<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac005)  [Next](zac007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 6

This chapter contains a vision of four chariots, and the explanation of
it; and an order to make crowns of gold and silver for certain uses
mentioned; and a famous prophecy concerning the Messiah as the builder
of the temple, the church. The chariots are described by their number,
four; by the place, the mountains, from whence they came out; and by the
different colour of the horses in each of them, [Zac
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md) upon the prophets inquiry what
these were, an explanation is given of them; and they are said to be the
four spirits of the heavens; and are described by their situation,
standing before the Lord of the whole earth; by their mission from him;
by each of the places to which they were sent; and by their success, or
by the good effects produced, at least by some of them, [Zac
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#004.md) then follows the order to make the
crowns; and it is declared what they should be made of, gold and silver;
from whom they were to be had, and who were to be concerned herein; and
what was to be done with them; they were to be put upon the head of
Joshua the high priest, [Zac 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#009.md) who,
being an eminent type of Christ, a prophecy concerning him is ordered to
be delivered to him; who is described by his name, the man, the Branch;
by the place he should grow up from; by the work he should do, building
the temple of the Lord; by the glory he should have on account of it;
and by the offices of King, Priest, and Prophet, he should execute, [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012.md) and after this was done, then the
crowns were to be laid up in the temple of the Lord for a memorial, by
the four men above mentioned, [Zac
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014.md) and though the Messiah is the
chief builder of the temple, the church, yet it is suggested that
others, and even Gentiles, should come and build in it; and which when
done, it would be evident that the prophet had his mission to the Jews
of the Lord; and the chapter is closed with a promise of the
accomplishment of all this, should they diligently hearken to the voice
of the Lord, [Zac 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015.md).

[Zechariah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 6:1</span></span>

And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked,.... When he saw
another vision, as follows:

and, behold, there came four chariots; by which are meant, not the four
Gospels; rather the apostles of Christ, who had their commission from
Christ; were sent into all the world by him, and carried his name and
Gospel thither; were the instruments Christ made use of in bringing many
souls to him, and into his church, and for the defence of his Gospel,
and of his interest; and were military chariots, who fought the good
fight of faith; and triumphal ones, who were made to triumph in Christ,
being more than conquerors through him; though others think angels are
here meant, the chariots of the Lord, [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017.md) since they are called the four
spirits of the heavens; and are said to go forth from standing before
the Lord of the earth, and are sent by him into each of the parts of it,
[Zac 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005.md) and are represented by horses
of various colours, as in [Zac 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md)
these may be signified by chariots, for their glory, strength, and
swiftness, in which Jehovah rides about the world, and executes his
will; and are made use of for the destruction of the church's enemies,
and for its protection and defence. The Jewish writers, after the
Targum, generally interpret them of the four monarchies, the Persian,
Grecian, and Roman, by whom were done the will of God in the world; and
seem to be greatly the design of the vision:

these came out from between two mountains: and the mountains were
mountains of brass; such in which this metal is found, as in Chalcis,
where it is said to be first found (o); and from thence it has its name
in the Greek tongue; or in the island of Cyprus, from whence it may be
is the name of copper; and such mountains were in Judea, Idumea, and
Arabia, formerly; as Carmel, according to Hesychius (p); and Phinon in
Idumea; and some mountains in Arabia, about eleven miles from Horeb,
which, Jerom says (q), formerly abounded with veins of gold and brass:
these may intend the decrees and purposes of God, which, like
"mountains", are very ancient, earlier than the everlasting hills, high
and deep, not to be reached and searched into; are dark, obscure, and
hidden to men, till made known; and are firm, solid, and immovable, and
are lasting and durable; and, like mountains of "brass", are never to be
broken in pieces, revoked, made null and void; for they stand upon the
unalterable will of God, upon the basis of infallible wisdom; are
supported by uncontrollable power, and can not be disannulled by all the
men on earth, and devils in hell: and, according to these fixed and
immutable decrees, the said monarchies in succession have took place in
the world; unless rather it should be thought, that by these mountains
of brass are designed the power and providence of God, by which the
several people that first founded those empires were restrained for a
while from going forth to make war upon others, and subdue their
kingdoms; until the time was come, it was the will of God they should.
The allusion may be to race horses in chariots, formerly used for such
exercises, which were held within the circus or bars, till the sign was
given when they should start: in like manner these nations were kept
within bounds for a while, just as the four angels were bound by the
providence of God at the river Euphrates, until they were loosed; which
signify the Saracens, and their numerous army of horsemen under their
four leaders, who were restrained from overrunning the "eastern" empire
of the Romans, until it was the pleasure of God to loose them, and give
them liberty, [Rev 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#014.md). Grotius
understands this literally of the straits of Cilicia, and the vastness
of the mountains there, through which the Babylonians and Persians,
Alexander and his generals, used to pass into Syria, Judea, and Egypt;
but rather these visionary chariots seemed to steer their course through
a valley, which lay between two mountains, whereby they escaped the
difficulties that lay in their way by the mountains; and may denote the
low estate of these monarchies in their original, and the difficulties
they grappled with, and got over, before they rose to the grandeur they
did. Some interpret the two mountains of brass of the kingdom of Israel,
after the Babylonish captivity, and the kingdom of the Messiah; and the
four chariots, of the four kingdoms, in this order; the Persian, the
Grecian, that of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, and the Roman, which is in
course last; but was seen first by the prophet, because utter
destruction was brought upon Israel by it (r): according to this
interpretation, the red horses are the Romans; and the other, the above
mentioned. So Cocceius is of opinion that the two mountains are two
powerful and unshaken kingdoms, set up by God; or rather two
manifestations of the same kingdom; the one the kingdom of the house of
David; the other the kingdom of Christ, which is spiritual, but as to
the effect earthly, in the subjection of all nations to it, [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022.md) the kingdom of the house of
David, as to the external form, is abolished, but notwithstanding
remains in the root, until it appears in another mountain; and between
these two, or in the middle space of time, four kingdoms with their
armies would possess the promised land; and he observes, that in [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035.md), mention is made of two
mountains, and, that these chariots in part agree with the several parts
of the image there.

\(o\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 4. c. 12. Vid. l. 7. c. 56. & l. 34. c. 2. (p)
Apud Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 6. col. 886. (q) De locis Hebraicis,
fol. 90. A. (r) Vid. Gurtler. Voc. Typ. Prophet. Explic. p. 58, 177.

[Zechariah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 6:2</span></span>

In the first chariot were red horses,.... If these are to be understood
of the apostles of Christ, and ministers of the Gospel, they may be
compared to "horses", for bearing the name of Christ, and drawing the
chariot of the Gospel; for their strength to labour in the word and
doctrine; for their courage in the cause of Christ; and for their
swiftness in doing his work; and to "red" ones, for their flaming zeal
for the honour of the Redeemer, and their bloody sufferings for his
sake: and if of angels, they may be compared to "horses", because strong
and swift to do the will of God; and to "red" ones, because they are the
executioners of his wrath and vengeance on wicked men: but if by "the
chariots" are meant the monarchies, then by these "red horses" must be
designed the Babylonians and Chaldeans, so called because their soldiers
were clothed in red, and their chariots were like flaming torches; and
they were sanguinary, cruel, and bloody in their tempers, and in their
actions to the Jews; and were signified by Nebuchadnezzar's head of gold
in his image; see [Nah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003.md),

and in the second chariot black horses; which, applied to the apostles
and ministers of the Gospel, may denote their mean and abject appearance
outwardly, and their knowledge in the mysteries of grace, which are dark
and obscure to others; and, if understood of angels, is applicable to
them, when messengers of ill tidings, or executioners of judgment: but
if the monarchies are meant, which seems best, the Medes and Persians
are intended; and their "black" colour is expressive of the sorrowful
estate of the Jews under them, especially in the time of Haman, as
Jarchi and Kimchi observe: black horses were reckoned strong, well made,
and fit for labour; and the Ethiopians and Moors chose to have their
horses they used in war all of this colour, to strike the greater horror
and terror into their enemies; and to see black horses in a dream was
accounted a bad omen (s). The Medes and Persians were a strong and
warlike people, and were very terrible to their enemies, under Cyrus;
and very troublesome and distressing to the Jews, under Cambyses and
Ahasuerus.

\(s\) Vid. Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 7. col. 106, 107.

[Zechariah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 6:3</span></span>

And in the third chariot white horses,.... Which, as referring to Gospel
preachers, may denote the purity of their lives and doctrines, and their
conquests and victories over the souls of men by the ministry of the
word; and, as applicable to angels, may express the purity of their
nature and actions, the joyful messages they bring to the heirs of
salvation, and their victories over the evil angels; but, as respecting
the monarchies, point at the Grecians, and the conquests of Alexander,
and his mildness and gentleness to the Jews: white horses were used in
triumphs, in token of victory (t); see [Rev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002.md) and they have been reckoned the
swiftest in running; and by the "oneirocritics", to see them in a dream
or vision is a good omen (u); and so it was accounted with the Jews (w);
all which suits very well with Alexander, who was famous for his
victories over many nations: and who, with great velocity, overran them,
and as soon conquered them, and was kind and beneficent to the Jewish
nation:

and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses: signifying either the
diversity of gifts in the ministers of the Gospel; or the different
employment and services of angels; or rather the Romans are meant, who
were collected out of various nations, and consisted of different
people, and had dvarious forms of government, and emperors of different
dispositions to the Jews; and particularly as two colours are assigned
to these, it may respect the division of their kingdom into Pagan and
Papal, as is predicted in [Dan 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041.md).
Kimchi thinks the "bay horses" design the kingdom of the Ishmaelites, or
Turks, a strong and powerful people; as some think the word used
signifies (x); rather the Goths and Vandals; see [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007.md). The word for "grisled" is by the
Targum rendered "spotted" or "speckled"; and comes from one which
signifies "hail"; and so denotes such coloured horses as are spotted
with white spots, like hailstones (y), upon another colour, as black or
red; and is by the Septuagint, and others, rendered "various" (z), of
divers colours: and the other word for "bay" is rendered by them
"starling coloured"; the colour of the starling, which is a black bird,
with white spots; and so were a fit emblem of the Goths, Huns, &c. who
were of various nations, and had various laws, customs, and usages;
though some think by these two are meant the successors of Alexander,
the Lagidae and the Seleucidae, put together, because of their
intermarriages with one another, as well as succeeding Alexander: the
former by the "grisled", who went and settled in the south country in
Egypt, [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006.md) whose first king was
Ptolemy Lagus, from whence is the name, and who is the king of the south
in [Dan 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005.md) and the latter by the
"bay" or "ash coloured", as the Targum; the kings of Syria hiding deep
their counsels, as under ashes, particularly Antiochus, as Grotius
observes; and sometimes making war on one nation, and sometimes on
another; and both of them in their turns falling upon the Jews suddenly,
and with great violence, like hailstones, and making sad devastations
among them, reducing them to ashes; but then this sense shuts out the
Romans, the fourth monarchy, from having any place in this vision, which
cannot be admitted; since these four chariots answer to the four sorts
of metal in Nebuchadnezzar's image, and to the four beasts in Daniel's
vision. So the Jewish writers (a) say, the red horses are the kingdom of
Babylon, which shed much blood in Israel; this is the head of gold: the
black horses, the kingdom of the Persians and Medes, like to a bear, who
made black the faces of Israel, by the decrees of Haman: the white
horses, the kingdom of Grecia, who made white the faces of Israel by
reproaches: the horses grisled and bay the fourth kingdom, which decreed
various decrees, different from one another: and these four chariots
went out from between two mountains, from between the kingdoms of Judah
and Israel, which dwell between two countries, that beyond Jordan, and
the land of Israel; and they went out between them, and carried them
captive; and these kingdoms are called mountains of brass, because
strong as brass, and hearkened not to the words of the prophets.

\(t\) Aurel. Victor de Viris Ilustrib. c. 26. in Furio Camillo, &
Plutarchus in Camillo. (u) Bochart, ut supra, (Hierozoic par. 1. l. 2.
c. 7.) col. 105, 106. (w) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 93. 1. (x) "fortes",
V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius; "robusti", Piscator, Tarnovius,
Gussetius, Stockius, p. 74. "validi", Burkius; so Kimchi; and the Jews
in Pesikta apud Yalkut in loc. (y) "grandinate", Montanus, Cocceius,
Burkius; "grandiue gut. tati", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Tarnovius,
De Dieu, Pembellus. (z) Sept.; "varii", Pagninus. (a) In Pesikta Rabbati
apud Yalkut in loc.

[Zechariah 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 6:4</span></span>

Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me,.... After
he had seen the chariots come out, and had observed the different
colours of the horses in them:

what are these, my lord? that is, what do they signify? what is the
meaning of this vision?

[Zechariah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 6:5</span></span>

And the angel answered and said unto me,.... In order to grant him his
request, and explain the vision of the chariots:

these are the four spirits of the heavens; or, "the four winds of the
heavens"; the apostles and ministers of the Gospel may be compared to
"the winds", because their ministry is the ministration of the Spirit,
which is like wind that blows invisibly, powerfully, and where it
listeth; and because in and by it the Spirit breathes life and comfort
into the souls of men; and because of the powerful efficacy and
penetrating nature of the word preached by them, and their swiftness and
readiness to do the will of God: angels are called "spirits" or "winds",
[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003.md) they are created spirits,
and so differ from God; are incorporeal ones, and so differ from men;
and are immaterial and immortal, and so die not: they are spiritual
subsistences, and spirits of the heavens, or heavenly spirits; heaven
being the place of their abode and residence; and they may be compared
to "winds", for their invisibility, wonderful penetration into places
and things, their very great swiftness, and prodigious power and
strength. The Targum paraphrases the words thus,

"these are the four kingdoms, which are as the winds of heaven;''

and so the same are signified by the four winds in [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002.md) to which they may be compared for
their swift and forcible carrying all before them, and for their
fickleness and changeableness; and to which, the several parts of the
world, into which they went, agree:

which go forth, from standing before the Lord of all the earth: so the
apostles of Christ, and ministers of the Gospel, stood before him in his
eternal purposes and decrees from everlasting; and went forth, having
their commission from him in time; and were sent by him into the several
parts of the world he is the Lord of; and by whom they were filled with
gifts, grace, and courage, fitting them for their work. Angels also
stand before him, ministering unto him; always behold him; are in his
presence, and enjoy his favour; and go forth from him, being sent forth
by him on various accounts into all the parts of the world; which
Jehovah is the Creator, Upholder, and Governor of: moreover, this is
applicable to the four monarchies; these stood before the Lord in his
vast and infinite mind; in the secret decrees of it, before the world
was; and the sending and going forth of them from him show that they
were powers ordained of God, who has the government of the whole world
in his hands.

[Zechariah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 6:6</span></span>

The black horses which are therein,.... Which were in the second
chariot: no further mention is made of the red horses in the first
chariot, because the kingdom of the Chaldeans was now extinct: these
design the Medes and Persians:

go forth into the north country: into the country of Babylon or Chaldea,
which lay north of Judea; see [Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013.md) and other places; these went to
Babylon, took that, and seized on the empire, and delivered the Jews,
who were captives there:

and the white go forth after them; the Grecians under Alexander, who
went after the Medes and Persians into the same country, and fought
Darius the Persian, and conquered him:

and the grisled go forth toward the south country; the Romans under
Julius Caesar, Augustus, and others before them, who went into Egypt,
which lay south of Judea, [Dan 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005.md)
and conquered that, and other nations, and set up the fourth kingdom or
monarchy.

[Zechariah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 6:7</span></span>

And the bay went forth, and sought to go,.... Without leave: these
design either the Romans; or, since distinct from the grisled, the Huns,
Goths, and Vandals; who sought to go out of their own places into other
countries: and were desirous

that they might walk to and fro through the earth: without control;
overrunning as they, did the Roman empire, and set up ten kingdoms in
it; unless this is to be understood of the land of Judea only, through
which the Romans walked to and fro at pleasure, and subdued it:

and he said; that is, the Lord of the whole earth, before whom they
stood:

Get ye hence, walk to and fro through the earth; as being filled with
indignation at them, and yet suffered them to have their will; and so
Kimchi interprets the phrase,

"he gave them power to go and subdue lands;''

and to the same purpose Jarchi,

"he gave them power to rule with great authority; and this is the
kingdom of Edom or Rome:''

So they walked to and fro through the earth; either the land of Judea,
as the Romans did, and made it a Roman province; and these may represent
Rome Papal, set up and supported by the above people, even the beast of
Rome, which has reigned over the kings of the earth, to whom the ten
kings gave their kingdom and power.

[Zechariah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 6:8</span></span>

Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying,.... That is, the Lord
of the whole earth spoke to the prophet with a loud voice, and uttered
the following words:

Behold, these that go toward the north country; meaning the Medes and
Persians, which went towards Babylon:

have quieted my spirit in the north country; by executing the judgments
of God upon the Chaldeans, and by helping, favouring, and delivering the
people of the Jews; which were very agreeable to the will of God, and
well pleasing in his sight, signified by the quieting or refreshing his
Spirit.

[Zechariah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 6:9</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Either "the word of
prophecy from the Lord", as the Targum paraphrases it; the visions being
ended, the prophetic part of the book begins; and many excellent
prophecies concerning the Messiah, and his kingdom, are contained in
this and the following chapters: or an order from the Lord, which is
expressed in the next verses [Zac
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010.md).

[Zechariah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 6:10</span></span>

Take of "them of" the captivity,.... That is, some of them that were
returned from the captivity of Babylon, and who are mentioned by name:

even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon;
either with Zerubbabel and Joshua, when they came from thence; or who
were now just come from those that remained there:

and come thou the same day; this very day in which they were come from
thence:

and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah; where the above
persons were; or where they were to go along with him: this Josiah might
be either a goldsmith, and therefore the prophet is sent to him to make
the crowns later mentioned; or else he might be a treasurer belonging to
the temple, who had gold and silver in his hands, which had been put
there for the use of it.

[Zechariah 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 6:11</span></span>

Then take silver and gold, &c. Which the Jewish writers suppose were
brought by the above men from their brethren in Babylon, as a free will
offering towards the building of the temple:

and make crowns; two at least, one of silver, and another of gold; the
one to be put upon the head of Joshua the high priest; the other upon
the head of Zerubbabel, as Kimchi conjectures; though, according to the
text, they seem to be both, or all of them, be they as many as they
will, to be put upon the head of Joshua; and may signify the different
states of the priesthood in the present time, and when in its pristine
glory; or that both the crown of the priesthood and the crown of the
kingdom should meet in his antitype Christ, who is said to have on his
head many crowns, [Rev 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012.md). The
Targum renders it, "thou shalt make a great crown"; as if only one crown
was to be made of gold and silver mixed together; and so the Arabic
version renders it; but more are certainly meant, for it follows:

and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech the high
priest; on whose head a fair mitre was set; see [Zac
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005.md) and with the mitre was wore by the
high priest the holy crown, made of pure gold; and which was no other
than the plate or "flower" of gold, on which was engraved "Holiness to
the Lord", [Exo 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036.md) and this,
according to the Jewish writers (b), was a plate of gold two fingers
broad, and reached from ear to ear; though Josephus (c) seems to give a
different account of it; he says,

"the golden crown surrounds (either the mitre, or perhaps rather the
forehead or temples); and on it were three rows of cups or flowers, like
those of the herb we call "saccharus"; and the Grecian botanists
"hyosciamus";''

or henbane; and after describing the herb, and the figure of the buds,
cups, or flowers of it, he adds,

"like to these is made a crown reaching from the hinder part of the head
unto both temples; for the flowers do not encompass the forehead; but
there is a golden plate, which has the name of God engraved in sacred
letters;''

which seems to disagree with the accounts of other Jewish writers;
unless, as Braunius (d) observes, they may be thus reconciled, that the
crown was nothing else but the plate that was two fingers broad, and was
in length from ear to ear; so that about the temples it was ornamented
with three rows of henbane flowers on each side: and these three rows
may give occasion for the use of the word in the plural number; and some
have called it a triple crown (e); and Popish writers fail not to
improve it in favour of the crown their pontiff wears; and Lyra (f)
speaks of little crowns or coronets, even in the mitres of the common
priests; which (he says) were circles in the lower part of them so
called; wherefore the rows of flowers in the high priest's crown, from
whence it might be called a flower, might with more propriety bear that
name. Philo the Jew (g), speaking of the golden plate, says it was like
a crown engraven with four letters of the name (Jehovah); and further
observes, that

"the mitre under it kept the plate from touching the head, on which the
"cidaris" or diadem was put; for it was like the cidaris which the
eastern kings used for a diadem:''

and indeed this crown, and the three rows of flowers in it, were a
hieroglyphic or emblem of the threefold office of Christ, whom the high
priest represented, kingly, priestly, and prophetic; and so may be fitly
signified here by crowns in the plural number; and it is usual with the
Jewish writers to speak of three crowns, the crown of the law, the crown
of the kingdom, and the crown of the priesthood (h); and very probably
from the high priest among the Jews wearing crowns it was that the
priests among the Heathens had the same ornaments on their heads; and to
be crowned was with them the same as to exercise the office of
priesthood (i), and who was an eminent type of the Messiah, and in this
of having crowns put upon his head, as the following words show.

\(b\) Maimon. Cele Hamikdash, c. 9. sect. 1. Jarchi in Exod. xxviii. 36.
(c) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 7. (d) De Vestitu Sacerdot. Hebr. l. 2. c.
28. sect. 18. p. 807. (e) Fortunatus Scacchus in Myrothec. l. 3. c. 40.
p. 1000. Solerius de Pileo, sect. 13. p. 266. (f) In Exod. xxxix. 27.
(g) De Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 670, 671. (h) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 13.
(i) Paschalius de Coronis, l. 4. c. 13.

[Zechariah 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 6:12</span></span>

And speak unto him, saying,.... That is, to Joshua the high priest,
having the crowns on his head:

thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, behold the man whose name is
The BRANCH; which is not to be understood of Zerubbabel, as some Jewish
writers interpret it; for he was not "the Branch", by way of eminency,
much less that righteous Branch of David, called the Lord our
righteousness, [Jer 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005.md) the same that
is here meant; besides, he was already grown up out of his place; nor
did he build a temple, from which he had great glory; nor was he either
king or priest, only governor of Judah; and, however, not both, as this
person is represented to be; and who is no other than the Messiah; and
so the Targum paraphrases the words,

"behold the man Messiah is his name;''

and Jarchi owns that some of their Rabbins interpret the words of the
King Messiah. The "Branch" is a name by which the Messiah goes in the
Talmud (k), and in other Jewish writings. It is asked (l), what is the
name of the King Messiah? it is answered, among others, his name is the
"Branch"; as it is said, "behold the man whose name is the Branch; he
shall grow up out of his place": elsewhere (m) they speak of five
letters doubled, which are the foundation of deliverance to certain
persons, or point thereat. The first four, they observe, were
accomplished in the deliverance of Abraham from Ur of the Chaldees, of
Isaac from the Philistines, of Jacob from Esau, and of the Israelites
from Egypt; and the fifth, which is the letter the first letter of
"Tzemach", the Branch, by it they say the holy blessed God will redeem
Israel at the end of the four monarchies; as it is said, "behold the man
whose name is the Branch", &c.; Philo the Jew (n) interprets this
passage of a divine Person, the Son of God, by whom no other than the
Messiah is meant,

"we have heard (says he) one of the friends of Moses, i. e. Zechariah,
saying thus, behold the man "whose name is the east", or rising sun (so
the Greek version renders the words); a new appellation, if you can
think it said of one consisting of soul and body; but if of that
incorporeal one, bearing the divine image, you will own that the name is
fitly given him, the ancient Sun, the Father of beings will cause to
arise; whom otherwise he names the first begotten, and who, being
begotten, imitates the ways of his Father; and looking at his archetypal
exemplars, forms the same.''

Abendana (o), a modern Jew, observes, that

"it is right that the Targum interprets it of the Messiah, for of him it
is spoken; therefore it is written, "and he shall grow up out of his
place"; for he shall go forth from him, and shall be of the seed of
Zerubbabel,--and the King Messiah shall bear the glory of the kingdom,
and he shall rule upon the throne of his kingdom;''

and when he is called a man, the meaning is not that he is a mere man,
nor was he really man before his incarnation; but as he was to be man,
and his incarnation was drawing near, he is so called: of his name the
"Branch", see [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002.md), and Joshua, he
is directed to look upon himself, with the crowns on his head, as a type
of him; and so were the prophet, and those that were with him; and he is
to be beheld, as before in type, so now in truth, by faith, with love
and affection, with diligent attention, and great admiration:

and he shall grow up out of his place: or, "from under him" (p); which
may regard his natural descent as man, and the persons or person from
whom he sprung; as from Abraham, Jacob, Judah, Jesse, and particularly
from David, from the royal seed, as Jarchi interprets it: or else the
place from whence this Branch arose, the land of Judea, the tribe of
Judah, the city of Bethlehem, where he was born; or Galilee, and
particularly Nazareth, where he was brought up, and grew, and increased
in the stature of his body, and in the wisdom of his mind: or it may be
rendered, "from his inferior place" (q); his superior, place, as the Son
of God, is heaven; his inferior place, as the Son of man, is the earth;
from whence he may be said to be, being born of a woman; and so this
Branch is called "the fruit of the earth", and said to spring out of it,
[Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002.md) or it is same as from
himself, as Aben Ezra observes; and so Calvin; for this Branch did not
grow up through any sowing and planting of man, but without any hand or
concern of his in it; Christ was born of a virgin, through the power of
the Highest, and through his own power, as God:

and he shall build the temple of the Lord; not a material temple, but
the spiritual temple, the Church; called so in allusion to the temple of
Jerusalem, built by Solomon; which was typical of the church, in the
builder of it, Solomon, the church being built by Christ the antitypical
Solomon, the true Peace, and Peacemaker; in the situation of it on a
mount, which denotes the safety, visibility, and exalted state of the
church; in the matter of it, being made of choice stones, and excellent
timber, to which believers in Christ, who as lively stones are built up
a spiritual house, are fitly compared; in the magnificence and
stateliness of it, especially as the church will be in the latter day,
when the glorious things spoken of it will be fulfilled; and in its
strength and firmness, as well as in its holiness: and it is called "the
temple of the Lord", because it is of his building, where he dwells, and
where he is worshipped; and in the building of it Christ has a great
concern; he is not only the foundation and cornerstone of it, but he is
the chief, the master builder of it; he builds it on himself, and builds
it up by his Spirit, his ministers, his word and ordinances, making
thereby continually an increase of it, and additions to it; see [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md).

\(k\) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 5. 1. (l) Echa Rabbati, fol. 50. 1. (m)
Pirke Eliezer, c. 48. fol. 58. 1. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 18. fol. 223. 2.
(n) De Confus. Ling. p. 329. (o) Not. in Miclol Yophi in loc. (p)
"subter eum", V. L. Pagninus; "ad verbum, de sub se", Calvin, Drusius;
"de subter se", Cocceius; "ex sub eo", Burkius. (q) "Ex inferiore loco",
Vitringa in Jesaiam, c. iv. 2. "E leco suo humili", Hiller. Onomastic.
Sacr. p. 47.

[Zechariah 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 6:13</span></span>

Even he shall build the temple of the Lord,.... Which is repeated, as
Kimchi observes, for confirmation sake:

and he shall bear the glory; that is, of building the temple; and the
phrase denotes that the glory of it shall be upon him, shall be hung
upon him, as in [Isa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024.md) and so
shall be visible; that it would be weighty and heavy, he having many
crowns on his head, put there by all the saints, who everyone of them
ascribe glory to him; that it would continue, and not pass away like the
glory of this world; and that he, and he alone, should bear it; not
Joshua, nor Zerubbabel, nor the ministers of the word, nor members of
churches, nor any other, but himself; he, and he alone, shall be
exalted:

and shall sit and rule upon his throne; in heaven, having done his work
on earth, where he is at ease and rest, and exercises power and
authority; he rules over the whole world, and the kings of it in
general, and in particular over his saints, by his Spirit, word, and
ordinates, feeding, protecting, and defending them:

and he shall be a Prince upon his throne; he is both Priest and King,
and exercises both offices at one and the same time, and even now in
heaven; having offered himself as a sacrifice on earth, by which he has
put away sin for ever, and perfected his people; he is set down upon his
throne, as a King crowned with glory and honour; and ever lives as a
Priest the throne, to make intercession for them; by appearing in the
presence of God for them; by presenting his blood, sacrifice, and
righteousness, to his divine Father; by offering up the prayers and
praises of his people; by declaring it as his will that such and such
blessings be bestowed upon them; and by applying the benefits of his
death unto them:

and the counsel of peace shall be between them both; not between Joshua
and Zerubbabel, who should agree together, as they did, in the
administration of government belonging to their distinct offices; rather
between the priestly and kingly offices of Christ; nor the council of
peace between the Father and the Son, concerning the salvation of the
elect; for that was past in eternity; but better the Gospel of peace,
called the whole counsel of God, which, in consequence of Christ being a
Priest on his throne, was preached to both Jews and Gentiles; which
brought the glad tidings of peace and salvation by Christ to both, and
was the means of making peace between them both.

[Zechariah 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 6:14</span></span>

And the crowns shall be to Helem,.... The same with Heldai, [Zac
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010.md),

and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah; the
same with Josiah, [Zac 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010.md),

for a memorial in the temple of the Lord; the crowns, after they had
been put upon the head of Joshua, were taken off, and laid up in some
part of the temple, of which the Jews make mention in their Misna (r);
and say there were golden chains fixed to the beams of the porch (of the
temple), by which the young priests went up, and saw the crowns; as it
is said, [Zac 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014.md) "and the crowns
shall be to Helem", &c.; these were laid up for a memorial of the
liberality and generosity of those men, as Jarchi interprets it; who had
so freely and largely offered towards the building of the temple; or
rather, as Alshec (s), another Jewish commentator, observes, they were
for a memorial of something future, even of the Messiah, who was
typified by Joshua; when he had those crowns upon him; for those crowns
respected the glory of Christ's government in future times; and being
made both of silver and gold, and put upon the head of the high priest
Joshua, denoted the union of the kingly and priestly offices in the
Messiah.

\(r\) Massech. Middot, c. 3. sect. 8. (s) Apud L'Empereur. Not. in ib.

[Zechariah 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 6:15</span></span>

And they that are afar off shall come,..... Into the temple; not the
material temple; nor is this a prophecy which was fulfilled in Herod, a
stranger, repairing that, as Kimchi suggests; but into the spiritual
temple, the church; and is a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles,
who are said to be "afar off", [Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md), from God; from having his image
on them; from subjection to his law; from the knowledge and fear of him;
and from communion with him: from Christ; from the knowledge of his
person, righteousness, and salvation by him; from love to him, faith in
him, and fellowship with him; from the Spirit of God, and from the
people of God, and from any solid hope of eternal life: now these being
called by grace, and brought to Christ under the drawings of the
Father's love, shall come to his church, and join themselves to his
people:

and build in the temple of the Lord; upon the foundation Christ; and be
useful in building up others, either by private conversation, or by
public preaching the word; it is not said, they shall "build the temple
of the Lord"; that is Christ's work; but "build in" it:

and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you; that is,
the Prophet Zechariah, who was sent to the Jews to declare these things
to them; or, as the Targum adds, "to prophesy unto you": which they
would fully know, and be assured of, when these things should have their
accomplishment:

and this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the
Lord your God; not that the fulfilment of the above predictions depended
upon their obedience; but when they should in the latter day obey the
Gospel of Christ, or "the word of the Lord" their "God", as the Targum
paraphrases it; then this would come to pass, that they should know that
the prophet had his mission from the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 7](zac007.md)

</div>
