<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac008)  [Next](zac010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 9

This chapter treats of the conversion of the Gentiles, before spoken of
in general, now particularly named; of the coming of Christ into the
world, and the advantages of it to his church; of the preaching of the
Gospel by the apostles, and of their protection, encouragement, and
success. The Gentiles converted are first the Syrians that dwelt in
Hadrach, Damascus, and Hamath, the Lord's eye being upon them, [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001) next the Phoenicians, the
inhabitants of Tyre and Zidon, who had a vain opinion of their wisdom,
and trusted in their riches, [Zac 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002)
and then the Philistines, the inhabitants of Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and
Ashdod, guilty of pride, murder, idolatry, and other abominations, [Zac
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005) when the church and people of God
should be safely protected, [Zac 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)
to whom, for their joy and comfort, is given forth a prophecy concerning
the coming of the Messiah; who is described by his character as a King,
just, having salvation, lowly, and riding on an ass; by the
peaceableness of his kingdom; by the various offices he executes; the
prophetic office, speaking peace to the Heathen; the kingly office, his
dominion being very large; and his priestly office, in the effusion of
his blood, by which the covenant is confirmed, his people delivered out
of distress, and encouraged to flee to him as their stronghold, where
they find plenty and protection, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009) next the apostles are represented
as military men, accoutered with the bow and the sword of the mighty,
[Zac 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013) whose success is owing to
the Lord's appearance over them, and the efficacy of his grace and
Spirit attending the word, [Zac 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)
who are protected and encouraged in it by the Lord, and honoured on
account of it, [Zac 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015) and the
chapter is concluded with an exclamation, wondering at the grace and
glory of Christ, and expressing the satisfying provisions of his house,
[Zac 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017).

[Zechariah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 9:1</span></span>

The burden of the word of the Lord,.... A prophecy, as in [Pro
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001) which is sometimes of things
sorrowful and distressing, as the destruction of people, as in [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001) and sometimes of things joyful,
as in [Zac 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001) and here it contains
good news to the church of Christ, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), &c.; and is called a "burden",
because the word of the Lord is often so to carnal men; see [Jer
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#033) the words may be rendered, a
"declaration", or "a publication", of "the word of the Lord" (u); it
signifies a publishing of it or bringing it forth; and so the Arabic
version renders it "a revelation of the word of the Lord"; a carrying of
it about: which was made

in the land of Hadrach; this is either the name of a man; of some king,
as Aben Ezra observes; and some Jewish writers (w) say the King Messiah,
who is "sharp" to the nations of the world, and "tender" to the
Israelites: or rather the name of a place, and may design Syria, to
which Damascus belonged; see [Isa 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008)
or some place near it: says R. Jose (x),

"I am of Damascus, and I call heaven and earth to witness that there is
a place there, the name of which is Hadrach.''

Hillerus (y) takes it to be the same with Coelesyria, or hollow Syria, a
vale which lay between Libanus and Antilibanus, and goes by many names;
the same that is called Hoba, [Gen
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015) the plain of Aren, and the house
of Eden, [Amo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005) and here Hadrach;
and thinks it had its name from Hadar, a son of Ishmael, [Gen
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#015) and observes what is said, [Gen
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018), that the "Ishmaelites dwelt
from Havilah", which is to the south of Palestine, "unto Shur", a town
situated over against Egypt, "as you go to Assyria"; that is, to the
Agra of Ptolemy in Susiana. The Targum renders it

"in the land of the south.''

There was a city in Coelesyria, called Adra by Ptolemy (z); which, as
Jerom says (a), was distant from Bostra twenty five miles; since called
the city of Bernard de Stampis; where were Christian churches in the
fourth and fifth centuries, whose bishops were present at councils held
in those times (b); and, according to this prophecy, here the word of
the Lord was to be published; and it may have respect to the conversion
of the inhabitants of it in future times: though some take it to be not
the proper name of a place, but an appellative, and render it, "the land
about", or "the land about thee" (c); that is, about Judea; the nations
round about it, particularly Syria, Phoenicia, and Palestine.

And Damascus shall be the rest thereof; either of the Lord himself; his
glorious Shechinah shall rest there, as Kimchi interprets it; and so the
Targum paraphrases it,

"and Damascus shall be converted, that it may be of the house of his
Shechinah;''

see [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010) or of the word of the
Lord, which should be declared and published there, as it was by the
Apostle Paul, who was converted near it, and preached in it, [Act
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003) or of Hadrach, or the adjacent
country: unless it is to be understood of the burden of the Lord resting
on it, or of the taking of this city in the times of Alexander the
great; which, with the destruction of the cities after mentioned, some
make a type or symbol of the abolition of Paganism in the Roman empire;
but the former sense seems best.

When the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be towards
the Lord; or, "when the eyes of men shall be to the Lord, and to all the
tribes of Israel"; so Kimchi and Ben Melech; that is, as they interpret
it, when the eyes of all men shall be to the Lord, and not to their
idols; and also to all the tribes of Israel, to go along with them in
their ways; as it is said above [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023), "we will go with you": or they
shall look to the Lord, even as the tribes of Israel themselves do; and
which is true of sinners when converted, whether Jews or Gentiles; and
particularly was true of that great man, the Apostle Paul, who was
converted near Damascus, when the eyes of his understanding being
enlightened, and he seeing the insufficiency of all other objects,
looked to the Lord alone for pardon, righteousness, life, and salvation;
even as all true Israelites do, who are after the Spirit, and not after
the flesh. Though some understand these words of the eyes of the Lord
being upon every man, as well as upon the tribes of Israel; upon wicked
men to punish them, as upon his people to protect and defend them: and
to this sense the Targum inclines, paraphrasing the words thus,

"for before the Lord are manifest the works of the children of men, and
he is well pleased with all the tribes of Israel.''

\(u\) "prolatio verbi Jehovae", Cocceius. (w) R. Judah in Jarchi, & R.
Benaiah in Kimchi in loc. & R. Nehemiah in Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 24.
1. (x) Shirhashirim ib. Siphre in Yalkut Simeoni in loc. (y) Onomast.
sacr. p. 578. (z) Geograph. l. 5. c. 15. (a) De locis Hebr. fol. 97. I.
(b) Reland. Palestina Illustrata, l. 3. p. 548. (c) "in terram
circumstantem te", Junius & Tremellius, Tarnovius; "super terram quae te
circuit", Grotius; "in terra circa te", Cocceius; "ad verbum, in terram
circuitus tui", De Dieu.

[Zechariah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 9:2</span></span>

And Hamath also shall border thereby,.... By the land of Hadrach, or by
Damascus; and that it was near Damascus is clear from [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009) it is called Hamath the great in
[Amo 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002) and according to Jerom (d),
is the same with Antioch, which he says was so called by some; and the
Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel on [Num
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021), renders Hamath by Antioch: and,
if so, here was the Lord's rest likewise; here the Gospel was preached,
and many converted, and a church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, was
formed; and here the disciples were first called Christians, [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026).

Tyrus and Zidon; these were famous cities of Phoenicia; upon the borders
of these our Lord himself was, [Mat
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021) of the conversion of the
inhabitants of these places the psalmist prophecies, [Psa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012) here likewise the Lord had his
resting place; we read of the disciples here, [Act
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#003),

though it be very wise; particularly Tyre, which was famous for wisdom,
[Eze 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003) which the Lord confounded by
the preaching of the Gospel, and by the foolishness of that saved them
that believe. Kimchi refers this to the times of the Messiah; his note
is, she shall not trust in her wisdom in the time of the Messiah: so Ben
Melech.

\(d\) Comment. in Amos, fol. 44. C. & Quaest. Hebr. in Genesim, fol. 67.
B. So Cyril. in Amos, p. 312.

[Zechariah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 9:3</span></span>

And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold,.... Tyre was built upon a
rock, and was a strong fortress itself, from whence it had its name;
and, besides its natural defence, it had a wall one hundred and fifty
feet high, and its breadth was answerable to its height (e); but yet, as
it could not defend itself against Alexander the great, who took it; so
neither against the Gospel of Christ, which found its way into it, and
was mighty to pull down strong holds in a spiritual sense:

and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the
streets; the riches of these cities, especially Tyre, are often made
mention of; they were famous for their wealth, being places of great
trade and merchandise; see [Isa 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002)
all which were to be holiness to the Lord, and for the sufficient
feeding and durable clothing of them that dwell before him, [Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018) his ministers.

\(e\) Arrian. de Exped. Alex. l. 2. c. 21.

[Zechariah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 9:4</span></span>

Behold, the Lord will cast her out,.... Or "inherit her" (f), or "them",
as the Septuagint render the words; when, being converted, she would
become the Lord's inheritance and possession, and her riches should be
devoted to his service:

and he will smite her power in the sea; for Tyre was situated in the
sea, at the entry of it, and was strong in it, [Eze
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017). Kimchi interprets this of her
humiliation and subjection in the days of the Messiah; and in a
spiritual sense it has been verified in such who have been spoiled of
their carnal strength, in which they trusted, and have laid down their
weapons, and have submitted to the sceptre of Christ:

and she shall be devoured with fire; with the spirit of judgment, and of
burning, which purges and removes the filth of sin; and with the fire of
the word, which burns up and consumes its lusts; and with the flames of
divine love, which make souls as a whole burnt offering to the Lord.
This was literally accomplished in the burning of Tyre by Alexander (g),
which injected fear and dread in cities near it, as follow:

\(f\) , Setp.; "possidebit eam", V. L. Munster, Castalio. So some in
Vatablus. (g) Curtius, l. 4. c. 4.

[Zechariah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 9:5</span></span>

Ashkelon shall see it, and fear,.... That is, as Kimchi explains it,
when Ashkelon shall see that Tyre humbles herself and submits, she shall
humble herself and submit also: and the sense may be, that the
inhabitants of Ashkelon, seeing that Tyre, with all her wisdom and
strong reasoning, could not stand before the power of the Gospel, but
submitted and embraced the Christian religion, were induced, through the
efficacy of divine grace, to do the same; and certain it is that this
place became Christian; we read (h) of a bishop of Ashkelon, in the
synod of Nice, and of other bishops of this place in later councils: it
belonged to Palestine, and was one of the five lordships of the
Philistines, [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003).

Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowful; this was a city of
Palestine, near to Ashkelon; they are mentioned together, [Jdg
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018) the Gentile inhabitants of this
place, when they saw the progress the Gospel made in Tyre, Zidon, and
Ashkelon, were grieved at it, but many among them submitted to it: very
likely Philip the evangelist first preached the Gospel here; see [Act
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026) there was a Christian bishop of
this place in the Nicene council, and others in after ones (i).

And Ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; this was also one of
the five lordships of the Philistines, [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003) which, being near to Tyre, had
its dependence on that, expecting it could never be taken; but when they
saw that it was taken by Alexander, it was ashamed of its vain
expectation, hope, and confidence: and so the inhabitants of this place,
when the Gospel came to it, were "ashamed of the house of their
confidence", as the Targum paraphrases the words; the confidence they
had in their idols, and in the works of their own hands; and were also
"ashamed because of their iniquities", as the Arabic version renders
them; being convinced of them, and humbled for them, and betaking
themselves to Christ for salvation from them. It is probable, that
Philip preached the Gospel here, seeing it was not far from Azotus or
Ashdod, next mentioned, where Philip is heard of after the baptism of
the eunuch: and if Ekron is the same with Caesarea, that was called
Strato's tower, as say the Jews (k); and which also Jerom (l) observes,
some say are the same it is certain that Philip was there, [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040) there were several Christian
bishops of this place in later times (m).

And the king shall perish from Gaza; some understand this of Batis, who
was governor of Gaza, when it was taken by Alexander; who was fastened
to a chariot, and dragged about the city, as Curtius (n) relates; but
this man was not a king, but governor of the city under one: I rather
think the idol Marnes, which signifies "the lord of man", and was
worshipped in this place, is here meant; which when it became Christian
was destroyed, and a Christian church built in the room of it, as is
reported by Jerom (o).

And Ashkelon shall not be inhabited; by Heathens, but by Christians.

\(h\) Reland. Palestina Illustrata, l. 3. p. 594. (i) Ib. p. 795. (k) T.
Bab. Megilla, fol. 6. 1. (l) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 88. D. (m) Reland.
ib. p. 676, &c. (n) Hist. l. 4. c. 6. (o) Comment in Isa. xvii. tom. 5.
fol. 39. H. Epist. ad Laetam, tom. 1. fol. 19. E.

[Zechariah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 9:6</span></span>

And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod,.... Some (p) take "mamzer", the
word for "bastard", to be the name of a people that should dwell in
Ashdod; this is the same place with Azotus, [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040) and was also one of the five
lordships of the Philistines, [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003) some, by the "bastard" here,
understand Alexander the great, who gave out that he was not the son of
Philip, but of Jupiter Ammon: others think Jonathan the Maccabee is
intended, who took this place and burnt it with fire, and the temple of
Dagon in it,

"83 The horsemen also, being scattered in the field, fled to Azotus, and
went into Bethdagon, their idol's temple, for safety. 84 But Jonathan
set fire on Azotus, and the cities round about it, and took their
spoils; and the temple of Dagon, with them that were fled into it, he
burned with fire.'' (1 Maccabees 10)

and though he was not a bastard, yet was a stranger to the Philistines;
in which sense the Jewish commentators, Jarchi and Kimchi, interpret the
word, and understand it of the Israelites who should dwell in this
place; even those, as Aben Ezra says, who were abject, mean, and
despised among the Israelites; which would be a great mortification to
the proud Philistines, as is suggested in the next clause: and to this
sense the Targum paraphrases the words,

"and the house of Israel shall dwell in Ashdod, who shall be in it as
strangers:''

but it is best to understand this of Israelites indeed, of true
Christians, who are accounted spurious, not the children of God, but
aliens and strangers, the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things; who should dwell here when the Gospel was preached in it, as
doubtless it was by Philip, [Act 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040)
and so the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions render the words,
"and strangers shall dwell in Ashdod"; men of another religion, and
despised and not owned even by their relations, as if they were
bastards.

And I will cut off the pride of the Philistines; by Alexander, and by
the Jews in the times of the Maccabees, bringing them into subjection,
which their haughty spirits could not well bear; or through the
abolition of their old Heathenish religion, in which they prided
themselves. It may be observed, that all along the conversion of these
various people to Christianity is expressed in terms which seem to
signify the destruction of them; and that partly because, in the literal
sense, reference is had to the conquest of them by Alexander, by which
means the Greek language obtained in Syria and Phoenicia, into which, a
little after, the Bible was translated, which paved the way for the
bringing of these people to the knowledge of Christ, through the
preaching of the Gospel; and partly because Paganism was abolished in
these places when Christianity prevailed.

\(p\) R. Judah ben Bileam apud Aben Ezram in loc.

[Zechariah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 9:7</span></span>

And I will take away his blood out of his mouth,.... The Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic versions, read "their blood"; not the blood of the
bastard, but of the Philistines. The Targum is, "I will destroy them
that eat blood"; the meaning may be, that they shall no more thirst
after blood, nor drink it; nor breathe out threatenings and slaughter
against the saints, or persecute the people of God: or that they should
no more offer the blood of their sacrifices upon the altars to their
deities, or eat things sacrificed to them:

and his abominations from between his teeth; their idols and idolatries
they were tenacious of, as a man is of his food, or of any thing that is
grateful to him; it may design things sacrificed to idols, eaten by
them:

but he that remaineth, even he shall be for our God: the Targum
paraphrases it,

"and the proselytes that remain among them, they also shall be added to
the people of our God:''

Jarchi interprets it of the synagogues and schools in the captivity of
Edom or Rome; but Aben Ezra's note is much better, that there shall be
none remaining of the Philistines, but only such who serve the blessed
God openly: but the true sense is, that here should be a remnant,
according to the election of grace, who should evidently appear to be
the Lord's people, by their conversion and effectual calling:

and he shall be as a governor in Judah; the Targum is,

"they shall be as the princes of the house of Judah;''

that is, as the heads of the families in that tribe; see [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002) compared with [Mat
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006) all true Christians are as
princes, yea, they are kings and priests unto God; and some of them are
as a guide, teacher; and instructor of others; who go before them, and
instruct them in the doctrines of the Gospel, as pastors and ministers
of the word:

and Ekron as a Jebusite; that is, the inhabitant of Ekron, that shall be
converted to Christ, shall be as an inhabitant of Jerusalem, which was
called Jebus, [Ch1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#004) shall have a
dwelling in the church, the city of God, and enjoy all the privileges
and immunities of it. Kimchi says this refers to the times of the
Messiah, when, he supposes, the Ekronites will be tributary to the
Israelites, as the Jebusites were in the days of David. The Targum is,

"and Ekron shall be filled with the house of Israel, as Jerusalem.''

The Syriac version is, "and Ekron shall be as Hebron".

[Zechariah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 9:8</span></span>

And I will encamp about my house, because of the army,.... Of profane
and wicked men, persecutors and heretics, who rose up in great numbers
in the first ages of Christianity against the church, the house of God,
where he dwells, which consisted of persons called from among the
Gentiles as before; in order to protect and defend them from that great
company which opposed them, the Lord encamped about them, partly by his
angels, [Psa 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007) and partly by his
ministers, set for the defence of the Gospel; but chiefly by his own
power and presence, who is as a fire round about them. The Targum is,

"and I will cause my glorious Shechinah to dwell in the house of my
sanctuary, and the strength of the arm of my power shall be as a wall of
fire round about it.''

Because of him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth;
either that his people might pass and repass with safety, who attended
the worship and service of his house; or because of Satan and wicked
men, who go to and fro, seeking to do all the mischief they can to the
saints of the most High. This may, in a literal sense, respect the care
of God over the Jewish nation, his church and people, in the times of
Alexander, who passed to and fro without distressing them; or in the
times of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, the kings of Egypt and Syria,
during whose commotions, and their passing to and fro against each
other, and against them, were still continued a kingdom.

And no oppressor shall pass through them any more; or "exactor" (q);
satisfaction for the sins of God's people being exacted, required, and
demanded of Christ their surety, it has been given; wherefore no exactor
shall pass through them, or over them, to require it of them; not the
law, for they are freed by Christ from the exaction, curse, and
condemnation of it; not justice, for that is fully satisfied, and
infinitely well pleased with the righteousness of Christ; nor Satan, the
accuser of the brethren, requiring punishment to be inflicted, which,
though he may do it, will be of no avail against them; nor the Jewish
tutors and governors, who exacted of the people obedience, not only to
the law of Moses, but to the traditions of the elders; since Christ has
redeemed his from this vain conversation, Christians are entirely free
from that yoke of bondage. This shows that this prophecy is not to be
literally understood, since it is certain, that, after the delivery, of
it, there were oppressors or exactors among the Jews in a literal sense:
Antiochus and others oppressed them before the birth of Christ; they
paid tribute to the Romans in his time; he was born at the time of a
Roman tax; and, after his death, Titus Vespasian destroyed their nation,
and city and temple: or, if it is, "any more" must be understood of a
long time, as it were, before they were utterly oppressed.

For now I have seen with mine eyes; these are either the words of God
the Father, looking with pleasure upon his church and people, about whom
he encamps; and upon the satisfaction his Son has given to the divine
justice for their sins, whereby they are free from all exactions and
oppressions: or of the Prophet Zechariah, as Aben Ezra thinks, who saw
with his eyes, in the visions of the night, all that is contained in
this prophecy: and now, inasmuch as all this predicted was to be
fulfilled in, or near, or about the times of Christ, therefore next
follows a glorious prophecy of his coming.

\(q\) "exactor", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius.

[Zechariah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 9:9</span></span>

Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem,....
By whom are meant, not the inhabitants of Jerusalem in common; nor the
children in it, that said Hosannas to the son of David; but the church
of God, and true believers in Christ, who are called upon to "rejoice"
and "shout": not merely in an external way, by showing marks of outward
joy, but in a spiritual manner, for which there was good reason, as
follows:

behold, thy King cometh unto thee; Aben Ezra says that interpreters are
divided about the sense of this prophecy; some say it is Messiah the son
of David; and others, Messiah the son of Joseph. R. Moses, the priest,
he observes, thinks that Nehemiah the Tirshathite is meant; and he
himself is of opinion that Judas Maccabeus is intended; but Jarchi
affirms that it is impossible to interpret it of any other than the King
Messiah; and this is the sense of many of their writers, both ancient
and modern. It is applied to him in the Talmud; they say (r), he that
sees an ass in his dream, let him look for salvation, as it is said,
behold, thy king cometh unto thee, "riding on an ass". R. Alexander
relates that R. Joshua ben Levi opposed these two phrases to each other,
"in its time", and "I will hasten it", [Isa
60:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#022) and gave this as the sense to
reconcile them: if they (the Israelites) are worthy, i.e. of the coming
of the Messiah, "I will hasten it"; if they are not worthy, it shall be
"in its time"; and that he also put these Scriptures together, and
compared them to that Scripture, "behold, one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven", [Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)
and also what is written, "poor, and riding on an ass"; if they are
worthy, he will come with the clouds of heaven; if they are not worthy,
he will come poor and riding on an ass (s). In an ancient book (t) of
theirs, at least so reckoned, it is said the King Messiah shall prevail
over them all (the nations of the world, and the Israelites); as it is
said, "poor, and riding on an ass, and on a colt, the foal of an ass":
and in several other places of that work, and other treatises in it (u),
the text is applied to the Messiah; as it likewise is in their ancient
Midrashes or expositions. In one (w) it is observed,

"the Rabbins say an ox; this is the anointed for war, as it is said,
"his glory is like the firstling of his bullock", [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017) an ass; this is the King
Messiah, as it is said, "poor, and riding on an ass";''

and again (x), on these words, "binding his foal to the vine, and his
ass's colt unto the choice vine", [Gen
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011), this remark is made; this shall
be when that shall come to pass which is written of him, "poor, and
riding on an ass". And in another (y) of their expositions, the two
Redeemers, Moses and the Messiah, are compared together; and, among the
several things in which they agree, this is one; as it is said of the
former redeemer, "and Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them on
an ass", [Exo 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#020) so it is said of
the latter Redeemer (the Messiah), "poor, and riding on an ass". And
thus it is interpreted by many of their more modern writers (z). This is
to be understood of Christ's coming, not merely to Jerusalem, when he
rode on an ass, after mentioned; but of his coming in the flesh, when he
came to Zion, and for her good; and which was wonderful, and therefore a
"behold" is prefixed to it; and is matter of great joy, which she is
called to show, because of the birth of him who is her Saviour; and
because of the good things that come by him; and because of his
appearing as a King, and her King; for, as he was prophesied of as such,
as such he came, though his kingdom was not of this world; and as Zion's
King, being placed there by his Father, and to which he has a right by
virtue of redemption, and is owned as such by his people in the
effectual calling, and to whom all the following characters belong.

He is just: not only essentially righteous as God, but just and upright
in the whole course of, his life as man; and faithful in the
administration of his office as Mediator; and the author and bringer in
of righteousness to his people:

and having salvation; the salvation of his church and people; which he
not only had at heart, but had it to execute, being appointed to that
service by his Father, and having agreed unto it as the surety of his
people, and was the business he was coming into the world to do, here
prophesied of; yea, he is called salvation itself, as in a parallel
text, [Isa 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#011) the purpose of it was
purposed in him; God resolved to save his people by him, and by him
only; he never intended to save any but in and through him; and the
thing was not only consulted with him, but the scheme of it was drawn in
him; God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. The covenant
of grace, in which salvation is a principal article, was made with him;
and he, as the surety of that covenant, undertook it; and in the fulness
of time being sent, came to effect it; for which he was abundantly
qualified, being God and man in one person, and so had something to
offer as a sacrifice for satisfaction to law and justice, in order to
obtain it; and could put a sufficient virtue therein to answer the end,
being the mighty God; and having as Mediator a commission from his
divine Father, he is become, by his obedience, sufferings, and death,
the author of eternal salvation to his people; and in him salvation is,
and in no other; and in vain it is to expect it from any other, or in
any other way, than by him, [Act 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012).
Some render the word "saved" (a); as he was by his divine Father, when
he was raised from the dead, and not suffered to see corruption; see
[Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007) others, "saving himself" (b);
when he raised himself from the dead, and thereby declared himself to be
the Son of God; and when he brought salvation to his body, the church,
which is himself, [Isa 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005)

lowly; meek, and humble, as he appeared to be in the assumption of human
nature; in his carriage to sinners, conversation with them, and
reception of them; in his ministrations to his disciples; and in not
seeking his own, but his Father's glory. Or "poor" (c); as Jesus the
Messiah was; born of poor parents, had not where to lay his head, and
was ministered unto by others; See [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)

and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass; which was
fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth, [Mat
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#004) not that he rode upon them both,
but on the foal only; for so it should be rendered, "upon an ass, that
is, upon a colt, the foal of an ass" (d). The Jews have a fable, that
the ass Abraham saddled, when he went to sacrifice his son Isaac, was
the foal of the ass that was created on the evening of the sabbath, that
is, at the creation; and that the same Moses set his wife and sons upon,
when he came out of Midian; and the same ass, they say, Messiah the son
of David was to ride upon at his coming (e); but one of such a
prodigious age surely could not be called a colt, or a foal; however,
this fable shows the conviction of their minds that this is a prophecy
of the Messiah, and that they expected the Messiah to ride upon an ass,
according to it, as our Messiah Jesus did. And the Greeks have another
fable, which perhaps took its rise from this prophecy, that when
Antiochus entered the temple at Jerusalem, he found in it an image of a
man in wood, with a long beard, riding on an ass (f). And a like
falsehood is told by Tacitus (g), that the Jews consecrated the effigies
of an ass in the inmost part of the temple; because a flock of wild
asses, as he pretends, directed them to fountains of water, when in the
wilderness, and ready to die with thirst; and yet he himself afterwards
says, the Jews have no images, neither in their cities, nor in their
temple: and from hence it may be arose the calumny cast upon the
primitive Christians, who were sometimes confounded with the Jews, that
they worshipped an ass's head; and which is refuted by Tertullian (h).

\(r\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 56. 2. (s) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 98. 1.
Vid. etiam ib. fol. 99. 10. (t) Zohar in Gen. fol. 127. 3. (u) Zohar in
Numb. fol. 83. 4. & in Deut. fol. 117. 1. & 118. 3. Raya Mehimna apud
ib. in Lev. fol. 38. 3. & in Numb. fol. 97. 2. (w) Bereshit Rabba, sect.
75. fol. 66. 2. (x) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 98. fol. 85. 3. (y) Midrash
Kohelet, fol. 63. 2. (z) Jarchi in Isa. xxvi. 6. Baal hatturim on Exod.
fol. 88. 2. Abarbinel, Mashmiah Jeshuah, fol. 15. 4. R. Abraham Seba,
Tzeror Hammor, fol. 46. 2. Caphtor Uperah, fol. 81. 2. (a) "et salvatus
ipse", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius; "servatus", Calvin, De Dieu.
Schultens (i) observes, that in the Arabic language, signifies large,
ample, spacious, and denotes amplitude of riches, power, knowledge,
happiness, and glory; and in this place the word describes a king endued
with most ample salvation, and brought into this amplitude out of
poverty and straits, darkness and misery. (b) "Servabit seipsum",
Vatablus. (c) pauper, V. L. Calvin, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator;
"inops", Cocceius (d) "id est, super pullum", Noldius. (e) Pirke
Eliezer, c. 31. fol. 32. 1. Caphtor Uperah, fol. 81. 2. (f) Diodor.
Sicul. Excerpta, l. 34. p. 901, 902. (g) Hist. l. 5. c. 3, 4, 5. (h)
Apologet. c. 16. ad nationes, l. 1. c. 11. (i) Origines Hebr. l. 1. p.
18, 19, 20. & indicul. voc. Hebr. in calce ejus.

[Zechariah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 9:10</span></span>

And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim,.... That is, the military
one; signifying that wars shall cease, [Psa
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009),

and the horse from Jerusalem; the warlike one; see [Mic
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010). Ephraim designs the ten tribes,
and Jerusalem stands for the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin; and the
sense is, that these shall be one in the days of the Messiah, as Kimchi
observes; and that all instruments of war shall be removed from them,
and there shall be an entire peace between them; see [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013),

and the battle bow shall be cut off; another instrument of war. The
Targum paraphrases it,

"I will break the strength of those that make war, the armies of the
people;''

all this does not design so much the outward peace that should be in the
world at the birth of Christ, as the spiritual peace of his kingdom; and
that, as it is not of this world, so neither is it spread, supported,
and defended by carnal weapons; and also the peaceableness and safety of
his subjects, and the destruction of their enemies:

and he shall speak peace unto the heathen; not only the church of
Christ, gathered out of the Jews, should enjoy great spiritual peace,
prosperity, and safety; but the Gentiles also should share in it, to
whom Christ went, and preached peace; not in his own person, being the
minister of the circumcision: but by his apostles, who had the
ministration of reconciliation committed to them; and being sent forth
by Christ, went everywhere preaching peace by him, who is Lord of all,
unto all nations; see [Eph 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017),

and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even
to the ends of the earth; according to Aben Ezra, from the Red Sea to
the sea of the Philistines, and from the river Euphrates to the ends of
the earth: or, as Kimchi cites him, from the south sea, called the sea
of Edom, to the north sea, which is the sea of the ocean; from the river
that goes out from Eden, which is at the beginning of the east, unto the
ends of the earth, which is the end of the west: or, as the Targum
paraphrases it,

"from the sea to the west, and from Euphrates to the ends of the
earth.''

The phrases are expressive of the extensiveness of Christ's dominion,
through the preaching of the Gospel, both in Judea and in the Gentile
world, before the destruction of Jerusalem; and especially in the latter
day; see [Psa 72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008). This and the
preceding clause are allowed to belong to the Messiah, by a modern
Jewish writer (i).

\(i\) R. Isaac, Chizzuk Emuna, par. 1. c. 1. p. 43, 44. So Kimchi in
Isa. lxv. 19.

[Zechariah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 9:11</span></span>

As for thee also,.... These words are not spoken to Christ, for "thee",
is of the feminine gender; but the congregation of Israel, as Kimchi
observes; or the church of God: nor are they the words of Christ to her;
he is the person before spoken of; but of God the Father, who, having
given out prophecies concerning the coming of Christ, and the
peaceableness and extensiveness of his kingdom, declares to the church
the benefits that she and those that belonged to her should receive by
the incarnation, sufferings, and death of Christ:

by the blood of thy covenant; not of the covenant of works, nor of
circumcision, nor of that that was made at Sinai, as the Jewish writers
interpret it; all which were a yoke of bondage; but of the covenant of
grace, namely, the blood of Jesus, which is a considerable article in
that covenant; that by which it is ratified and confirmed, and through
which all the blessings of it come, as redemption, peace, pardon,
justification, and admission into heaven: and this covenant is called
the church's covenant, because it is made with her in Christ, her
covenant Head, in whom she was considered; and it was made on her
account, and she has an interest in it, and in all things contained
therein. God is her covenant God and Father; Christ her surety,
Mediator, Redeemer, and Saviour, and the covenant itself unto her; and
all things in it, the blessings of grace and promises of good things,
are hers: and though the covenant at Sinai is not the covenant here
intended, that being a covenant which gendered to bondage, and under
which men were held as convicted and condemned malefactors; and so
cannot be that, the blood of which is the cause of a release from
prison, and of bringing into a state of liberty; yet the allusion is
unto it, which was a typical covenant; and the blood of the sacrifices
then sprinkled on the people is called "the blood of the covenant", [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008). It was not unusual with the
Heathens, at making covenants, to use blood, even human blood: it was a
custom with them to draw it from each other, and drink it, at least lick
and taste of it, as particularly with the Medes and Lydians (k); and was
reckoned by them the most sacred bond of covenants; and such covenants
with the Carmeni and Scythians were accounted the chief covenants of
friendship, and their mutual blood they used the greatest bond of
concord (l); and the surest pledge of keeping faith, and that it would
abide (m): but the blood of Christ shed is a far greater proof, as well
as cement, of love, concord, and friendship; and a much firmer bond of
the covenant of grace; and a surer pledge of the continuance of it, and
of its being faithfully performed; and which, having the nature of a
will or testament, becomes of force through the death of him the
testator; see [Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027),

I have sent forth thy prisoners: that is, the church's prisoners; not
prisoners to her, or in her; for the church of Christ is no prison; nor
are those that have a name and a place in her prisoners; they walk at
large, and walk at liberty; are fellow citizens with the saints; are
Christ's freemen, and are possessed of many privileges and immunities:
but these design such persons as are in a secret relation to her, and
yet, being in a state of nature, are prisoners; and so are such as are
not members of any visible church; nor as yet converted persons and
believers in Christ, who have an open relation to the invisible church;
but they are such who secretly belong to the general assembly and church
of the firstborn, written in heaven, whose names are in the Lamb's book
of life; or are chosen in Christ, and also redeemed by his blood: but,
being as yet in a state of unregeneracy, are prisoners to sin; are under
the power, dominion, and guilt of it; and, being transgressors of the
law, are arraigned by it as guilty persons; are convicted and condemned,
and shut up in it, and held under it; and are also the captives of
Satan, being led as such by him, at his will; and thus they are
prisoners, though there is a secret connection between the church and
them: and sooner or later, by virtue of the blood of that covenant,
which she and they have an interest in, they are brought

out of the pit wherein is no water; which is expressive of the state and
condition men are in by sin, and while in unregeneracy; they are in mire
and clay, in a most filthy and famishing condition, in a very wretched
and uncomfortable one; as in a dark and lonesome dungeon, and where no
refreshment can be had; where there are no true peace, joy, and comfort.
The allusion is to the custom of the eastern countries, and still
continues, who, in the nighttime, put their slaves into a well or pit,
and there shut them up till the morning, when they are let out for
business: now, from this state of captivity and bondage to sin, Satan,
and the law, and from all the miseries of such a state, are the Lord's
people, and who belong to Zion, the general assembly and church of the
first born, delivered by virtue of the blood of Christ, shed for the
redemption of them; in consequence of which it is said to these
prisoners of sin, Satan, and the law, go forth; these are made sensible
of their wretched condition, and are called and drawn out of it, and
delivered from it, and brought into a state of liberty. Ben Melech
interprets this pit of the captivity of the Jews.

\(k\) Herodot. Clio, sive l. 1. c. 74. (l) Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier.
l. 5. c. 3. (m) Mela de situ Orbis, l. 2. c. 1.

[Zechariah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 9:12</span></span>

Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope,.... "That hope for
redemption", as the Targum paraphrases it; not for redemption from the
Babylonish captivity, at the end of seventy years, which was now over;
but for redemption and salvation by Christ; for not the people of the
Jews, who stayed in Babylon, can be meant; for, as they were at liberty
to go from thence by the edict of Cyrus, they can not be said to be
prisoners, much less prisoners hoping for deliverance, when they had, or
might have it; but rather the Jews, who were come out of Babylon, as out
of a pit, wherein was no water; out of an uncomfortable state and
condition, and yet in their own land were encompassed with many straits
and difficulties, through the opposition they met with from many, who
discouraged and hindered them in their work; but were hoping they should
surmount all their difficulties, and get out of their troubles: though
it seems better to understand it of such, who, about the time of the
Messiah's coming, were looking for the consolation and redemption of
Israel, and hoping and waiting for it; as good old Simeon, and others,
who were prisoners under the former dispensation; but expecting
deliverance and salvation by the Messiah. It may be applied to all
sensible sinners, in every age and period of time; all men are concluded
in sin, shut up under the law, and led captive by Satan; but some are
not sensible of their imprisoned state, nor desirous of being out of it,
nor have any hope concerning it; others groan under their bondage, long
for deliverance, and are hoping for it: they hope that Christ will
receive them, and save them; that he will pardon their sins; that the
Spirit of God has begun a good work in them, and will perform it; and
that they shall enjoy eternal glory and happiness; for all which there
is good ground to hope: as that Christ will receive sinners sensible of
their lost perishing condition into his arms of mercy; since he is the
good Samaritan, the merciful High Priest, the compassionate Saviour;
who, in his love and pity, has redeemed the sons of men; and seeing he
died for sinners, even the chief of them; and therefore it need not be
doubted that he will receive them; and, besides, he has made kind
invitations to them to come to him, and has promised he will in no wise
reject them; and has actually received sinners, and most kindly and
tenderly embraced them: as also that they shall be saved by him; since
complete salvation is wrought out by him, and that for such as are lost,
and even the most abandoned of sinners; and which is freely to be had,
not according to the works of men, or as they shall deserve; but purely
through the free grace of God, and his abundant mercy in Christ: as well
as that their sins shall be pardoned of God for his sake, seeing there
is forgiveness with God; he has promised, proclaimed, and published it;
the blood of Christ has been shed for it; and he is exalted as a Saviour
to give it, and has ordered it to be preached in his name; and some of
the greatest of sinners have had their sins forgiven them: likewise such
have good ground to hope that the work of God is begun in them; though
it may be at present but a day of small things with them; there being
some light let into them, as to their state, and the way of salvation by
Christ; some fear of God, and love to him, to Christ, his people,
truths, ordinances, ways, and worship; sin is become odious, and Christ
precious: and good reason they have to hope, and even to be confident,
that this good work will be performed in them, though at times they have
many fears about it; since it is in such good hands, and the glory of
all the divine Persons is concerned in it; wherefore they may most
safely go on to hope for eternal life, which God has promised, before
the world began, is in Christ, and in his hands to give; and is the free
gift of God through him, whose righteousness entitles to it, and whose
grace makes meet for it; wherefore, having the one, they may truly hope
for the other; for grace is a well of living water, springing up unto
eternal life: such as these may well be called prisoners of hope;
partakers of that grace, and as it were shut up in it, and under the
influence and in the exercise of it; which is a gift of grace; is of the
operation of the Spirit of God, through whose power it is exercised; is
founded on the person, blood, and righteousness of Christ; is encouraged
by the promises of the Gospel; and is increased through the discoveries
of the love of God; and deals with things unseen and future: and those
who have the least share of it, as these described are supposed to have,
are here encouraged "to turn to the strong hold"; by which is meant, not
Judea, nor Jerusalem, nor the temple in it, nor the church of God; but
rather the blessed God, as Kimchi interprets it; and indeed a divine
Person is intended, even the Messiah, who is a "strong hold" for refuge,
and was typified by the cities of refuge, whither the manslayer fled,
and was safe; to which the allusion may well be thought to be, since one
of the names of the cities of refuge was Bezer, which signifies a
fortress, or strong hold; and comes from the same root as the word here
used: and such who are enabled and encouraged to flee to Christ for
refuge, are safe from vindictive justice, which is fully satisfied by
the blood, righteousness, and atoning sacrifice of Christ; and from the
law, its curses, and condemnation; Christ being made a curse for them,
and having had its sentence of condemnation executed on him; and from
all their sins, and the sad effects of them; from the guilt of them, and
obligation to punishment by them; from Satan, and all enemies, in whose
power it is not to destroy them, being out of their reach; and from the
wrath of God, everlasting destruction, and the second death: and such
find Christ to be a strong habitation, or a dwellingplace; where they
may and do dwell safely, pleasantly, and comfortably, enjoying plenty of
all good things; their bread in this munition of rocks being given to
them, and their water sure unto them; and to "turn" to it is to quit all
other dependencies, and to believe in Christ, and trust all with him:

even today do I declare that I will render double unto thee; which is
said, either to the church, or rather to her prisoners, to each of them,
to encourage them to flee to Christ, and trust in him; seeing, by the
present declaration of grace made, they may expect to enjoy all fulness
of grace, plenty of blessings, temporal and spiritual; the promise of
this life, and that which is to come; all spiritual blessings in Christ,
grace here, and glory hereafter. So "double" signifies anything large,
sufficient, plentiful, [Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)
particularly the Spirit and his grace; and double comfort from him,
instead of distress and trouble before experienced: according to the
accents, the word for "double" is to be connected with the word
"declare", and be read "this day", at this present time, however
distressing it may be, or you in it be attended with uncomfortable and
distressed circumstances, "I declare double" (n); double grace, as some
supply it, an abundance of it; which "I will render unto thee"; to
everyone of the prisoners of hope, who turn to the strong hold Christ,
in whom they will find a fulness of all grace, and shall receive out of
it grace for grace; double grace, a large measure of it; double to what
was received under the former dispensation. Cocceius renders it "another
declarer", discoverer, or shewer forth, "do I render unto thee" (o);
meaning the Spirit of God, the other Comforter from the Father: Christ
was the first declarer, who declared his Father, his nature,
perfections, purposes, mind, and will, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018) the Holy Spirit is the second, or
the other declarer, who was to bring all things to remembrance spoken by
Christ, and to lead into all truth, and show things to come, and to take
of the things of Christ, and show them to his people, [Joh
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016) and who was sent after Christ,
was received up into heaven, as his second, his deputy, to officiate in
his room and stead; as this word is used sometimes of the second priest,
or sagan, or deputy of the high priest, [Jer
52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024).

\(n\) "annuncians duplicem gratiam, quam reddam tibi", Vatablus. (o)
"Indicem alterum reddo tibi", Cocceius.

[Zechariah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 9:13</span></span>

When I have bent Judah for me,.... By whom are meant the apostles, who
were Jews, and whose ministrations were made use of as a bow with
arrows, to strike the hearts of men, and bring them into subjection to
Christ: they were a bow of the Lord's bending and preparing, and which
abode in strength, being made strong and effectual through the hands of
the mighty God of Jacob:

filled the bow with Ephraim: or rather, "filled Ephraim with the bow"
(p); filled his hand with it; meaning, that some out of the ten tribes,
as were the apostles, should be employed in drawing the bow of the
Gospel, and shooting its arrows, the doctrines of it; which are
comparable to them for swiftness, suddenness, and secrecy, and for their
piercing and penetrating nature:

and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece; that is,
persons of the land of Judea, as such the apostles were, and who
belonged to Zion the church of Christ; who were raised up, qualified,
and sent forth by him into the Gentile world, with weapons of warfare,
not carnal, but spiritual; against the Gentiles in general, and the wise
men of Greece, as at Athens, in particular, to confound some, and to
conquer others, and bring them to the obedience of Christ. Some
understand this of the Maccabees raised up against Antiochus, and the
Greeks that possessed the kingdom of Syria:

and made thee as the sword of a mighty man; that is, made the Gospel in
the hands of the church, and of her sons, as a sword in the hand of a
mighty man, by whom execution is done with it; this is the sword of the
Spirit, even the word of God; and is sharp and cutting, and is the power
of God unto salvation; as it is girt upon the thigh, and is in the hands
of Christ the most Mighty; and as it is accompanied with the Spirit of
God, and of power.

\(p\) "arcu implebo manum Ephraim", Vatablus; so Ben Melech.

[Zechariah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 9:14</span></span>

And the Lord shall be seen over them,.... His apostles and ministers:
or, "shall appear to them" (q); and be seen by them, as he was in the
days of his flesh; they saw his person, his miracles, his sorrows, and
sufferings; they saw him after his resurrection, and some have seen him
since his ascension, with the eyes of their bodies, as well as with the
eyes of their understandings; and so were fit to be witnesses of him:
or, "the Lord shall appear over them", or "upon them" (r); he was seen
over, and above them, when he ascended up to heaven; and upon them, by
the descent of his Spirit on them at the day of Pentecost, and in other
miraculous gifts bestowed upon them: or, "the Lord shall appear unto",
or "for them" (s); by giving strength of body, and fortitude of mind; by
protecting and preserving them, and by succeeding their labours:

and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: meaning the Gospel, and
the swift progress of it, as well as the light it communicates, and the
glory that goes along with it, and the efficacy of it:

and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet; of the Gospel, so called, in
allusion to the jubilee trumpet, which proclaimed liberty to servants,
and restoration of inheritances: or to the trumpets made for the
congregation of Israel to gather them together, and to express their joy
at feasts: or to the trumpet used to proclaim war, and as an alarm for
it; and this was blown by the Lord himself in person when here on earth,
and by his ministers in his name:

and shall go with whirlwinds of the south; that is, the Lord in the
ministration of the Gospel shall go forth with the efficacy and energy
of the Spirit: the Spirit is compared to "wind", because he works in a
sovereign way where he listeth, and oftentimes imperceptibly, and ever
powerfully; and to the "south" wind, because that brings warmth,
serenity, and calmness, produces rain, and makes fruitful; and he it is
which makes the Gospel efficacious; see [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016).

\(q\) "aderit illis", Vatablus, Drusius. (r) "Super cos", V. L. Calvin;
"super eis", Montanus, Piscator; "super illis", Cocceius. (s) So the
particle is sometimes used; see Noldius, p. 690, 703.

[Zechariah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 9:15</span></span>

The Lord of hosts shall defend them,.... Against all their enemies;
against Satan, and his temptations, and all the opposition made by him;
against the world, and all the rage and reproach of men; this was
remarkably verified in the apostles, who were preserved by the Lord
amidst a thousand snares and dangers; and who was able to do it, being
Jehovah, and the Lord of armies in heaven and in earth; he was as a
shield unto them, as the word (t) used signifies; and to which he is
often compared in Scripture. The Targum renders it,

"the Lord of hosts shall have mercy on them;''

he encompassed them about with his favour as with a shield:

and they shall devour; or "eat" (u); spiritual food; Christ the bread of
life; whose flesh is meat indeed, and who is lived upon by faith; the
blessings and promises of the everlasting covenant, of which the meek
eat, and are satisfied; the Gospel and the truths of it, the words of
faith and good doctrine, with which faithful ministers are nourished;
all which is necessary, that they may be strengthened, and qualified to
feed others with knowledge and understanding:

and subdue with sling stones; such who are stouthearted, and far from
righteousness; who become by their ministry penitent and humble, and
subject to Christ, his Gospel and ordinances, even by the means of
preaching of the word, which seem very unpromising and unlikely; being
to men foolishness, and like the scrip and sling David took with him,
and by which he brought Goliath down to the ground:

and they shall drink; of the love of God, which, for its antiquity,
purity, and refreshing nature, is like the best wine; and of the blood
of Christ, which is drink indeed; and of the grace of the Spirit, which
revives, strengthens, and extinguishes thirst:

and make a noise as through wine; being full of joy and thankfulness for
their spiritual food and drink; and so warm, zealous, and fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord; free and open in their ministrations, loudly
proclaiming the grace of God; bold, and fearless of danger:

and they shall be filled like bowls; that were full of the blood of the
offerings, as Jarchi and Kimchi explain it; or rather, as the Targum,
that were full of fine flour and oil; they having their souls filled
with good things, as the first of the above writers observes; a
comfortable view of interest in the love of God; a large measure of
spiritual joy, and a fulness of the gifts and graces of the Spirit,
qualifying them for their work:

and, as the corners of the altar; the Targum is,

"they shall shine as the blood that shines upon the wall of the altar;''

at the corners of which it was poured out; signifying that they should
be as full of the Spirit, and spiritual things, as the altar was of
blood: so the Jewish writers say, when the priest took the blood in the
bowl, he sprinkled of it two sprinklings upon the two corners of the
altar, on the diameter of it, and below upon the northeast horn, and
upon the southwest horn; and he ordered it so, as to sprinkle the blood
on the horn, that it might surround the corners, and that the blood
might be on the four sides of the altar round about (w).

\(t\) "obteget", Burkius. (u) "ut comedant", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Tarnovius, "et edent", Burkius. (w) Maimon. Maase Hakorbanot,
c. 5. sect. 6.

[Zechariah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 9:16</span></span>

And the Lord their God shall save them in that day,.... In the times of
the Gospel, and the dispensation of it; meaning either the apostles,
before said to be protected and defended, [Zac
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015) or rather the persons converted,
conquered, and subdued by them, who are not killed, but saved by the
Lord their God, their glorious Redeemer, from sin, Satan, the law, wrath
to come, and out of the hands of all their enemies:

as the flock of his people; they being his special people, by choice, by
covenant grace, and by redemption, and like to a flock of sheep; to
sheep, for harmlessness, meekness, weakness, and timorousness, for being
prone to go astray, and for their being clean, profitable, and sociable;
and to a flock, being a distinct society of men, and but one, and a
small one too, though a flock beautiful and holy:

for they shall be as the stones of a crown; like the gems and precious
stones which are on a king's crown; they being Christ's jewels, highly
valued and esteemed of by him; and comparable to them, for their
richness through the grace of God, and for their purity, brightness, and
glory in themselves, as owing to that; and for the glory they give to
Christ, and for the durableness of them. The Targum renders it, "the
stones of the ephod"; they may be translated, "the stones of separation"
(x); set for boundaries to distinguish places; those being separated by
the grace of God, in effectual calling, from the rest of mankind, and
laid as lively stones upon the foundation Christ:

lifted up as an ensign upon his land; the land of Judea, as trophies of
victorious grace; as monuments of praise and thankfulness; and as means
of encouraging others to seek to Christ, and believe in him. The
allusion seems to be to trophies erected on account of victories
obtained by valiant men, to perpetuate their memories; which were
sometimes of brass, and sometimes of marble, with inscriptions and
titles on them, that they might endure forever; and where sufficiency of
such materials could not be got, a vast heap of stones used to be laid
together; or large trees, and their branches cut down, and the spoils of
the enemy laid upon them; and these were raised up as trophies to
perpetuate the memory of mighty men to posterity. So Germanicus, having
conquered the nations between the Rhine and the Elbe, piled up a vast
heap of marble stones, and dedicated them to Tiberius (y); and Fabius
Aemilianus, having, with an army not amounting to 30,000 men, defeated
an army of the Gauls near the river Rhosne, consisting of 200,000 men,
set up a trophy of white stone, as well as built two temples, one to
Mars, and another to Hercules (z); and Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius
Maximus, having got the victory over the Allobroges, the people of Savoy
and Piedmont, erected stone towers on the spot, and fixed trophies
adorned with hostile arms, which before had been unusual (a); and it was
an ancient custom with the Goths and Swedes, in the camps and fields
where battles were fought, to fix stones like the Egyptian pyramids, on
which they engraved, in a brief manner, the famous exploits performed,
thereby to perpetuate the memory of the names and actions of great men
(b); and these pillars of stone set up for trophies, the chapiters of
them might be made in the form of crowns, and may be here referred to;
and so some render the words to this sense (c).

\(x\) "lapides separationis", Sanctius; so Aquila in Drusius. (y) Vid.
Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 1. c. 22. (z) Strabo. Geograph. l. 4. p.
128. (a) Flori Roman. Gest. l. 3. c. 2. (b) Olai Magni de Ritu Gent.
Septentrional. Epitome, l. 1. c. 16. (c) "Lapides coronarii", Junius &
Tremellius; "lapides coronati", i. e. "epistyliis ornati trophaeis",
Piscator.

[Zechariah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 9:17</span></span>

For how great is his goodness?.... Not of the land of Judea, as Kimchi;
nor of the doctrine of the law, as the Targum; nor of the people of the
Jews; but of the Messiah: and designs not his essential nor his
providential goodness; but his goodness as Mediator, which he has in his
heart, and has shown unto his people, in being their surety, and
becoming their Saviour; in assuming their nature; bearing their sins,
and obeying and suffering in their room and stead: and also that which
he has in his hands for them, and communicates to them; his fulness of
grace; all those spiritual blessings that are in him; the large measures
of grace given at conversion; and the numerous instances of his goodness
afterwards; yea, it includes glory, as well as grace:

and how great is his beauty? not as God, nor as man, but as Mediator; as
beheld in the covenant and promises; in the Gospel and in the truths and
in the ordinances of it:

corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids; by
"young men" are meant the same as in [Jo1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014) believers in Christ, who are
lively, warm, and zealous for Christ, his cause and interest; who are
active, diligent, and industrious in the discharge of duty; and are
strong in Christ, and in his grace; and particularly in the grace of
faith, and quit themselves like men: and by "maids" or "virgins" are
meant the same; so called because of their chaste adherence to Christ;
for their beauty, comeliness, and attire; and for their purity of divine
worship and conversation: and the Gospel is intended by "corn" and "new
wine"; which is compared to "corn", in opposition to the chaff of human
doctrines; and because it contains Christ the bread of life, and is
nourishing and comfortable: and to "new wine", not because it is a novel
doctrine, for it is the everlasting Gospel ordained before the world
was; but because, under the Gospel dispensation, to which this prophecy
refers, it is newly and more clearly revealed; See Gill on [Zac
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015). The effect of which is, that it
makes saints "cheerful", fills them with joy and spiritual mirth; for it
is a joyful sound: or, "shall make fruitful" (d); it causes them to grow
and increase, and makes them fruitful in every good word and work: or,
"shall make them speak" eloquently (e); or cause them to put forth the
fruit of their lips, in giving thanks to God for the abundance of grace
bestowed upon them: or, "shall" make "them sing" (f), as others; in
psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. This new wine may be interpreted of
the gifts and graces bestowed in great plenty on the day of Pentecost,
both on sons and daughters, on servants and handmaids, whereby they
prophesied, and saw visions, [Act 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016)
see [Eph 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018).

\(d\) "germinare faciet", Montanus; "progerminare faciet", Burkius;
"foecundabit", Castalio; "dicitur de virginibus spiritualibus, quae sunt
fructus multi evangelii", Zech. ix. 17. Stockius, p. 654. (e) "Facundas
faciet", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Tarnovius. (f) "Cantare faciet",
Pagninus, Drusius; so Ben Melech.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 10](zac010)

</div>
