<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac007)  [Next](zac009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 8

This chapter contains promises of various blessings to the people of the
Jews; and exhortations to each of the duties incumbent on them; and is
concluded with a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles. The cause of
all the blessings promised is the love of God to them, signified by
zeal, or jealousy for them, [Zac 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001).
The blessings promised are the Lord's return to dwell in Jerusalem, and
the integrity and holiness of that city, [Zac
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#003). The long life of the inhabitants
of it, and the plenty of children that should be born in it, [Zac
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#004) and, however wonderful and
incredible this might seem to some, it was not to the Lord, who was
determined to bring his people that were in various distant countries to
Jerusalem, and settle them there; and renew and reestablish his covenant
with them, [Zac 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#006) wherefore the Lord
encourages them to go on in rebuilding the temple, [Zac
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009) and promises them that things
would be better with them than in times past; that whereas there had
been nothing but penury, affliction, and distress, now there should be
great affluence and prosperity, [Zac
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#010) and though before they were a
curse among the nations, now they should be a blessing; and though their
fathers were punished, they should be dealt well with, [Zac
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#013) and then they are exhorted to the
discharge of several duties mentioned, to which they are induced by the
Lord's hatred of that which is evil, and by his turning their fasts into
cheerful feasts. [Zac 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016) to which is
added a prophecy of the calling and conversion of the Gentiles, which
would make for the glory of the Jewish church; who are described by
their numbers, being many people, and the inhabitants of many cities; by
their association together, to pray to the Lord, and worship him; by
their coming up to Jerusalem for that purpose; and by their junction
with the Jews, to which they will be encouraged by having heard that God
is with them, [Zac 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#020).

[Zechariah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 8:1</span></span>

Again the word of the Lord of hosts came to me saying. The phrase, "to
me", is wanting in the Hebrew text; and is the only place it is wanting
in, as the Masora observes; though undoubtedly it is to be understood;
and therefore is rightly supplied, as it is by the Targum, "with me".
Mention being made in the latter part of the preceding chapter [Zac
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#008) of the desolations of the earth,
comfort is here administered, as Aben Ezra notes.

[Zechariah 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 8:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... This prophecy, according to Kimchi and
Ben Melech, respects time to come; the days of the Messiah, in the war
of Gog and Magog, when they shall come up against Jerusalem, and the
Lord shall pour out his great wrath upon them; and it seems right to
interpret it, not only literally of Jerusalem, but spiritually of the
church in Gospel times:

I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy; the Arabic version reads,
"for Jerusalem, and for Zion"; as in [Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014); see Gill on [Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014),

and I was jealous for her with great fury: that is, against her enemies;
the Babylonians and Chaldeans now, and the antichristian powers in
Gospel times. The Targum paraphrases it, "against the people that
provoked her to jealousy"; the past tense is put for the future, as
Kimchi and Ben Melech observe.

[Zechariah 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 8:3</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, I am returned to Zion,.... The temple being now
building, and almost finished, and the worship of God restored in it.
The Targum renders it, "I will return to Zion"; and it may refer to the
time of Christ's incarnation, when the Redeemer came to Zion, [Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020) or to the time of the conversion
of the Jews in the latter day, of both which it is true; see [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026),

and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: or "cause my Shechinah to
dwell there", as the Targum paraphrases it; which was fulfilled when the
Word was made flesh, , "and dwelt" or "tabernacled" among the
inhabitants of Judea and of Jerusalem, and taught his doctrines, and
wrought his miracles, in the midst of them; and will be also when he
shall dwell among them by his Spirit and grace in the latter day:

and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; when Christ, who is
"truth" itself, was in it, and the truths of the Gospel were preached
there by him and his apostles, and they were received and professed by
many, though despised by others; and especially in the latter day, when
the Jews shall generally and cordially embrace Christ and his Gospel,
and shall worship God in spirit and in truth, and not in that shadowy,
formal, and hypocritical way they do now; see [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026) and especially this will be true
of the New Jerusalem, into which nothing shall enter that makes a lie,
[Rev 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027),

the mountain of the Lord of hosts; which will be established upon the
top of the mountains, and where the Lord will be seen and exalted in his
glory, even the Lamb, with the hundred and forty four thousand with him,
[Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002),

the holy mountain; where the holy word of God will be preached, the holy
ordinances administered, and holiness of life and conversation will be
strictly attended to; yea, Holiness will be upon the bells of the
horses, [Zac 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020).

[Zechariah 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 8:4</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... These words are used at every
consolatory promise given, as Kimchi observes, for the confirmation of
it:

there shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem;
signifying that the inhabitants should be very healthful; no sweeping
disease or calamity should be among them, but they should live to a good
old age, as follows:

and every man with his staff in his hand for very age; or "because of
multitude of days" (i); the length of time they should have lived in the
world, being worn out, not with diseases, but with old age, and
therefore obliged to use a staff when they walk the streets for their
support; all which is an emblem of the healthfulness of the inhabitants
of Zion, who have no reason to complain of sickness, because their sins
are forgiven them; and of that spiritual and eternal life, which they
that are written among the living in Jerusalem do enjoy; who are in
understanding men, fathers in Christ, and are growing up to the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ; see [Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020).

\(i\) "prae multitudine dierum", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Cocceius, Burkius.

[Zechariah 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 8:5</span></span>

And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls,....
Denoting a large increase of inhabitants, in a literal sense; and may
spiritually signify the large numbers of converts, of new born babes,
who are regenerated by the grace and Spirit of God, and are accounted of
by the Lord for a generation:

playing the streets thereof; being in health and rigour, and in great
security. The Targum renders it, "singing" or "praising in the spacious
places thereof"; singing the praises of God in Gospel strains; saying
their Hosannas to the Son of David; rejoicing in the great salvation by
Christ, and magnifying the grace of God, and setting forth the glories
of it in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs; see [Mat
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016). In Jerusalem, literally taken,
there were various streets, besides the street of the temple, which led
to it, [Ezr 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009) mention is made of
others in Jewish writings, as of the upper street (k), and of the street
of the butchers, and of the street of those that dealt in wool (l).

\(k\) Misn. Shekalim, c. 8. sect. 1. (l) Misn. Erubin, c. 10. sect. 9.

[Zechariah 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 8:6</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... This is repeated for the same end as
before; See Gill on [Zac 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#004),

If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these
days; either in the then present days and time; and the sense is, if it
should seem wonderful, incredible, and scarcely possible to the small
number of the Jews in Judea, that all the great and good things before
promised should be fulfilled; or in the times of the Gospel, when the
remnant, according to the election of grace, would wonder at the
marvellous loving kindness of the Lord, in doing each great things for
his church and people:

should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts; no,
not as if it was impossible to be done; it shall be done, as marvellous
as it may seem to be. Aben Ezra understands these words, not as spoken
by way of interrogation and admiration, but as an affirmation; that God
would do that which was marvellous, and such as he had never done the
like, even as follows:

[Zechariah 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 8:7</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold,.... As being something wonderful,
of great importance, and deserving attention:

I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country;
this can not be understood of bringing those Jews that remained in
Babylon, and other places, to their own land, for Babylon lay north of
Judea; see [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006), and as yet there
were no Jews in the western part of the world; but now they are chiefly
in the east and west, from whence they will be gathered at the time of
their general conversion; though this may refer to the times of the
apostles of Christ, and to their ministry in the several parts of the
world, who went forth, east, west, north, and south, and were the means
and instruments of saving the Lord's people, both Jews and Gentiles,
wherever they came, from the rising of the sun, to the setting of the
same; see [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011).

[Zechariah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 8:8</span></span>

And l will bring them,.... To Zion, into the church of God, the Gospel
fold, where Christ has engaged to bring his other sheep, that there may
be one fold for Jew and Gentile, [Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014) [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016),

and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: the Gospel church; and
be no more foreigners and strangers, but of the household of God,
enjoying all the immunities and privileges of the Jerusalem that is
above, the mother of us all:

and they shall be my people; appear to be so by effectual calling; which
makes those manifest to be the people of God, to be in the covenant of
his grace, who before were not known to be so, either by themselves or
others, [Pe1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010),

and I will be their God, in truth, and in righteousness; according to
the covenant of his grace, which will now in a very open manner be truly
and faithfully fulfilled; and they, in consequence of the grace bestowed
on them, will worship God in sincerity and truth, being justified by the
righteousness of Christ, and so will have no dependence on their own for
their acceptance with God; see [Hos
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019).

[Zechariah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 8:9</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Let your hands be strong,.... In going on
with the building of the temple, which was typical of the church of God,
since so many great and good things were promised by the Lord, [Hag
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#004),

ye that hear in these days; such as Zerubbabel the ruler, Joshua the
high priest, and the rest of the people of the land:

these words by the mouth of the prophets; that is, these prophecies of
future good things, which were delivered by Haggai, Zechariah, and
Malachi; who were the prophets,

which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the Lord of
hosts was laid; which was in the second year of Darius, on the twenty
fourth day of the ninth month, [Hag
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010),

that the temple might be built; in order to the rebuilding of it, the
foundation was laid; and from that time it was to continue building,
till it was finished (m).

\(m\) The true reading of these words, according to the accents, is,
"Thus saith the Lord of hosts: let your hands be strong, that hear in
those days these words: out of the prophets, I say, ye have heard, that,
from the day the house of the Lord of hosts shall be founded, the temple
should be continued to be built." So Reinbeck. De Accent. Heb. p. 453.

[Zechariah 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 8:10</span></span>

For before these days,.... That the temple began to be built:

there was no hire for men, nor any hire for beasts; that turned to any
account; the wages earned by the one, and with the other, were as if
they were put into a bag with holes, did not prosper with them, or do
them any service, [Hag 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006),

neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in, because of
the affliction; there was no safety in passing to and fro, nor any
peaceable enjoyment of what a man had, because of affliction and
oppression by the enemy on every side, and from every quarter:

for I set all men everyone against his neighbour; expressive of the
internal divisions and contentions among themselves, which are said to
be of the Lord, because he permitted them as a chastisement upon them
for their sins.

[Zechariah 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 8:11</span></span>

But now I will not be unto the residue of this people,.... The remnant
brought out of captivity, settled in the land, and now rebuilding the
temple:

as in the former days, saith the Lord of hosts; when they neglected the
house of the Lord, caring only for their own cieled houses, [Hag
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002).

[Zechariah 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 8:12</span></span>

For the seed shall be prosperous,.... Being cast into the earth, it
shall spring up again, and produce a large increase; whereas before,
though they sowed much, it came to little, [Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006),

the vine shall give her fruit; be loaded with clusters, and produce
large quantities of wine; whereas before there was a drought upon the
new wine; and where there were wont to be had fifty vessels out of the
press, there were but twenty, [Hag
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#011),

and the ground shall give her increase; as usual, meaning of wheat and
barley; whereas before there was a drought upon the corn, and where
there used to be a heap of twenty measures, there were but ten, [Hag
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#011),

and the heavens shall give their dew; which makes the earth fruitful;
whereas before the heaven over them was stayed from dew, and instead of
it were blasting, mildew, and hail, [Hag
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#010),

and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things;
as a symbol of better things inherited by the remnant according to the
election of grace; and who have the promise both of this life and that
to come; and who, seeking in the first place spiritual things, have all
others added to them, convenient for them.

[Zechariah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 8:13</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the
heathen,.... Reproached, vilified, and called accursed by them; see [Jer
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009) as true Christians, and real
believers in Christ, are by the men of this world, [Co1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012),

O house of Judah, and house of Israel; both being carried captive at
different times, and were typical of the true and Spiritual Israel of
God:

so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing; be blessed in themselves
with the above blessings of plenty and prosperity in outward things; see
[Hag 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019) and a blessing to others,
and blessed by them; and all those who are saved in the Lord with an
everlasting salvation are blessed with all spiritual blessings in him:

fear not; neither their enemies, nor the accomplishment of these
promises:

but let your hands be strong; as in [Zac
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009).

[Zechariah 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 8:14</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... In order to assure them of the
truth of what he promised, he observes the fulfilment of what he had
threatened, he being as true and faithful in the one as in the other:

As I thought to punish you: determined to do it, by suffering them to be
carried captive:

when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the Lord of hosts; by
their immorality, idolatry, and contempt of his prophets:

and I repented not; the Targum adds, "of my word"; of the resolution he
had taken up in his heart, and of the declaration of it by his prophets,
that he would punish them; this he did not repent of, revoke, change,
and alter, but steadily abode by it, and executed it.

[Zechariah 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 8:15</span></span>

So again,.... Or "so I am returned" (n), as in [Zac
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#003),

have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and to the house
of Judah; by bestowing the above mentioned blessings on them; and as
Jehovah has thought, so it comes to pass, and as he has purposed, so it
stands; whatever he determines shall be, as for evil, so for good, [Isa
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024),

fear ye not; as in [Zac 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#013).

\(n\) "sic conversus sum", Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin; "ita conversus",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "reversus sum", Burkius.

[Zechariah 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 8:16</span></span>

These are the things that ye shall do,.... Which were duties incumbent
on them, and which it became them to perform, under a sense of the
favours bestowed on them, to show their gratitude to God, and that they
might glorify him:

Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; not using deceit,
prevarication, and lying, [Eph 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)
and it becomes every man under the Gospel dispensation, according to the
gift he has received, to speak, publish, and declare the truth of the
Gospel, to the edification of others:

execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates; that is, execute
true judgment, as in [Zac 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009) do
justice between man and man, without respect of persons; the issue of
which will be peace between the contending parties: and this was to be
done in their "gates", because there their courts of judicature were
kept.

[Zechariah 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 8:17</span></span>

And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
neighbour,.... See Gill on [Zac 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010)
hatred without a cause was a governing vice under the second temple, and
Jarchi says was the cause of the destruction of it; see [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025),

and love no false oath; whereby the character and property of a fellow
creature are hurt; nor any vain one, which the Jews were addicted to,
[Mat 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034),

for all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord; as being contrary
to his nature, and to his law; and is a reason why they should be hated
and avoided by men.

[Zechariah 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 8:18</span></span>

And the word of the Lord of hosts came unto me, saying. The word of
prophecy, as the Targum paraphrases it: here begins a new prophecy,
respecting the abrogation of Jewish fasts, and the calling of the
Gentiles.

[Zechariah 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">zac 8:19</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... What follows is a full answer to the
question in [Zac 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#003),

The fast of the fourth month; the month Tammuz, which answers to June:
this fast was kept on the ninth day of the month, on account of the city
of Jerusalem being broken up on that day (o), as it is said, [Kg2
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#003) though Kimchi says this was on
the seventeenth day of that month, as also says the Misna (p); on which
day a fast was kept likewise, for the breaking of the two tables of the
law on that day: the reconciliation of this with the above Scriptures is
attempted in the Talmud (q) by observing, that the Scripture speaks of
the first temple, the Misna of the second temple:

and the fast of the fifth; the month Ab, which answers to July, on the
tenth of which the city was burnt, [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012) but the fast on account of it
was kept on the ninth day; See Gill on [Zac
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#003) on which day the Jews say that
both the first and second temple were destroyed, Bither was taken, and
the city ploughed (r):

and the fast of the seventh; the month Tisri, which answers to
September; on the third of this month a fast was kept on account of the
murder of Gedaliah; see [Zac 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005) and
on the tenth day of the same was the day of atonement, which was the
grand fast; see [Act 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#009),

and the fast of the tenth; the month Tebet; which answers to December,
on the tenth day of which the city of Jerusalem was besieged by
Nebuchadnezzar; and this fast was kept on that account, [Jer
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004) now of all these fasts the Lord
by the prophet says, they

shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts;
that is, there shall be no occasion for them; but, on the contrary, such
plenty of good things, both temporal and spiritual, shall be had, that,
instead of them, rather festivals should be kept with the greatest
cheerfulness, joy, and gladness. So Maimonides (s) says, that all these
fasts shall cease in the times of the Messiah, with all others, which
will be times of joy and gladness.

Therefore love the truth and peace; love to speak truth, and execute the
judgment of peace, [Zac 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016) or
express by words and deeds love to Christ, who is the way, the truth,
and the life; and also is our Peace, the Peacemaker, and Peace giver;
and on these accounts, as well as on others, is greatly to be loved:
likewise the Gospel, which is the word of truth, and the Gospel of
peace; which contains nothing but truth, and is the ministry of
reconciliation, and is to be loved on that account; and even peace with
men is no further to be loved and sought after than as it is consistent
with truth; and these being the principal things under the Gospel
dispensation, these, and not fasts, or any other ceremonial observances,
are to be attended to.

\(o\) T. Bab. Roshhashanah, fol. 18. 2. (p) Taanith, c. 4. sect. 7. (q)
T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 28. 2. (r) Roshhashanah, ut supra. (fol. 18. 2.)
(s) Hilchot Taanioth, c. 5. sect. 19.

[Zechariah 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">zac 8:20</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, It shall yet come to pass,.... This is
another thing that shall certainly be accomplished:

that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities; in the
Gentile world; they shall come and hear the word, believe in Christ, and
join together in a Gospel church state; as they did at Antioch,
Thessalonica, Corinth, and many other places: Ben Melech says this shall
be in the days of the Messiah; and so it has been in the days of the
true Messiah Jesus, and will be again in the latter day.

[Zechariah 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">zac 8:21</span></span>

And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another,.... Which shows
their concern for the spiritual welfare of each other, their zeal for
the honour and glory of God, and their readiness to attend divine
worship:

saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord; for pardoning,
justifying, and sanctifying grace which shows their sense of need of
these things, and that they are only to be had of the Lord; and that
their case required haste, and would admit of no delay:

and to seek the Lord of hosts: by prayer and supplication, as before:
the Chaldee paraphrase is, "to seek doctrine from the Lord of hosts"; to
learn the truths of his Gospel; to know his will, and be informed of the
right way of worshipping him, as well as to seek to Christ for life and
salvation:

I will go also; that is, "this shall say to that", as the Targum
supplies it; one shall say to another, and express himself in such
language, by way of example and encouragement.

[Zechariah 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">zac 8:22</span></span>

Yea, many people, and strong nations,.... Or, "mighty kingdoms", as the
Targum renders it; even such have embraced the Gospel, and professed the
Christian religion; of which there has been abundant proof since the
downfall of Paganism under Constantine:

shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem; that is, shall attend
the public worship of God in the church:

and to pray before the Lord; join in public prayer, and other ordinances
of the Gospel. This phrase, which is used also in the preceding verse
[Zac 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#021), signifies that the Lord,
and he only, is the object of prayer: it is not to be made to a
creature, or to an idol made with hands, they had been used to pray to
before, but to the one only living and true God, Father, Son, and
Spirit; and that this is to be done as in the presence of God, who is
omniscient, who knows all persons and their cases, and what are their
ends and views in their petitions to him, and whether these come from a
true heart and unfeigned lips; for all things are naked and open unto
him, with whom we have to do; that, under the Gospel dispensation
especially, men may come into the presence of God with great freedom and
liberty, and pour out their souls before him, and with great boldness
and confidence, through the blood of Christ being shed, and a new and
living way opened by it, in which they may come and ask in faith
whatever they want; though this should always be performed with
reverence and godly fear, and with all humility and submission to the
will of God: and though it may take in all sorts of prayer, and wherever
and by whomsoever performed, either mental or vocal, in the closet or in
the family, which is always to be done in like manner before God; yet it
seems chiefly to design social and public prayer: which being put up to
God in the church, may be said to be before the Lord, it being in the
assembly of his saints, where he more especially grants his presence,
and shows himself to be a God hearing and answering prayer; see [Psa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001).

[Zechariah 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">zac 8:23</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... For the further confirmation and
illustration of this prophecy:

in those days it shall come to pass; this shall be done in the times of
the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his apostles:

that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even
shall take bold of the skirt of him that is a Jew: which may be
understood either of our Lord Jesus Christ; who was a Jew by nation, the
Jews were his own people, and Judea his nation; by descent, he springing
from the tribe of Judah, and the family of David; by religion, being
made under the Jewish law; by his habit and dress, by which, as well as
by his language, the woman of Samaria knew he was a Jew, [Joh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009) and very probably he wore the
fringe the Jews did on the border of his garment, [Mat
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020) and which the Jewish doctors
think is here meant (t) by the skirt; but this may intend, in a
spiritual sense, the skirt being put for the whole garment, [Eze
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008), the robe of Christ's
righteousness, which sensible sinners take hold of by faith, and put it
on as their justifying righteousness: and "ten men" out of "all nations"
being said to do it, and this number signifying many, [Lev
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026) may denote that the number of
them that believe in Christ for righteousness, and are justified by it,
are many, [Isa 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011) though they are
but few when compared with others; and that as God has chosen, Christ
has redeemed, so the Spirit calls some out of all nations; and God is
the God of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews, since the one are
justified by him as well as the other, [Rom
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029) or this may be understood of any
of the apostles of Christ, who were all Jews; and especially the Apostle
Paul, who was the apostle of the Gentiles; who were sent into all the
world to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, by which means they came to
hear it; and many of them out of every nation laid hold on the skirts of
these men; believed and embraced the doctrines they preached; were
greatly affected towards them; gave up themselves to them; consorted
with them; accompanied them, and cleaved unto them; did not care to part
with them, as children, that lay hold on their parents' skirts, will not
leave them, but go with them where they go, as follows:

saying, We will go with you; either with Christ, resolving to follow him
whithersoever he goes; to hold to him the Head; to abide by his truths
and ordinances; to walk on in his ways, whatever they suffer for his
name's sake: or with his ministers and people, determining to go along
and join with them in all religious exercises; see [Rut
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#016),

for we have heard that God is with you: with Christ, as he always was;
in the council and covenant of grace before time, and at the beginning
of time to his incarnation; and during his state of humiliation, and in
his sufferings and death; and now in his state of exaltation; hence his
name "Ithiel", God with me, [Pro 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)
or with his ministers and people, which he has promised to be unto the
end of the world; and this the Gentiles heard and understood, by the
power that went along with their ministry, to the conversion of
multitudes of sinners; and by the miracles which they wrought, for the
confirmation of the doctrines they delivered.

\(t\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 32. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 9](zac009)

</div>
