[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic26)  [Next](tic28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

SPEAKS OF VARIOUS OTHER GRACES GOD BESTOWS ON THE SOUL IN DIFFERENT
WAYS, AND OF THE GREAT BENEFITS CONFERRED BY THEM.

*1. Reasons for speaking of these supernatural favours. 2. An
intellectual vision. 3. God compared to a palace in which His creatures
dwell. 4. Forgive as we are forgiven. 5. The vision shows God to be
Truth itself. 6. We should imitate God by truthfulness. 7. Why God
reveals these truths*.

1\. OUR Lord communicates with the soul by means of these apparitions on
many occasions--sometimes when it is afflicted, at other times when it
is about to receive some heavy cross, and again for the sake of the
mutual delight of Himself and His beloved. There is no need for me to
specify each different case nor do I intend to do so. I only wish to
teach you (as far as I am acquainted with them myself) what are the
different favours God shows a soul in this state so that you may
understand their characteristics and the effects they produce.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus you will not
mistake every idle fancy for a vision and if you really see one, knowing
that such a thing is possible, you will not be disturbed nor unhappy.
The devil, who gains greatly by it, is delighted to see a soul troubled
and distressed, knowing how this hinders it from employing itself wholly
in loving and serving God.

2\. His Majesty has far higher ways of communicating Himself to the
soul; they are less dangerous for I do not think the evil spirit can
imitate them. They are more difficult to explain, being more abstruse;
therefore imaginary visions are easier to describe. God is sometimes
pleased, while a person is engaged in prayer and in perfect possession
of her senses, to suspend them and to discover sublime mysteries to her
which she appears to see within God Himself. This is no vision of the
most sacred Humanity nor can I rightly say the soul 'sees,' for it sees
nothing; this is no imaginary vision but a highly intellectual one,
wherein is manifested how all things are beheld in God and how He
contains them within Himself. <span id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_374) It
is of great value, for although passing in an instant, it remains deeply
engraved in the memory, producing a feeling of great shame in the mind
which perceives more clearly the malice of offences against God, since
these most heinous sins are committed within His very being since we
dwell within Him. I will try to explain this truth to you by a
comparison, for although it is obvious and has been often told us, we
either never reflect upon it or do not wish to

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

understand it. If we realized it, we could not possibly behave with such
audacity.

3\. Let us compare God to a very spacious and magnificent mansion or
palace and remember that this edifice is God Himself. Can the sinner
withdraw from it in order to carry out his crimes? No, certainly not,
for within this very palace, that is, within God Himself, are
perpetrated all the abominations, impurities and evil deeds that sinners
commit. Oh awful thought, well worthy to be pondered over! What profit
it would bring to us, who know so little and understand these truths but
partially or how could we possibly be so reckless in our daring? Let us,
sisters, meditate on the infinite mercy and patience of God in not
casting us down to hell at once and let us render Him hearty thanks.
Surely we should be ashamed of resenting anything done or said against
us--*we* who are the scum of the earth--when we see what outrages are
offered to *God* our *Creator* within His very being, by us His
creatures; yet we are wounded whenever we hear of an unkind word having
been spoken of us in our absence, although perhaps with no evil
intention.

4\. Oh misery of mankind! When, daughters, shall we imitate Almighty God
in any way? Oh, let us not think we are doing great things if we suffer
injuries *patiently*: rather let us bear them with *alacrity*; let us
love our enemies, since this great God has not ceased to love us in
spite of our many sins! This is indeed the chief reason that all should
forgive any harm done them. I assure you, daughters, that though this
vision passes very quickly,

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

our Lord has bestowed signal grace on her to whom He grants it, if she
seeks to profit by keeping it constantly in mind.

5\. Short as the time lasts, yet, in a manner impossible to describe,
God also manifests that in Him there is a verity which makes all truth
in creatures seem obscure. He convinces the soul that He alone is that
Truth which cannot lie, thus demonstrating the meaning of David's words
in the psalm: 'Every man is a liar,' <span
id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_375) which could never be thus realized by
any other means, however often we might hear that God is truth
infallible. As I recall Pilate and how he besought our Lord in His
Passion to answer his question: 'What is truth?' <span
id="fr_376"></span>[3](#fn_376) I realize how little mortals know of
that sublime veracity.

6\. I wish I could explain this better but am unable to do so. Let us
learn from it, sisters, that if we would bear any resemblance to our God
and our Spouse, we must strive to walk ever in the truth. I do not
merely mean that we should not tell falsehoods thank God, I see that in
these convents you are most careful never to do so on any account--but I
desire that as far as possible we should at with perfect truth before
God and man and above all that we should not wish to be thought better
than we are; that in all our deeds we should ascribe to God what is His
and attribute what is ours to ourselves, and that we should seek for
verity in all things. Thus we shall care little for this world, which is
but deception and falsehood, and therefore

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

cannot last. Once, while I was wondering why our Lord so dearly loves
the virtue of humility, the thought suddenly struck me, without previous
reflection, that it is because God is the supreme Truth and humility is
the *truth*, for it is most true that we have nothing good of ourselves
but only misery and nothingness: whoever ignores this, lives a life of
falsehood. They that realize this fact most deeply are the most pleasing
to God, the supreme Truth, for they walk in the truth. God grant,
sisters, that we may have the grace never to lose this self-knowledge!
Amen.

7\. Our Lord shows the soul these favours because she is now indeed His
bride, resolute to do His will in all things; therefore He wishes to
give her some idea how to accomplish it and to manifest to her some of
His divine attributes. I need say no more about it, but I believe the
two points above mentioned will prove very useful. These favours should
cause no fear but lead us to praise God for bestowing these graces. I
think neither the devil nor our own imaginations can have much to do
with them, therefore the soul may rest in perfect peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[248:1](tic27.htm#fr_374) *Life*, ch. xl.
13-16.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[250:2](tic27.htm#fr_375) Ps. cxv. 11. 'Omnis
homo mendax.'

<span id="fn_376"></span>[250:3](tic27.htm#fr_376) St. John xviii. 38:
Quid est veritas?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Dart of Love](tic28)
