[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm089)  [Next](asm091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER LX

 

### SHOWING HOW WE HAVE NEED OF THE GRACE OF GOD, WHICH MAKES US LIKE UNTO GOD AND LEADS US TO GOD WITHOUT MEANS

 

Now all holiness and all blessedness lie in this: that the spirit is led
upwards, through likeness and by means of grace or glory, to rest in the
essential unity. For the grace of God is the way by which we must always
go, if we would enter into the naked essence in which God gives Himself
with all His riches without means. And this is why the sinners and the
damned spirits dwell in darkness; for they lack the grace of God, which
should enlighten them, and lead them, and show them the way to the
fruitive unity. Yet the essential being of the spirit is so noble, that
even the damned cannot will their own annihilation. But sin builds up a
barrier, and gives rise to such darkness and such unlikeness between the
powers and the essence in which God lives, that the spirit cannot be
united with its proper essence; which would be its own and its eternal
rest, did sin not impede it. For whosoever lives without sin, he lives
in likeness unto God, and in grace, and God is his own. And so we have
need of grace, which casts out sin, and prepares the way, and makes our
whole life fruitful. And this is why Christ always comes into us through
means, that is, through grace and multifarious gifts; and we too go out
towards Him through means, that is, through virtues and diverse
practices. And the more inward gifts He gives and the more deeply He
stirs us, the more inward and delightful are the workings of our spirit,
as you have already heard in all the ways which have been shown forth
before. And here there is a perpetual renewal; for God ever gives new
gifts, and our spirit ever turns inward in such wise as it is invited
and as is bestowed on it by God, and in that meeting it always receives
a higher renewal. And thus one grows continually into a higher life. And
this active meeting is altogether through means; for the gifts of God
and our virtues and the activity of our spirit are the means. And these
means are necessary for all men and all spirits: for, without the
mediation of God's grace and a loving turning to Him in freedom, no
creature shall ever be saved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIX. of How God and Our Spirit Visit Each Other in the
Unity and in the Likeness](asm091)
