[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm014)  [Next](asm016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XII

 

### HOW HUMILITY IS THE FOUNDATION OF ALL OTHER VIRTUES

 

Now consider this: as we have laid down humility as a foundation, so
therefore we shall speak of humility first.

Humility, that is lowliness or self-abasement, is an inward bowing down
or prostrating of the heart and of the conscience before God's
transcendent worth. Righteousness demands and orders this, and through
charity a loving heart cannot leave it undone. When a lowly and loving
man considers that God has served him so humbly, so lovingly, and so
faithfully; and sees God so high, and so mighty, and so noble, and man
so poor, and so little, and so low: then there springs up within the
humble heart a great awe and a great veneration for God. For to pay
homage to God by every outward and inward act, this is the first and
dearest work of humility, the most savoury among those of charity, and
most meet among those of righteousness. The loving and humble heart
cannot pay homage enough, either to God or to His noble manhood, nor can
it abase itself as much as it would. And that is why a humble man thinks
that his worship of God and his lowly service are always falling short.
And he is meek, reverencing Holy Church and the sacraments. And he is
discreet in food and drink, in speech, in the answers which he makes to
everybody; and in his behaviour, dress, and lowly service he is without
hypocrisy and without pretence. And he is humble in his devotions, both
outwardly and inwardly, before God and before all men, so that none are
offended because of him. And so he overcomes and casts out Pride, which
is the source and origin of all other sins. By humility the snares of
the devil, and of sin, and of the world, are broken, and man is set in
order, and established in the very condition of virtue. And heaven is
opened to him, and God stoops to hear his prayers, and he is fulfilled
with grace. And Christ, that strong rock, is his foundation. Whosoever
therefore grounds his virtues in humility, he shall never err.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of Obedience](asm016)
