[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm024)  [Next](asm026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXII

 

### OF PURITY

 

From this temperance there springs purity both of soul and of body, for
none can be perfectly pure in body and in soul save him who is temperate
in body and in soul.

Purity of spirit is this: that a man should not cleave to any creature
with desirous affection, but to God alone; for we should use all
creatures, but enjoy only God. Purity of spirit makes a man cleave to
God, above all understanding, and above all feelings, and above all the
gifts which God may pour into his soul: for all that a creature receives
in his understanding and in his feeling, purity will pass by, to rest in
God. Go therefore to the Sacrament of the Altar, not for the sake of
refreshment, nor because of desire, nor for pleasure, nor for peace, nor
for satisfaction, nor for sweetness, nor for anything else than the
glory of God and your own growth in all virtues. This is purity of
spirit.

Purity of heart is this: that a man, in every bodily temptation or
natural inclination, of his own free will, and with an ever-renewed
confidence and without hesitation, turns to God; with an ever-renewed
faithfulness and with a firm will ever to remain with Him. For
consenting to those sins or satisfactions, which the bodily nature seeks
like a beast, is a departure from God.

Purity of body is this: that a man withdraws from, and bewares of, all
unchaste deeds, in whatsoever manner they be, which his conscience
teaches and declares to be unchaste, and contrary to the commandments,
the honour, and the will of God.

By these three kinds of purity the seventh mortal sin is overcome and
cast out; that is, Unchastity. And this is a consenting and turning of
the spirit from God to some creaturely thing; it is the unchaste work of
the body contrary to the dispensation of Holy Church; it is a sensual
dwelling of the heart upon the taste or enjoyment of some creature,
whatsoever it be. But thereby I do not mean those sudden movements of
appetite and desire, which no one can prevent.

Now you should know that purity of spirit keeps a man in the likeness of
God, untroubled by any creature and inclined towards God, and united
with Him.

Purity of body is likened to the whiteness of lilies and to the
cleanness of the angels. In withstanding, it is likened to the redness
of roses and to the nobleness of martyrs. If it is kept for the love and
the glory of God, it is perfect. And so it is likened to the sunflower,
for it is one of the highest ornaments of nature.

Purity of heart works a renewal and increase of the grace of God. By
purity of heart all the virtues are prompted, practised and preserved.
It guards and keeps the senses from without; it quells and restrains the
animal lusts from within; it is an adornment of all inwardness. And it
is the door of the heart; barred against all earthly things and all
deceit, but opened to all heavenly things and to all truth. And of all
such Christ says: Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God;
and in this vision consist our eternal joy, our reward and our entrance
into bliss. Therefore men should be sober and temperate in all things,
and beware of all intercourse and occasion whereby purity, whether of
soul or of body, may be defiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Of Three Enemies to be Overcome by
Righteousness](asm026)
