[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm067)  [Next](asm069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXXVIII

 

### THE THIRD RILL ESTABLISHES THE WILL TO EVERY PERFECTION

 

From this gladness and the fulness of grace and the faithfulness of God,
there is born and flows forth the third rill in this same unity of the
spirit. This rill, like a fire, enkindles the will, and swallows up and
consumes everything into unity. And it fills to the brim and flows
through all the powers of the soul, with rich gifts and with a singular
nobility: and it calls forth in the will a tender spiritual love without
effort.

Now Christ says inwardly within the spirit by means of this burning
brook: Go ye out by practices in conformity with these gifts and with
this coming. By the first rill, which is a simple light, the memory has
been lifted above sensible images, and has been grounded and established
in the unity of the spirit. By the second rill, which is an inflowing
light, understanding and reason have been enlightened, to know the
diverse ways of virtue and of practice, and discern the mysteries of the
Scriptures. By the third rill, which is an inpouring heat, the supreme
will has been enkindled in tranquil love, and has been endowed with
great riches. Thus has this man become spiritually enlightened; for the
grace of God dwells like a fountainhead in the unity of his spirit; and
its rills cause in the powers an outflowing with all the virtues. And
the fountainhead of grace ever demands a flowing-back into the same
source from whence the flood proceeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX. Showing How the Established Man Shall Go Out in
Four Ways](asm069)
