[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm092)  [Next](asm094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER LXIII

 

### OF THE ORDERING OF ALL THE VIRTUES THROUGH THE SEVEN GIFTS OF THE HOLY GHOST

 

Now consider the order and the degrees of all the virtues and of all
holiness, with which we should go out to meet God through resemblance;
that so we may rest with Him in the unity.

 

### The Gift of Fear

 

When a man lives in the Fear of God, in the moral virtues and in outward
works; and when he is obedient and submissive to Holy Church and to the
Divine commandments, and when he is ready and willing in simplicity of
intention to do all good things: then he is like unto God, through
faithfulness, and through the gathering of his will into the will of
God, both in doing and in leaving undone. And he rests in God, above
likeness; for through faithfulness and singleness of intention, he
fulfils the will of God, more or less according to the measure of his
likeness; and through love, he rests in his Beloved above likeness.

 

### The Gift of Piety

 

And if he exerts himself well in that which he has received from God,
then God bestows upon him the spirit of Piety and Mercy. Thus he becomes
gentle of heart, meek and merciful. And thereby he becomes more full of
life and more like to God, and feels himself to be resting more in God,
and to be broader and deeper in virtue than before. And he savours this
likeness and this rest so much the better, the more his resemblance is
increased.

 

### The Gift of Knowledge

 

And if he here exerts himself well, with great zeal, and with a single
intention, and fights all that which is opposed to the virtues; this man
receives the third gift, which is Knowledge and Discretion. Thus he
becomes reasonable and discerning, and knows what to do and what to
leave undone, and where he must give and where he must take away. And
through simplicity of intention and godly love, this man rests in God
above himself in the unity; and he possesses himself in likeness, and he
possesses all his works with a greater delight, because he is obedient
and submissive to the Father, and has reason and discernment through the
Son, and is gentle and merciful through the Holy Ghost. And thus he
bears a resemblance unto the Holy Trinity, and he rests in God, through
his love and the simplicity of his intention. And herein the whole of
the active life consists. Thus a man should exert himself with great
zeal, and should follow his single intention with reason and
discernment. And he must beware of all that is opposed to the virtues,
and must ever bow himself down in humility at the feet of Christ: and in
this way he will grow ever more and more in virtue and in resemblance;
and if he keeps himself thus he cannot err. Yet according to this way,
he still remains in the active life. For if a man practises and clings
to the activities of the heart and the diversity of works, more than to
the ground and reason of all works; and if he busies himself more with
the practice of the sacraments, with their forms and outward symbols,
than with the ground and the truth which are signified thereby: so he
shall ever remain an outward man. But he shall be saved by his good
works and his simplicity of intention.

 

### The Gift of Strength

 

And therefore, if a man wishes to come nearer to God, and to exalt his
practice and his life, he must proceed from the works to their reason,
and from the forms to the truth; thereby he shall become master of his
works, and shall know truth, and shall come into the inward life. And
God gives him the fourth gift, which is the spirit of Strength: and thus
he shall be able to overcome joy and grief, profit and loss, hope and
care in earthly things, together with all kinds of hindrances and all
multiplicity. And thus he becomes free and detached from all creatures.
When a man has become free from all creaturely images, he is master of
himself, and easily and without labour becomes inward and recollected;
and turns freely and without hindrance to God, with fervent devotion,
with lofty desire, with thanksgiving and praise, and with a single
intention. Thus he enters into fruition of all his deeds and his whole
life, inward and outward; for he stands before the throne of the Holy
Trinity, and often receives inward consolation and sweetness from God.
For he who serves at such a table with thanksgiving and praise, and with
inward reverence, often drinks of the wine, and often eats of that which
is left, and of the crumbs which fall from the Lord's table: and he
continually possesses inward peace, through the singleness of his
intention. And if he will abide steadfastly before God in thanksgiving
and praise, and with uplifted purpose, the spirit of Strength is doubled
within him; for then he no longer loses himself in bodily desires, in
longings after consolation or sweetness, nor in any other gift of God,
nor in rest and peace of the heart. But he will forego all gifts and
every consolation, if so be that he may find Him Whom he loves. In this
way he is strong who abandons and overcomes the unrest of the heart and
earthly things; and doubly strong is he who also foregoes and overpasses
every consolation and heavenly gift. Thus a man transcends all
creatures, and possesses himself, powerful and free, through the gift of
spiritual Strength.

 

### The Gift of Counsel

 

When, therefore, no creature can either overcome or impede a man from
persisting in his single and upward-striving intention, and when through
this Strength he is steadfast in praising God, seeking and meaning God
above all His gifts, then God bestows upon him the fifth gift, which is
the gift of Counsel In this gift the Father draws the man inwardly, and
calls him to His right hand, with the chosen in His unity. And the Son
says in ghostly wise within him: Follow Me to My Father: one thing is
needful." And the Holy Ghost makes the heart expand and flame up in
fiery love. And thence comes the life of loving tumult and inward
restlessness; for, in him who listens to this counsel, there arises a
storm of love, and nothing can satisfy him save God alone. And therefore
he abandons himself and all things, that he may find Him in Whom he
lives and in Whom all things are one. Here the man should have God in
mind in a simple way, and should master himself by means of the reason,
and should renounce all self-will, and should await in freedom the unity
which he desires, until the day when it is God's pleasure to give it.
Thus the spirit of Counsel works in him in two ways: for that man is
great, and follows the precept and counsel of God, who abandons himself
and all things, and says, with an insatiable, impetuous and burning
love: Thy Kingdom come. But that man is greater still, and follows still
better the counsel of God, who overcomes his own self-will, and
renounces it in love, and says unto God with reverent submission: Thy
Will be done in all things and not my will. When Christ our dear Lord
approached His passion, He said those very words unto His Father, in
humble abnegation of Himself; and they were to Him the most happy, and
to us the most wholesome, and to the Father the most lovable, and to the
devil the most terrible, words which Christ ever spoke; for, by His
renunciation of self-will according to His manhood, we are all saved. In
this way the will of God now becomes to the loving and humble man the
highest joy, and the greatest desire of his ghostly feelings: even
though this will should lead him to hell, which is impossible. And here
nature is cast down into the depths, and God is exalted most highly; and
this man becomes capable of receiving all the gifts of God; for he has
denied himself, and has renounced his own self, and has given all for
all. And he therefore asks nothing and wills nothing but that which God
wishes to give him. That which God wills, this is his joy; and he who
surrenders himself to God in love is the most free of all men living. He
lives without care, for God cannot lose that which is His.

Now mark this: although God knows all hearts, yet such a man is often
tempted and tried of Him, whether he is able to renounce himself in
freedom: and by this, he may then become enlightened, and may live for
the glory of God and also for his own salvation. And that is why God
sometimes takes him from His right hand to His left, from heaven into
hell, from all blessedness into great misery; so that it seems to him as
though he were forsaken and despised of God and of all creatures. If,
then, he has formerly renounced himself and his own will in love and in
joy, so that he sought not himself but the good pleasure of God, he will
easily renounce himself also in pains and misery, so that in these too
he will seek not himself but always the glory of God. He who is willing
to work great things is willing also to suffer great things; but to bear
and to suffer in resignation is nobler and more pleasing to God, and
more satisfying to our spirit, than to work great things in a like
resignation, for it is more contrary to our nature. And this is why our
spirit is more exalted and our nature more cast down by grievous
suffering than by great works done with equal love. When a man maintains
himself in this resignation, without any other preference, right as one
who neither wills nor knows anything else, then he possesses the spirit
of Counsel in two ways; for he satisfies the will and the counsel of God
in his working and his suffering, by self-surrender, and by submissive
obedience. And his nature is adorned most gloriously: and he is capable
of being enlightened according to

 

### The Gift of Understanding

 

And therefore God gives him the sixth gift, which is the spirit of
Understanding. This gift we have already likened to a fountain with
three rills, for it establishes our spirit in the unity, it reveals
Truth and it brings forth a wide and general love. This gift may also be
likened to sunshine, for by its shining the sun fills the air with a
simple brightness and lights all forms, and shows the distinctions of
all colours. And thereby it shows forth its own power; and its heat is
common to the whole world, bringing forth fruits and useful things. So
likewise does the first ray of this gift bring about simplicity within
the spirit. And this simplicity is penetrated by a particular radiance
even as the air of the heavens by the splendour of the sun. For the
grace of God, which is the ground of all gifts, maintains itself
essentially like to a simple light in our potential understanding: and,
by means of this simple light our spirit is made stable and onefold and
enlightened, and fulfilled of grace and Divine gifts: and here it is
like unto God through grace and Divine love. And since the spirit is now
like unto God, and means and loves God alone above all gifts, it will no
longer be satisfied by likeness, nor by a created brightness; for it has
both by nature and above nature a primal tendency towards the Abysmal
Being from which it has flowed forth. And the Unity of the Divine Being
eternally draws back all likeness into its unity. And here the spirit is
enkindled into fruition, and it melts into God as into its eternal rest;
for the grace of God is to God even as the sunshine is to the sun, and
the grace of God is the means and the way which leads us to God. And for
this reason it shines within us in simplicity, and makes us deiform,
that is, like unto God. And this likeness perpetually merges itself in
God, and dies in God, and becomes one with God, and remains one, for
charity makes us one with God, and causes us to remain one and to dwell
in the One. Nevertheless we keep the eternal likeness in the light of
grace or of glory; thereby we possess ourselves actively in charity and
in the virtues. And we keep the union with God, above our activity, in
the nakedness of our spirit, in the Divine light, where we possess God
in rest, above all virtues. For charity in the likeness must ever be at
work; and union with God in fruitive love must ever be at rest. And this
is the working of love; for in one "Now" and at the same time love works
and rests in its Beloved. And the one is strengthened by the other; for
the higher the love, the greater the rest; and the greater the rest, the
deeper the love; for the one lives in the other, and whosoever loves
not, rests not, and whosoever rests not, loves not. And yet, some good
men think that they neither love nor rest in God; and this thought
itself comes from love. Because they desire to love more than they can,
it seems to them that their love falls short. And yet in this work they
taste love and rest; for none save the resigned, emptied and enlightened
man can understand how one may love in labour and rest in fruition. Yet
every lover is one with God in rest, and like unto God in the works of
love; for God in His most high nature, of which we bear the likeness,
dwells in fruition in eternal rest according to His Essential Unity, but
works in eternal activity according to the Trinity: and the one is the
perfection of the other; for rest abides in the Unity, and work in the
Trinity. And thus they dwell together throughout eternity. And,
therefore, if a man is to taste of God, he must love and if he will
love, then he may taste. But if he lets himself be satisfied with other
things, he shall not be able to taste what God is. And therefore we must
possess ourselves in simplicity, in virtue, and in likeness, and God
above ourselves through love in rest and unity. And this is the first
way in which the man who is common to all is made stable.

When the air is fulfilled with the brightness of the sun, the beauty and
the wealth of the whole world are revealed, and the eyes of men become
enlightened and rejoice in the manifold diversity of colours. And so it
is, when we are onefold within ourselves, and our power of understanding
is enlightened and the Spirit of Understanding shines through it. Then
we can become aware of the high attributes which are in God, and which
are the causes of all the works which flow forth from Him. Although all
men may understand the works, and God through His works; yet no one can
truly understand, neither in their appearance nor in their reality, the
attributes of the works of God as they are in their ground, save by
means of this gift. For this teaches us to seek out and to recognise our
own nobleness, and it gives us the power to discern the virtues and all
practices, and the way in which we should live without error in
accordance with eternal Truth: and he who is enlightened by it can dwell
in the spirit, and can, with enlightened reason, rightly apprehend and
understand all things in heaven and on earth. And therefore such a one
walks in heaven, and beholds and apprehends with all saints the nobility
of his Beloved, His incomprehensible height, His abysmal depth, length
and breadth, wisdom and truth, His bounty and His unspeakable
generosity, and all those loveworthy attributes which are in God our
Lover without number, and without limit in His most high nature: for all
this is He Himself. Then that enlightened man lowers his eyes, and
beholds himself and all other men and all creatures, and observes how
God in His free generosity has created them in nature and endowed them
in many ways, and how, above nature, it is His pleasure to endow them
and to enrich them with Himself, if they will but seek and desire Him.
All such reasoning observation of the manifold diversities of the Divine
riches rejoices our spirit, if, through Divine love, we have died unto
ourselves in God, and if we live and walk in the spirit, and taste of
the things which are eternal. This gift of Understanding shows us the
unity which we possess in God through the fruitive immersion of love,
and also the likeness to God which we have in ourselves through charity
and the works of virtue. And it gives to us light and brightness in
which we can walk with discernment in the ways of the spirit, and can
seek out and recognise God in ghostly similitudes, and also ourselves,
and all things according to the mode and the measure of that light and
according to the will of God and the greater nobility of our
understanding. This is the second degree in which the man who is common
to all may be enlightened.

According to the measure in which the air is irradiated by the
brightness of the sun, so too the heat increases and brings all things
to fruitfulness. When our reason and understanding are so enlightened,
that they can recognise and distinguish Divine truth, then the will,
that is, the power of love, grows hotter and streams forth in abundant
loyalty and love towards all men in common. For this gift, through the
knowledge of truth which is imparted to us in its light, establishes in
us a wide-stretching love toward all in common. Now the most simple are
also the most tranquil, and have the most peace in themselves; and are
the most deeply immersed in God; and are most enlightened in
understanding, and most fruitful in good works, and in outflowing love
toward all in common. And they are hindered least, for they are most
like unto God; for God is simplicity in His Being, clarity in His
understanding, and outflowing and universal love in His works. And the
more we are like unto God in these three things, so much the more
closely are we united with Him. And for this reason we must remain
simple in our ground, and must apprehend all things by means of
enlightened reason, and must flow forth through all things in universal
love. So likewise the sun in the heavens, though it abides in itself
simple and unchanged, sends forth its light and heat to the whole world
in common.

Now understand how we should live with enlightened reason in universal
love. The Father is the Origin of the whole Godhead according to Essence
and according to Personality. We therefore should bow down in spirit, in
humble awe, before the sublimity of the Father: and thereby we possess
humility, the foundation of all the virtues. We should fervently adore,
that is to say, we should honour and reverence, the mightiness of the
Father, because He, in His might, creates and preserves all things out
of nothing. And thereby we shall be lifted up in ghostly wise. We should
offer praise and thanks and everlasting service to the faithfulness and
love of God, Who has freed us from the fetters of the enemy and from
eternal death: and thereby we shall be made free. We should present and
bewail before the wisdom of God the blindness and ignorance of human
nature; and should crave that all men may become enlightened, and may
attain to the knowledge of truth: thus God shall be known and honoured
by them. We should pray for the mercy of God upon sinners, that thus
they may be converted, and may grow in virtue: thus God shall be loved
by them with a desirous love. We should give generously to all those who
have need of it of the rich treasures of God, that therewith they may
all be filled, and may flow back towards God; and thus God shall be
possessed by them all. We should offer to the Father, with awe and
reverence, all the service and all the works which Christ, according to
His manhood, fulfilled in love: thus all our prayers shall be heard. We
should also offer to the Father in Christ Jesus all the fervent devotion
of the angels and the saints and the just: so we shall be united with
them all in the glory of Godly We should also offer up to the Father the
whole service of Holy Church, and the Holy Sacrifice of all the priests,
and all that we may achieve and think, in the name of Christ; that
thereby we may go out to meet God through Christ, and may become like
unto Him in universal love, and may transcend all likeness in
simplicity, and may be united with Him within the Essential Unity. We
should ever abide in oneness with God, and should eternally flow forth
with God and all His saints in universal love, and continually return
with thankfulness and praise, and immerse ourselves in fruitive love in
the Essential Rest. This is the richest life of which I know: and in it
we possess the gift of Understanding.

 

### The Gift of Wisdom

 

Now understand this well: when we turn within ourselves in
contemplation, the fruitive unity of God is like to a darkness, a
somewhat which is unconditioned and incomprehensible. And the spirit
turns inward through love and through simplicity of intention, because
it is active in all virtues, offering itself up in fruition above all
virtues. In this loving introversion, there arises the seventh gift,
which is the spirit of Savouring Wisdom; <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](asm132.htm#fn_62) and it saturates the simplicity
of our spirit, soul and body, with wisdom and with ghostly savours. And
it is a ghostly touch or stirring within the unity of our spirit; and it
is an inpouring and a source of all grace, all gifts and all virtues.
And, in this touch of God, each man savours his exercise and his life
according to the power of the touch and the measure of his love. And
this Divine stirring is the inmost mediator between God and ourselves,
between rest and activity, between the conditioned and the
unconditioned, between eternity and time. And God works this ghostly
touching within us first of all, before all gifts; and yet it is known
and tasted by us last of all. For only when we have lovingly sought God
in all our practices even to the inward deeps of our ground, do we first
feel the gushing in of all the graces and gifts of God; and we feel this
touch in the unity of our highest powers, above reason, but not without
reason, for we understand in truth that we are touched. But if we would
know what this is and whence it comes, then reason and all creaturely
observation fail. For though the air be illuminated by the sunlight, and
the eyes be sharp and sound, if one would follow the rays which bring
the brightness, and look at the disc of the sun, the eyes would fail in
their activity, and would only receive the lustre of the rays in a
passive way. So likewise, the reflection of the Incomprehensible Light
in the unity of our highest power is so intense that all creaturely
activity which works in distinction must fail. And here our activity
must passively endure the interior working of God, which is the source
of all Divine gifts. For could we receive God Himself into our
comprehension, He would give Himself to us without intermediary; but
this is impossible to us because we are too narrow and too little to
comprehend God. And therefore He pours His gifts into us according to
the measure of our comprehension and the worthiness of our practices.
For the fruitful unity of God ever abides above the unity of our powers
and ever demands of us likeness in love and in virtues. And that is why
we are touched again and again, that we may each time be renewed and
become more like Him in the virtues. And, through these renewed touches,
the spirit falls into hunger and thirst, and would taste through and
through, and pass through and through the whole abyss in a storm of
love, that thereby it may be satisfied. Hence there comes an eternal,
hungry craving, and an eternal unsatisfied desire. For all loving
spirits desire and strive after God, each according to its nobleness and
the measure in which it has been touched by God; yet God remains
eternally incomprehensible by way of our active desires, and therefore
there abides in us, together with all saints, an eternal hunger, and an
eternal desirous introversion. And in the meeting with God, the radiance
and the heat are so great and so limitless that all spirits must fail in
their activity, and must melt and vanish away in sensible love in the
unity of their spirit. And here they must passively endure as sheer
creatures the working of God. And here our spirit and Divine grace and
all our virtues are one sensible love without activity; for our spirit
has spent itself and has itself become love. And here the spirit is
simple and susceptible of all gifts and is capable of every virtue. And,
in this ground of sensible love, there dwells the gushing spring, that
is, the inpouring or inward working of God, which at every hour moves us
and urges us and draws us inward and causes us to flow forth into new
works of virtue. Thus I have shown to you the ground and the condition
of all the virtues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter :LXIV. Of the Highest Degree of the Most Interior
Life](asm094)
