[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm078)  [Next](asm080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XLIX

 

### SHOWING HOW GOD POSSESSES AND MOVES THE SOUL BOTH IN A NATURAL AND A SUPERNATURAL WAY

 

Now mark well: I will show you an image of this. God has created the
highest heaven, a pure and simple Radiance, which enrings and encloses
all the heavens and all bodily and material things that God has ever
created; for it is an outward dwelling-place and a kingdom of God and
His saints, full of glory and eternal joy. Now since this heaven is an
unmingled Radiance, there is here neither time, nor space, nor movement,
nor any change; for it is immovable and unchangeable above all things.
The sphere which is nearest to this glowing heaven is called the First
Movement. For here all movement arises from the highest heaven, by the
Power of God. From this movement the firmament and all planets derive
their courses. And, through it, all creatures live and grow, each
according to its kind <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](asm132.htm#fn_53).
Now understand this well: so likewise the essence of the soul is a
ghostly kingdom of God, full of Divine radiance transcending all our
powers, except they be in that simplified state of which I will not
speak now. Behold, in regard to the essence of the soul, wherein God
reigns, the unity of our spirit is like to the First Movement; for, in
this unity, the spirit is moved from above by the power of God, both
naturally and supernaturally. For we have nothing of our own, neither in
nature, nor above nature. And this stirring of God, when it is
supernatural, is the first and principle cause of all virtues. And
through this stirring of God, there are given to some men the seven
gifts of the Holy Ghost, like to the seven planets, which illuminate and
make fruitful the whole life of man. This is the way in which God
possesses the essential unity of our spirit as His kingdom; and in which
He works and flows forth with His gifts into our potential unity and
into all our powers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L. Howing How A Man Should Be Adorned if He is to Receive
the Most Inward Exercise](asm080)
