[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm051)  [Next](asm053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXII

 

### OF THE THIRD DEGREE OF THE SPIRITUAL COMING OF CHRIST

 

When the sun has risen in the heavens as high as it can, it stands in
the sign of Cancer (which means Crab, because it cannot go further, but
begins to go back). Then come the fiercest heats of the whole year. And
the sun draws up all the moisture, and the earth becomes dry, and the
fruits ripen quickly.

So likewise, when Christ, the Divine Sun, has risen to the zenith of our
hearts—that is, above all the gifts and consolations and sweetness which
we may receive from Him—so that we do not rest in any savours, how great
soever they be, which God may pour into our souls; if then, masters of
ourselves, we ever turn inwards, by the way which has been shown
heretofore, with humble praise and with fervent thanksgiving, towards
the very source from which all gifts flow forth according to the needs
and the merits of each creature: then Christ stands on high in the
zenith of our hearts, and He will draw all things, that is, all our
powers, to Himself. When thus neither savour nor consolation can
overcome or hinder the loving heart, but it would rather forgo all
consolations and all gifts, that it may find Him Whom it loves: then
there arises from this the third kind of inward exercise, by which man
is uplifted and adorned in his sensibility and the lower part of his
being.

The first work of Christ, and the beginning of this degree consists in
this: that God draws the heart, the desires, and all the powers of the
soul up towards heaven, and calls them to be united with Him, and says
in ghostly wise within the heart: Go ye out of yourselves by the way in
which I draw and invite you. This drawing and this inviting I cannot
well make plain to gross and insensitive men; but it is an inward
constraining and drawing of the heart towards the most high unity of
God. This inward summons is joyful to the loving heart above anything it
ever experienced before. For hence arise a new way and a higher
exercise.

Here the heart opens itself in joy and in desire, and all the veins
gape, and all the powers of the soul are in readiness, and desire to
fulfil that which is demanded of them by God and by His unity. This
invitation is a shining forth of Christ, the Eternal Sun; and it brings
forth such great pleasure and joy in the heart, and makes the heart open
so widely, that it can never wholly close again. And thereby a man is
wounded in the heart from within, and feels the wound of love. To be
wounded by love is the sweetest feeling and the sharpest pain which any
one may endure. To be wounded by love is to know for certain that one
shall be healed; for the ghostly wound brings woes and weal at the same
time. For Christ, the true Sun streams and shines into the wounded and
open heart and calls it to oneness again. And this renews the wound and
all its pangs. <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](asm132.htm#fn_44)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Of the Pain and Restlessness of Love](asm053)
