[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm020)  [Next](asm022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XVIII

 

### OF COMPASSION

 

Out of kindliness springs compassion, which is a fellow-feeling with all
men; for none can share the griefs of all, save him who is kind.

Compassion is an inward movement of the heart, stirred by pity for the
bodily and ghostly griefs of all men. This compassion makes a man suffer
with Christ in His passion; for he who is compassionate marks the
wherefore of His pains and the way of His resignation; of His love, His
wounds, His tenderness; of His grief and His nobleness; of the disgrace,
the misery, and the shame He endured; of the way in which He was
despised; of His crown; of the nails; of His mercifulness; of His
destruction and dying in patience. These manifold and unheard-of sorrows
of Christ, our Saviour and our Bridegroom, move all kindly men to pity
and compassion with Christ.

Compassion makes a man look into himself, and recognize his faults, his
feebleness in virtues and in the worship of God, his lukewarmness, his
laziness, his many failings, the time he has wasted and his present
imperfection in moral and other virtues; all this makes a man feel true
pity and compassion for himself. Further, compassion marks the errors
and disorders of our fellow-creatures, how little they care for their
God and their eternal blessedness, their ingratitude for all the good
things which God has done for them, and the pains He suffered for their
sake; how they are strangers to virtue, unskilled and unpractised in it,
but skilful and cunning in every wickedness; how attentive they are to
the loss and gain of earthly goods, how careless and reckless they are
of God, of eternal things, and their eternal bliss. When he marks this,
a good man is moved to compassion for the salvation of all men.

Such a man will also regard with pity the bodily needs of his
neighbours, and the manifold sufferings of human nature; seeing men
hungry, thirsty, cold, naked, sick, poor, and abject; the manifold
oppressions of the poor, the grief caused by loss of kinsmen, friends,
goods, honour, peace; all the countless sorrows which befall the nature
of man. These things move the just to compassion, so that they share the
sorrows of all. But their greatest pain springs from this: that men are
so impatient of this suffering, that they lose their reward, and may
often earn hell for themselves. Such is the work of compassion and of
pity.

This work of compassion and of common neighbourly love overcomes and
casts out the third mortal sin, that is hatred or Envy. For compassion
is a wound in the heart, whence flows a common love to all mankind and
which cannot be healed so long as any suffering lives in man; for God
has ordained grief and sorrow of heart before all the virtues. And this
is why Christ says: Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be
comforted. And that shall come to pass when they reap in joy that which
now, through compassion and pity, they sow in tears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Of Generosity](asm022)
