[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm057)  [Next](asm059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXVIII

 

### OF THE FOURTH DEGREE OF THE COMING OF CHRIST

 

Now we will speak further of the fourth manner of the coming of Christ,
uplifting and perfecting a man by inward exercise in the lower part of
his being. But having likened all the inward comings to the splendour of
the sun, and to its power, according to the course of the year, we will
speak further, according to the course of the seasons, of another action
and another work of the sun.

When the sun first begins to descend from the zenith to the nadir, it
enters the sign which is called Virgo, that is, the Virgin, because now
the season becomes unfruitful, as a virgin is. (In this time the
glorious Virgin Mary, the mother of Christ, ascended to heaven full of
joy and rich in all virtues.) At this time the heat begins to grow less;
and men begin to gather in, for use during the rest of the year, those
ripe and lasting fruits which can be kept and consumed long afterwards,
such as corn and wine and the durable fruits, which have now come to
their maturity. And a part of the same corn is sown, so that it be
multiplied for the benefit of men. In this season all the work of the
sun of the whole year is perfected and fulfilled.

So likewise, when Christ the glorious Sun has risen to the zenith in a
man's heart, as I have taught you in the third degree; and when He then
begins to descend and to hide the shining of His Divine rays and to
forsake the man; then the heat and impatience of love begin to grow
less. Now when Christ thus hides Himself, and withdraws the shining of
His brightness and His heat, this is the first work, and the new coming,
of this degree. Then Christ speaks in ghostly wise within this man,
saying: "Go ye out in such wise as I will now show you." So the man goes
out, and finds himself poor and miserable and forsaken. Here all the
tempest and fury and impatience of love grow less, and the hot summer
passes into autumn, and all its riches are turned to great poverty. Then
the man begins to complain because of his wretchedness: Whither has gone
the ardent love, the inwardness, the gratitude, the joyful praise? And
the inward consolation, the intimate joy, the sensible savour, how has
he lost them? How have the fierce tempest of love, and all the other
gifts which he felt before, become dead in him? And he feels like an
ignorant man who has lost all his pains and his labour. And often his
natural life is troubled by such a loss.

Sometimes these unhappy men are also deprived of their earthly goods, of
friends, of kinsmen; and they are abandoned of all creatures, their
holiness is not known or esteemed, men speak evil of their works and
their whole lives, and they are despised and rejected by all their
neighbours. And at times they fall into sickness and many a plague, and
some into bodily temptations; or, that which is worst of all, into
temptations of the spirit.

From this poverty arise a fear lest one should fall, and a kind of
half-doubt. This is the utmost point at which a man can hold his ground
without falling into despair. Such a man likes to seek out good men, and
to complain to them, and show them his miseries; and he desires the help
and prayers of Holy Church and of all the just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. Showing What the Forsaken Man Should Do](asm059)
