[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm005)  [Next](asm007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

###  

### OF HUMILITY

 

Now understand this: we find in Christ, according to His Godhead, two
kinds of humility.

The first kind is this: that He willed to become man, and took upon
Himself that very nature which had been banished and cursed to the
bottom of hell, and willed to become one with it according to His
personality; so that now any man, either good or evil, can say: Christ,
the Son of God, is my brother.

The second kind of humility according to His Godhead consists in this;
that He chose a poor maiden, and not a king's daughter, for His mother,
so that a poor maiden should be the mother of God, who is Lord of heaven
and earth and all creatures.

And further, we can say of all the works of humility which Christ ever
wrought, that they were wrought by God Himself.

Now let us take the humility which was in Christ according to His
manhood and through the grace and the gifts of God. In this humility His
soul with all its powers bowed down in reverence and adoration before
the most high might of the Father; for a bowed down heart is a humble
heart. And therefore He wrought all His works for the praise and for the
honour of His Father, and never and in nothing sought His own glory
according to His humanity.

He was humble and subject to the old law, and to the commandments, and
also to custom whenever such was right. And that is why He was
circumcised, and taken into the temple, and redeemed in the customary
way; and He paid His tribute money to Caesar like any other Jew. And He
was humble and subject to His mother and to the lord Joseph; and that is
why He served them with true reverence according to all their needs. He
chose poor and outcast people for His comrades, to live with, and
wherewith to convert the world: these were the Apostles. And He was
lowly and meek among them and among all other men. And He was ever ready
for all men in whatever inward or outward need they might be: as if he
were the servant of all the world.

This is the first point which we find in Christ our Bridegroom.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of Charity](asm007)
