[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm063)  [Next](asm065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XXXIV

 

### SHOWING HOW A MAN SHOULD LIVE IF HE WOULD BE ENLIGHTENED

 

The man who lives in true obedience and in the moral virtues, according
to the commandments of God, and besides this practices the inward
virtues according to the teaching and stirring of the Holy Ghost, who is
just in deed and in word, who seeks not his own, neither in time nor in
eternity, who can bear with equanimity and with true patience, darkness
and heaviness, and all kinds of miseries, and thanks God for everything,
and offers himself up with humble resignation: he has received the first
coming of Christ according to the way of inward exercise. And he has
gone out from himself in the inward life, and has adorned with rich
virtues and gifts his quickened heart and the unity of his body and
senses. When such a man has been altogether purified and set at rest,
and is gathered together into unity as regards his lower powers, he can
be inwardly enlightened, if God deems that the time is fit and he craves
it. It may also come to pass, that a man may be enlightened at the
beginning of his conversion, if he yield himself wholly to the will of
God and renounce all selfhood; all lies in this. Such a man, however,
must afterwards pass through those degrees and ways of the outward and
the inward life which have been shown heretofore; but this would be
easier to him than to another, who mounts from below upwards, for he has
more light than the other man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV. Of The Second Coming of Christ, or, the Fountain
with Three Rills](asm065)
