[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm097)  [Next](asm099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## HERE BEGINS

 

# THE THIRD BOOK

 

## CHAPTER I

 

### SHOWING THE THREE WAYS BY WHICH ONE ENTERS INTO THE GOD-SEEING LIFE

 

The inward lover of God, who possesses God in fruitive love, and himself
in adhering and active love, and his whole life in virtues according to
righteousness; through these three things, and by the mysterious
revelation of God, such an inward man enters into the God-seeing life.
Yea, the lover who is inward and righteous, him will it please God in
His freedom to choose and to lift up into a superessential
contemplation, in the Divine Light and according to the Divine
Way. <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](asm132.htm#fn_69) This contemplation
sets us in purity and clearness above all our understanding, for it is a
singular adornment and a heavenly crown, and besides the eternal reward
of all virtues and of our whole life. And to it none can attain through
knowledge and subtlety, neither through any exercise whatsoever. Only he
with whom it pleases God to be united in His Spirit, and whom it pleases
Him to enlighten by Himself, can see God, and no one else. The
mysterious Divine Nature is eternally and actively beholding and loving
according to the Persons, and has everlasting fruition in a mutual
embrace of the Persons in the unity of the Essence. In this embrace, in
the essential Unity of God, all inward spirits are one with God in the
immersion of love; and are that same one which the Essence is in Itself,
according to the mode of Eternal Bliss. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](asm132.htm#fn_70) And in this most high unity of
the Divine Nature, the heavenly Father is origin and beginning of every
work which is worked in heaven and on earth. And He says in the deep
sunken hiddenness of the spirit: Behold, the Bride groom cometh; go ye
out to meet Him.

These words we will now explain and set forth in their relation to that
superessential contemplation which is the source of all holiness, and of
all perfection of life to which one may attain. Few men can attain to
this Divine seeing, because of their own in capacity and the
mysteriousness of the light in which I one sees. And therefore no one
will thoroughly understand the meaning of it by any learning or subtle
consideration of his own; for all words, and all

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

that may be learnt and understood in a creaturely way, are foreign to,
and far below, the truth which I mean. But he who is united with God,
and is en lightened in this truth, he is able to understand the truth by
itself. For to comprehend and to under stand God above all similitudes,
such as He is in Himself, is to be God with God, without intermediary,
and without any otherness that can become a hindrance or an
intermediary. And therefore I beg every one who cannot understand this,
or feel it in the fruitive unity of his spirit, that he be not offended
at it, and leave it for that which it is: for that which I am going to
say is true, and Christ, the Eternal Truth, has said it Himself in His
teaching in many places, if we could but show and explain it rightly.
And therefore, whosoever wishes to understand this must have died to
himself, and must live in God, and must turn his gaze to the eternal
light in the ground of his spirit, where the Hidden Truth reveals Itself
without means. For our Heavenly Father wills that we should see; for He
is the Father of Light, and this is why He utters eternally, without
intermediary and without interruption, in the hiddenness of our spirit,
one unique and abysmal word, and no other. And in this word, He utters
Himself and all things. And this word is none other than: Behold. And
this is the coming forth and the birth of the Son of Eternal Light, in
Whom all blessedness is known and seen.

 

Now if the spirit would see God with God in this Divine light without
means, there needs must be on the part of man three things.

The first is that he must be perfectly ordered from without in all the
virtues, and within must be unencumbered, and as empty of every outward
work as if he did not work at all: for if his emptiness is troubled
within by some work of virtue, he has an image; and as long as this
endures within him, he cannot contemplate.

Secondly, he must inwardly cleave to God, with adhering intention and
love, even as a burning and glowing fire which can never more be
quenched. As long as he feels himself to be in this state, he is able to
contemplate.

Thirdly, he must have lost himself in a Waylessness and in a Darkness,
in which all contemplative men wander in fruition and wherein they never
again can find themselves in a creaturely way. In the abyss of this
darkness, in which the loving spirit has died to itself, there begin the
manifestation of God and eternal life. For in this darkness there shines
and is born an incomprehensible Light, which is the Son of God, in Whom
we behold eternal life. And in this Light one becomes seeing; and this
Divine Light is given to the simple sight of the spirit, where the
spirit receives the brightness which is God Himself, above all gifts and
every creaturely activity, in the idle emptiness in which the spirit has
lost itself through fruitive love, and where it receives without means
the brightness of God, and is changed without interruption into that
brightness which it receives. Behold, this mysterious brightness, in
which one sees everything that one can desire according to the emptiness
of the spirit: this brightness is so great that the loving
contemplative, in his ground wherein he rests, sees and feels nothing
but an incomprehensible Light; and through that Simple Nudity which
enfolds all things, he finds himself, and feels himself, to be that same
Light by which he sees, and nothing else. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](asm132.htm#fn_71) And this is the first condition
by which one becomes seeing in the Divine Light. Blessed are the eyes
which are thus seeing, for they possess eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. How the Eternal Birth of God is Renewed Without
Interruption in the Nobility of the Spirit](asm099)

</div>
