[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm121)  [Next](asm123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER V

 

### OF THE UNION WITHOUT MEANS

 

You may remember that I showed heretofore how all saints and all good
men are united with God through means. Now I will further show to you
how they are all united with God without means. But in this life there
are but few who are meet for this, and sufficiently enlightened to feel
and understand it. And therefore, whosoever wishes to find and to feel
within himself those three unions of which I am going to speak, he must
live entirely and wholly in God, so that he may satisfy and be amenable
to the grace and the stirring of God, in all virtues and inward
exercises. And he must be lifted up through love, and die in God to
himself and all his works; so that he yields himself up with all his
powers, and submits to the transformation through the incomprehensible
Truth which is God Himself. And to that end it is needful that living he
should go forth in the virtues, and dying should enter into God. And in
these two things his perfect life consists; and these two are joined
together within him like matter and form, like body and soul. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](asm132.htm#fn_85) And as he exercises himself in
them so he becomes clear in understanding, and rich and overflowing in
feeling; for he has joined himself to God with uplifted powers, with
true intention, with his heart's desire, with ceaseless craving, with
the living ardour of his spirit and of his nature. And since he thus
exercises himself and keeps himself in the Presence of God, love
overpowers him: in whatsoever manner he moves, he is ever growing in
love and in all virtues. But love always moves each man according to the
profit and the ability of each.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of Heavenly Weal and Hellish Woe](asm123)
