[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm106)  [Next](asm108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER V

 

### OF THE WORKS WHICH GOD WORKS IN ALL IN COMMON AND OF FIVE KINDS OF SINNERS

 

Hear now what those three works are, which our Lord works in all men if
they will submit themselves thereto. The first work which God works in
all men in common consists in His calling and inviting them all, without
exception, to union with Himself. And as long as a sinner does not
follow this call, he must lack all the other gifts which would follow
thereafter.

Now I have observed that all sinners may be divided into five kinds. To
the first kind belong all those who are careless of good works, who
through bodily ease and the lust of the senses prefer to live in worldly
employments and in multiplicity of heart. All such are unfit to receive
the grace of God, and even if they had received it, they would not be
able to keep it.

To the second kind belong those who have willingly and wittingly fallen
into mortal sin, yet also do good works, and dwell in the fear and awe
of the Lord, and love the just, and desire their prayers, and put their
trust therein. So long, however, as turning from God and love of sin
vanquish and repulse love of God and turning to God, so long these
remain unworthy of the grace of God.

The third kind of sinners consists in all unbelievers, and those who err
in faith. What good works soever they do, or what lives soever they
lead, without the true faith they cannot please God; for true faith is
the foundation of all holiness and all virtues.

To the fourth kind belong those who abide in mortal sin without fear and
without shame, who care not for God and His gifts, and neglect all
virtues. They hold all ghostly life to be hypocrisy and deceit; and they
hardly listen to all that one may say to them of God or of the virtues,
for they have established themselves as though there were no God, nor
heaven, nor hell, and therefore they desire to know of nothing but that
which they now perceive and have before them. Behold, all such are
rejected and despised by God, for they sin against the Holy Ghost. Yet
they may be converted; but this happens with difficulty and seldom.

The fifth kind of sinners are those hypocrites who do outward good
works, not for the glory of God and their own salvation, but to acquire
a name for holiness or for the sake of some fleeting thing. Though they
may appear holy and good from without, within they are false and turned
away from God, and they lack the grace of God and every virtue.

See, I have shown to you five kinds of sinners, who have all been
inwardly called to union with God. But so long as a sinner remains in
the service of sin, so long he remains deaf and blind and unable to
taste, or to feel, all the good that God wishes to work in him. But
whenever a sinner enters into himself, and considers himself, if he be
displeased by his sinful life, then he draws near to God. But if he
would be obedient to the call and the words of God, he must of his own
free will resolve to leave sin and to do penance. And so he becomes one
aim and one will with God, and receives the grace of God.

And therefore we should all conceive of God in this way: First of all
that, of His free goodness, He calls and invites all men, without
distinction, to union with Himself; both the good and the wicked,
without exception. Secondly, we should thus comprehend the goodness of
God; how He through grace flows forth towards all men who are obedient
to the call of God. Thirdly, we should find and understand clearly in
ourselves that we can become one life and one spirit with God, when we
renounce ourselves in every way, and follow the grace of God to the
height whereto it would guide us. For the grace of God works according
to order in every man, after the measure and the way in which he is able
to receive it. And thereby, through the universal working of the grace
of God, every sinner, if he desires it, receives the discernment and
strength which are needful, that he may leave sin and turn towards
virtue. And, through that hidden cooperation of the grace of God, every
good man can overcome all sins, and can resist all temptations, and can
fulfil all virtues, and can persevere in the highest perfection, if he
be in all things submissive to the grace of God. For all that we are,
and all that we have received, from without and from within, these are
all the free gifts of God; for which we must thank and praise Him, and
with which we must serve Him, if we are to please Him. But there are
many gifts of God which are for the good an aid to, and a source of,
virtue; but for the wicked an aid to, and an occasion of, sin: such are
health, beauty, wisdom riches, and worldly dignity. These are the lowest
and least precious gifts of God, which God gives for the benefit of all,
to His friends and to His enemies, to the good and to the wicked. And
with these the good serve God and His friends; but the wicked, their own
flesh, and the devil, and the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the Difference Between the Hirelings and the
Faithful Servants of God](asm108)
