[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm103)  [Next](asm105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER II

 

### THROUGH THREE THINGS A MAN BECOMES INWARD

 

If, further, this good man would become an inward and ghostly man, he
needs must have three further things. The first is a heart unencumbered
with images; the second is spiritual freedom in his desires, the third
is the feeling of inward union with God. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](asm132.htm#fn_77)

Now let every one who thinks himself to be ghostly observe himself. He
who would have a heart void of images may not possess anything with
affection, nor may he cling to any one, or have intercourse with him
with attachment of the will; for all intercourse and all affection which
do not aim purely at the honour of God bring images into a man's heart,
since they are born, not of God, but of the flesh. And so if a man would
become spiritual, he must forsake all fleshly lusts and loves and must
cleave with longing and love to God alone, and thus possess Him. And
through this, all imaginations and all inordinate love towards creatures
are cast out. And this loving possession of God makes a man inwardly
free from ungodly images; for God is a Spirit, of Whom no one can make
to himself a true image. Certainly in this exercise a man should lay
hold of good images to help him; such as the Passion of our Lord and all
those things that may stir him to greater devotion. But in the
possession of God, the man must sink down to that imageless Nudity which
is God; and this is the first condition, and the foundation, of a
ghostly life.

The second condition is inward freedom. Through this, the man should be
able to raise himself towards God in all inward exercises, free from
images and encumbrances; that is, in thanksgiving and praise, in
worship, in devout prayer and fervent love, and in all those things that
may be done by longing and love with the help of the grace of God and
through inward zeal in all ghostly exercises.

Through this inward exercise, he reaches the third state; which is that
he feels a ghostly union with God. Whosoever then has, in his inward
exercise, an imageless and free ascent unto his God, and means nought
else but the glory of God, must taste of the goodness of God; and he
must feel from within a true union with God. And in this union, the
inward and spiritual life is made perfect; for in this union, the
desirous power is perpetually enticed anew and stirred to new inward
activity. And by each act, the spirit rises upwards to a new union. And
so activity and union perpetually renew themselves; and this perpetual
renewal in activity and in union is a ghostly life. And so you are now
able to see how a man becomes good through the moral virtues and an
upright intention; and how he may become ghostly through the inward
virtues and union with God. But without these said points, he can
neither be good nor ghostly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ChapterIII. Through Three Things A Man Becomes
God-Seeing](asm105)
