[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm124)  [Next](asm126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VIII

 

### SHOWING HOW THE INWARD MAN SHOULD EXERCISE HIMSELF, THAT HE MAY BE UNITED WITH GOD WITHOUT MEANS

 

But now I will tell you how the inward man, who has health amidst all
miseries, should feel himself to be one with God without means. When
such a quickened man rises up, with his whole being and all his powers,
and joins himself to God with life-giving and active love, then he feels
that his love is, in its ground, where it begins and ends, fruitive and
without ground. If he then wishes to penetrate further, with his active
love into that fruitive love: then, all the powers of his soul must give
way, and they must suffer and patiently endure that piercing Truth and
Goodness which is God's self. For, as the air is penetrated by the
brightness and heat of the sun, and iron is penetrated by fire; so that
it works through fire the works of fire, since it burns and shines like
the fire, and so likewise it can be said of the airfor, if the air had
understanding, it could say: "I enlighten and brighten the whole
world"—yet each of these keeps its own nature. For the fire does not
become iron and the iron does not become fire, though their union is
without means; for the iron is within the fire and the fire within the
iron; and so also the air is in the sunshine and the sunshine in the
air <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](asm132.htm#fn_86). So likewise is God
in the being of the soul; and whenever the soul's highest powers are
turned inward with active love, they are united with God without means,
in a simple knowledge of all truth, and in an essential feeling and
tasting of all good. This simple knowing and feeling of God is possessed
in essential love, and is practised and preserved through active love.
And therefore it is accidental to our powers through the dying
introversion in love; but it is essential to our being, and always
abides within it. And therefore we must perpetually turn inwards and be
renewed in love, if we would seek out love through love. And this is
taught us by St John, where he says: He that dwelleth in love dwelleth
in God and God in him. And though this union of the loving spirit with
God is without means, yet there is here a great distinction, for the
creature never becomes God, nor does God ever become the creature; as I
explained to you heretofore in the example of the iron and the fire. And
if material things, which have been made by God, may thus be united
without means; so much the more may He, whenever such is His pleasure,
unite himself with his beloved, if they, through His grace, submit to it
and make themselves ready for it. And so in such an inward man, whom God
has adorned with virtues, and, above that, has lifted up into a
contemplative life, there is no intermediary between himself and God in
his highest introversion but his enlightened reason and his active love.
And through these two things, he has an adherence to God; and this is
"becoming one with God," says St Bernard. But above reason, and above
active love, he is lifted up into a naked contemplation, and dwells
without activity in essential love. And there he is one love and one
spirit with God, as I said heretofore. In this essential love through
the unity which he has essentially with God, he infinitely transcends
his understanding; and this is a life common to all God-seeing men. For
in this transcendence such a man is able to see in one sight—if it be
God's pleasure to show it to him—all the creatures in heaven and on
earth, with the distinction of their lives and their rewards. But before
the Infinity of God, he must yield, and must follow after It essentially
and without end; for This no creature, not even the soul of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which yet received the highest union above all other
creatures, can either comprehend or overtake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Of The Inward Working of God's Grace](asm126)
