[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm100)  [Next](asm102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV

 

### OF A DIVINE MEETING WHICH TAKES PLACE IN THE HIDDENNESS OF OUR SPIRIT

 

When the inward and God-seeing man has thus attained to his Eternal
Image, and in this clearness, through the Son, has entered into the
bosom of the Father: then he is enlightened by Divine truth, and he
receives anew, every moment, the Eternal Birth, and he goes forth
according to the way of the light, in a Divine contemplation. And here
there begins the fourth and last point; namely, a loving meeting, in
which, above all else, our highest blessedness consists.

You should know that the heavenly Father, as a living ground, with all
that lives in Him, is actively turned towards His Son, as to His own
Eternal Wisdom. And that same Wisdom, with all that lives in It, is
actively turned back towards the Father, that is, towards that very
ground from which It comes forth. And in this meeting, there comes forth
the third Person, between the Father and the Son; that is the Holy
Ghost, Their mutual Love, who is one with them Both in the same nature.
And He enfolds and drenches through both in action and fruition the
Father and the Son, and all that lives in Both, with such great riches
and such joy that as to this all creatures must eternally be silent; for
the incomprehensible wonder of this love, eternally transcends the
understanding of all creatures. But where this wonder is understood and
tasted without amazement, <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](asm132.htm#fn_75)
there the spirit dwells above itself, and is one with the Spirit of God;
and tastes and sees without measure, even as God, the riches which are
the spirit itself in the unity of the living ground, where it possesses
itself according to the way of its uncreated essence.

Now this rapturous meeting is incessantly and actively renewed in us,
according to the way of God; for the Father gives Himself in the Son,
and the Son gives Himself in the Father, in an eternal content and a
loving embrace; and this renews itself every moment within the bonds of
love. For like as the Father incessantly beholds all things in the birth
of His Son, so all things are loved anew by the Father and the Son in
the outpouring of the Holy Ghost. And this is the active meeting of the
Father and of the Son, in which we are lovingly embraced by the Holy
Ghost in eternal love.

Now this active meeting and this loving embrace are in their ground
fruitive and wayless; for the abysmal Waylessness of God is so dark and
so unconditioned that it swallows up in itself every Divine way and
activity, and all the attributes of the Persons, within the rich compass
of the essential Unity, and it brings about a Divine fruition in the
abyss of the Ineffable. And here there is a death in fruition, and a
melting and dying into the Essential Nudity, where all the Divine names,
and all conditions, and all the living images which are reflected in the
mirror of Divine Truth, lapse in the Onefold and Ineffable, in
waylessness and without reason. For in this unfathomable abyss of the
Simplicity, all things are wrapped in fruitive bliss; and the abyss
itself may not be comprehended, unless by the Essential Unity. To this
the Persons, and all that lives in God, must give place; for here there
is nought else but an eternal rest in the fruitive embrace of an
outpouring Love. And this is that wayless being which all interior
spirits have chosen above all other things. This is the dark silence in
which all lovers lose themselves. But if we would prepare ourselves for
it by means of the virtues, we should strip ourselves of all but our
very bodies, and should flee forth into the wild Sea, whence no created
thing can draw us back again. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](asm132.htm#fn_76)

May we possess in fruition the essential Unity, and clearly behold unity
in the Trinity; this may Divine Love, which turns no beggar away, bestow
upon us. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue](asm102)
