[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm128)  [Next](asm130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XII

 

### OF THE HIGHEST UNION, WITHOUT DIFFERENCE OR DISTINCTION

 

And after this there follows the union without distinction. For you must
apprehend the Love of God not only as an outpouring with all good, and
as drawing back again into the Unity; but it is also, above all
distinction, an essential fruition in the bare Essence of the Godhead.
And in consequence of this enlightened men have found within themselves
an essential contemplation which is above reason and without reason, and
a fruitive tendency which pierces through every condition and all being,
and through which they immerse themselves in a wayless abyss of
fathomless beatitude, where the Trinity of the Divine Persons possess
Their Nature in the essential Unity. Behold, this beatitude is so
onefold and so wayless that in it every essential gazing, tendency, and
creaturely distinction cease and pass away. For by this fruition, all
uplifted spirits are melted and noughted in the Essence of God, Which is
the superessence of all essence. There they fall from themselves into a
solitude and an ignorance which are fathomless; there all light is
turned to darkness; there the three Persons give place to the Essential
Unity, and abide without distinction in fruition of essential
blessedness. This blessedness is essential to God, and superessential to
all creatures; for no created essence can become one with God's Essence
and pass away from its own substance. For so the creature would become
God, which is impossible; for the Divine Essence can neither wax nor
wane, nor can anything be added to It or taken from It. Yet all loving
spirits are one fruition and one blessedness with God without
distinction; for that beatific state, which is the fruition of God and
of all His beloved, is so simple and onefold that therein neither
Father, nor Son, nor Holy Ghost, is distinct according to the Persons,
neither is any creature. But all enlightened spirits are here lifted up
above themselves into a wayless fruition, which is an abundance beyond
all the fulness that any creature has ever received or shall ever
receive. For there all uplifted spirits are, in their superessence, one
fruition and one beatitude with God without distinction; and there this
beatitude is so onefold that no distinction can enter into it. And this
was prayed for by Christ when He besought His Father in heaven that all
His beloved might be made perfect in one, even as He is one with the
Father through the Holy Ghost: even so He prayed and besought that He in
us and we in Him and His heavenly Father might be one in fruition
through the Holy Ghost. And this I think the most loving prayer which
Christ ever made for our blessedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of the Threefold Prayer of Christ, That We Might Be
One With God](asm130)
