[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm127)  [Next](asm129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER XI

 

### HOW GOOD MEN IN THEIR CONTEMPLATION HAVE THE LOVE OF GOD BEFORE THEM, AND HOW THEY ARE LIFTED UP INTO GOD

 

They have the Love of God before them in their inward seeing, as a
common good pouring forth through heaven and earth; and they feel the
Holy Trinity inclined towards them, and within them, with fulness of
grace. And therefore they are adorned without and within with all the
virtues, with holy practices and with good works. And thus they are
united with God through Divine grace and their own holy lives. And
because they have abandoned themselves to God in doing, in leaving
undone, and in suffering, they have steadfast peace and inward joy,
consolation and savour, of which the world cannot partake; neither any
dissembler, nor the man who seeks and means himself more than the glory
of God. Moreover, those same inward and enlightened men have before them
in their inward seeing whenever they will, the Love of God as something
drawing or urging them into the Unity; for they see and feel that the
Father with the Son through the Holy Ghost, embrace Each Other and all
the chosen, and draw themselves back with eternal love into the unity of
Their Nature. Thus the Unity is ever drawing to itself and inviting to
itself everything that has been born of It, either by nature or by
grace. And therefore, too, such enlightened men are, with a free spirit,
lifted up above reason into a bare and imageless vision, wherein lives
the eternal indrawing summons of the Divine Unity; and, with an
imageless and bare understanding, they pass through all works, and all
exercises, and all things, until they reach the summit of their spirits.
There, their bare understanding is drenched through by the Eternal
Brightness, even as the air is drenched through by the sunshine. And the
bare, uplifted will is transformed and drenched through by abysmal love,
even as iron is by fire. And the bare, uplifted memory feels itself
enwrapped and established in an abysmal Absence of Image. And thereby
the created image is united above reason in a threefold way with its
Eternal Image, which is the origin of its being and its life; and this
origin is preserved and possessed, essentially and eternally, through a
simple seeing in an imageless void: and so a man is lifted up above
reason in a threefold manner into the Unity, and in a onefold manner
into the Trinity. Yet the creature does not become God, for the union
takes place in God through grace and our homeward-turning love: and
therefore the creature in its inward contemplation feels a distinction
and an otherness between itself and God. And though the union is without
means, yet the manifold works which God works in heaven and on earth are
nevertheless hidden from the spirit. For though God gives Himself as He
is, with clear discernment, He gives Himself in the essence of the soul,
where the powers of the soul are simplified above reason, and where, in
simplicity, they suffer the transformation of God. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](asm132.htm#fn_87) There all is full and
overflowing, for the spirit feels itself to be one truth and one
richness and one unity with God. Yet even here there is an essential
tending forward, and therein is an essential distinction between the
being of the soul and the Being of God; and this is the highest and
finest distinction which we are able to feel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Of the Highest Union, Without Difference or
Distinction](asm129)
