[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](asm102)  [Next](asm104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BDV8D2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage*, by Jan van Ruysbroeck,
\[1916\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER I

 

### THROUGH THREE THINGS A MAN BECOMES GOOD

 

Hear now three things which constitute a good man. The first, which a
good man must have, is a clean conscience without reproach of mortal
sin. And therefore whosoever wishes to become a good man must examine
and prove himself with due discernment, from that time onward when he
could first have committed sin. And from all these sins he must purge
himself, according to the precept and the custom of Holy Church.

The second thing which pertains to a good man is that he must in all
things be obedient to God, and to Holy Church, and to his own proper
convictions. And to each of these three he must be equally obedient: so
shall he live without care and doubt, and shall ever abide without
inward reproach in all his deeds.

The third thing which behoves every good man is that in all his deeds he
should have in mind, above all else, the glory of God. And if it happens
that by reason of his business or the multiplicity of his works, he has
not always God before his eyes, yet at least there should be established
in him the intention and desire to live according to the dearest will of
God.

Behold, these three things, when they are possessed in this way, make a
man good. And whosoever lacks any one of these three is neither good nor
in the grace of God; but whenever a man resolves in his heart to fulfil
these three points, how wicked soever he may have been before, in that
very instant he becomes good, and is susceptible of God, and filled with
the grace of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Through Three Things A Man Becomes Inward](asm104)
