[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu05)  [Next](amu07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER THREE

### UTOPIAN ECONOMICS

### SECTION 1

These modern Utopians with the universally diffused good manners, the
universal education, the fine freedoms we shall ascribe to them, their
world unity, world language, world-wide travellings, world-wide freedom
of sale and purchase, will remain mere dreamstuff, incredible even by
twilight, until we have shown that at that level the community will
still sustain itself. At any rate, the common liberty of the Utopians
will not embrace the common liberty to be unserviceable, the most
perfect economy of organisation still leaves the fact untouched that all
order and security in a State rests on the certainty of getting work
done? How will the work of this planet be done? What will be the
economics of a modern Utopia?

Now in the first place, a state so vast and complex as this world
Utopia, and with so migratory a people, will need some handy symbol to
check the distribution of services and commodities. Almost certainly
they will need to have money. They will have money, and it is not
inconceivable that, for all his sorrowful thoughts, our botanist, with
his trained observation, his habit of looking at little things upon the
ground, would be the one to see and pick up the coin that has fallen
from some wayfarer's pocket. (This, in our first hour or so before we
reach the inn in the Urseren Thal.) You figure us upon the high Gotthard
road, heads together over the little disk that contrives to tell us so
much of this strange world.

It is, I imagine, of gold, and it will be a convenient accident if it is
sufficient to make us solvent for a day or so, until we are a little
more informed of the economic system into which we have come. It is,
moreover, of a fair round size, and the inscription declares it one
Lion, equal to "twaindy" bronze Crosses. Unless the ratio of metals is
very different here, this latter must be a token coin, and therefore
legal tender for but a small amount. (That would be pain and pleasure to
Mr. Wordsworth Donisthorpe if he were to chance to join us, for once he
planned a Utopian coinage,  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) and the
words Lion and Cross are his. But a token coinage and "legal tender" he
cannot abide. They make him argue.) And being in Utopia, that unfamiliar
"twaindy" suggests at once we have come upon that most Utopian of all
things, a duodecimal system of counting.

My author's privilege of details serves me here. This Lion is distinctly
a beautiful coin, admirably made, with its value in fine, clear letters
circling the obverse side, and a head thereon—of Newton, as I live! One
detects American influence here. Each year, as we shall find, each
denomination of coins celebrates a centenary. The reverse shows the
universal goddess of the Utopian coinage—Peace, as a beautiful woman,
reading with a child out of a great book, and behind them are stars, and
an hour-glass, halfway run. Very human these Utopians, after all, and
not by any means above the obvious in their symbolism!

So for the first time we learn definitely of the World State, and we get
our first clear hint, too, that there is an end to Kings. But our coin
raises other issues also. It would seem that this Utopia has no simple
community of goods, that there is, at any rate, a restriction upon what
one may take, a need for evidences of equivalent value, a limitation to
human credit.

It dates—so much of this present Utopia of ours dates. Those former
Utopists were bitterly against gold. You will recall the undignified use
Sir Thomas More would have us put it to, and how there was no money at
all in the Republic of Plato, and in that later community for which he
wrote his Laws an iron coinage of austere appearance and doubtful
efficacy. . . . It may be these great gentlemen were a little hasty with
a complicated difficulty, and not a little unjust to a highly
respectable element.

Gold is abused and made into vessels of dishonour, and abolished from
ideal society as though it were the cause instead of the instrument of
human baseness; but, indeed, there is nothing bad in gold. Making gold
into vessels of dishonour and banishing it from the State is punishing
the hatchet for the murderer's crime. Money, did you but use it right,
is a good thing in life, a necessary thing in civilised human life, as
complicated, indeed, for its purposes, but as natural a growth as the
bones in a man's wrist, and I do not see how one can imagine anything at
all worthy of being called a civilisation without it. It is the water of
the body social, it distributes and receives, and renders growth and
assimilation and movement and recovery possible. It is the
reconciliation of human interdependence with liberty. What other device
will give a man so great a freedom with so strong an inducement to
effort? The economic history of the world, where it is not the history
of the theory of property, is very largely the record of the abuse, not
so much of money as (if credit devices to supplement money, to amplify
the scope of this most precious invention; and no device of labour
credits  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) or free demand of commodities
from a central store  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) or the like has
ever been suggested that does not give ten thousand times more scope for
that inherent moral dross in man that must be reckoned with in any sane
Utopia we may design and plan. . . . Heaven knows where progress may not
end, but at any rate this developing State, into which we two men have
fallen, this Twentieth Century Utopia, has still not passed beyond money
and the use of coins.

### SECTION 2

Now if this Utopian world is to be in some degree parallel to
contemporary thought, it must have been concerned, it may be still
concerned, with many unsettled problems of currency, and with the
problems that centre about a standard of value. Gold is perhaps of all
material substances the best adapted to the monetary purpose, but even
at that best it falls far short of an imaginable ideal. It undergoes
spasmodic and irregular cheapening through new discoveries of gold, and
at any time it may undergo very extensive and sudden and disastrous
depreciation through the discovery of some way of transmuting less
valuable elements. The liability to such depreciations introduces an
undesirable speculative element into the relations of debtor and
creditor. When, on the one hand, there is for a time a check in the
increase of the available stores of gold, or an increase in the energy
applied to social purposes, or a checking of the public security that
would impede the free exchange of credit and necessitate a more frequent
production of gold in evidence, then there comes an undue appreciation
of money as against the general commodities of life, and an automatic
impoverishment of the citizens in general as against the creditor class.
The common people are mortgaged into the bondage of debt. And on the
other hand an unexpected spate of gold production, the discovery of a
single nugget as big as St. Paul's, let us say—a quite possible
thing—would result in a sort of jail delivery of debtors and a financial
earthquake.

It has been suggested by an ingenious thinker that it is possible to use
as a standard of monetary value no substance whatever, but instead,
force, and that value might be measured in units of energy. An excellent
development this, in theory, at any rate, of the general idea of the
modern State as kinetic and not static; it throws the old idea of the
social order and the new into the sharpest antithesis. The old order is
presented as a system of institutions and classes ruled by men of
substance; the new, of enterprises and interests led by men of power.

Now I glance at this matter in the most incidental manner, as a man may
skim through a specialist's exposition in a popular magazine. You must
figure me, therefore, finding from a casual periodical paper in our inn,
with a certain surprise at not having anticipated as much, the Utopian
self of that same ingenious person quite conspicuously a leader of
thought, and engaged in organising the discussion of the currency
changes Utopia has under consideration. The article, as it presents
itself to me, contains a complete and lucid, though occasionally rather
technical, explanation of his newest proposals. They have been
published, it seems, for general criticism, and one gathers that in the
modern Utopia the administration presents the most elaborately detailed
schemes of any proposed alteration in law or custom, some time before
any measure is taken to carry it into effect, and the possibilities of
every detail are acutely criticised, flaws anticipated, side issues
raised, and the whole minutely tested and fined down by a planetful of
critics, before the actual process of legislation begins.

The explanation of these proposals involves an anticipatory glance at
the local administration of a Modern Utopia. To any one who has watched
the development of technical science during the last decade or so, there
will be no shock in the idea that a general consolidation of a great
number of common public services over areas of considerable size is now
not only practicable, but very desirable. In a little while heating and
lighting and the supply of power for domestic and industrial purposes
and for urban and inter-urban communications will all be managed
electrically from common generating stations. And the trend of political
and social speculation points decidedly to the conclusion that so soon
as it passes out of the experimental stage, the supply of electrical
energy, just like drainage and the supply of water, will fall to the
local authority. Moreover, the local authority will be the universal
landowner. Upon that point so extreme an individualist as Herbert
Spencer was in agreement with the Socialist. In Utopia we conclude that,
whatever other types of property may exist, all natural sources of
force, and indeed all strictly natural products coal, water power, and
the like, are inalienably vested in the local authorities (which, in
order to secure the maximum of convenience and administrative
efficiency, will probably control areas as large sometimes as half
England) they will generate electricity by water power, by combustion,
by wind or tide or whatever other natural force is available, and this
electricity will be devoted, some of it to the authority's lighting and
other public works, some of it, as a subsidy, to the World-State
authority which controls the high roads, the great railways, the inns
and other apparatus of world communication, and the rest will pass on to
private individuals or to distributing companies at a uniform fixed rate
for private lighting and heating, for machinery and industrial
applications of all sorts. Such an arrangement of affairs will
necessarily involve a vast amount of book-keeping between the various
authorities, the World-State government and the customers, and this
book-keeping will naturally be done most conveniently in units of
physical energy.

It is not incredible that the assessment of the various local
administrations for the central world government would be already
calculated upon the estimated total of energy, periodically available in
each locality, and booked and spoken of in these physical units.
Accounts between central and local governments could be kept in these
terms. Moreover, one may imagine Utopian local authorities making
contracts in which payment would be no longer in coinage upon the gold
basis, but in notes good for so many thousand or millions of units of
energy at one or other of the generating stations.

Now the problems of economic theory will have undergone an enormous
clarification if, instead of measuring in fluctuating money values, the
same scale of energy units can be extended to their discussion, if, in
fact, the idea of trading could be entirely eliminated. In my Utopia, at
any rate, this has been done, the production and distribution of common
commodities have been expressed as a problem in the conversion of
energy, and the scheme that Utopia was now discussing was the
application of this idea of energy as the standard of value to the
entire Utopian coinage. Every one of those giant local authorities was
to be free to issue energy notes against the security of its surplus of
saleable available energy, and to make all its contracts for payment in
those notes up to a certain maximum defined by the amount of energy
produced and disposed of in that locality in the previous year. This
power of issue was to be renewed just as rapidly as the notes came in
for redemption. In a world without boundaries, with a population largely
migratory and emancipated from locality, the price of the energy notes
of these various local bodies would constantly tend to be uniform,
because employment would constantly shift into the areas where energy
was cheap. Accordingly, the price of so many millions of units of energy
at any particular moment in coins of the gold currency would be
approximately the same throughout the world. It was proposed to select
some particular day when the economic atmosphere was distinctly equable,
and to declare a fixed ratio between the gold coinage and the energy
notes; each gold Lion and each Lion of credit representing exactly the
number of energy units it could buy on that day. The old gold coinage
was at once to cease to be legal tender beyond certain defined limits,
except to the central government, which would not re-issue it as it came
in. It was, in fact, to become a temporary token coinage, a token
coinage of full value for the day of conversion at any rate, if not
afterwards, under the new standard of energy, and to be replaceable by
an ordinary token coinage as time went on. The old computation by Lions
and the values of the small change of daily life were therefore to
suffer no disturbance whatever.

The economists of Utopia, as I apprehended them, had a different method
and a very different system of theories from those I have read on earth,
and this makes my exposition considerably more difficult. This article
upon which I base my account floated before me in an unfamiliar,
perplexing, and dream-like phraseology. Yet I brought away an impression
that here was a rightness that earthly economists have failed to grasp.
Few earthly economists have been able to disentangle themselves from
patriotisms and politics, and their obsession has always been
international trade. Here in Utopia the World State cuts that away from
beneath their feet; there are no imports but meteorites, and no exports
at all. Trading is the earthly economists' initial notion, and they
start from perplexing and insoluble riddles about exchange value,
insoluble because all trading finally involves individual preferences
which are incalculable and unique. Nowhere do they seem to be handling
really defined standards, every economic dissertation and discussion
reminds one more strongly than the last of the game of croquet Alice
played in Wonderland, when the mallets were flamingoes and the balls
were hedgehogs and crawled away, and the hoops were soldiers and kept
getting up and walking about. But economics in Utopia must be, it seems
to me, not a theory of trading based on bad psychology but physics
applied to problems in the theory of sociology. The general problem of
Utopian economics is to state the conditions of the most efficient
application of the steadily increasing quantities of material energy the
progress of science makes available for human service, to the general
needs of mankind. Human labour and existing material are dealt with in
relation to that. Trading and relative wealth are merely episodical in
such a scheme. The trend of the article I read, as I understood it, was
that a monetary system based upon a relatively small amount of gold,
upon which the business of the whole world had hitherto been done,
fluctuated unreasonably and supplied no real criterion of well-being,
that the nominal values of things and enterprises had no clear and
simple relation to the real physical prosperity of the community, that
the nominal wealth of a community in millions of pounds or dollars or
Lions, measured nothing but the quantity of hope in the air, and in
increase of confidence meant an inflation of credit and a pessimistic
phase a collapse of this hallucination of possessions. The new
standards, this advocate reasoned, were to alter all that, and it seemed
to me they would.

I have tried to indicate the drift of these remarkable proposals, but
about them clustered an elaborate mass of keen and temperate discussion.
Into the details of that discussion I will not enter now, nor am I sure
I am qualified to render the multitudinous aspect of this complicated
question at all precisely. I read the whole thing in the course of an
hour or two of rest after lunch—it was either the second or third day of
my stay in Utopia—and we were sitting in a little inn at the end of the
Lake of Uri. We had loitered there, and I had fallen reading because of
a shower of rain. . . . But certainly as I read it the proposition
struck me as a singularly simple and attractive one, and its exposition
opened out to me for the first time clearly, in a comprehensive outline,
the general conception of the economic nature of the Utopian State.

### SECTION 3

The difference between the social and economic sciences as they exist in
our world  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) and in this Utopia deserves
perhaps a word or so more. I write with the utmost diffidence, because
upon earth economic science has been raised to a very high level of
tortuous abstraction by the industry of its professors, and I can claim
neither a patient student's intimacy with their productions nor—what is
more serious—anything but the most generalised knowledge of what their
Utopian equivalents have achieved. The vital nature of economic issues
to a Utopia necessitates, however, some attempt at interpretation
between the two.

In Utopia there is no distinct and separate science of economics. Many
problems that we should regard as economic come within the scope of
Utopian psychology. My Utopians make two divisions of the science of
psychology, first, the general psychology of individuals, a sort of
mental physiology separated by no definite line from physiology proper,
and secondly, the psychology of relationship between individuals. This
second is an exhaustive study of the reaction of people upon each other
and of all possible relationships. It is a science of human
aggregations, of all possible family groupings, of neighbours and
neighbourhood, of companies, associations unions, secret and public
societies, religious groupings, of common ends and intercourse, and of
the methods of intercourse and collective decision that bold human
groups together, and finally of government and the State. The
elucidation of economic relationships, depending as it does on the
nature of the hypothesis of human aggregation actually in operation at
any time is considered to be subordinate and subsequent to this general
science of Sociology. Political economy and economics, in our world now,
consist of a hopeless muddle of social assumptions and preposterous
psychology, and a few geographical and physical generalisations. Its
ingredients will be classified out and widely separated in Utopian
thought. On the one hand there will be the study of physical economies,
ending in the descriptive treatment of society as an organisation for
the conversion of all the available energy in nature to the material
ends of mankind—a physical sociology which will be already at such a
stage of practical development as to be giving the world this token
coinage representing energy—and on the other there will be the study of
economic problems as problems in the division of labour, having regard
to a social organisation whose main ends are reproduction and education
in an atmosphere of personal freedom. Each of these inquiries, working
unencumbered by the other, will be continually contributing fresh valid
conclusions for the use of the practical administrator.

In no region of intellectual activity will our hypothesis of freedom
from tradition be of more value in devising a Utopia from here. From its
beginning the earthly study of economics has been infertile and
unhelpful, because of the mass of unanalysed and scarcely suspected
assumptions upon which it rested. The facts were ignored that trade is a
by-product and not an essential factor in social life, that property is
a plastic and fluctuating convention, that value is capable of
impersonal treatment only in the case of the most generalised
requirements. Wealth was measured by the standards of exchange. Society
was regarded as a practically unlimited number of avaricious adult units
incapable of any other subordinate groupings than business partnerships,
and the sources of competition were assumed to be inexhaustible. Upon
such quicksands rose an edifice that aped the securities of material
science, developed a technical jargon and professed the discovery of
"laws." Our liberation from these false presumptions through the
rhetoric of Carlyle and Ruskin and the activities of the Socialists, is
more apparent than real. The old edifice oppresses us still, repaired
and altered by indifferent builders, underpinned in places, and with a
slight change of name. "Political Economy" has been painted out, and
instead we read "Economics—under entirely new management." Modern
Economics differs mainly from old Political Economy in having produced
no Adam Smith. The old "Political Economy" made certain generalisations,
and they were mostly wrong; new Economics evades generalisations. and
seems to lack the intellectual power to make them. The science hangs
like a gathering fog in a valley, a fog which begins nowhere and goes
nowhere, an incidental, unmeaning inconvenience to passers-by. Its most
typical exponents display a disposition to disavow generalisations
altogether, to claim consideration as "experts," and to make immediate
political application of that conceded claim. Now Newton, Darwin,
Dalton, Davy, Joule, and Adam Smith did not affect this "expert"
hankey-pankey, becoming enough in a hairdresser or a fashionable
physician, but indecent in a philosopher or a man of science. In this
state of impotent expertness, however, or in some equally unsound state,
economics must struggle on—a science that is no science, a floundering
lore wallowing in a mud of statistics until either the study of the
material organisation of production on the one hand as a development of
physics and geography, or the study of social aggregation on the other,
renders enduring foundations possible.

### SECTION 4

The older Utopias were all relatively small states; Plato's Republic,
for example, was to be smaller than the average English borough, and no
distinction was made between the Family, the Local Government, and the
State. Plato and Campanella—for all that the latter was a Christian
priest carried communism to its final point and prescribed even a
community of husbands and wives, an idea that was brought at last to the
test of effectual experiment in the Oneida Community of New York State
(1848-1879). This latter body did not long survive its founder, at least
as a veritable communism, by reason of the insurgent individualism of
its vigorous sons. More, too, denied privacy and ruled an absolute
community of goods, at any rate, and so, coming to the Victorian
Utopias, did Cabet. But Cabet's communism was one of the "free store"
type, and the goods were yours only after you had requisitioned them.
That seems the case in the "Nowhere" of Morris also. Compared with the
older writers Bellamy and Morris have a vivid sense of individual
separation, and their departure, from the old homogeneity is
sufficiently marked to justify a doubt whether there will be any more
thoroughly communistic Utopias for ever.

A Utopia such as this present one, written in the opening of the
Twentieth Century, and after the most exhaustive discussion—nearly a
century long—between Communistic and Socialistic ideas on the one hand,
and Individualism on the other, emerges upon a sort of effectual
conclusion to those controversies. The two parties have so chipped and
amended each other's initial propositions that, indeed, except for the
labels still flutteringly adhesive to the implicated men, it is hard to
choose between them. Each side established a good many propositions, and
we profit by them all. We of the succeeding generation can see quite
clearly that for the most part the heat and zeal of these discussions
arose in the confusion of a quantitative for a qualitative question. To
the onlooker, both Individualism and Socialism are, in the absolute,
absurdities; the one would make men the slaves of the violent or rich,
the other the slaves of the State official, and the way of sanity runs,
perhaps even sinuously, down the intervening valley. Happily the dead
past buries its dead, and it is not our function now to adjudicate the
preponderance of victory. In the very days when our political and
economic order is becoming steadily more Socialistic, our ideals of
intercourse turn more and more to a fuller recognition of the claims of
individuality. The State is to be progressive, it is no longer to be
static, and this alters the general condition of the Utopian problem
profoundly; we have to provide not only for food and clothing, for order
and health, but for initiative. The factor that leads the World State on
from one phase of development to the next is the interplay of
individualities; to speak teleologically, the world exists for the sake
of and through initiative, and individuality is the method of
initiative, Each man and woman, to the extent that his or her
individuality is marked, breaks the law of precedent, transgresses the
general formula, and makes a new experiment for the direction of the
life force. It is impossible, therefore, for the State, which represents
all and is preoccupied by the average to make effectual experiments and
intelligent innovations, and so supply the essential substance of life.
As against the individual the state represents the species, in the case
of the Utopian World State it absolutely represents the species. The
individual emerges from the species, makes his experiment, and either
fails, dies, and comes to an end, or succeeds and impresses himself in
offspring, in consequences and results, intellectual, material and
moral, upon the world.

Biologically the species is the accumulation of the experiments of all
its successful individuals since the beginning, and the World State of
the Modern Utopist will, in its economic aspect, be a compendium of
established economic experience, about which individual enterprise will
be continually experimenting, either to fail and pass, or to succeed and
at last become incorporated with the undying organism of the World
State. This organism is the universal rule, the common restriction, the
rising level platform on which individualities stand.

The World State in this ideal presents itself as the sole landowner of
the earth, with the great local governments I have adumbrated, the local
municipalities, holding, as it were, feud ally under it as landlords.
The State or these subordinates holds all the sources of energy, and
either directly or through its tenants, farmers and agents, develops
these sources, and renders the energy available for the work of life. It
or its tenants will produce food, and so human energy, and the
exploitation of coal and electric power, and the powers of wind and wave
and water will be within its right. It will pour out this energy by
assignment and lease and acquiescence and what not upon its individual
citizens. It will maintain order, maintain roads, maintain a cheap and
efficient administration of justice, maintain cheap and rapid locomotion
and be the common carrier of the planet, convey and distribute labour,
control, let, or administer all natural productions, pay for and secure
healthy births and a healthy and vigorous new generation, maintain the
public health, coin money and sustain standards of measurement,
subsidise research, and reward such commercially unprofitable
undertakings as benefit the community as a whole; subsidise when needful
chairs of criticism and authors and publications, and collect and
distribute in formation. The energy developed and the employment
afforded by the State will descend like water that the sun has sucked
out of the sea to fall upon a mountain range, and hack to the sea again
it will come at last, debouching in ground rent and royalty and licence
fees, in the fees of travellers and profits upon carrying and coinage
and the like, in death duty, transfer tax, legacy and forfeiture,
returning to the sea. Between the clouds and the sea it will run, as a
river system runs, down through a great region of individual enterprise
and interplay, whose freedom it will sustain. In that intermediate
region between the kindred heights and deeps those beginnings and
promises will arise that are the essential significance, the essential
substance, of life. From our human point of view the mountains and sea
are for the habitable lands that lie between. So likewise the State is
for Individualities. The State is for Individuals, the law is for
freedoms, the world is for experiment, experience, and change: these are
the fundamental beliefs upon which a modern Utopia must go.

### SECTION 5

Within this scheme, which makes the State the source of all energy, and
the final legatee, what will be the nature of the property a man may
own? Under modern conditions—indeed, under any conditions—a man without
some negotiable property is a man without freedom, and the extent of his
property is very largely the measure of his freedom. Without any
property, without even shelter or food, a man has no choice but to set
about getting these things; he is in servitude to his needs until he has
secured property to satisfy them. But with a certain small property a
man is free to do many things, to take a fortnight's holiday when he
chooses, for example, and to try this new departure from his work or
that; with so much more, he may take a year of freedom and go to the
ends of the earth; with so much more, he may obtain elaborate apparatus
and try curious novelties, build himself houses and make gardens,
establish businesses and make experiments at large. Very speedily, under
terrestrial conditions, the property of a man may reach such proportions
that his freedom oppresses the freedom of others. Here, again, is a
quantitative question, an adjustment of conflicting freedoms, a
quantitative question that too many people insist on making a
qualitative one.

The object sought in the code of property laws that one would find in
operation in Utopia would be the same object that pervades the whole
Utopian organisation, namely, a universal maximum of individual freedom.
Whatever far-reaching movements the State or great rich men or private
corporations may make, the starvation by any complication of employment,
the unwilling deportation, the destruction of alternatives to servile
submissions, must not ensue. Beyond such qualifications, the object of
Modern Utopian statesmanship will be to secure to a man the freedom
given by all his legitimate property, that is to say, by all the values
his toil or skill or foresight and courage have brought into being.
Whatever he has justly made he has a right to keep, that is obvious
enough; but he will also have a right to sell and exchange, and so this
question of what may be property takes really the form of what may a man
buy in Utopia?

A modern Utopian most assuredly must have a practically unqualified
property in all those things that become, as it were, by possession,
extensions and expressions of his personality; his clothing, his jewels,
the tools of his employment, his books, the objects of art he may have
bought or made, his personal weapons (if Utopia have need of such
things), insignia, and so forth. All such things that he has bought with
his money or acquired—provided he is not a professional or habitual
dealer in such property—will he inalienably his, his to give or lend or
keep, free even from taxation. So intimate is this sort of property that
I have no doubt Utopia will give a man posthumous rights over it—will
permit him to assign it to a successor with at the utmost the payment of
a small redemption. A horse, perhaps, in certain districts, or a
bicycle, or any such mechanical conveyance personally used, the Utopians
might find it well to rank with these possessions. No doubt, too, a
house and privacy owned and occupied by a man, and even a man's own
household furniture, might be held to stand as high or almost as high in
the property scale, might be taxed as lightly and transferred under only
a slightly heavier redemption, provided he had not let these things on
hire, or otherwise alienated them from his intimate self. A
thoroughgoing, Democratic Socialist will no doubt be inclined at first
to object that if the Utopians make these things a specially free sort
of property in this way, men would spend much more upon them than they
would otherwise do, but indeed that will be an excellent thing. We are
too much affected by the needy atmosphere of our own mismanaged world.
In Utopia no one will have to hunger because some love to make and have
made and own and cherish beautiful things. To give this much property to
individuals will tend to make clothing, ornamentation, implements,
books, and all the arts finer and more beautiful, because by buying such
things a man will secure something inalienable—save in the case of
bankruptcy—for himself and for those who belong to him. Moreover, a man
may in his lifetime set aside sums to ensure special advantages of
education and care for the immature children of himself and others, and
in this manner also exercise a posthumous right.  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md)

For all other property, the Utopians will have a scantier respect; even
money unspent by a man, and debts to him that bear no interest, will at
his death stand upon a lower level than these things. What he did not
choose to gather and assimilate to himself, or assign for the special
education of his children, the State will share in the lion's proportion
with heir and legatee.

This applies, for example, to the property that a man creates and
acquires in business enterprises, which are presumably undertaken for
gain, and as a means of living rather than for themselves. All new
machinery, all new methods, all uncertain and variable and non-universal
undertakings, are no business for the State; they commence always as
experiments of unascertained value, and next after the invention of
money, there is no invention has so facilitated freedom and progress as
the invention of the limited liability company to do this work of trial
and adventure. The abuses, the necessary reforms of company law on earth
are no concern of ours here and now, suffice it that in a Modern Utopia
such laws must be supposed to be as perfect as mortal laws can possibly
be made. *Caveat vendor* will be a sound qualification of *Caveat
emptor* in the beautifully codified Utopian law. Whether the Utopian
company will be allowed to prefer this class of share to that or to
issue debentures, whether indeed usury, that is to say lending money at
fixed rates of interest, will be permitted at all in Utopia, one may
venture to doubt. But whatever the nature of the shares a man may hold,
they will all be sold at his death, and whatever he has not clearly
assigned for special educational purposes will—with possibly some
fractional concession to near survivors—lapse to the State. The "safe
investment," that permanent, undying claim upon the community, is just
one of those things Utopia will discourage; which indeed the developing
security of civilisation quite automatically discourages through the
fall in the rate of interest. As we shall see at a later stage, the
State will insure the children of every citizen, and those legitimately
dependent upon him, against the inconvenience of his death; it will
carry out all reasonable additional dispositions he may have made for
them in the same event, and it will insure him against old age and
infirmity; and the object of Utopian economics will be to give a man
every inducement to spend his surplus money in intensifying the quality
of his surroundings, either by economic adventures and experiments,
which may yield either losses or large profits, or in increasing the
beauty, the pleasure, the abundance and promise of life.

Besides strictly personal possessions and shares in business adventures,
Utopia will no doubt permit associations of its citizens to have a
property in various sorts of contracts and concessions, in leases of
agricultural and other land, for example; in houses they may have built,
factories and machinery they may have made, and the like. And if a
citizen prefer to adventure into business single-handed, he will have
all the freedoms of enterprise enjoyed by a company; in business affairs
he will be a company of one, and his single share will be dealt with at
his death like any other shares. . . . So much for the second kind of
property. And these two kinds of property will probably exhaust the
sorts of property a Utopian may possess.

The trend of modern thought is entirely against private property in land
or natural objects or products, and in Utopia these things will be the
inalienable property of the World State. Subject to the rights of free
locomotion, land will be leased out to companies or individuals, but—in
view of the unknown necessities of the future—never for a longer period
than, let us say, fifty years.

The property of a parent in his children, and of a husband in his wife,
seems to be undergoing a steadily increasing qualification in the world
of to-day, but the discussion of the Utopian state of affairs in regard
to such property may be better reserved until marriage becomes our
topic. Suffice it here to remark, that the increasing control of a
child's welfare and upbringing by the community, and the growing
disposition to limit and tax inheritance are complementary aspects of
the general tendency to regard the welfare and free intra-play of future
generations no longer as the concern of parents and altruistic
individuals, but as the predominant issue of statesmanship, and the duty
and moral meaning of the world community as a whole.

### SECTION 6

From the conception of mechanical force as coming in from Nature to the
service of man, a conception the Utopian proposal of a coinage based on
energy units would emphasise, arise profound contrasts between the
modern and the classical Utopias. Except for a meagre use of water power
for milling, and the wind for sailing—so meagre in the latter case that
the classical world never contrived to do without the galley slave and a
certain restricted help from oxen in ploughing, and from horses in
locomotion, all the energy that sustained the old-fashioned State was
derived from the muscular exertion of toiling men. They ran their world
by hand. Continual bodily labour was a condition of social existence. It
is only with the coming of coal burning, of abundant iron and steel, and
of scientific knowledge that this condition has been changed. To-day, I
suppose, if it were possible to indicate, in units of energy, the grand
total of work upon which the social fabric of the United States or
England rests, it would be found that a vastly preponderating moiety is
derived from non-human sources, from coal and liquid fuel, and
explosives and wind and water. There is every indication of a steady
increase in this proportion of mechanical energy, in this emancipation
of men from the necessity of physical labour. There appears no limit to
the invasion of life by the machine.

Now it is only in the last three hundred years that any human being
seems to have anticipated this. It stimulates the imagination to remark
how entirely it was overlooked as a modifying cause in human
development.  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) Plato clearly had no
ideas about machines at all as a force affecting social organisation.
There was nothing in his world to suggest them to him. I suppose there
arose no invention, no new mechanical appliance or method of the
slightest social importance through all his length of years. He never
thought of a State that did not rely for its force upon human muscle,
just as he never thought of a State that was not primarily organised for
warfare hand to hand. Political and moral inventions he saw enough of
and to spare, and in that direction lie still stimulates the
imagination. But in regard to all material possibilities he deadens
rather than stimulates.  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) An
infinitude of nonsense about the Greek mind would never have been
written if the distinctive intellectual and artistic quality of Plato's
time, its extraordinarily clear definition of certain material
conditions as absolutely permanent, coupled with its politico-social
instability, had been borne in mind. The food of the Greek imagination
was the very antithesis of our own nourishment. We are educated by our
circumstances to think no revolution in appliances and economic
organisation in credible, our minds play freely about possibilities that
would have struck the men of the Academy as outrageous extravagance, and
it is in regard to politico-social expedients that our imaginations
fail. Sparta, for all the evidence of history, is scarcely more credible
to us than a motor-car throbbing in the agora would have been to
Socrates.

By sheer inadvertence, therefore, Plato commenced the tradition of
Utopias without machinery, a tradition we find Morris still loyally
following, except for certain mechanical barges and such-like toys, in
his *News from Nowhere*. There are some foreshadowings of mechanical
possibilities in the *New Atlantis*, but it is only in the nineteenth
century that Utopias appeared in which the fact is clearly recognised
that the social fabric rests no longer upon human labour. It was, I
believe, Cabet  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) who first in a
Utopian work insisted upon the escape of man from irksome labours
through the use of machinery. He is the great primitive of modern
Utopias, and Bellamy is his American equivalent. Hitherto, either slave
labour (Phaleas),  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) or at least
class distinctions involving unavoidable labour in the lower class, have
been assumed—as Plato does, and as Bacon in the *New Atlantis* probably
intended to do (More gave his Utopians bonds men *sans phrase* for their
most disagreeable toil); or there is—as in Morris and the outright
Return-to-Nature Utopians—a bold make-believe that all toil may be made
a joy, and with that a levelling down of all society to an equal
participation in labour. But indeed this is against all the observed
behaviour of mankind. It needed the Olympian unworldliness of an
irresponsible rich man of the shareholding type, a Ruskin or a Morris
playing at life, to imagine as much. Road-making under Mr. Ruskin's
auspices was a joy at Oxford no doubt, and a distinction, and it still
remains a distinction; it proved the least contagious of practices. And
Hawthorne did not find bodily toil anything more than the curse the
Bible says it is, at Brook Farm.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)

If toil is a blessing, never was blessing so effectually disguised, and
the very people who tell us that, hesitate to suggest more than a
beautiful ease in the endless day of Heaven. A certain amount of bodily
or mental exercise, a considerable amount of doing things under the
direction of one's free imagination is quite another matter. Artistic
production, for example, when it is at its best, when a man is freely
obeying himself, and not troubling to please others, is really not toil
at all. It is quite a different thing digging potatoes, as boys say,
"for a lark," and digging them because otherwise you will starve,
digging them day after day as a dull, unavoidable imperative. The
essence of toil is that imperative, and the fact that the attention
*must* cramp itself to the work in hand—that it excludes freedom, and
not that it involves fatigue. So long as anything but a quasi-savage
life depended upon toil, so long was it hopeless to expect mankind to do
anything but struggle to confer just as much of this blessing as
possible upon one another. But now that the new conditions physical
science is bringing about, not only dispense with man as a source of
energy but supply the hope that all routine work may be made automatic,
it is becoming conceivable that presently there may be no need for any
one to toil habitually at all; that a labouring class—that is to say, a
class of workers without personal initiative—will become unnecessary to
the world of men.

The plain message physical science has for the world at large is this,
that were our political and social and moral devices only as well
contrived to their ends as a linotype machine, an antiseptic operating
plant, or an electric tram-car, there need now at the present moment be
no appreciable toil in the world, and only the smallest fraction of the
pain, the fear, and the anxiety that now makes human life so doubtful in
its value. There is more than enough for every one alive. Science
stands, a too competent servant, behind her wrangling underbred masters,
holding out resources, devices, and remedies they are too stupid to use.
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) And on its material side a modern
Utopia must needs present these gifts as taken, and show a world that is
really abolishing the need of labour, abolishing the last base reason
for any one's servitude or inferiority.

### SECTION 7

The effectual abolition of a labouring and servile class will make
itself felt in every detail of the inn that will shelter us, of the
bedrooms we shall occupy. You conceive my awakening to all these things
on the morning after our arrival. I shall lie for a minute or so with my
nose peeping over the coverlet, agreeably and gently coming awake, and
with some vague nightmare of sitting at a common table with an
unavoidable dustman in green and gold called Boffin,  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) fading out of my mind. Then I should
start up. You figure my apprehension, startled inspection of my chamber.
"Where am I?" that classic phrase, recurs. Then I perceive quite clearly
that I am in bed in Utopia.

Utopia! The word is enough to bring any one out of bed to the nearest
window, but thence I see no more than the great mountain mass behind the
inn, a very terrestrial looking mountain mass. I return to the
contrivances about me, and make my examination as I dress, pausing
garment in hand to hover over first this thing of interest and then
that.

The room is, of course, very clear and clean and simple; not by any
means cheaply equipped, but designed to economise the labour of redding
and repair just as much as is possible. It is beautifully proportioned
and rather lower than most rooms I know on earth. There is no fireplace,
and I am perplexed by that until I find a thermometer beside six
switches on the wall. Above this switch-board is a brief instruction:
one switch warms the floor, which is not carpeted, but covered by a
substance like soft oilcloth; one warms the mattress (which is of metal
with resistance coils threaded to and fro in it); and the others warm
the wall in various degrees, each directing current through a separate
system of resistances. The casement does not open, but above, flush with
the ceiling, a noiseless rapid fan pumps air out of the room. The air
enters by a Tobin shaft. There is a recess dressing-room, equipped with
a bath and all that is necessary to one's toilet, and the water, one
remarks, is warmed, if one desires it warm, by passing it through an
electrically heated spiral of tubing. A cake of soap drops out of a
store machine on the turn of a handle, and when you have done with it,
you drop that and your soiled towels and so forth, which also are given
you by machines, into a little box, through the bottom of which they
drop at once, and sail down a smooth shaft. A little notice tells you
the price of your room, and you gather the price is doubled if you do
not leave the toilet as you found it. Beside the bed, and to be lit at
night by a handy switch over the pillow, is a little clock, its face
flush with the wall. The room has no corners to gather dirt, wall meets
floor with a gentle curve, and the apartment could be swept out
effectually by a few strokes of a mechanical sweeper. The door frames
and window frames are of metal, rounded and impervious to draught. You
are politely requested to turn a handle at the foot of your bed before
leaving the room, and forthwith the frame turns up into a vertical
position, and the bedclothes hang airing. You stand at the doorway and
realise that there remains not a minute's work for any one to do.
Memories of the fœtid disorder of many an earthly bedroom after a
night's use float across your mind.

And you must not imagine this dustless, spotless, sweet apartment as
anything but beautiful. Its appearance is a little unfamiliar of course,
but all the muddle of dust-collecting hangings and witless ornament that
cover the earthly bedroom, the valances, the curtains to check the
draught from the ill-fitting wood windows, the worthless irrelevant
pictures, usually a little askew, the dusty carpets, and all the
paraphernalia about the dirty, black-leaded fireplace are gone. But the
faintly tinted walls are framed with just one clear coloured line, as
finely placed as the member of a Greek capital; the door handles and the
lines of the panels of the door, the two chairs, the framework of the
bed, the writing table, have all that final simplicity, that exquisite
finish of contour that is begotten of sustained artistic effort. The
graciously shaped windows each frame a picture—since they are
draughtless the window seats are no mere mockeries as are the window
seats of earth—and on the sill, the sole thing to need attention in the
room, is one little bowl of blue Alpine flowers.

The same exquisite simplicity meets one downstairs.

Our landlord sits down at table with us for a moment, and seeing we do
not understand the electrically heated coffee-pot before us, shows us
what to do. Coffee and milk we have, in the Continental fashion, and
some excellent rolls and butter.

He is a swarthy little man, our land lord, and overnight we saw him
preoccupied with other guests. But we have risen either late or early by
Utopian standards, we know not which, and this morning he has us to
himself. His bearing is kindly and inoffensive, but he cannot conceal
the curiosity that possesses him. His eye meets ours with a mute
inquiry, and then as we fall to, we catch him scrutinising our cuffs,
our garments, our boots, our faces, our table manners He asks nothing at
first, but says a word or so about our night's comfort and the day's
weather, phrases that have an air of being customary. Then comes a
silence that is interrogative.

"Excellent coffee," I say to fill the gap.

"And excellent rolls," says my botanist.

Our landlord indicates his sense of our approval.

A momentary diversion is caused by the entry of an elfin-tressed little
girl, who stares at us half impudently, half shyly, with bright black
eyes, hesitates at the botanist's clumsy smile and nod, and then goes
and stands by her father and surveys us steadfastly.

"You have come far?" ventures our landlord, patting his daughter's
shoulder.

I glance at the botanist. "Yes," I say, "we have."

I expand. "We have come so far that this country of yours seems very
strange indeed to us."

"The mountains?"

"Not only the mountains."

"You came up out of the Ticino valley?"

"No—not that way."

"By the Oberalp?"

"No."

"The Furka?"

"No."

"Not up from the lake?"

"No."

He looks puzzled.

"We came," I say, "from another world."

He seems trying to understand. Then a thought strikes him, and he sends
away his little girl with a needless message to her mother.

"Ah!" he says. "Another world—eh? Meaning——?"

"Another world—far in the deeps of space."

Then at the expression of his face one realises that a Modern Utopia
will probably keep its more intelligent citizens for better work than
inn-tending. He is evidently inaccessible to the idea we think of
putting before him. He stares at us a moment, and then remarks, "There's
the book to sign."

We find ourselves confronted with a book, a little after the fashion of
the familiar hotel visitors' book of earth. He places this before us,
and beside it puts pen and ink and a slab, upon which ink has been
freshly smeared.

"Thumbmarks," says my scientific friend hastily in English.

"You show me how to do it," I say as quickly.

He signs first, and I look over his shoulder.

He is displaying more readiness than I should have expected. The book is
ruled in broad transverse lines, and has a space for a name, for a
number, and a thumbmark. He puts his thumb upon the slab and makes the
thumbmark first with the utmost deliberation. Meanwhile he studies the
other two entries. The "numbers" of the previous guests above are
complex muddles of letters and figures. He writes his name, then with a
calm assurance writes down his number, A.M.a.1607.2.α β+. I am wrung
with momentary admiration. I follow his example, and fabricate an
equally imposing signature. We think ourselves very clever. The landlord
proffers finger bowls for our thumbs, and his eye goes, just a little
curiously, to our entries.

I decide it is advisable to pay and go before any conversation about our
formulæ arises.

As we emerge into the corridor, and the morning sunlight of the Utopian
world, I see the landlord bending over the book.

"Come on," I say. "The most tiresome thing in the world is explanations,
and I perceive that if we do not get along, they will fall upon us now."

I glance back to discover the landlord and a gracefully robed woman
standing outside the pretty simplicity of the Utopian inn, watching us
doubtfully as we recede.

"Come on," I insist.

### SECTION 8

We should go towards the Schoellenen gorge, and as we went, our fresh
morning senses would gather together a thousand factors for our
impression of this more civilised world. A Modern Utopia will have done
with yapping about nationality, and so the ugly fortifications, the
barracks and military defilements of the earthly vale of Urseren will be
wanting. Instead there will be a great multitude of gracious little
houses clustering in college-like groups, no doubt about their common
kitchens and halls, down and about the valley slopes. And there will be
many more trees, and a great variety of trees—all the world will have
been ransacked for winter conifers. Despite the height of the valley
there will be a double avenue along the road. This high road with its
tramway would turn with us to descend the gorge, and we should hesitate
upon the adventure of boarding the train. But now we should have the
memory of our landlord's curious eye upon us, and we should decide at
last to defer the risk of explanations such an enterprise might
precipitate.

We should go by the great road for a time, and note something of the
difference between Utopian and terrestrial engineering.

The tramway, the train road, the culverts, and bridges, the Urnerloch
tunnel, into which the road plunges, will all be beautiful things.

There is nothing in machinery, there is nothing in embankments and
railways and iron bridges and engineering devices to oblige them to be
ugly. Ugliness is the measure of imperfection; a thing of human making
is for the most part ugly in proportion to the poverty of its
constructive thought, to the failure of its producer fully to grasp the
purpose of its being. Everything to which men continue to give thought
and attention, which they make and remake in the same direction, and
with a continuing desire to do as well as they can, grows beautiful
inevitably. Things made by mankind under modern conditions are ugly,
primarily because our social organisation is ugly, because we live in an
atmosphere of snatch and uncertainty, and do everything in an underbred
strenuous manner. This is the misfortune of machinery, and not its
fault. Art, like some beautiful plant, lives on its atmosphere, and when
the atmosphere is good, it will grow everywhere, and when it is bad
nowhere. If we smashed and buried every machine, every furnace, every
factory in the world, and without any further change set ourselves to
home industries, hand labour, spade husbandry, sheep-folding and
pig-minding, we should still do things in the same haste, and achieve
nothing but dirtiness, inconvenience, bad air, and another gaunt and
gawky reflection of our intellectual and moral disorder. We should mend
nothing.

But in Utopia a man who designs a tram road will be a cultivated man, an
artist craftsman; he will strive, as a good writer, or a painter
strives, to achieve the simplicity of perfection. He will make his
girders and rails and parts as gracious as that first engineer, Nature,
has made the stems of her plants and the joints and gestures of her
animals. To esteem him a sort of anti-artist, to count every man who
makes things with his unaided thumbs an artist, and every man who uses
machinery as a brute, is merely a passing phase of human stupidity. This
tram road beside us will be a triumph of design. The idea will be so
unfamiliar to us that for a time it will not occur to us that it is a
system of beautiful objects at all. We shall ad mire its ingenious
adaptation to the need of a district that is buried half the year in
snow, the hard bed below, curved and guttered to do its own clearing,
the great arched sleeper masses, raising the rails a good two yards
above the ground, the easy, simple standards and insulators. Then it
will creep in upon our minds, "But, by Jove! *This is designed!*"

Indeed the whole thing will be designed.

Later on, perhaps, we may find students in an art school working in
competition to design an electric tram, students who know something of
modern metallurgy, and something of electrical engineering, and we shall
find people as keenly critical of a signal box or an iron bridge as they
are on earth of——! Heavens! what *are* they critical about on earth?

The quality and condition of a dress tie!

We should make some unpatriotic comparisons with our own planet, no
doubt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](amu06.htm#fr_5.md) *A System of Measures*, by
Wordsworth Donisthorpe.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](amu06.htm#fr_6.md) Edward Bellamy's *Looking
Backward*, ch. ix.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](amu06.htm#fr_7.md) More's *Utopia* and Cabet's
*Icaria*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](amu06.htm#fr_8.md) But see Gidding's *Principles
of Sociology*, a modern and richly suggestive American work, imperfectly
appreciated by the British student. See also Walter Bagehot's *Economic
Studies*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](amu06.htm#fr_9.md) But a Statute of Mortmain
will set a distinct time limit to the continuance of such benefactions.
A periodic revision of endowments is a necessary feature in any modern
Utopia.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](amu06.htm#fr_10.md) It is interesting to note
how little even Bacon seems to see of this in his *New Atlantis*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](amu06.htm#fr_11.md) The lost Utopia of
Hippodamus provided rewards for inventors, but unless Aristotle
misunderstood him, and it is certainly the fate of all Utopias to be
more or less misread, the inventions contemplated were political
devices.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](amu06.htm#fr_12.md) Cabet, *Voyage en Icarie*,
1848.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](amu06.htm#fr_13.md) Aristotle's *Politics*,
bk. ii., ch. viii.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](amu06.htm#fr_14.md) *The Blythedale
Experiment*, and see also his Notebook.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](amu06.htm#fr_15.md) See that most suggestive
little book, *Twentieth Century Inventions*, by Mr. George Sutherland.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](amu06.htm#fr_16.md) *Vide* William Morris's
*News from Nowhere*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four](amu07.md)
