[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX

#### SCEPTICISM OF THE INSTRUMENT

A Portion of a Paper read to the Oxford Philosophical Society, November
8, 1903, and reprinted, with some Revision, from the Version given in
*Mind*, vol. xiii. (N.S.), No. 51.

(See also Chapter One, Section 6, and Chapter Ten, Sections 1 and 2.)

It seems to me that I may most propitiously attempt to interest you this
evening by describing very briefly the particular metaphysical and
philosophical system in which I do my thinking, and more particularly by
setting out for your consideration one or two points in which I seem to
myself to differ most widely from current accepted philosophy.

You must be prepared for things that will strike you as crude, for a
certain difference of accent and dialect that you may not like, and you
must be prepared, too, to hear what may strike you as the clumsy
statement of my ignorant re-discovery of things already beautifully
thought out and said. But in the end you may incline to forgive me some
of this first offence. . . . It is quite unavoidable that, in setting
out these intellectual foundations of mine, I should lapse for a moment
or so towards autobiography.

A convergence of circumstances led to my having my knowledge of concrete
things quite extensively developed before I came to philosophy
examination at all. I have heard some one say that a savage or an animal
is mentally a purely objective being, and in that respect I was like a
savage or an animal until I was well over twenty. I was extremely
unaware of the subjective or introverted element in my being. I was a
Positivist without knowing it. My early education was a feeble one; it
was one in which my private observation, inquiry and experiment were far
more important factors than any instruction, or rather perhaps the
instruction I received was less even than what I learnt for myself, and
it terminated at thirteen. I had come into pretty intimate contact with
the harder realities of life, with hunger in various forms, and many
base and disagreeable necessities, before I was fifteen. About that age,
following the indication of certain theological and speculative
curiosities, I began to learn something of what I will call deliberately
and justly, Elemental Science—stuff I got out of *Cassell's* *Popular
Educator* and cheap text-books—and then, through accidents and ambitions
that do not matter in the least to us now, I came to three years of
illuminating and good scientific work. The central fact of those three
years was Huxley's course in Comparative Anatomy at the school in
Exhibition Road. About that as a nucleus I arranged a spacious digest of
facts. At the end of that time I had acquired what I still think to be a
fairly clear and complete and ordered view of the ostensibly real
universe. Let me try to give you the chief things I had. I had man
definitely placed in the great scheme of space and time. I knew him
incurably for what he was, finite and not final, a being of compromises
and adaptations. I had traced his lungs, for example, from a swimming
bladder, step by step, with scalpel and probe, through a dozen types or
more, I had seen the ancestral c‘cum shrink to that disease nest, the
appendix of to-day, I had watched the gill slit patched slowly to the
purposes of the ear and the reptile jaw suspension utilised to eke out
the needs of a sense organ taken from its native and natural water. I
had worked out the development of those extraordinarily unsatisfactory
and untrustworthy instruments, man's teeth, from the skin scutes of the
shark to their present function as a basis for gold stoppings, and
followed the slow unfolding of the complex and painful process of
gestation through which man comes into the world. I had followed all
these things and many kindred things by dissection and in embryology—I
had checked the whole theory of development again in a year's course of
pal‘ontology, and I had taken the dimensions of the whole process, by
the scale of the stars, in a course of astronomical physics. And all
that amount of objective elucidation came before I had reached the
beginnings of any philosophical or metaphysical inquiry, any inquiry as
to why I believed, how I believed, what I believed, or what the
fundamental stuff of things was.

Now following hard upon this interlude with knowledge, came a time when
I had to give myself to teaching, and it became advisable to acquire one
of those Teaching Diplomas that are so widely and so foolishly despised,
and that enterprise set me to a superficial, but suggestive study of
educational method, of educational theory, of logic, of psychology, and
so at last, when the little affair with the diploma was settled, to
philosophy. Now to come to logic over the bracing uplands of comparative
anatomy is to come to logic with a lot of very natural preconceptions
blown clean out of one's mind. It is, I submit, a way of taking logic in
the flank. When you have realised to the marrow that all the physical
organs of man and all his physical structure are what they are through a
series of adaptations and approximations, and that they are kept up to a
level of practical efficiency only by the elimination of death, and that
this is true also of his brain and of his instincts and of many of his
mental predispositions, you are not going to take his thinking apparatus
unquestioningly as being in any way mysteriously different and better.
And I had read only a little logic before I became aware of implications
that I could not agree with, and assumptions that seemed to me to be
altogether at variance with the general scheme of objective fact
established in my mind.

I came to an examination of logical processes and of language with the
expectation that they would share the profoundly provisional character,
the character of irregular limitation and adaptation that pervades the
whole physical and animal being of man. And I found the thing I had
expected. And, as a consequence, I found a sort of intellectual
hardihood about the assumptions of logic, that at first confused me and
then roused all the latent scepticism in my mind.

My first quarrel with the accepted logic I developed long ago in a
little paper that was printer in the *Fortnightly Review* in July 1891.
It was called the "Rediscovery of the Unique," and re-reading it I
perceive not only how bad and even annoying it was in manner—a thing I
have long known—but also how remarkably bad it was in expression. I have
good reason for doubting whether my powers of expression in these uses
have very perceptibly improved, but at any rate I am doing my best now
with that previous failure before me.

That unfortunate paper, among other oversights I can no longer regard as
trivial, disregarded quite completely the fact that a whole literature
upon the antagonism of the one and the many, of the specific ideal and
the individual reality, was already in existence. It defined no
relations to other thought or thinkers. I understand now, what i did not
understand then, why it was totally ignored. But the idea underlying
that paper I cling to to-day. I consider it an idea that will ultimately
be regarded as one of primary importance to human thought, and I will
try to present the substance of that early paper again now very briefly,
as the best opening of my general case. My opening scepticism is
essentially a doubt of *the objective reality of classification*. I have
no hesitation in saying that is the first and primary proposition of my
philosophy.

I have it in mind that classification is a necessary condition of the
working of the mental implement, but that it is a departure from the
objective truth of things, that classification is very serviceable for
the practical purposes of life, but a very doubtful preliminary to those
fine penetrations the philosophical purpose, in its more arrogant moods,
demands. All the peculiarities of my way of thinking derive from that.

A mind nourished upon anatomical study is, of course, permeated with the
suggestion of the vagueness and instability of biological species. A
biological species is quite obviously a great number of unique
individuals which is separable from other biological species only by the
fact that an enormous number of other linking individuals are
inaccessible in time—are in other words dead and gone—and each new
individual in that species does, in the distinction of its own
individuality, break away in however infinitesimal degree from the
previous average properties of the species. There is no property of any
species, even the properties that constitute the specific definition,
that is not a matter of more or less. If, for example, a species be
distinguished by a single large red spot on the back, you will find if
you go over a great number of specimens that red spot shrinking here to
nothing, expanding there to a more general redness, weakening to pink,
deepening to russet and brown, shading into crimson, and so on, and so
on. And this is true not only of biological species. It is true of the
mineral specimens constituting a mineral species, and I remember as a
constant refrain in the lectures of Prof. Judd upon rock classification,
the words "they pass into one another by insensible gradations." That is
true, I hold, of all things.

You will think perhaps of atoms of the elements as instances of
identically similar things, but these are things not of experience but
of theory, and there is not a phenomenon in chemistry that is not
equally well explained on the supposition that it is merely the immense
quantities of atoms necessarily taken in any experiment that mask by the
operation of the law of averages the fact that each atom also has its
unique quality, its special individual difference. This idea of
uniqueness in all individuals is not only true of the classifications of
material science; it is true, and still more evidently true, of the
species of common thought, it is true of common terms. Take the word
*chair*. When one says chair, one thinks vaguely of an average chair.
But collect individual instances, think of armchairs and reading chairs,
and dining-room chairs and kitchen chairs, chairs that pass into
benches, chairs that cross the boundary and become settees, dentists'
chairs, thrones, opera stalls, seats of all sorts, those miraculous
fungoid growths that cumber the floor of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition,
and you will perceive what a lax bundle in fact is this simple straight.
forward term. In co-operation with an intelligent joiner I would
undertake to defeat any definition of chair or chairishness that you
gave me. Chairs, just as much as individual organisms, just as much as
mineral and rock specimens, are unique things—if you know them well
enough you will find an individual difference even in a set of
machine-made chairs—and it is only because we do not possess minds of
unlimited capacity, because our brain has only a limited number of
pigeon-holes for our correspondence with an unlimited universe of
objective uniques, that we have to delude ourselves into the belief that
there is a chairishness in this species common to and distinctive of all
chairs.

Let me repeat; this is of the very smallest importance in all the
practical affairs of life, or, indeed, in relation to anything but
philosophy and wide generalisations. But in philosophy it matters
profoundly. If I order two new-laid eggs for breakfast, up come two
unhatched but still unique avian individuals, and the chances are they
serve my rude physiological purpose. I can afford to ignore the hens'
eggs of the past that were not quite so nearly this sort of thing, and
the hens' eggs of the future that will accumulate modification age by
age; I can venture to ignore the rare chance of an abnormality in
chemical composition and of any startling aberration in my physiological
reaction; I can, with a confidence that is practically perfect, say with
unqualified simplicity "two eggs," but not if my concern is not my
morning's breakfast but the utmost possible truth.

Now let me go on to point out whither this idea of uniqueness tends. I
submit to you that syllogism is based on classification, that all hard
logical reasoning tends to imply and is apt to imply a confidence in the
objective reality of classification. Consequently in denying that I deny
the absolute validity of logic. Classification and number, which in
truth ignore the fine differences of objective realities, have in the
past of human thought been imposed upon things. Let me for clearness'
sake take a liberty here—commit, as you may perhaps think, an
unpardonable insolence. Hindoo thought and Greek thought alike impress
me as being overmuch obsessed by an objective treatment of certain
necessary preliminary conditions of human thought—number and definition
and class and abstract form. But these things, number, definition, class
and abstract form, I hold, are merely unavoidable conditions of mental
activity—regrettable conditions rather than essential facts. *The
forceps of our minds are clumsy forceps, and crush the truth a little in
taking hold of it.*

It was about this difficulty that the mind of Plato played a little
inconclusively all his life. For the most part he tended to regard the
*idea* as the something behind reality, whereas it seems to me that idea
idea is the more proximate and less perfect thing, the thing by which
the mind, by ignoring individual differences, attempts to comprehend an
otherwise unmanageable number of unique realities.

Let me give you a rough figure of what I am trying to convey in this
first attack upon the philosophical validity of general terms. You have
seen the results of those various methods of black and white
reproduction that involve the use of a rectangular net. You know the
sort of process picture I mean—it used to be employed very frequently in
reproducing photographs. At a little distance you really seem to have a
faithful reproduction of the original picture, but when you peer closer
you find not the unique form and masses of the original, but a multitude
of little rectangles, uniform in shape and size. The more earnestly you
go into the thing, the closer you look, the more the picture is lost in
reticulations. I submit the world of reasoned inquiry has a very similar
relation to the world I call objectively real. For the rough purposes of
every day the network picture will do, but the finer your purpose the
less it will serve, and for an ideally fine purpose, for absolute and
general knowledge that will be as true for a man at a distance with a
telescope as for a man with a microscope it will not serve at all.

It is true you can make your net of logical interpretation finer and
finer, you can fine your classification more and more—up to a certain
limit. But essentially you are working in limits, and as you come
closer, as you look at finer and subtler things, as you leave the
practical purpose for which the method exists, the element of error
increases. Every species is vague, every term goes cloudy at its edges,
and so in my way of thinking, relentless logic is only another phrase
for a stupidity—for a sort of intellectual pigheadedness. If you push a
philosophical or metaphysical inquiry through a series of valid
syllogisms-never committing any generally recognised fallacy-you
nevertheless leave a certain rubbing and marginal loss of objective
truth, and you get deflections that are difficult to trace, at each
phase in the process. Every species waggles about in its definition,
every tool is a little loose in its handle, every scale has its
individual error. So long as you are reasoning for practical purposes
about the finite things of experience, you can every now and then check
your process, and correct your adjustments. But not when you make what
are called philosophical and theological inquiries, when you turn your
implement towards the final absolute truth of things. Doing that is like
firing at an inaccessible, unmarkable and indestructible target at an
unknown distance, with a defective rifle and variable cartridges. Even
if by chance you hit, you cannot know that you hit, and so it will
matter nothing at all.

This assertion of the necessary untrustworthiness of all reasoning
processes arising out of the fallacy of classification in what is quite
conceivably a universe of uniques, forms only one introductory aspect of
my general scepticism of the Instrument of Thought.

I have now to tell you of another aspect of this scepticism of the
instrument which concerns negative terms.

Classes in logic are not only represented by circles with a hard firm
outline, whereas they have no such definite limits, but also there is a
constant disposition to think of negative terms as if they represented
positive classes. With words just as with numbers and abstract forms
there are definite phases of human development. There is, you know, with
regard to number, the phase when man can barely count at all, or counts
in perfect good faith and sanity upon his fingers. Then there is the
phase when he is struggling with the development of number, when he
begins to elaborate all sorts of ideas about numbers, until at last he
develops complex superstitions about perfect numbers and imperfect
numbers, about threes and sevens and the like. The same is the case with
abstracted forms, and even to-day we are scarcely more than heads out of
the vast subtle muddle of thinking about spheres and ideally perfect
forms and so on, that was the price of this little necessary step to
clear thinking. You know better than I do how large a part numerical and
geometrical magic, numerical and geometrical philosophy has played in
the history of the mind. And the whole apparatus of language and mental
communication is beset with like dangers. The language of the savage is,
I suppose, purely positive; the thing has a name, the name has a thing.
This indeed is the tradition of language, and to-day even, we, when we
hear a name, are predisposed—and sometimes it is a very vicious
disposition—to imagine forthwith something answering to the name. *We
are disposed, as an incurable mental vice, to accumulate intension in
terms.* If I say to you Wodget or Crump, you find yourself passing over
the fact that these are nothings, these are, so to speak, mere terms.
Our instrument of knowledge persists in handling even such openly
negative terms as the Absolute, the Infinite, as though they were real
existences, and when the negative element is ever so little disguised,
as it is in such a word as Omniscience, then the illusion of positive
reality may be complete.

Please remember that I an trying to tell you my philosophy, and not
arguing about yours. Let me try to express how in my mind this matter of
negative terms has shaped itself. I think of something which I may
perhaps best describe as being off the stage or out of the court, or as
the Void without Implications, or as Nothingness or as Outer Darkness.
This is a sort of hypothetical Beyond to the visible world of human
thought, and thither I think all negative terms reach at last, and merge
and become nothing. Whatever positive class you make, whatever boundary
you draw, straight away from that boundary begins the corresponding
negative class and passes into the illimitable horizon of nothingness.
You talk of pink things, you ignore, if you are a trained logician, the
more elusive shades of pink, and draw your line. Beyond is the not pink,
known and knowable, and still in the not pink region one comes to the
Outer Darkness. Not blue, not happy, not iron, all the *not* classes
meet in that Outer Darkness. That same Outer Darkness and nothingness is
infinite space, and infinite time, and any being of infinite qualities,
and all that region I rule out of court in my philosophy altogether. I
will neither affirm nor deny if I can help it about any *not* things. I
will not deal with not things at all, except by accident and
inadvertence. If I use the word "infinite" I use it as one often uses
"countless," "the countless hosts of the enemy"—or
"immeasurable"—"immeasurable cliffs"—that is to say as the limit of
measurement rather than as the limit of imaginary measurability, as a
convenient equivalent to as many times this cloth yard as you can, and
as many again and so on and so on. Now a great number of apparently
positive terms are, or have become, practically negative terms and are
under the same ban with me. A considerable number of terms that have
played a great part in the world of thought, seem to me to be
invalidated by this same defect, to have no content or an undefined
content or an unjustifiable content. For example, that word Omniscient,
as implying infinite knowledge, impresses me as being a word with a
delusive air of being solid and full when it is really hollow with no
content whatever. I am persuaded that knowing is the relation of a
conscious being to something not itself, that the thing known is defined
as a system of parts and aspects and relationships, that knowledge is
comprehension, and so that only finite things can know or be known. When
you talk of a being of infinite extension and infinite duration,
omniscient and omnipotent and Perfect, you seem to me to be talking in
negatives of nothing whatever.

When you speak of the Absolute you speak to me of nothing.

If, however, you talk of a great yet finite and thinkable being, a being
not myself, extending beyond my imagination in time and space, knowing
all that I can think of as known and capable of doing all that I can
think of as done, you come into the sphere of my mental operations, and
into the scheme of my philosophy. . . .

These then are my first two charges against our Instrument of Knowledge,
firstly, that it can work only by disregarding individuality and
treating uniques as identically similar objects in this respect or that,
so as to group them under one term, and that once it has done so it
tends automatically to intensify the significance of that term, and
secondly, that it can only deal freely with negative terms by treating
them as though they were positive. But I have a further objection to the
Instrument of Human Thought, that is not correlated to these former
objections and that is also rather more difficult to convey.

Essentially this idea is to present a sort of stratification in human
ideas. I have it very much in mind that various terms in our reasoning
lie, as it were, at different levels and in different planes, and that
we accomplish a large amount of error and confusion by reasoning terms
together that do not lie or nearly lie in the same plane.

Let me endeavour to make myself a little less obscure by a most flagrant
instance from physical things. Suppose some one began to talk seriously
of a man seeing an atom through a microscope, or better perhaps of
cutting one in half with a knife. There are a number of non-analytical
people who would be quite prepared to believe that an atom could be
visible to the eye or cut in this manner. But any one at all conversant
with physical conceptions would almost as soon think of killing the
square root of 2 with a rook rifle as of cutting an atom in half with a
knife. Our conception of an atom is reached through a process of
hypothesis and analysis, and in the world of atoms there are no knives
and no men to cut. If you have thought with a strong consistent mental
movement, then when you have thought of your atom under the knife blade,
your knife blade has itself become a cloud of swinging grouped atoms,
and your microscope lens a little universe of oscillatory and vibratory
molecules. If you think of the universe, thinking at the level of atoms,
there is neither knife to cut, scale to weigh, nor eye to see. The
universe *at that plane to which the mind of the molecular physicist
descends* has none of the shapes or forms of our common life whatever.
This hand with which I write is in the universe of molecular physics a
cloud of warring atoms and molecules, combining and recombining,
colliding, rotating, flying hither and thither in the universal
atmosphere of ether.

You see, I hope, what I mean when I say that the universe of molecular
physics is at a different level from the universe of common
experience;—what we call stable and solid is in that world a freely
moving system of interlacing centres of force, what we call colour and
sound is there no more that this length of vibration or that. We have
reached to a conception of that universe of molecular physics by a great
enterprise of organised analysis, and our universe of daily experiences
stands in relation to that elemental world as if it were a synthesis of
those elemental things.

I would suggest to you that this is only a very extreme instance of the
general state of affairs, that there may be finer and subtler
differences of level between one term and another, and that terms may
very well be thought of as lying obliquely and as being twisted through
different levels.

It will perhaps give a clearer idea of what I am seeking to convey if I
suggest a concrete image for the whole world of a man's thought and
knowledge. Imagine a large clear jelly, in which at all angles and in
all states of simplicity or contortion his ideas are embedded. They are
all valid and possible ideas as they lie, none in reality incompatible
with any. If you imagine the direction in which one moves by analysis or
by synthesis, if you go down for example from matter to atoms and
centres of force and up to men and states and countries—if you will
imagine the ideas lying in that manner—you will get the beginning of my
intention. But our Instrument, our process of thinking, like a drawing
before the discovery of perspective, appears to have difficulties with
the third dimension, appears capable only of dealing with or reasoning
about ideas by projecting them upon the same plane. It will be obvious
that a great multitude of things may very well exist together in a solid
jelly, which would be overlapping and incompatible and mutually
destructive, when projected together upon one plane. Through the bias in
our Instrument to do this, through reasoning between terms not in the
same plane, an enormous amount of confusion, perplexity, and mental
deadlocking occurs.

The old theological deadlock between predestination and free-will serves
admirably as an example of the sort of deadlock I mean. Take life at the
level of common sensation and common experience, and there is no more
indisputable fact than man's freedom of will, unless it is his complete
moral responsibility. But make only the least penetrating of analyses
and you perceive a world of inevitable consequences, a rigid succession
of cause and effect. Insist upon a flat agreement between the two, and
there you are! The Instrument fails.

It is upon these three objections, and upon an extreme suspicion of
abstract terms which arises materially out of my first and second
objections, that I chiefly rest my case for a profound scepticism of the
remoter possibilities of the Instrument of Thought. It is a thing no
more perfect than the human eye or the human ear, though like those
other instruments it may have undefined possibilities of evolution
towards increased range, and increased power.

So much for my main contention. But before I conclude I may—since I am
here—say a little more in the autobiographical vein, and with a view to
your discussion to show how I reconcile this fundamental scepticism with
the very positive beliefs about world-wide issues I possess, and the
very definite distinction I make between right and wrong.

I reconcile these things by simply pointing out to you that if there is
any validity in my image of that three dimensional jelly in which our
ideas are suspended, such a reconciliation as you demand in logic, such
a projection of the things as in accordance upon one plane, is totally
unnecessary and impossible.

This insistence upon the element of uniqueness in being, this
subordination of the class to the individual difference, not only
destroys the universal claim of philosophy, but the universal claim of
ethical imperatives, the universal claim of any religious teaching. If
you press me back upon my fundamental position I must confess I put
faith and standards and rules of conduct upon exactly the same level as
I put my belief of what is right in art, and what I consider right
practice in art. I have arrived at a certain sort of self-knowledge, and
there are, I find, very distinct imperatives for me, but I am quite
prepared to admit there is no proving them imperative on any one else.
One's political proceedings, one's moral acts are, I hold, just as much
self-expression as one's poetry or painting or music. But since life has
for its primordial elements assimilation and aggression, I try not only
to obey my imperatives, but to put them persuasively and convincingly
into other minds, to bring about *my* good and to resist and overcome
*my* evil as though they were the universal Good and the universal Evil
in which unthinking men believe. And it is obviously in no way
contradictory to this philosophy, for me, if I find others responding
sympathetically to any notes of mine, or if I find myself responding
sympathetically to notes sounding about me, to give that common
resemblance between myself and others a name, to refer these others and
myself in common to this thing as if it were externalised and spanned us
all.

Scepticism of the Instrument is, for example, not incompatible with
religious association and with organisation upon the basis of a common
faith. It is possible to regard God as a Being synthetic in relation to
men and societies, just as the idea of a universe of atoms and molecules
and inorganic relationships is analytical in relation to human life.

The repudiation of demonstration in any but immediate and verifiable
cases that this Scepticism of the Instrument amounts to, the abandonment
of any universal validity for moral and religious propositions, brings
ethical, social, and religious teaching into the province of poetry, and
does something to correct the estrangement between knowledge and beauty
that is a feature of so much mental existence at this time. All these
things are self-expression. Such an opinion sets a new and greater value
on that penetrating and illuminating quality of mind we call insight,
insight which when it faces towards the contradictions that arise out of
the imperfections of the mental instrument is called humour. In these
innate, unteachable qualities I hold—in humour and the sense of
beauty—lies such hope of intellectual salvation from the original sin of
our intellectual instrument as we may entertain in this uncertain and
fluctuating world of unique appearances. . . .

So frankly I spread my little equipment of fundamental assumptions
before you, heartily glad of the opportunity you have given me of taking
them out, of looking at them with the particularity the presence of
hearers ensures, and of hearing the impression they have made upon you.
Of course, such a sketch must have an inevitable crudity of effect. The
time I had for it—I mean the time I was able to give in preparation—was
altogether too limited for any exhaustive finish of presentation; but I
think on the whole I have got the main lines of this sketch map of my
mental basis true. Whether I have made myself comprehensible is a
different question altogether. It is for you rather than me to say how
this sketch map of mine lies with regard to your own more systematic
cartography. . . .
