[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu09)  [Next](amu11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER SEVEN

#### A FEW UTOPIAN IMPRESSIONS

### SECTION 1

But now we are in a better position to describe the houses and ways of
the Utopian townships about the Lake of Lucerne, and to glance a little
more nearly at the people who pass. You figure us as curiously settled
down in Utopia, as working for a low wage at wood-carving, until the
authorities at the central registry in Paris can solve the perplexing
problem we have set them. We stay in an inn looking out upon the lake,
and go to and fro for our five hours' work a day, with a curious effect
of having been born Utopians. The rest of our time is our own.

Our inn is one of those inns and lodging houses which have a minimum
tariff, inns which are partly regulated, and, in the default of private
enterprise, maintained and controlled by the World State throughout the
entire world. It is one of several such establishments in Lucerne. It
possesses many hundreds of practically self-cleaning little bedrooms,
equipped very much after the fashion of the rooms we occupied in the
similar but much smaller inn at Hospenthal, differing only a little in
the decoration. There is the same dressing-room recess with its bath,
the same graceful proportion in the succinct simplicity of its
furniture. This particular inn is a quadrangle after the fashion of an
Oxford college; it is perhaps forty feet high, and with about five
stories of bedrooms above its lower apartments; the windows of the rooms
look either outward or inward to the quadrangle, and the doors give upon
artificially-lit passages with staircases passing up and down. These
passages are carpeted with a sort of cork carpet, but are otherwise
bare. The lower story is occupied by the equivalent of a London club,
kitchens and other offices, dining-room, writing-room, smoking and
assembly-rooms, a barber's shop, and a library. A colonnade with seats
runs about the quadrangle, and in the middle is a grass-plot. In the
centre of this a bronze figure, a sleeping child, reposes above a little
basin and fountain, in which water lilies are growing. The place has
been designed by an architect happily free from the hampering traditions
of Greek temple building, and of Roman and Italian palaces; it is
simple, unaffected, gracious. The material is some artificial stone with
the dull surface and something of the tint of yellow ivory the colour is
a little irregular, and a partial confession of girders and pillars
breaks this front of tender colour with lines and mouldings of greenish
grey, that blend with the tones of the leaden gutters and rain pipes
from the light red roof. At one point only does any explicit effort
towards artistic effect appear, and that is in the great arched gateway
opposite my window. Two or three abundant yellow roses climb over the
face of the building, and when I look out of my window in the early
morning—for the usual Utopian working day commences within an hour of
sunrise—I see Pilatus above this outlook, rosy in the morning sky.

This quadrangle type of building is the prevalent element in Utopian
Lucerne, and one may go from end to end of the town a on corridors and
covered colonnades without emerging by a gateway into the open roads at
all. Small shops are found in these colonnades, but the larger stores
are usually housed in buildings specially adapted to their needs. The
majority of the residential edifices are far finer and more substantial
than our own modest shelter, though we gather from such chance glimpses
as we get of their arrangements that the labour-saving ideal runs
through every grade of this servantless world; and what we should
consider a complete house in earthly England is hardly known here.

The autonomy of the household has been reduced far below terrestrial
conditions by hotels and clubs, and all sorts of co-operative
expedients. People who do not live in hotels seem usually to live in
clubs. The fairly prosperous Utopian belongs, in most cases, to one or
two residential clubs of congenial men and women. These clubs usually
possess, in addition to furnished bedrooms, more or less elaborate
suites of apartments, and if a man prefers it one of these latter can be
taken and furnished according to his personal taste. A pleasant boudoir,
a private library and study, a private garden plot, are among the
commonest of such luxuries. Devices to secure roof gardens, loggias,
verandahs, and such-like open-air privacies to the more sumptuous of
these apartments, give interest and variety to Utopian architecture.
There are sometimes little cooking corners in these fiats—as one would
call them on earth—but the ordinary Utopian would no more think of a
special private kitchen for his dinners than he would think of a private
flour mill or dairy farm. Business, private work, and professional
practice go on sometimes in the house apartments, but often in special
offices in the great warren of the business quarter. A common garden, an
infant school, play rooms, and a playing garden for children, are
universal features of the club quadrangles.

Two or three main roads, with their tramways, their cyclists' paths, and
swift traffic paths, will converge on the urban centre, where the public
offices will stand in a group close to the two or three theatres and the
larger shops, and hither, too, in the case of Lucerne, the head of the
swift railway to Paris and England and Scotland, and to the Rhineland
and Germany will run. And as one walks out from the town centre one will
come to that mingling of homesteads and open country which will be the
common condition of all the more habitable parts of the globe.

Here and there, no doubt, will stand quite solitary homesteads,
homesteads that will nevertheless be lit and warmed by cables from the
central force station, that will share the common water supply, will
have their perfected telephonic connection with the rest of the world,
with doctor, shop, and so forth, and may even have a pneumatic tube for
books and small parcels to the nearest post office. But the solitary
homestead, as a permanent residence, will be something of a luxury—the
resort of rather wealthy garden lovers; and most people with a bias for
retirement will probably get as much residential solitude as they care
for in the hire of a holiday châlet in a forest, by remote lagoons or
high up the mountain side.

The solitary house may indeed prove to be very rare indeed in Utopia.
The same forces, the same facilitation of communications that will
diffuse the towns will tend to little concentrations of the agricultural
population over the countryside. The field workers will probably take
their food with them to their work during the day, and for the
convenience of an interesting dinner and of civilised intercourse after
the working day is over, they will most probably live in a college
quadrangle with a common room and club. I doubt if there will be any
agricultural labourers drawing wages in Utopia. I am inclined to imagine
farming done by tenant associations, by little democratic unlimited
liability companies working under elected managers, and paying not a
fixed rent but a share of the produce to the State. Such companies could
reconstruct annually to weed out indolent members.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) A minimum standard of efficiency in
farming would be insured by fixing a minimum beneath which the rent must
not fall, and perhaps by inspection. The general laws respecting the
standard of life would, of course, apply to such associations. This type
of co-operation presents itself to me as socially the best arrangement
of productive agriculture and horticulture, but such enterprises as
stock breeding, seed farming, and the stocking of loan and agricultural
implements are probably, and agricultural research and experiment
certainly, best handled directly by large companies or the municipality
of the State.

But I should do little to investigate this question; these are presented
as quite incidental impressions. You must suppose that for the most part
our walks and observations keep us within the more urban quarters of
Lucerne. From a number of beautifully printed placards at the streets
corners, adorned with caricatures of considerable pungency, we discover
an odd little election is in progress. This is the selection, upon
strictly democratic lines, with a suffrage that includes every permanent
resident in the Lucerne ward over the age of fifteen, of the ugliest
local building. The old little urban and local governing bodies, we
find, have long since been superseded by great provincial municipalities
for all the more serious administrative purposes, but they still survive
to discharge a number of curious minor functions, and not the least
among these is this sort of æsthetic ostracism. Every year every minor
local governing body pulls down a building selected by local plebiscite,
and the greater Government pays a slight compensation to the owner, and
resumes possession of the land it occupies. The idea would strike us at
first as simply whimsical, but in practice it appears to work as a cheap
and practical device for the æsthetic education of builders, engineers,
business men, opulent persons, and the general body of the public. But
when we come to consider its application to our own world we should
perceive it was the most Utopian thing we had so far encountered.

### SECTION 2

The factory that employs us is something very different from the
ordinary earthly model. Our business is to finish making little wooden
toys—bears, cattle men, and the like—for children. The things are made
in the rough by machinery, and then finished by hand, because the work
of unskilful but interested men—and it really is an extremely amusing
employment—is found to give a personality and interest to these objects
no machine can ever attain.

We carvers—who are the riff-raff of Utopia—work in a long shed together,
nominally by time; we must keep at the job for the length of the spell,
but we are expected to finish a certain number of toys for each spell of
work. The rules of the game as between employer and employed in this
particular industry hang on the wall behind us; they are drawn up by a
conference of the Common Council of Wages Workers with the employers, a
common council which has resulted in Utopia from a synthesis of the old
Trades Unions, and which has become a constitutional power; but any man
who has skill or humour is presently making his own bargain with our
employer more or less above that datum line.

Our employer is a quiet blue-eyed man with a humorous smile. He dresses
wholly in an indigo blue, that later we come to consider a sort of
voluntary uniform for Utopian artists. As he walks about the workshop,
stopping to laugh at this production or praise that, one is reminded
inevitably of an art school. Every now and then he carves a little
himself or makes a sketch or departs to the machinery to order some
change in the rough shapes it is turning out. Our work is by no means
confined to animals. After a time I am told to specialise in a comical
little Roman-nosed pony; but several of the better paid carvers work up
caricature images of eminent Utopians. Over these our employer is most
disposed to meditate, and from them he darts off most frequently to
improve the type.

It is high summer, and our shed lies open at either end. On one hand is
a steep mountain side down which there comes, now bridging a chasm, now
a mere straight groove across a meadow, now hidden among green branches,
the water-slide that brings our trees from the purple forest overhead.
Above us, but nearly hidden, hums the machine shed, but we see a corner
of the tank into which, with a mighty splash, the pine trees are
delivered. Every now and then, bringing with him a gust of resinous
smell, a white-clad machinist will come in with a basketful of crude,
unwrought little images, and will turn them out upon the table from
which we carvers select them.

(Whenever I think of Utopia that faint and fluctuating smell of resin
returns to me, and whenever I smell resin, comes the memory of the open
end of the shed looking out upon the lake, the blue-green lake, the
boats mirrored in the water, and far and high beyond floats the
atmospheric fairyland of the mountains of Glarus, twenty miles away.)

The cessation of the second and last spell of work comes about midday,
and then we walk home, through this beautiful intricacy of a town to our
cheap hotel beside the lake.

We should go our way with a curious contentment, for all that we were
earning scarcely more than the minimum wage. We should have, of course,
our uneasiness about the final decisions of that universal eye which has
turned upon us, we should have those ridiculous sham numbers on our
consciences; but that general restlessness, that brooding stress that
pursues the weekly worker on earth, that aching anxiety that drives him
so often to stupid betting, stupid drinking, and violent and mean
offences will have vanished out of mortal experience.

### SECTION 3

I should find myself contrasting my position with my preconceptions
about a Utopian visit. I had always imagined myself as standing outside
the general machinery of the State—in the distinguished visitors'
gallery, as it were—and getting the new world in a series of
comprehensive perspective views. But this Utopia, for all the sweeping
floats of generalisation I do my best to maintain, is swallowing me up.
I find myself going between my work and the room in which I sleep and
the place in which I dine, very much as I went to and fro in that real
world into which I fell five-and-forty years ago. I find about me
mountains and horizons that limit my view, institutions that vanish also
without an explanation, beyond the limit of sight, and a great
complexity of things I do not understand and about which, to tell the
truth, I do not formulate acute curiosities. People, very
unrepresentative people, people just as casual as people in the real
world, come into personal relations with us, and little threads of
private and immediate interest spin themselves rapidly into a thickening
grey veil across the general view. I lose the comprehensive
interrogation of my first arrival; I find myself interested in the grain
of the wood I work, in birds among the tree branches, in little
irrelevant things, and it is only now and then that I get fairly back to
the mood that takes all Utopia for its picture.

We spend our first surplus of Utopian money in the reorganisation of our
wardrobes upon more Utopian lines; we develop acquaintance with several
of our fellow-workers, and of those who share our table at the inn. We
pass insensibly into acquaintanceships and the beginnings of
friendships. The World Utopia, I say, seems for a time to be swallowing
me up. At the thought of detail it looms too big for me. The question of
government, of its sustaining ideas, of race, and the wider future, hang
like the arch of the sky over these daily incidents, very great indeed,
but very remote. These people about me are everyday people, people not
so very far from the minimum wage accustomed much as the everyday people
of earth are accustomed to take their world as they find it. Such
inquiries as I attempt are pretty obviously a bore to them, pass outside
their range as completely as Utopian speculation on earth outranges a
stevedore or a member of Parliament or a working plumber. Even the
little things of daily life interest them in a different way. So I get
on with my facts and reasoning rather slowly. I find myself looking
among the pleasant multitudes of the streets for types that promise
congenial conversation.

My sense of loneliness is increased during this interlude by the better
social success of the botanist. I find him presently falling into
conversation with two women who are accustomed to sit at a table near
our own. They wear the loose, coloured robes of soft material that are
the usual wear of common adult Utopian women; they are both dark and
sallow, and they affect amber and crimson in their garments. Their faces
strike me as a little unintelligent, and there is a faint touch of
middle-aged coquetry in their bearing that I do not like. Yet on earth
we should consider them women of exceptional refinement. But the
botanist evidently sees in this direction scope for the feelings that
have wilted a little under my inattention, and he begins that petty
intercourse of a word, of a slight civility, of vague inquiries and
comparisons that leads at last to associations and confidences. Such
superficial confidences, that is to say, as he finds satisfactory.

This throws me back upon my private observations.

The general effect of a Utopian population is vigour. Every one one
meets seems to be not only in good health but in training; one rarely
meets fat people, bald people, or bent or grey. People who would be
obese or bent and obviously aged on earth are here, in good repair, and
as a consequence the whole effect of a crowd is livelier and more
invigorating than on earth. The dress is varied and graceful; that of
the women reminds one most of the Italian fifteenth century; they have
an abundance of soft and beautifully-coloured stuffs, and the clothes,
even of the poorest, fit admirably. Their hair is very simply but very
carefully and beautifully dressed, and, except in very sunny weather,
they do not wear hats or bonnets. There is little difference in
deportment between one class and another; they all are graceful and bear
themselves with quiet dignity, and among a group of them a European
woman of fashion in her lace and feathers, her hat and metal ornaments,
her mixed accumulations of "trimmings," would look like a barbarian
tricked out with the miscellaneous plunder of a museum. Boys and girls
wear much the same sort of costume—brown leather shoes, then a sort of
combination of hose and close-fitting trousers that reaches from toe to
waist, and over this a beltless jacket fitting very well, or a belted
tunic. Many slender women wear the same sort of costume. We should see
them in it very often in such a place as Lucerne, as they returned from
expeditions in the mountains, The older men would wear long robes very
frequently, but the greater proportion of the men would go in variations
of much the same costume as the children. There would certainly be
hooded cloaks and umbrellas for rainy weather, high boots for mud and
snow, and cloaks and coats and furry robes for the winter. There would
be no doubt a freer use of colour than terrestrial Europe sees in these
days, but the costume of the women at least would be soberer and more
practical, and (in harmony with our discussion in the previous chapter)
less differentiated from the men's.

But these, of course, are generalisations. These are the mere
translation of the social facts we have hypotheticated into the language
of costume. There will be a great variety of costume and no compulsions.
The doubles of people who are naturally foppish on earth will be foppish
in Utopia, and people who have no natural taste on earth will have
inartistic equivalents. Every one will not be quiet in tone, or
harmonious, or beautiful. Occasionally, as I go through the streets to
my work, I shall turn round to glance again at some robe shot with gold
embroidery, some slashing of the sleeves, some eccentricity of cut, or
some discord or untidiness. But these will be but transient flashes in a
general flow of harmonious graciousness; dress will have scarcely any of
that effect of disorderly conflict, of self-assertion qualified by the
fear of ridicule, that it has in the crudely competitive civilisations
of earth.

I shall have the seeker's attitude of mind during those few days at
Lucerne. I shall become a student of faces. I shall be, as it were,
looking for some one. I shall see heavy faces, dull faces, faces with an
uncongenial animation, alien faces, and among these some with an
immediate quality of appeal. I should see desirable men approaching me,
and I should think; "Now if I were to speak to *you*?" Many of these
latter I should note wore the same clothing as the man who spoke to us
at Wassen I should begin to think of it as a sort of uniform. . . .

Then I should see grave-faced girls, girls of that budding age when
their bearing becomes delusively wise, and the old deception of my youth
will recur to me; "Could you and I but talk together?" I should think.
Women will pass me lightly, women with open and inviting faces, but they
will not attract me, and there will come beautiful women, women with
that touch of claustral preoccupation which forbids the thought of any
near approach. They are private and secret, and I may not enter, I know,
into their thoughts. . . .

I go as often as I can to the seat by the end of old Kapelbrucke, and
watch the people passing over.

I shall find a quality of dissatisfaction throughout all these days. I
shall come to see this period more and more distinctly as a pause, as a
waiting interlude, and the idea of an encounter with my double, which
came at first as if it were a witticism, as something verbal and
surprising, begins to take substance. The idea grows in my mind that
after all this is the "some one" I am seeking, this Utopian self of
mine. I had at first an idea of a grotesque encounter, as of something
happening in a looking-glass, but presently it dawns on me that my
Utopian self must be a very different person from me. His training will
be different, his mental content different. But between us there will be
a strange link of essential identity, a sympathy, and understanding. I
find the thing rising suddenly to a preponderance in my mind. I find the
interest of details dwindling to the vanishing point. That I have come
to Utopia is the lesser thing now; the greater is that I have come to
meet myself.

I spend hours trying to imagine the encounter, inventing little
dialogues. I go alone to the Bureau to find if any news has come to hand
from the Great Index in Paris, but I am told to wait another twenty-four
hours. I cease absolutely to be interested in anything else, except so
far as it leads towards intercourse with this being who is to be at once
so strangely alien and so totally mine.

### SECTION 4

Wrapped up in these preoccupations as I am, it will certainly be the
botanist who will notice the comparative absence of animals about us.

He will put it in the form of a temperate objection to the Utopian
planet.

He is a professed lover of dogs and there are none. We have seen no
horses and only one or two mules on the day of our arrival, and there
seems not a cat in the world. I bring my mind round to his. "This
follows," I say.

It is only reluctantly that I allow myself to be drawn from my secret
musings into a discussion of Utopian pets.

I try to explain that a phase in the world's development is inevitable
when a systematic world-wide attempt will be made to destroy for ever a
great number of contagious and infectious diseases, and that this will
involve, for a time at any rate, a stringent suppression of the free
movement of familiar animals. Utopian houses, streets and drains will be
planned and built to make rats, mice, and such-like house parasites
impossible; the race of cats and dogs providing, as it does, living
fastnesses to which such diseases as plague, influenza, catarrhs and the
like, can retreat to sally forth again—must pass for a time out of
freedom, and the filth made by horses and the other brutes of the
highway vanish from the face of the earth. These things make an old
story to me, and perhaps explicitness suffers through my brevity.

My botanist fails altogether to grasp what the disappearance of diseases
means. His mind has no imaginative organ of that compass. As I talk his
mind rests on one fixed image. This presents what the botanist would
probably call a "dear old doggie"—which the botanist would make believe
did not possess any sensible odour—and it has faithful brown eyes and
understands everything you say. The botanist would make believe it
understood him mystically, and I figure his long white hand—which seems
to me, in my more jaundiced moments, to exist entirely for picking
things and holding a lens—patting its head, while the brute looked
things unspeakable. . . .

The botanist shakes his head after my explanation and says quietly, "I
do not like your Utopia, if there are to be no dogs."

Perhaps that makes me a little malicious. Indeed, I do not hate dogs,
but I care ten thousand times more for a man than for all the brutes on
the earth, and I can see, what the botanist I think cannot, that a life
spent in the delightful atmosphere of many pet animals may have too dear
a price. . . .

I find myself back again at the comparison of the botanist and myself.
There is a profound difference in our imaginations, and I wonder whether
it is the consequence of innate character or of training, and whether he
is really the human type or I. I am not altogether without imagination,
but what imagination I have has the most insistent disposition to square
itself with every fact in the universe. It hypothesises very boldly, but
on the other hand it will not gravely make believe. Now the botanist's
imagination is always busy with the most impossible make-believe. That
is the way with all children I know. But it seems to me one ought to
pass out of it. It isn't as though the world was an untidy nursery it is
a place of splendours indescribable for all who will lift its veils. It
may be he is essentially different from me, but I am much more inclined
to think he is simply more childish. Always it is make-believe. He
believes that horses are beautiful creatures, for example, dogs are
beautiful creatures, that some women are inexpressibly lovely, and he
makes believe that this is always so. Never a word of criticism of horse
or dog or woman! Never a word of criticism of his impeccable friends!
Then there is his botany. He makes believe that all the vegetable
kingdom is mystically perfect and exemplary, that all flowers smell
deliciously and are exquisitely beautiful, that *Drosera* does not hurt
flies very much, and that onions do not smell. Most of the universe does
not interest this nature lover at all. But I know, and I am querulously
incapable of understanding why every one else does not know, that a
horse is beautiful in one way and quite ugly in another, that everything
has this shot-silk quality, and is all the finer for that. When people
talk of a horse as an ugly animal I think of its beautiful moments, but
when I hear a flow of indiscriminate praise of its beauty I think of
such an aspect as one gets for example from a dog-cart, the
fiddle-shaped back, and that distressing blade of the neck, the narrow
clumsy place between the ears, and the ugly glimpse of cheek. There is,
indeed, no beauty whatever save that transitory thing that comes and
comes again; all beauty is really the beauty of expression, is really
kinetic and momentary. That is true even of those triumphs of static
endeavour achieved by Greece. The Greek temple, for example, is a barn
with a face that at a certain angle of vision and in a certain light has
a great calm beauty.

But where are we drifting? All such things, I hold, are cases of more
and less, and of the right moment and the right aspect, even the things
I most esteem. There is no perfection, there is no enduring treasure.
This pet dog's beautiful affection, I say, or this other sensuous or
imaginative delight, is no doubt good, but it can be put aside if it is
incompatible with some other and wider good. You cannot focus all good
things together.

All right action and all wise action is surely sound judgment and
courageous abandonment in the matter of such incompatibilities. If I
cannot imagine thoughts and feelings in a dog's brain that cannot
possibly be there, at least I can imagine things in the future of men
that might be there had we the will to demand them. . . .

"I don't like this Utopia," the botanist repeats. "You don't understand
about dogs. To me they're human beings—and more! There used to be such a
jolly old dog at my aunt's at Frognal when I was a boy——"

But I do not heed his anecdote. Something—something of the nature of
conscience—has suddenly jerked back the memory of that beer I drank at
Hospenthal, and puts an accusing finger on the memory.

I never have had a pet animal, I confess, though I have been fairly
popular with kittens. But with regard to a certain petting of myself——?

Perhaps I was premature about that beer. I have had no pet animals, but
I perceive if the Modern Utopia is going to demand the sacrifice of the
love of animals, which is, in its way, a very fine thing indeed, so much
the more readily may it demand the sacrifice of many other indulgencies,
some of which are not even fine in the lowest degree.

It is curious this haunting insistence upon sacrifice and discipline!

It is slowly becoming my dominant thought that the sort of people whose
will this Utopia embodies must be people a little heedless of small
pleasures. You cannot focus all good things at the same time. That is my
chief discovery in these meditations at Lucerne. Much of the rest of
this Utopia I had in a sort of way anticipated, but not this. I wonder
if I shall see my Utopian self for long and be able to talk to him
freely. . . .

We lie in the petal-strewn grass under some Judas trees beside the lake
shore, as I meander among these thoughts, and each of us, disregardful
of his companion, follows his own associations.

"Very remarkable," I say, discovering that the botanist has come to an
end with his story of that Frognal dog.

"You'd wonder how he knew," he says.

"You would."

I nibble a green blade.

"Do you realise quite," I ask, "that within a week we shall face our
Utopian selves and measure something of what we might have been?"

The botanist's face clouds. He rolls over, sits up abruptly and puts his
lean hands about his knees.

"I don't like to think about it," he says. "What is the good of
reckoning... might have beens?"

### SECTION 5

It is pleasant to think of one's puzzling the organised wisdom of so
superior a planet as this Utopia, this moral monster State my
Frankenstein of reasoning has made, and to that pitch we have come. When
we are next in the presence of our Lucerne official, he has the bearing
of a man who faces a mystification beyond his powers, an incredible
disarrangement of the order of Nature. Here, for the first time in the
records of Utopian science, are two cases—not simply one but two, and
these in each other's company!—of duplicated thumb marks. This, coupled
with a cock-and-bull story of an instantaneous transfer from some planet
unknown to Utopian astronomy. That he and all his world exists only upon
a hypothesis that would explain every one of these difficulties
absolutely, is scarcely likely to occur to his obviously unphilosophic
mind.

The official eye is more eloquent than the official lips and asks almost
urgently, "What in this immeasurable universe have you managed to do to
your thumbs? And why?" But he is only a very inferior sort of official
indeed, a mere clerk of the post, and he has all the guarded reserve of
your thoroughly unoriginal man. "You are not the two persons I
ascertained you were," he says, with the note of one resigned to
communion with unreason; "because you"—he indicates me—"are evidently at
your residence in London." I smile. "That gentleman"—he points a pen at
the botanist in a manner that is intended to dismiss my smile once for
all—"will be in London next week. He will be returning next Friday from
a special mission to investigate the fungoid parasites that have been
attacking the cinchona trees in Ceylon."

The botanist blesses his heart.

"Consequently"—the official sighs at the burthen of such nonsense, "you
will have to go and consult with—the people you ought to be."

I betray a faint amusement.

"You will have to end by believing in our planet," I say.

He waggles a negation with his head. He would intimate his position is
too responsible a one for jesting, and both of us in our several ways
enjoy the pleasure we poor humans have in meeting with intellectual
inferiority. "The Standing Committee of Identification," he says, with
an eye on a memorandum, "has remitted your case to the Research
Professor of Anthropology in the University of London, and they want you
to go there, if you will, and talk to him."

"What else can we do?" says the botanist.

"There's no positive compulsion," he remarks, "but your work here will
probably cease. Here——" he pushed the neat slips of paper towards
us—"are your tickets for London, and a small but sufficient supply of
money,"—he indicates two piles of coins and paper on either hand of
him—"for a day or so there." He proceeds in the same dry manner to
inform us we are invited to call at our earliest convenience upon our
doubles, and upon the Professor, who is to investigate our case.

"And then?"

He pulls down the corners of his mouth in a wry deprecatory smile, eyes
us obliquely under a crumpled brow, shrugs his shoulders, and shows us
the palms of his hands.

On earth, where there is nationality, this would have been a
Frenchman—the inferior sort of Frenchman—the sort whose only happiness
is in the routine security of Government employment.

### SECTION 6

London will be the first Utopian city centre we shall see.

We shall find ourselves there with not a little amazement. It will be
our first experience of the swift long distance travel of Utopia, and I
have an idea—I know not why—that we should make the journey by night.
Perhaps I think so because the ideal of long-distance travel is surely a
restful translation less suitable for the active hours.

We shall dine and gossip and drink coffee at the pretty little tables
under the lantern-lit trees, we shall visit the theatre, and decide to
sup in the train, and so come at last to the station. There we shall
find pleasant rooms with seats and books—luggage all neatly
elsewhere—and doors that we shall imagine give upon a platform. Our
cloaks and hats and such-like outdoor impedimenta will be taken in the
hall and neatly labelled for London, we shall exchange our shoes for
slippers there, and we shall sit down like men in a club. An officious
little bell will presently call our attention to a label "London" on the
doorway, and an excellent phonograph will enforce that notice with
infinite civility. The doors will open, and we shall walk through into
an equally comfortable gallery.

"Where is the train for London?" we shall ask a uniformed fellow
Utopian.

"This is the train for London," he will say.

There will be a shutting of doors, and the botanist and I, trying not to
feel too childish, will walk exploring through the capacious train.

The resemblance to a club will strike us both. "A *good* club," the
botanist will correct me.

When one travels beyond a certain speed, there is nothing but fatigue in
looking out of a window, and this corridor train, twice the width of its
poor terrestrial brother, will have no need of that distraction. The
simple device of abandoning any but a few windows, and those set high,
gives the wall space of the long corridors to books; the middle part of
the train is indeed a comfortable library with abundant arm-chairs and
couches, each with its green-shaded light, and soft carpets upon the
sound-proof floor. Farther on will be a news-room, with a noiseless but
busy tape, at one corner, printing off messages from the wires by the
wayside, and farther still, rooms for gossip and smoking, a billiard
room, and the dining car. Behind we shall come to bedrooms, bathrooms,
the hairdresser, and so forth.

"When shall we start?" I ask presently, as we return, rather like
bashful yokels, to the library, and the old gentleman reading the
*Arabian Nights* in the arm-chair in the corner glances up at me with a
sudden curiosity.

The botanist touches my arm and nods towards a pretty little lead-paned
window, through which we see a village sleeping under cloudy moonlight
go flashing by. Then a skylit lake, and then a string of swaying lights,
gone with the leap of a camera shutter.

Two hundred miles an hour!

We resort to a dignified Chinese steward and secure our berths. It is
perhaps terrestrial of us that we do not think of reading the Utopian
literature that lines the middle part of the train. I find a bed of the
simple Utopian pattern, and lie for a time thinking—quite tranquilly—of
this marvellous adventure.

I wonder why it is that to lie securely in bed, with the light out,
seems ever the same place, wherever in space one may chance to be? And
asleep, there is no space for us at all. I become drowsy and incoherent
and metaphysical. . . .

The faint and fluctuating drone of the wheels below the car, re-echoed
by the flying track, is more perceptible now, but it is not unpleasantly
loud, merely a faint tinting of the quiet. . . .

No sea crossing breaks our journey; there is nothing to prevent a
Channel tunnel in that other planet; and I wake in London.

The train has been in London some time when I awake, for these
marvellous Utopians have discovered that it is not necessary to bundle
out passengers from a train in the small hours, simply because they have
arrived. A Utopian train is just a peculiar kind of hotel corridor that
flies about the earth while one sleeps.

### SECTION 7

How will a great city of Utopia strike us?

To answer that question well one must needs be artist and engineer, and
I am neither. Moreover, one must employ words and phrases that do not
exist, for this world still does not dream of the things that may be
done with thought and steel, when the engineer is sufficiently educated
to be an artist, and the artistic intelligence has been quickened to the
accomplishment of an engineer. How can one write of these things for a
generation which rather admires that inconvenient and gawky muddle of
ironwork and Flemish architecture, the London Tower Bridge. When before
this, temerarious anticipators have written of the mighty buildings that
might some day be, the illustrator has blended with the poor ineffectual
splutter of the author's words, his powerful suggestion that it amounted
simply to something bulbous, florid and fluent in the vein of the onion,
and *L'Art* *Nouveau*. But here, it may be, the illustrator will not
intervene.

Art has scarcely begun in the world.

There have been a few forerunners and that is all. Leonardo Michael
Angelo; how they would have exulted in the liberties of steel! There are
no more pathetic documents in the archives of art than Leonardo's
memoranda. In these, one sees him again and again reaching out as it
were, with empty desirous hands, towards the unborn possibilities of the
engineer. And Dürer, too, was a Modern, with the same turn towards
creative invention. In our times these men would have wanted to make
viaducts to bridge wild and inaccessible places, to cut and straddle
great railways athwart the mountain masses of the world. You can see,
time after time, in Dürer's work, as you can see in the imaginary
architectural landscape of the Pompeian walls, the dream of structures,
lighter and bolder than stone or brick can yield. . . . These Utopian
town buildings will be the realisation of such dreams.

Here will be one of the great meeting-places of mankind. Here—I speak of
Utopian London—will be the traditional centre of one of the great races
in the commonalty of the World State—and here will be its social and
intellectual exchange. There will be a mighty University here, with
thousands of professors and tens of thousands of advanced students, and
here great journals of thought and speculation, mature and splendid
books of philosophy and science, and a glorious fabric of literature
will be woven and shaped, and with a teeming leisureliness, put forth.
Here will be stupendous libraries, and a mighty organisation of museums.
About these centres will cluster a great swarm of people, and close at
hand will be another centre, for I who am an Englishman must needs
stipulate that Westminster shall still be a seat of world Empire. one of
several seats, if you will—where the ruling council of the world
assembles. Then the arts will cluster round this city, as gold gathers
about wisdom, and here Englishmen will weave into wonderful prose and
beautiful rhythms and subtly atmospheric forms, the intricate, austere
and courageous imagination of our race.

One will come into this place as one comes into a noble mansion. They
will have flung great arches and domes of glass above the wider spaces
of the town, the slender beauty of the perfect metal-work far overhead
will be softened to a fairy-like unsubstantiality by the mild London
air. It will be the London air we know, clear of filth and all impurity,
the same air that gives our October days their unspeakable clarity, and
makes every London twilight mysteriously beautiful. We shall go along
avenues of architecture that will be emancipated from the last memories
of the squat temple boxes of the Greek, the buxom curvatures of Rome;
the Goth in us will have taken to steel and countless new materials as
kindly as once he took to stone. The gay and swiftly moving platforms of
the public ways will go past on either hand, carrying sporadic groups of
people, and very speedily we shall find ourselves in a sort of central
space, rich with palms and flowering bushes and statuary. We shall look
along an avenue of trees, down a wide gorge between the cliffs of
crowded hotels, the hotels that are still glowing with internal lights,
to where the shining morning river streams dawnlit out to sea.

Great multitudes of people will pass softly to and fro in this central
space, beautiful girls and youths going to the University classes that
are held in the stately palaces about us, grave and capable men and
women going to their businesses, children meandering along to their
schools, holiday makers, lovers, setting out upon a hundred quests; and
here we shall ask for the two we more particularly seek. A graceful
little telephone kiosk will put us within reach of them, and with a
queer sense of unreality I shall find myself talking to my Utopian twin.
He has heard of me, he wants to see me and he gives me clear directions
how to come to him.

I wonder if my Own voice sounds like that.

"Yes," I say, "then I will come as soon as we have been to our hotel."

We indulge in no eloquence upon this remarkable occasion. Yet I feel an
unusual emotional stir. I tremble greatly, and the telephonic mouthpiece
rattles as I replace it.

And thence the botanist and I walk on to the apartments that have been
set aside for us, and into which the poor little rolls of the property
that has accumulated about us in Utopia, our earthly raiment, and a
change of linen and the like, have already been delivered. As we go I
find I have little to say to my companion, until presently I am struck
by a transitory wonder that he should have so little to say to me.

"I can still hardly realise," I say, "that I am going to see myself—as I
might have been."

"No," he says, and relapses at once into his own preoccupation.

For a moment my wonder as to what he should be thinking about brings me
near to a double self-forgetfulness.

I realise we are at the entrance of our hotel before I can formulate any
further remark.

"This is the place," I say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](amu10.htm#fr_29.md) Schemes for the
co-operative association of producers will be found in Dr. Hertzka's
*Freeland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eight](amu11.md)
