[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tcr03)  [Next](tcr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930985/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*True Christian Religion*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1771\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1906\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### True Christian Religion

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.">151.</span></span>

Believing in the Lord is not merely acknowledging Him but also doing His
commandments; for simply acknowledging Him is solely a matter of
thought, arising from somewhat of the understanding; but doing His
commandments is also a matter of acknowledgment from the will. Man's
mind consists of understanding and will; and as the understanding deals
with thinking and the will with doing, so when man's acknowledgment is
merely from the thought of the understanding he comes to the Lord with
only half of his mind; but when there is doing he comes with all of it;
and this is to believe. But on the other hand, man is able to divide his
heart, and to force the outermost of his nature to soar aloft, the flesh
in him meanwhile turning downward; thus he flies like an eagle between
heaven and hell. And yet, the man himself does not follow his \[upward\]
look, but the delight of his flesh; and this he does because he is in
hell; therefore to hell he flies; and when he has there sacrificed to
his voluptuous pleasures and poured out libations to demons, he puts on
a countenance of merriment, and his eyes sparkle with fire, and so he
feigns himself an angel of light. Such satans do those become after
death who acknowledge the Lord but do not keep His commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.">152.</span></span>

Under the preceding proposition it has been shown that the salvation and
eternal life of men are the first and last end of the Lord; and as the
first and last end contain within them the mediate ends, it follows that
the above mentioned spiritual energies are together in the Lord, and
from the Lord in man, although they come forth successively. For the
human mind grows like its body, the latter growing in stature while the
former grows in wisdom. So, too, is the mind exalted from one region to
another, that is, from the natural to the spiritual, and from the
spiritual to the celestial. In this celestial region man is wise, in the
spiritual he is intelligent, and in the lowest knowing. But this
exaltation of the mind is effected only from time to time, and as man
acquires for himself truths and conjoins them with good. It is the same
with one who builds a house; he first procures the materials for it,
such as bricks, tiles, boards, and beams, and thus lays the foundations,
raises the walls, divides off the rooms, furnishes them with doors, puts
windows in the walls, and constructs stairs from one story to another.
All these things are together in the end, which is the convenient and
worthy dwelling he foresees and provides for. It is the same in the
building of a church, every thing pertaining to its construction is
included in the end, which is the worship of God. So is it with
everything else, as with gardens and fields, and also with employments
and business, for which the end itself procures for itself the
accessories.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.">153.</span></span>

\(5\) The Lord operates of Himself from the Father, and not the reverse.
To operate here means the same as sending the Holy Spirit, since the
above mentioned operations (which, in general, are reformation,
regeneration, renewal, vivification, sanctification, justification,
purification from evils, and forgiveness of sins and salvation), which
are at this day attributed to the Holy Spirit as a God by Himself, are
operations of the Lord. That these are of the Lord from the Father and
not the reverse, shall first be proved from the Word, and afterwards
illustrated by various things that appeal to the reason. From the Word
by the following passages: When the Comforter is come whom I will send
unto you from the Father, the Spirit of truth that goes forth from the
Father, He shall bear witness of Me (John 15:26). If I go not away the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I go away I will send Him unto
you (John 16:7). The Comforter, the Spirit of truth, shall not speak
from Himself, but He shall take of Mine and shall declare it unto you.
All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine; therefore said I that He
shall take of Mine and shall declare it unto you (John 16:13-15). The
Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified (John
7:39). Jesus breathed on the disciples and said, Receive ye the Holy
Spirit (John 20:22). Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do,
that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in
My name I will do it (John 14:13, 14). \[2\] From these passages it is
very evident that the Lord sends the Holy Spirit, that is, effects those
things which at this day are ascribed to the Holy Spirit as a God by
Himself; for He says that "He will send the Comforter from the Father,"
that "He will send it to them," that "the Holy Spirit was not yet
because Jesus was not yet glorified;" and after the glorification He
breathed on the disciples and said, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit;" also
that He said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do;" and
that the Comforter "shall take of Mine what He is to declare." That the
Comforter and the Holy Spirit are the same see John 14:26. That God the
Father does not operate these energies of Himself through the Son, but
that the Son operates them of Himself from the Father, is evident from
the following: No one hath seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son,
who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath brought Him forth to view
(John 1:18). And elsewhere: Ye have neither heard the Father's voice at
any time nor seen His form (John 5:37). \[3\] From all this it follows
that God the Father operates in and into the Son, but not through the
Son; also that the Lord operates of Himself from His Father; for He
says: All things of the Father are Mine (John 16:15). The Father hath
given all things into the hand of the Son (John 3:35). Again: As the
Father hath life in Himself so hath He given to the Son to have life in
Himself (John 5:26). And again: The words that I speak unto you are
spirit and are life (John 6:63). The Lord declares that the Spirit of
truth goes forth from the Father (John 15:26), because it goes forth
from God the Father into the Son, and out of the Son from the Father.
Therefore He also says: In that day ye shall know that the Father is in
Me and I am in the Father, and ye in Me and I in you (John 14:11, 20).
From these plain declarations of the Lord an error of the Christian
world is clearly manifest, namely, that God the Father sends the Holy
Spirit to man; also the error of the Greek Church, which is, that God
the Father sends the Holy Spirit directly. The truth that the Lord of
Himself from God the Father sends the Holy Spirit, and not the reverse,
is from heaven. The angels call this an arcanum because it has not
before been disclosed to the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.">154.</span></span>

All this may be made clear by various rational considerations; as for
example, it is known that when the Apostles had received from the Lord
the gift of the Holy Spirit they preached the gospel through a great
part of the world, promulgating it both by speech and by writing; and
this they did of themselves from the Lord. For Peter taught and wrote in
one manner, James in another, John in another, and Paul in another, each
according to his own intelligence. The Lord filled them all with His
Spirit; but the measure in which each partook of it was in accordance
with the character of his perceptions; and this was made use of in
accordance with the character of his ability. The Lord fills all the
angels in the heavens, for they are in the Lord and the Lord is in them;
and yet each one speaks and acts in accordance with the state of his own
mind, some with simplicity and some with wisdom, thus with infinite
variety; nevertheless everyone speaks of himself from the Lord. \[2\] It
is the same with every minister of the church, whether he be in truths
or in falsities; each one has his own utterance and his own
intelligence, and each one speaks from his own mind, that is, from the
spirit he possesses. So with all Protestants, whether called Evangelical
or Reformed, after they have been instructed in the dogmas taught by
Luther, Melancthon, or Calvin. It is not these leaders or their dogmas
that speak of themselves through their followers; but their followers
speak of themselves from the leaders or the dogmas. Furthermore, each
dogma may be explained in a thousand ways, for each is like a cornucopia
from which everyone draws what favors and is suited to his genius, and
explains it according to his talent. \[3\] This may be illustrated by
the action of the heart in and upon the lungs, and by the reaction of
the lungs of themselves from the heart, the two being distinct, and yet
reciprocally united. The lungs breathe of themselves from the heart; but
the heart does not breathe through the lungs; if this should take place
they would both cease to act. It is the same again with the action of
the heart in and into the viscera of the whole body. The heart sends out
the blood in all directions, and the viscera draw from it each one its
portion in accordance with the nature of the use it performs, and in
accordance with that use it acts, thus each in its own way. \[4\] The
same truth may be illustrated also by the evil derived from parents,
which is called hereditary evil; this acts in and into man; in like
manner good from the Lord acts, the good acting above or within, and the
evil acting below or without. If the evil acted through man he would
neither be capable of reformation nor be culpable; or if the good from
the Lord acted through man he would be incapable of reformation; but as
both good and evil depend on man's free choice he becomes guilty when he
acts of himself from evil, and is blameless when he acts of himself from
good. And since evil is the devil, and good is the Lord, man becomes
guilty when he acts from the devil, and is blameless when he acts from
the Lord. It is from this free choice, which every man has, that man is
capable of reformation. \[5\] It is the same with the entire internal
and the entire external in man. These two are distinct, and yet are
reciprocally united. The internal acts in and into the external, but not
through it; for the internal meditates a thousand things, and from these
the external chooses only such as are suited to its use. For in man's
internal (by which is meant his voluntary and perceptive mind) there are
voluminous heaps of ideas, and if these were to flow forth through man's
mouth it would be like a blast from a bellows. As the internal deals
with universals it may be compared to an ocean or flower bed or garden,
from which the external selects just what is sufficient for its use.
Again, the Word of the Lord is like an ocean or a flower bed or a
garden, in that when it has place in man's internal in any degree of
fullness it does not act through man, but man speaks and acts of himself
from the Word. The same is true of the Lord, because He is the Word,
that is, the Divine truth and Divine good that are in it. The Lord acts
from Himself or from the Word in and into man, and not through him,
since man acts and speaks from the Lord freely when he acts and speaks
from the Word. \[6\] But this may be illustrated more closely by the
mutual interaction of the soul and body, which are two distinct things,
and yet are reciprocally united. The soul acts in and into the body, not
through it; the body acts of itself from the soul. The soul does not act
through the body, for the two do not consult and deliberate each with
the other, nor does the soul command or ask the body to do this or that,
or to speak from its mouth; neither does the body demand or beg the soul
to give or supply anything; for every thing that belongs to the soul
belongs also to the body, mutually and interchangeably. It is the same
with the Divine and the Human of the Lord, for the soul of His Human is
the Divine of the Father, and the Human is His body; and the Human does
not ask its own Divine to tell it what to say or do. Therefore the Lord
says: In that day ye shall ask in My name; and I say not unto you that I
will pray the Father for you, for the Father Himself loveth you because
ye have loved Me (John 16:26, 27). "In that day" means after His
glorification, that is, after His perfect and absolute union with the
Father. This arcanum is from the Lord Himself, given for those who will
be of His new church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.">155.</span></span>

It has been shown above, under the third proposition, that the Divine
energy, meant by the operation of the Holy Spirit, with the clergy
especially, is enlightenment and instruction; but in addition to these
there are two intermediate operations, which are perception and
disposition. Thus there are four things that with the clergy follow in
order: Enlightenment, Perception, Disposition, and Instruction.
Enlightenment is from the Lord. Perception pertains to man, and is in
accordance with the state of mind formed in him by doctrinals. If these
doctrinals are true his perception becomes clear from the light that
enlightens; but if they are false his perception becomes obscure,
although from confirmations it may seem to be clear, this arising from a
fatuous light which to the merely natural vision resembles clearness.
Disposition is from the affection of the will's love, and that which
disposes is the delight of that love. If it is a delight of the love of
evil and of falsity there from, it excites a zeal which is outwardly
harsh, rough, burning, and fiery, while inwardly it is anger, ferocity,
and unmercifulness. But if it is a delight of the love of good and of
truth therefrom it is outwardly mild, smooth, resounding, and glowing,
while within it is charity, grace, and mercy. Instruction follows from
these as an effect from causes. Thus in each man enlightenment, which is
from the Lord, is turned into various kinds of light and heat in
accordance with the state of his mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.">156.</span></span>

\(6\) The spirit of man is his mind and whatever proceeds from it. In
the concrete, man's spirit means simply his mind; for this it is that
lives after death, and it is then called a spirit-if good, an angelic
spirit and afterwards an angel, if evil, a satanic spirit and afterwards
a satan. The mind of everyone is his internal man, which is actually the
man, and resides within the external man which constitutes his body;
consequently when the body is cast off, which is effected by its death,
the internal is in a complete human form. Therefore they err who believe
that man's mind resides only in the head; it is there in principles
only, from which everything that man thinks from his understanding or
does from his will first proceeds; but in the body it is in derivatives,
which are formed for sensation and action. And because the mind
invariably adheres to the bodily structures it imparts to them sensation
and motion; and it also inspires them with a perception that the body
thinks and acts of itself, although this latter is a fallacy, as every
wise man knows. Since, then, the spirit of man thinks from the
understanding and acts from the will, and since the body acts not from
itself but from the spirit, it follows that the spirit of man means his
intelligence and his love's affection and whatever goes forth and
operates from these. That "the spirit of man" signifies such things as
pertain to the mind is evident from many passages in the Word. That this
is their meaning anyone can see as soon as they are presented. The
following are a few passages from among many: Bezaleel was filled with
the spirit of wisdom and understanding and knowledge (Exod. 31:3).
Nebuchadnezzar said of Daniel that an excellent spirit of knowledge and
understanding and wisdom was found in him (Dan. 5:11, 12). Joshua was
full of the spirit of wisdom (Deut. 34:9). Make you a new heart and a
new spirit (Ezek. 18:31). Blessed are the poor in spirit, for of such is
the kingdom of the heavens (Matt. 5:3). I dwell in the contrite and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble (Isa. 57:15). The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit (Ps. 51:17). I will give the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness (Isa. 61:3). (And
elsewhere.) That "the spirit" signifies also such things as pertain to a
perverse and wicked mind is evident from the following: He said to the
foolish prophets that go away after their own spirit (Ezek. 13:3).
Conceive chaff, bring forth stubble; as to your spirit, fire shall
devour you (Isa. 33:11). A man who is a wanderer in spirit and uttereth
falsehood (Micah 2:11). A generation whose spirit is not constant with
God (Ps. 78:8). The spirit of whoredoms (Hos. 5:4; 4:12). That every
heart may melt, and every spirit faint (Ezek. 21:7). That which
ascendeth upon your spirit shall never come to pass (Ezek. 20:32). In
whose spirit there is no guile (Ps. 32:2). Pharaoh's spirit was troubled
(Gen. 41:8); So also was Nebuchadnezzar's (Dan. 2:3). From these and
numerous other passages it is clearly evident that the "spirit"
signifies the mind of man and such things as pertain thereto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="157.">157.</span></span>

As man's spirit means his mind, therefore "being in the spirit" (a
phrase sometimes used in the Word) means a state of mind separate from
the body; and because in that state the prophets saw such things as
exist in the spiritual world it is called "a vision of God." The
prophets were then in a state like that of spirits and angels themselves
in that world. In that state man's spirit like his mind in regard to
sight, may be transferred from place to place, the body remaining
meanwhile in its own place. This is the state in which I have now been
for twenty-six years, with the difference, that I am in the spirit and
in the body at the same time, and only at times out of the body. That
Ezekiel, Zachariah, Daniel, and John when he wrote the Apocalypse, were
in that state is evident from the following passages. Ezekiel says: The
spirit lifted me up, and brought me back in vision in the spirit of God
into Chaldea, to the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up
from me (Ezek. 11:1, 24). That the spirit lifted him up, and he heard
behind him an earthquake (Ezek. 3:12, 14). That the spirit lifted him up
between earth and heaven and brought him to Jerusalem, and he saw
abominations (Ezek. 8:3 seq.). That he saw four living creatures that
were cherubim, and various things with them (Ezek. 1, 10). Also a new
earth and a new temple, and an angel measuring them (Ezek. 40, 47). That
he was then in vision and in the spirit (Ezek. 40:2; 43:5). \[2\] It was
the same with Zachariah (in whom there was then an angel) when he saw: A
man riding among the myrtle trees (Zech. 1:8 seq.); Four horns, and a
man with a measuring line in his hand (Zech. 1:18; 2:1, 5 seq.); Joshua
the high priest (Zech. 3:1 seq.); The lampstand and two olive trees
(Zech. 4:1 seq.); A flying roll and an ephah (Zech. 5:1, 6); Four
chariots going out from between two mountains, and horses (Zech 6:1-3).
Daniel was in a like state: When he saw the four great beasts coming up
from the sea, and many things respecting them (Dan. 7:1-12); When he saw
the battles between the ram and the he-goat (Dan. 8:1-12); All of which
he saw in vision (Dan. 7:1, 2, 7, 13; 8:2; 10:1, 7, 8); The angel
Gabriel appeared to him in vision and talked with him (Dan. 9:21). \[3\]
The same occurred to John when he wrote the Apocalypse; he said: That he
was in the spirit on the Lord's day (1:10); That he was carried away in
the spirit into the wilderness (17:3); Upon a high mountain in spirit
(21:10); That he saw in vision (9:17); and elsewhere that he saw the
things he described; as when he saw the Son of man in the midst of the
seven lampstands; the tabernacle, the temple, the ark and the altar, in
heaven; a book sealed with seven seals, and horses going out of it; four
living creatures around the throne; the twelve thousand elect from each
tribe; the Lamb on Mount Zion; the locusts ascending from the abyss; the
dragon, and his combat with Michael; the woman bringing forth a male
child, and fleeing into the desert on account of the dragon; the two
beasts, one ascending out of the sea and the other out of the earth; the
woman sitting upon the scarlet beast; the dragon cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone; the white horse and the great supper; the holy city
Jerusalem descending, the gates, walls, and foundations of which he
described; the river of the water of life, and the trees of life bearing
fruit every month; and many other things. Peter, James, and John were in
a like state when they saw Jesus transfigured, and Paul when he heard
from heaven things ineffable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="158.">158.</span></span>

COROLLARY. As this chapter treats of the Holy Spirit, it is worthy of
special notice that in the Word of the Old Testament the Holy Spirit is
nowhere mentioned, and the "Spirit of Holiness" in three places only,
once in David (Ps. 51:11); and twice in Isaiah 43:10, 11). But in the
Word of the New Testament, both in the Gospels and in the Acts of the
Apostles, as also in their Epistles it is mentioned frequently. This is
because the Holy Spirit first was, when the Lord had come into the
world; for it goes forth out of Him from the Father; for: The Lord alone
is Holy (Apoc. 15:4) therefore also the angel Gabriel said to Mary the
mother: The holy thing that shall be born of thee (Luke 1:35). It is
said: The Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified
(John 7:39) although it is previously declared that the Holy Spirit
filled Elizabeth (Luke 1:41), and Zacharias (Luke 1:67), as also Simeon
(Luke 2:25); this is because the Spirit of Jehovah the Father filled
them, which was called the Holy Spirit because of the Lord who was
already in the world. This is why nowhere in the Word of the Old
Testament is it said that the prophets spoke from the Holy Spirit, but
from Jehovah; for everywhere we read, "Jehovah spoke unto me," "The Word
of Jehovah came unto me," "Jehovah said," "Thus said Jehovah." That no
one may be in doubt about this I will refer to the passages in Jeremiah
alone, where these expressions occur: 1:4, 7, 11-14, 19; 2:1-5, 9, 19,
22, 29, 31; 3:1, 6, 10, 12, 14, 16; 4:1, 3, 9, 17, 27; 5:11, 14, 18, 22,
29; 6:6, 9, 12, 15, 16, 21, 22; 7:1, 3, 11, 13, 19-21; 8:1, 3, 12, 13;
ix. 3, 7, 9, 13, 15, 17, 22, 24, 25; 10:1, 2, 18; 11:1, 3, 6, 9, 11, 17,
18, 21, 22; 12:14, 17; 13:1, 6, 9, 11-15, 25; 14:1, 10, 14, 15; 15:1-6,
11, 19, 20; 16:1, 3, 5, 9, 14, 16; 17:5, 19-21, 24; 18:1, 5, 6, 11, 13;
19:1, 3, 6, 12, 15; 20:4; 21:1, 4, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14; 22:2, 5, 6, 11, 16,
18, 24, 29, 30; 23:2, 5, 7, 12, 15, 24, 29, 31, 38; 24:3, 5, 8; 25:1, 3,
7-9, 15, 27-29, 32; 26:1, 2, 18; 27:1, 2, 4, 8, 11, 16, 19, 21, 22;
28:2, 12, 14, 16; 29:4, 8, 9, 16, 19-21, 25, 30-32; 30:1-5, 8, 10-12,
17, 18; 31:1, 2, 7, 10, 15-17, 23, 27, 28, 31-38; 32:1, 6, 14, 15, 25,
26, 28, 30, 36, 42, 44; 33:1, 2, 4, 10-13, 17, 19, 20, 23, 25; 34:1, 2,
4, 8, 12, 13, 17, 22; 35:1, 13, 17-19; 36:1, 6, 27, 29, 30; 37:6, 7, 9;
38:2, 3, 17; 39:15-18; 40:1; 42:7, 9, 15, 18, 19; 43:8, 10; 44:1, 2, 7,
11, 24-26, 30; 45:2, 5; 46:1, 23, 25, 28; 47:1; 48:1, 8, 12, 30, 35, 38,
40, 43, 44, 47; 49:2, 5-7, 12, 13, 16, 18, 26, 28, 30, 32, 35, 37-39;
50:1, 4, 10, 18, 20, 21, 30, 31, 33, 35, 40; 51:25, 33, 36, 39, 52, 58.
The same expressions occur in all the other prophets, but nowhere is it
said that the Holy Spirit spoke to them, or that Jehovah spoke to them
through the Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="159.">159.</span></span>

To this I will add the following Memorable Relations. First: Once when
in company with the angels in heaven, I saw below at some distance a
great smoke, and then fire breaking out from it; and I said to the
angels talking with me that the smoke seen in the hells, as a few among
them knew, arises from falsities confirmed by reasonings, and that the
fire is burning anger against those who contradict; and I added, "In
this world, as in mine where I live in the body, it is unknown that
flame is simply smoke on fire. That such is the fact I have often proved
by experiment; for I have seen streaks of smoke rising from wood on the
hearth, and when I set fire to them with a brand I have seen them turn
to flames, which assumed a shape like that of the smoke; for the
separate particles of smoke become little sparks which blaze up
together, like gunpowder when it is ignited. So is it with the smoke we
see below. This consists of an equal number of falsities; and the fire
breaking out like flames is the glow of zeal in behalf of those
falsities." \[2\] Then the angels said to me, "Let us ask the Lord for
leave to go down and draw towards the smoke, that we may perceive what
those falsities are that so smoke and blaze with those there." This was
granted; and lo, there appeared round about us a column of light
reaching continuously to the place. And then we saw four crowds of
spirits, who were strenuously maintaining that it is God the Father who
should be approached and worshiped, because He is invisible, and not His
Son born in the world, since He is a man and is visible. Looking towards
the sides I saw on the left some learned men of the clergy, and behind
these the unlearned; and on the right the learned of the laity, and
behind these the unlearned; while between us and these there was a
yawning gulf which was impassable. \[3\] But we turned our eyes and ears
to the left, where were the learned of the clergy, and behind them the
unlearned, and we heard them reasoning about God in this wise, "From the
doctrine of our church respecting God which is the same everywhere in
Europe, we know that God the Father ought to be approached, because He
is invisible, and at the same time God the Son and God the Holy Spirit,
who are also invisible, being co-eternal with the Father; also God the
Father, being the Creator of the universe, and therefore in the
universe, is present wherever we turn our eyes; and whenever we pray to
Him He graciously listens, and after accepting the mediation of the Son
He sends the Holy Spirit, who implants in our hearts the glory of His
Son's righteousness and bestows blessedness upon us. We who have been
made doctors in the church have felt in our breasts, when preaching, the
holy operation of that sending, and from the presence of the Spirit in
our minds have then breathed forth devotion. We are thus affected
because we direct all our senses to the invisible God, who operates not
singly upon the sight of our understanding, but universally upon our
whole system, mental and corporeal, by the Spirit He sends. Such effects
as these would not result from the worship of a visible God, that is, of
a God conspicuously before the mind as a man." \[4\] When this was said
the unlearned of the clergy who stood behind the others applauded, and
added, "Whence comes what is holy but from an invisible and
imperceptible Divine? At this, the moment it touches the entrance to our
ears, our features expand, and we are gladdened as by the sweetness of a
fragrant aura, and we smite upon our breasts. But it is otherwise with a
visible and perceptible Divine; when this enters our ears it becomes
merely natural, and not Divine. For a like reason the Roman Catholics
repeat their masses in Latin, and the host (to which they ascribe Divine
mystical properties) they bring out from the recesses of the altar and
hold up to sight; whereupon the people fall on their knees as before
something most mysterious, and take in breaths of holiness." \[5\] After
this we turned to the right, where the learned of the laity stood, and
the unlearned behind them; and from the learned we heard the following:
"We know that the wisest of the ancients worshiped an invisible God whom
they called Jehovah; but after them in the succeeding ages men made for
themselves gods out of deceased rulers, among whom were Saturn, Jupiter,
Neptune, Pluto, Apollo, and also Minerva, Diana, Venus, and Themis; and
to these they built temples and offered divine worship; and as in time
this worship degenerated it gave rise to idolatry, from which at last
the whole world became filled with insanity. We therefore agree
unanimously with our priests and elders that there were and are three
Divine persons from eternity, each one of whom is God; and it is enough
for us that they are invisible." To this the unlearned behind them
added, "We agree. Is not God God, and man man? Still we know that if
anyone should set before them a God-Man, the common people, who have a
sensuous idea about God, would accept it." \[6\] When they had said this
their eyes were opened and they saw us near them; but being indignant
because we had heard them they became silent. But presently the angels,
from a power given them, closed the outer or lower things of their
thoughts, from which they had been speaking, and opened the inner or
higher things, and compelled them to speak from these about God. And
speaking thus they said, "What is God? We have neither seen His shape
nor heard His voice. What, then, is God but nature in its firsts and
lasts. Nature we have seen, for she beams in our eyes; and we have heard
her, for she sounds in our ears." On hearing this we said to them, "Have
you ever seen Socinus, who acknowledged God the Father only; or Arius,
who denied the Divinity of the Lord our Savior, or have you seen any of
their adherents?" To which they answered, "We have not." We said, "They
are in the deep beneath you." And shortly some of them were summoned
from the deep and questioned about God; and they spoke as the others had
done; and they added, "What is God? We can make as many gods as we
like." \[7\] And then we said, "It is useless to talk with you about the
Son of God born in the world; yet we will say this much: Lest faith
respecting God and faith in God and from God, which in the first two
ages, from no one's having beheld God, had been like a beautifully
colored bubble in the air, should for the same reason in the third and
following age collapse to nothing, it pleased Jehovah God to descend and
assume a Human and thus make Himself visible, and convince men that He
is not a mere figment of reason, but the Itself, which was and is and
will be, from eternity to eternity; also that God is not a mere word of
three letters, but is the All of reality from Alpha to Omega,
consequently the life and salvation of all who believe in Him as
visible, but not of those who say that they believe in an invisible God.
For believing, seeing, and knowing make one. Therefore the Lord said to
Philip: That whosoever sees and knows Him sees and knows the Father; and
elsewhere: That it is the will of the Father that men should believe in
the Son and that whosoever believes in the Son has eternal life, while
he who does not believe in the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him (John 3:15-16, 36; 14:6-15). Hearing this many of the
four crowds were so enraged that smoke and flame issued from their
nostrils; we therefore left them; and the angels, after accompanying me
home, ascended to their heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="160.">160.</span></span>

Second memorable relation: At one time in company with some angels I was
walking in the world of spirits (which is intermediate between heaven
and hell, and which all men enter first after death, the good being
there made ready for heaven and the evil for hell), and I talked with
them on various subjects, on this among others: That in the world where
I am living in the body there are seen at night innumerable stars,
larger and smaller, which are so many suns, only the light of which
reaches our solar system; and I added, "When I saw that stars are
visible in your world also I supposed them to be as numerous as those in
the world where I live." The angels, delighted with this conversation,
said, "Perhaps they are, since every society of heaven, in the sight of
those who are under heaven, sometimes shines like a star; and the
societies of heaven are numberless, all arranged in order according to
the varieties of the affections of the love of good; which affections in
God are infinite, and thus from Him are numberless; and as these were
all foreseen before creation, I suppose that in accord with their number
there have been provided, that is, created, an equal number of stars in
the world where the men live who were to be natural-material bodies."
\[2\] While we were talking together in this way I saw in the north a
leveled way, so crowded with spirits that there was scarcely room to
step between any two; and I said to the angels that I had already seen
this way, with spirits thronging it like an army; and that I had heard
that this is the way by which all pass when departing from the natural
world. And the way is covered with such a vast number of spirits because
many thousands of men die every week, and after death they all pass into
this world. The angels added, "This road terminates in the middle of
this world where we now are-in the middle because on the sides towards
the east there are societies who are in love to God and love towards the
neighbor, and to the left towards the west societies of those who are
opposed to these loves; while in front towards the south are societies
of those who are more intelligent than the others. This is why the
newcomers from the natural world move first to this point. When here,
they are in the externals in which they had last been in the former
world. Afterwards they are gradually let into their internals, and their
characters are examined; and after the examination the good are borne to
their places in heaven and the evil to theirs in hell." \[3\] We stopped
at the middle point, at the termination of this way of entrance, and we
said, "Let us wait here awhile and talk with some of the newcomers." And
from those approaching we picked out twelve, who having just come from
the natural world did not know but that they were in it still. We asked
them their views of heaven and hell and the life after death. One
replied, "Our sacred order impressed upon me the belief that we are to
live after death, and that there is a heaven and a hell; and therefore I
have believed that all who live a moral life go to heaven; and as all do
live a moral life, that no one goes to hell; and therefore that hell is
a fable manufactured by the clergy to frighten men from evil living.
What does it matter whether I think about God in this way or that,
Thought is only chaff, as it were, or like a bubble on the water that
bursts and passes away." Another near him said, "It is my belief that
there is a heaven and a hell; and that God rules heaven, and the devil
rules hell; and as they are enemies, and therefore opposed to each
other, one calls evil what the other calls good; also that a moral man
who is a dissembler, and who can make evil look like good and good like
evil, will side with both parties. What, then, does it matter whether I
am on the side of one Lord or the other, providing He favors me? Good
and evil are equally delightful to men." \[4\] A third, standing beside
him, said, "Of what consequence is it to me to believe that there is a
heaven and a hell? For who has come from either place and told us of
them? If every man lives after death, why, out of so vast a multitude,
has no one come back and told us?" Next came a fourth, who said, "I will
tell you why no one has come back and told. It is because when a man
breathes his last and dies, he either becomes a ghost and is dissipated,
or is like the breath of the mouth, which is merely wind. How can a
being like that come back and talk with anyone?" The fifth took up the
matter and said, "Friends, wait till the day of the last judgment; for
all will then return into their bodies, and you will see and talk with
them, and each one will tell his fate to the other." \[5\] A sixth,
standing opposite, laughed and said, "How can the spirit, which is wind,
return into a body that has been eaten up by worms, and into its
skeleton that has been dried up by the sun and has crumbled into dust?
Or how is an Egyptian, who has been made a mummy and mixed by a quack
with extracts or emulsions into a potion or powder, to come back and
tell anything? Therefore, if you have the faith, wait till that last
day; but your waiting will be forever, and forever in vain." After him a
seventh said, "If I believed in a heaven and a hell, and therefore in a
life after death, I would also believe that birds and beasts live after
death likewise. Are not some of these quite as moral and as rational as
men? It is denied that beasts live after death, therefore I deny that
men do. The reasoning is equally good; one follows from the other. What
is man but an animal?" An eighth, standing at his back, came forward and
said, "Believe in a heaven if you will, but I do not believe in any
hell. Is not God omnipotent and able to save everybody?" \[6\] Then a
ninth, caressing his hand, said, "God is not only omnipotent He is also
gracious; and cannot send anyone into eternal fire; and if anyone is
there He cannot but take him out and raise him up." A tenth ran out of
his place into the midst and said, "Neither do I believe in a hell. Did
not God send His Son, and did He not make expiation for the sins of the
whole world and take them away? What can the devil do against that? And
as he can do nothing, what then is hell?" An eleventh, who was a priest,
took fire at hearing this, and said, "Do you not know that those who
have attained to the faith on which Christ's merit is inscribed are
saved, and that those attain to that faith whom God elects. Does not
election rest in the will of the Almighty, and in His judgment as to who
are worthy of it? Who can prevail against these?" The twelfth, who was a
politician, kept silent; but being asked to crown the replies, he said,
"From my own thought I will not say anything about heaven and hell and
the life after death, since no one knows anything about them;
nevertheless you should not blame the priests for preaching them; for in
that way the minds of the vulgar are kept bound by an invisible bond to
the laws and to their rulers. Does not the public welfare depend upon
this?" \[7\] We were amazed to hear such things as these, and we said to
each other, "Although these go by the name of Christians they are
neither men nor beasts, but they are men-beasts." However, to arouse
them from their sleep we said, "There is a heaven and a hell and a life
after death; of this you will be convinced when we have dispelled your
ignorance of the state of life in which you now are. During the first
few days after death no one knows but that he is still living in the
same world in which he lived before; for the time that has passed is
like a Sleep, on being awakened from which he had no other feeling than
that he still is where he was before. So is it with you now; and
therefore you have been speaking just as you thought the former world."
The angels then dispelled their ignorance; and they saw that they were
in another world, and among those with whom they were not acquainted;
and they cried out, "O where are we?" We said, "You are no longer in the
natural world, but in the spiritual world, and we are angels." Then,
being quite awake, they said, "If you are angels, show us heaven." We
replied, "Wait here a little, and we will return." And returning after
half an hour we found them waiting for us; and we said, "Follow us into
heaven." They did so, and we went up with them, and because we were with
them the guards opened the gate and admitted us. And we said to those
who receive newcomers at the entrance, "Examine these men." And they
turned them about and saw that the hinder parts of their heads were
quite hollow. They then said to them, "Go away from here, for there is
in you the delight of the love of doing evil; therefore you are not in
conjunction with heaven; for in your heads you have denied God and have
despised religion." And we said to them, "Do not delay, or you will be
cast out." So they hastened down and departed. \[8\] On the way home we
talked about the reason why in the spiritual world the back parts of the
head of those who take delight in doing evil are hollow. And I gave as
the reason that man has two brains, one behind, called the cerebellum,
and one in front called the cerebrum; and the love of the will dwells in
the cerebellum, and the thought of the understanding in the cerebrum;
and whenever the thought of the understanding does not guide the love of
man's will the inmosts of the cerebellum, which in themselves are
heavenly, collapse; hence the hollowness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="161.">161.</span></span>

Third Memorable Relation: In the spiritual world I once heard a noise
like that of a mill; it was in the northern quarter. At first I wondered
what It was: but I called to mind that the meaning of a mill and of
grinding is to seek from the Word what is serviceable for doctrine. I
therefore went towards the place where the noise was heard, and when I
came near it stopped; and I then saw a sort of arched roof above the
ground, to which there was an entrance through a cavern; seeing which I
descended, and entered. And behold, there was a room in which I saw an
old man sitting among books, holding the Word before him and searching
out from it what would be serviceable for his doctrine. Pieces of paper
were lying around, on which he had written whatever he could use. In an
adjoining room were copyists who were collecting the papers and copying
what was written on them on a full-sized sheet. I first asked him about
the books around him. He said that they all treated of Justifying Faith;
those from Sweden and Denmark profoundly; those from Germany more
profoundly; those from Britain still more so; and most profoundly of all
the ones from Holland. And he added that on several points they
differed; but in the article on justification and salvation by faith
alone they all agreed. He afterwards said that he was then collecting
from the Word this first principle of justifying faith, that God the
Father ceased to be gracious towards the human race on account of its
iniquities, and it was therefore a Divine necessity for man's salvation
that satisfaction, reconciliation, propitiation, and mediation should be
effected by some one who would take upon himself the damnation enjoined
by justice; and that this could never have been done except by His only
Son; but having once been done there was a way of approach open to God
the Father for the Son's sake; for we pray, "Father, be merciful to us
for the sake of Thy Son." And he said, "I see and have seen, that this
is in accordance with all reason and Scripture. By what other way than
by faith in the merits of could God the Father be approached?" \[2\] I
listened to this, and was amazed that he should declare it to be in
accord with reason and Scripture, when yet it is contrary to both, and
this I plainly told him. In the heat of his zeal he then rejoined, "How
can you say that?" Therefore I opened my mind to him, saying, "Is it not
contrary to reason to think that God the Father failed of grace towards
the human race, and rejected and excommunicated it? Is not Divine grace
an attribute of the Divine essence? Wherefore failing of grace would be
failing of Divine essence; and failing of His Divine essence would be to
be no longer God. Is it possible for God to be alienated from Himself?
Believe me, as grace on God's part is infinite, so it is also eternal.
On men's part God's grace may be lost if man does not accept it \[but
never on God's part\]. But if grace were to depart from God there would
be an end to the whole heaven and the whole human race. Wherefore on
God's part grace endures forever, not only towards angels and men, but
even towards the devils in hell. Since this accords with reason, why do
you say that the only access to God the Father is through faith in the
merits of the Son, when yet there is perpetually an access to Him
through grace? \[3\] But why do you say, access to God the Father for
the sake of the Son, instead of through the Son? Is not the Son the
Mediator and Savior? Why do you not go to the Mediator and Savior
Himself Is He not both God and Man? On earth who goes directly to an
emperor, king, or prince? Must there not be some one to procure
admission and introduce him? Do you not know that the Lord came into the
world that He might introduce men to the Father, and that only through
Him is there any access to the Father; while this access is perpetual
when you go directly to the Lord Himself, since He is in the Father and
the Father in Him? Search now in Scripture, and you will see that this
is in accordance with Scripture, while your way to the Father is
contrary to Scripture as it is contrary to reason. I tell you, moreover,
it is a presumption to climb up thus to God the Father, and not through
Him who is in the bosom of the Father, and who alone is present with the
Father. Have you not read John 14:6?" Hearing this, the old man became
so angry that he sprang from his seat and shouted to his copyists to put
me out; and when I had gone out immediately of my own accord, he threw
after me out of the door a book that he happened to lay hand upon, and
that book was the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="162.">162.</span></span>

Fourth Memorable Relation: A discussion arose among certain spirits,
whether one can see any doctrinal truth of theology in the Word except
from the Lord. They all agreed in this, that no one can except from God,
because: Man can receive nothing except it be given from heaven (John
3:27). The discussion, therefore, was whether anyone can do this unless
he go directly to the Lord. On one side it was declared that the Lord
must be approached directly, because He is the Word; and on the other
that true doctrine may also be seen when God the Father is approached
directly. The discussion therefore first turned to this point: Is it
permissible for any Christian to approach God the Father directly,
thereby climbing over the Lord; and is not this insolence and audacity
unbecoming as well as rash, since the Lord says that: No one comes to
the Father except through Him (John 14:6)? But they left this point, and
said that man can see true doctrine from the Word by his own natural
light. This was rejected. Then they insisted that it could be seen by
those who pray to God the Father; and something from the Word was read
to them, and upon their knees they prayed God the Father to enlighten
them; and they said of what had been read to them from the Word that it
contained such and such truth; but it was falsity. This was repeated
until it became tiresome; and at last they confessed that it could not
be done. But those on the other side who approached the Lord directly
saw the truths, and communicated them to the others. \[2\] When this
discussion had been thus ended, certain spirits ascended from the abyss
who at first looked like locusts, and afterwards like dwarfs. They were
such as in the world had prayed to God the Father, and had confirmed
themselves in the doctrine of justification by faith alone. They were
the same as those treated of in Revelation (9:1-11). They said that they
saw in clear light, and also from the Word that a man is justified by
faith alone without the works of the law. They were asked, "By what
faith?" They answered, "By faith in God the Father." But when they had
been examined they were told from heaven that they did not know a single
doctrinal truth from the Word. They retorted that still they saw their
own truths in light. They were told that it was a fatuous light in which
they saw them. They asked, "What is a fatuous light?" They were told
that a fatuous light is the light of the confirmation of what is false,
and that it corresponds to the light in which are owls and bats, to
which darkness is light and light darkness. This was confirmed to them
by the fact that when they looked up to heaven, the abode of light
itself, they saw darkness; and when they looked down to the abyss from
which they came they saw light. \[3\] Nettled by this confirmation they
said that light and darkness then are nothing, being a mere state of the
eye, according to which light is said to be light and darkness to be
darkness. But it was shown that their light was a fatuous light, which
is the light of the confirmation of what is false, and that it was
nothing but an activity of the mind, arising from the fire of their
lusts, not unlike the light with cats, whose eyes at night in cellars,
from their burning appetite for mice, look like candles. Enraged at
hearing this, they said they were not cats and were not like cats, for
they could see if they wished to. But fearing they might be asked why
they did not wish to see, they withdrew, and let themselves down to
their abyss. Those in that abyss and those like them are called by the
angels owls and bats and also locusts. \[4\] When they had reached their
companions in the abyss, and had told them that the angels had said
"that we know no doctrinal truth whatever, not a single one; and they
called us owls, bats, and locusts," a tumult arose there. And they said,
"Let us pray to God for permission to ascend, and we will show clearly
that we have many doctrinal truths, which the archangels themselves will
acknowledge." And because they prayed to God, permission was given them;
and as many as three hundred of them ascended. And when they appeared
above the ground they said, "In the world we were men of celebrity and
renown, because we knew and taught the mysteries of justification by
faith alone; and from confirmations we not only saw light, but saw it as
a glittering radiance, and we see it so still in our cells; and yet we
have heard from our companions who were still with you that that light
is not light but darkness, for the reason, as you say, that we have no
doctrinal truth from the Word. We know that every truth of the Word
shines, and we have believed that our radiance, when we meditated
profoundly upon our mysteries, came from that source. We will therefore
demonstrate to you that we have truths from the Word in abundance." And
they said, "Have we not this truth, that there is a trinity, consisting
of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and that men ought to
believe in the trinity? Have we not this truth, that Christ is our
Redeemer and Savior? Have we not this truth, that Christ alone is
righteousness, and to Him alone belongs merit, and that any man who
wishes to attribute to himself any of Christ's merit and righteousness
is himself unrighteous and impious? Have we not this truth, that no
mortal man is able of himself to do any spiritual good, but that from
God is all good that is good in itself? Have we not this truth, that
there are meritorious good and hypocritical good, and that such goods
are evil? Have we not this truth, that good works ought nevertheless to
be done? Have we not this truth, that there is such a thing as faith,
and that men ought to believe in God, and that everyone has life
according as he believes; besides many other truths from the Word? Which
of you can deny a single one of these? And yet you declared that in our
schools we have no truths at all, not even a single one. Have you not
cast these charges against us ungraciously?" \[5\] But they received
this answer, "All these things that you have advanced are in themselves
true; but with you they are truths falsified, which are falsities,
because they are derived from a false principle. That this is so we will
make clear to your sight. Not far from here is a place upon which the
light of heaven falls directly, and in the center of it there is a
table. Whenever any paper upon which some truth from the Word has been
written is placed upon this table, the paper, because of the truth
written upon it, shines like a star. Therefore write your truths on a
paper, and let the paper be placed on the table, and you will see." This
they did, and gave the paper to a guard, who placed it on the table and
said to them, "Stand back and look at the table." They stood back and
looked, and lo, the paper shone like a star. Then the guards said, "You
see that the things you have written on the paper are truths; but come
nearer and fix your gaze upon it." They did so, and suddenly the light
vanished and the paper became black, as if covered with soot from a
furnace. The guard said further, "Touch the paper with your hands, but
be careful not to touch the writing." And when they did so a flame broke
out and consumed the paper. When they had seen this they were told, "If
you had touched the writing you would have heard an explosion and you
would have burned your fingers." Then those standing behind them said,
"You now see that the truths which you abused to confirm the mysteries
of your justification are truths in themselves, but that in you they are
truths falsified." Then they looked upward, and heaven appeared to them
like blood, and presently like thick darkness; and in the eyes of the
angelic spirits they appeared, some like bats, and some like owls, and
some like horned owls; and they fled away into their own darkness, which
to their eyes shone delusively. \[6\] The angelic spirits who were
present were astonished, for until then they had known nothing of that
place or of the table there. And a voice then came to them from the
southern quarter, saying, "Come hither, and you will see something still
more wonderful." And they went, and entered a chamber, the walls of
which shone like gold, and there also they saw a table on which the Word
lay, encircled with precious stones arranged in a heavenly form. And the
angel guard said, "When the Word is opened a light of ineffable
brightness shines forth from it; and at the came time there is from the
precious stones the appearance of a rainbow above and roundabout the
Word. When an angel from the third heaven comes hither there appears
above and around the Word a rainbow on a red ground; when an angel from
the second heaven comes and looks, a rainbow on an azure ground appears;
when an angel from the lowest heaven comes and looks, a rainbow on a
white ground appears; when any good spirit comes and looks a variegation
of light like marble appears." That this was so was also showed to them
visibly. The angel guard said further, "When anyone who has falsified
the Word approaches, at first the splendor is dissipated, and then if he
comes near and fixes his eyes on the Word, there arises an appearance of
blood about it; and he is admonished to withdraw because there is
danger." \[7\] But a certain person who in the world had been a leading
writer on the doctrine of justification by faith alone, came up boldly
and said, "When I was in the world I did not falsify the Word. Together
with faith I exalted charity and taught that a man in that state of
faith in which he practices charity and its works is renewed,
regenerated, and sanctified by the Holy Spirit; also that faith does not
exist solitary, that is, separated from good works, as there can be no
good tree without fruit, no sun without light, no fire without heat. I
also rebuked those who said that good works are not necessary; and even
obedience to the commandments of the Decalogue is not necessary; and I
made repentance of great importance; and thus in wonderful manner
applied everything in the Word to the subject of faith; and yet I made
it clear and demonstrated that faith alone is saving." Confident in this
assertion that he had not falsified the Word, this man approached the
table, and in spite of the warning of the angel he touched the Word; and
suddenly out of the Word there went forth fire and smoke, and there was
an explosion and a crash which hurled him to a corner of the room, where
he lay like one dead for nearly an hour. The angelic spirits were
astonished at this; but they were told that although this leader had
exalted more than others the goods of charity as proceeding from faith,
yet he had meant nothing more than political social works, which are
also called moral and civil, and which were to be done for the sake of
the world and worldly prosperity, but by no means for the sake of
salvation; also that he had assumed some hidden works of the Holy
Spirit, of which man knows nothing, but which are generated in the act
of faith in a state of faith. \[8\] The angelic spirits then talked
together about the falsification of the Word; and they agreed that
falsifying the Word is taking truths therefrom and applying them to
confirm falsities; whereby truths from the Word are dragged apart from
it and slain; as for example, when any such truths as those quoted above
by the spirits from the abyss are applied to the faith of the present
day and are explained by that faith, which is impregnated with
falsities, as will be shown hereafter; or, again, when one takes from
the Word the truth that charity ought to be exercised, and that good
ought to be done to the neighbor, and then adds confirmations to show
that this ought to be done, but not for the sake of salvation (since no
good done by man is good, because meritorious), he drags that truth from
the Word apart from the Word, and slays it. For the Lord in His Word
enjoins it on every man who wishes to be saved that he must love the
neighbor, and from love do good to. So also with other truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="163.">163.</span></span>

THE DIVINE TRINITY. God the Creator, together with creation, has been
treated of; also the Lord the Redeemer, together with redemption; and
lastly the Holy Spirit, together with the Divine operation. Having thus
treated of the Triune God, it is necessary to treat also of the Divine
trinity, which is known and yet unknown in the Christian world; for only
through this can a right idea of God be acquired; and a right idea of
God in the church is like the sanctuary and altar in a temple, or like
the crown upon the head and the scepter in the hand of a king on his
throne; for on a right idea of God the whole body of theology hangs,
like a chain on its first link; and if you will believe it, everyone is
allotted his place in the heavens in accordance with his idea of God.
For that idea is like a touchstone by which the gold and silver are
tested, that is, the quality of good and truth in man. For there can be
no saving good in man except from God, nor any truth that does not
derive its quality from the bosom of good. But that it may be seen with
both eyes what the Divine trinity is, the explanation of it shall be
divided into sections as follows: (1) There is a Divine Trinity, which
is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. (2) These three, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, are the three essentials of one God, and they make one as soul,
body, and operation make one in man. (3) Before the world was created
this Trinity was not; but after creation, when God became incarnate, it
was provided and brought about; and then in the Lord God the Redeemer
and Savior Jesus Christ. (4) In the ideas of thought a Trinity of Divine
Persons from eternity, or before the world was created, is a Trinity of
Gods; and these ideas cannot be effaced by a lip-confession of one God.
(5) A Trinity of Persons was unknown in the Apostolic church, but was
hatched by the Nicene Council, and from that was introduced into the
Roman Catholic church, and from that again into the churches separated
from it. (6) From the Nicene Trinity and the Athanasian Trinity together
a faith arose by which the whole Christian church has been perverted.
(7) This is the source of that "abomination of desolation, and that
tribulation such as has not been nor ever shall be," which the Lord
foretold in Daniel and in the Gospels and in the Apocalypse. (8) So too,
unless a new heaven and a new church were established by the Lord there
could no flesh be saved. (9) From a Trinity of Persons, each one of whom
singly is God, according to the Athanasian Creed, many discordant and
heterogeneous ideas respecting God have arisen, which are phantasies and
abortions. These propositions shall now be explained one by one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="164.">164.</span></span>

\(1\) There it a Divine Trinity, which is Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
That there is a Divine trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is made
clearly evident in the Word, as in the following passages: The angel
Gabriel said to Mary, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Most High shall overshadow thee therefore that holy thing
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God (Luke 1:35).
Here three are mentioned, the Most High, who is God the Father, the Holy
Spirit, and the Son of God: When Jesus was baptized, Lo, the heavens
were opened, and John saw the Holy Spirit descending as a dove and
coming upon Him and lo, a voice out of heaven saying, This is My beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased (Matt. 3:16, 17; Mark 1:10, 11; John
1:32). And still more plainly in these words of the Lord to His
disciples: Go ye and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit (Matt.
28:19); and still again in these words in John: There are three that
bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit (1
John 5:7). Furthermore, the Lord prayed to His Father, and spoke of Him
and with Him, and said that He would send the Holy Spirit, and He did
send it. Finally the apostles in their Epistles frequently mentioned the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. From all this it is clear that
there is a Divine trinity, which is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="165.">165.</span></span>

But in what manner these passages are to be understood, whether as
meaning that these are three Gods, who in essence and consequently in
name are one God; or that they are three objects belonging to one
subject, that is, merely qualities or attributes of one God which are so
named; or in some other way, the reason left to itself is incapable of
seeing. What then is to be done? There is no other way than for man to
go to the Lord God the Savior, and under His auspices read the Word; for
He is the God of the Word; and man will then be enlightened and will see
truths which reason also will acknowledge. But on the other hand, if you
do not approach the Lord, though you read the Word a thousand times, and
see therein the Divine trinity and the unity also, you will never
understand otherwise than that there are three Divine persons, each one
of whom singly is God, and thus that there are three Gods. But because
this is repugnant to the common perception of all men throughout the
world, to escape reproaches men have invented the notion that although
there are in truth three Gods, it is indispensable to faith that one God
only, and not three, be named. Furthermore, lest they should be
overwhelmed with censure it was determined that on this point especially
the understanding should be imprisoned and held bound under obedience to
faith; and that this should evermore be a sacred principle of Christian
order in the Christian church \[2\] Such a paralytic birth resulted from
their not reading the Word under the Lord's auspices; for everyone who
does not read the Word under His auspices reads it under the auspices of
his own intelligence, which is like an owl in such things as are in
spiritual light, as all the essentials of the church are. And when one
so reads in the Word what is said of the trinity, and from what he reads
thinks that although there are three Gods they are still one, the matter
appears to him like a response from a tripod, which, because he does not
understand it he rolls about between his teeth; for if he should set it
before his eyes it would become a riddle, which the more he tries to
solve the more he involves himself in darkness, until finally he begins
to think about it without understanding, which is like seeing without an
eye. In short, those who read the Word under the auspices of one's own
intelligence, as is done by all who do not acknowledge the Lord as the
God of heaven and earth, and therefore approach and worship Him alone,
may be likened to children at play, who tie a bandage over their eyes
and try to walk in a straight line, and even think that they are going
straight ahead, when yet they turn step by step to one side and finally
go in the opposite direction, and strike against a stone and fall. \[3\]
Such are also like mariners sailing without a compass, who run their
vessel on the rocks and perish. They are also like a man walking over a
wide plain in a thick fog, who seeing a scorpion takes it for a bird,
and attempting to seize and pick it up with his hand receives a deadly
wound. Such again are like a waterfowl or a hawk, which sees above the
water a little of the back of a big fish, and darts down and fixes its
beak in it, and is drawn under by the fish and drowned. Again they are
like one entering a labyrinth without a guide or a cord, and the farther
he goes in the more he loses sight of the way out. A man who reads the
Word not under the Lord's auspices but under the auspices of his own
intelligence, thinks himself a lynx and better sighted than Argus; and
yet he inwardly sees not a shred of truth, but only what is false; and
under self-persuasion this falsity seems to him like a polar star
towards which he directs all the sails of his thought; and then he no
more sees truths than a mole does, or if he sees them he bends them to
favor his phantasies, and so perverts and falsifies the holy things of
the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="166.">166.</span></span>

\(2\) These three, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the three
essentials of the one God, and they make one as soul, body, and
operation make one in man. In anyone thing there are both general and
particular essentials, and these together make one essence. The general
essentials of the one man are his soul, body, and operation. That these
constitute one essence can be seen from this-that one is from the other
and for the sake of the other in an unbroken series; for man gets his
beginning from the soul, which is the very essence of the semen; and the
soul not only initiates, but also produces in their order all things
that pertain to the body, and afterward all things that proceed from the
soul and body together, which are called operations. From this
production, therefore, of one from the other, and the consequent
ingrafting and conjunction, it can be seen that these three are of one
essence, and therefore they are called three essentials.

<span class="margnote"><span id="167.">167.</span></span>

Everyone acknowledges that these three essentials, namely, soul, body,
and operation, both were and are in the Lord God the Savior. That His
soul was from Jehovah the Father cannot be denied except by Antichrist;
for in the Word of both Testaments He is called the Son of Jehovah, the
Son of the Most High God, the Only-begotten; consequently the Divine of
the Father, like the soul in man, is His first essential. From this it
follows that the Son whom Mary brought forth is the body to that Divine
soul; for in the mother's womb nothing is furnished except the body that
has been conceived and derived from the soul; this, therefore, is His
second essential. Operations constitute the third essential, since these
proceed from soul and body together, and what proceeds is of the same
essence as that which produces it. That the three essentials, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, in the Lord are one, like soul, body, and
operation in man, is clearly evident from the Lord's words, that the
Father and He are one; that the Father is in Him and He in the Father;
and in like manner He and the Holy Spirit, since the Holy Spirit is the
Divine that goes forth out of the Lord from the Father, as fully shown
above from the Word (n. 153, 154); therefore to show it again would be
superfluous, and like loading a table with food after the appetite has
been satisfied.

<span class="margnote"><span id="168.">168.</span></span>

When it is said that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are the three
essentials of the one God, like soul, body, and operation in man, it
seems to the human mind as if these three essentials are three persons,
which is impossible. But when it is understood that the Divine of the
Father, which constitutes the soul, and the Divine of the Son, which
constitutes the body, and the Divine of the Holy Spirit or the
proceeding Divine, which constitutes the operation, are the three
essentials of the one God, the statement is comprehensible. For God the
Father is His Divine, the Son from the Father is His Divine, and the
Holy Spirit from both is His Divine; and as these are one in essence and
one in mind they constitute one God. But if these three Divine
essentials are called persons, and if to each person is attributed his
own property, to the Father imputation, to the Son mediation, and to the
Holy Spirit operation, the Divine Essence, which in fact is one and not
divisible, becomes divided: and thus none of the three is God in
fullness, but each has a sub-triple power; and this a sound
understanding must needs reject.

<span class="margnote"><span id="169.">169.</span></span>

From the trinity in every man, then, who can fail to perceive the
trinity in the Lord? In every man there is soul, body, and operation; so
also in the Lord, "for in the Lord dwells all the fullness of Divinity
bodily," according to Paul (Col. 2:9); therefore in the Lord the trinity
is Divine, but in man it is human. In this mystical notion that there
are three Divine persons and yet one God, and that this God, although
one, is nevertheless not one person, everyone can see that reason has no
part, but has been lulled to sleep, and still it compels the mouth to
speak like a parrot. And when reason is put to sleep what is speech from
the mouth but dead speech? When the mouth utters that which reason turns
away from and dissents from, is not speech foolish? At this day human
reason, in respect to the Divine trinity, is bound like a man in prison,
manacled and fettered; and it may be compared to a vestal virgin buried
alive for permitting the sacred fire to die out; and yet in the minds of
men of the church the Divine trinity ought to shine like a lamp, since
God in His trinity and in the unity thereof is the All in all the
sanctities of heaven and the church. But if the soul is made one God,
and the body another, and the operation a third, how does this differ
from making three parts, each distinct from the other, out of these
three essentials of one man? And what is that but cutting him in pieces
and slaying him?

<span class="margnote"><span id="170.">170.</span></span>

\(3\) Before the world was created this Trinity was not; but after
creation, when God became incarnate, it was provided and brought about,
and then in the Lord God the Redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ. In the
Christian church at the present day a Divine trinity existing before the
creation of the world is acknowledged; that is, that Jehovah God begat a
Son from eternity, and that the Holy Spirit then went forth from both,
and that each of these three is by Himself or singly God, because each
is one person subsisting of Himself. But as this is incomprehensible to
all reason it is called a mystery, which can be penetrated only in this
way-that these three have one Divine essence, by which is meant
eternity, immensity, omnipotence, and thus an equal Divinity, glory, and
majesty. But that this trinity is a trinity of three Gods, and therefore
in no sense a Divine trinity, will be shown in what follows: while from
all that precedes it is evident that the trinity (which is also a
trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit) which was provided and brought
about when God became incarnate, thus after the world was created, is a
Divine trinity, because it is a trinity in one God. This divine trinity
is in the Lord God the Redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ, because the
three essentials of the one God, which constitute one essence, are in
Him. That in Him (as Paul says) dwelleth all the fullness of Divinity is
evident also from the words of the Lord Himself, that all things of the
Father are His, and that the Holy Spirit speaks from Him, and not of
itself; and finally, that when He arose He took from the sepulchre His
whole human body, both the flesh and the bones (Matt. 28:1-8; Mark 16:5,
6; Luke 24:1-3; John 20:11-15), unlike any other man; of which He bore
living witness to His disciples, saying: Behold My hands and My feet,
that it is I Myself handle Me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones as ye see Me have (Luke 24:39). From this every man may be
convinced, if he will, that the Lord's humanity is Divine; consequently,
that in Him God is Man and Man is God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="171.">171.</span></span>

The trinity which the present Christian church has embraced and brought
into its faith, is that God the Father begat a Son from eternity, and
that the Holy Spirit then went forth from both, and that each one of
Himself is a God. Human minds can conceive of this trinity only as a
triarchy, like the government of three kings in one kingdom, or of three
generals over one army, or of three masters in one household, all
possessing an equal power. From this what but destruction could ensue?
Or if one wishes to figure or shadow forth this triarchy before his
mind's sight, and at the same time the unity of its members, he can
present it to contemplation only as a man with three heads on one body,
or as three bodies under one head. In such a monstrous image must the
trinity appear to those who believe that there are three Divine persons
each by Himself God, and who join these into one God, but deny that God,
because He is one, is therefore one person. That a Son of God begotten
from eternity descended and assumed a Human may be compared to the
fables of the ancients, that human souls created at the beginning of the
world enter into bodies and become men; also to the absurd notion that
the soul of one person passes into another, as many in the Jewish church
believed; for example, that the soul of Elijah would pass into the body
of John the Baptist, and that David would return into his own or into
some other man's body, and rule over Israel and Judah, because it is
said in Ezekiel: I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even My servant David; and he shall be their shepherd and I
Jehovah will be to them as God, and David a prince among them (34:23,
24); besides other passages; not knowing that the Lord is there meant by
"David."

<span class="margnote"><span id="172.">172.</span></span>

\(4\) In the ideas of thought a Trinity of Divine Persons from eternity,
or before the world was created, is a Trinity of Gods; and these ideas
cannot be effaced by, a lip-confession of one God. That a trinity of
Divine persons from eternity is a trinity of Gods is clearly evident
from the following passage in the Athanasian Creed: "There is one person
of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Spirit; the
Father is God and Lord; the Son is God and Lord; and the Holy Spirit is
God and Lord; nevertheless there are not three Gods and Lords, but one
God and Lord; for as we are compelled by the Christian verity to confess
each person singly to be God and Lord, so are we forbidden by the
Catholic religion to say three Gods or three Lords." This creed is
accepted as ecumenical or universal by the whole Christian church, and
all that is at this day known and acknowledged respecting God is from
it. That no other trinity than a trinity of Gods was understood by the
members of the Nicene Council, from which the Athanasian Creed came
forth like a posthumous birth, anyone can see who reads it with his eyes
open. And not only was the trinity understood by them to be a trinity of
Gods, it was so understood by the whole Christian world as well, for the
reason that the whole Christian world derives all its knowledge of God
from that source, and every man clings to a belief in its words. \[2\] I
appeal to everyone, layman and clergyman, to titled masters and
professors, consecrated bishops and arch-bishops, purple-robed
cardinals, and even the Roman pontiff himself, whether in the Christian
world today the trinity is understood to be anything else than a trinity
of Gods; let everyone of them consult with himself and speak from the
things that are in his mind; for from the words of this universally
accepted doctrine respecting God this is as manifest and clear as water
in a crystal goblet, and also that there are three persons, each one of
whom is God and Lord; and further that according to Christian verity
each person singly ought to be confessed or acknowledged to be God and
Lord, but that the Catholic or Christian religion or faith forbids the
saying or naming three Gods and Lords; thus verity and religion, or
verity and faith, are not one thing but two things, each contrary to the
other. But lest all this should be exposed to ridicule before the whole
world it was added that there are not three Gods and Lords, but one God
and Lord; for who would not laugh at the idea of three Gods? And still
does not everyone see the contradiction in this addition? \[3\] If they
had said, indeed, that to the Father belongs the Divine essence, to the
Son the Divine essence, and to the Holy Spirit the Divine essence, and
yet there are not three Divine essences, but one indivisible essence,
that is to say, if by the Father there be understood the Divine from
whom \[a Quo\], by the Son the Divine Human therefrom, and by the Holy
Spirit the proceeding Divine, which are the three constituents of the
one God, then this mystery would be explicable. Or if we understood by
the Divine of the Father what is like the soul in man, and by the Divine
Human what is like the body of that soul, and by the Holy Spirit what is
like the operation that proceeds from both, then three essences, which
belong to one and the same person, and so together constitute one
indivisible essence, are understood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="173.">173.</span></span>

The idea of three Gods cannot be effaced by a lip-confession of one God,
for the reason that from childhood this idea has been implanted in the
memory, and it is from the things contained in the memory that everyone
thinks. The memory in man is like the ruminatory stomach in birds and
beasts; into which they thrust the food from which they gradually derive
nourishment; and from time to time they draw the food from it and convey
it to the true stomach, where it is digested and meted out to the
various uses of the body. The human understanding is this latter
stomach, as the memory is the former. That the idea of three Divine
persons from eternity, which is the same as the idea of three Gods,
cannot be effaced by a lip confession of one God, can be seen by anybody
from this fact alone, that it has not yet been effaced, and that among
the notable there are some who do not wish it to be effaced; for while
they insist that the three Divine persons are of one God, they
obstinately deny that God, on account of being one, is one person. But
what wise man does not think within himself that the term person can not
in this case mean person but that it predicates some quality, though
what quality is not known? And this not being known, what has been
implanted in the memory from childhood remains, as the roots of a tree
remain in the ground, and from them, even if the tree be cut down, a
shoot will spring forth. \[2\] But, my friend, not only cut down the
tree, but also dig up the root, and then plant in your garden trees
bearing good fruit. Thus beware, lest in your mind there should lurk the
idea of three Gods, while your mouth utters the words one God, with no
idea in them. In that case is not the understanding (which above the
memory is thinking of three Gods, and at the same time below the memory
is causing the mouth to utter one God), like a player on the stage able
to act two roles by running from one side to the other, at one side
saying one thing and at the other just the opposite, and by such
contradiction playing on the one side the wise man and on the other the
fool? What else can result from this but that when the understanding
stands in the center and looks both ways it will conclude that neither
this nor that amounts to anything, and so, perhaps, that there is
neither one God nor three, thus that there is no God? The prevailing
naturalism of the day is from no other source. In heaven no one can
utter the words, A trinity of persons each one of whom singly is God;
for it is resisted by the very aura of heaven, in which the thoughts of
those there fly and undulate, as sounds do in our air. Such words can be
uttered only by a hypocrite, and the sound of his speech grates in the
heavenly aura like the gnashing of teeth, or is like the croak of a
raven trying to imitate a bird of song. Moreover, I have heard from
heaven that to efface a belief established in the mind by confirmations
favoring a trinity of Gods, by means of a lip-confession of one God, is
as impossible as it is to draw a tree back through its seed, or a man's
chin through a hair growing out of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="174.">174.</span></span>

\(5\) A Trinity of Persons was unknown in the Apostolic Church, but was
hatched by the Nicene Council, and from that was introduced into the
Roman Catholic church, and from that again into the churches separated
from it. By the Apostolic church is meant the church that existed in
various places not only in the time of the apostles, but also in the
second and third centuries after. But at length men began to wrench the
door of the temple off its hinges, and to break robber-like into its
sanctuary. The temple is the church; the door is the Lord God the
Redeemer; and the sanctuary His Divinity; for Jesus says: Verily, I say
unto you, he that entereth not by the door into the sheep fold, but
climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. I am the
door; by Me if any man enter in he shall be saved (John 10:1, 9). This
crime was committed by Arius and his followers. \[2\] On this account a
council was convoked by Constantine the Great at Nice, a city in
Bithynia; and in order to overthrow the pernicious heresy of Arius it
was devised, decided upon, and ratified by the members of the council
that there were from eternity three Divine persons, a Father, a Son, and
a Holy Spirit, to each one of whom belonged personality, existence, and
subsistence, by Himself and in Himself; also that the second person, or
the Son, came down and took on a Human and wrought redemption; and
therefore His Human, by a hypostatic union, possesses Divinity, and
through that union He has close relationship with God the Father. From
that time heaps of abominable heresies about God and the person of
Christ began to spring up from the earth, and Antichrists began to rear
their heads and to divide God into three persons, and the Lord the
Savior into two, thus destroying the temple set up by the Lord through
the apostles, and this until not one stone was left upon another that
was not thrown down, according to the Lord's words (Matt. 24:2), where
by "the temple" not only the edifice at Jerusalem is meant but also the
church, the consummation or end of which is treated of in the whole
chapter. \[3\] But what else could have been expected from that council,
or from those that followed, which in like manner divided the Godhead
into three, and placed God in the flesh beneath them on their footstool?
For by climbing up some other way they took the Head of the church away
from its body; that is, they passed Him by, and mounted beyond to God
the Father as to another, with the mere mention on their lips of
Christ's merit, that is, that God on account of it might be merciful,
and justification might thus flow into them directly with all that goes
with it, namely, remission of sins, renovation, sanctification,
regeneration, and salvation, and this without any meditation on man's
part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="175.">175.</span></span>

That the Apostolic church had not the least knowledge of a trinity of
persons, or of three persons from eternity, can be clearly seen from the
creed of that church which is called the Apostles' Creed, in which are
these words - "I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and
earth; and in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by
the Holy Spirit, born of the virgin Mary;" and "I believe in the Holy
Ghost." Here no mention is made of a Son born from eternity, but only of
a Son conceived by the Holy Spirit, and born of the virgin Mary; for
they knew from the apostles: That Jesus Christ was the true God (1 John
5:20) And that in Him dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col.
2:9); And that the apostles preached faith in Him (Acts 20:21); And that
to Him was given all power in heaven and on earth (Matt. 28:18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="176.">176.</span></span>

What confidence is to be had in councils when they do not go directly to
the God of the church? Is not the church the Lord's body, and He its
head? What is a body without a head? And what sort of a body is that
upon which three heads have been put, under the auspices of which men
hold consultations and pass decrees? Does not enlightenment (which is
spiritual when it is from the Lord alone, who is the God of heaven and
the church, and also the God of the Word) then become more and more
natural and at length sensual? And then not a single genuine theological
truth in its internal form is perceived without being instantly cast out
of the thought of the rational understanding, and like chaff from a
winnowing machine blown into the air. In this state fallacies steal into
the mind instead of truths, and darkness instead of rays of light; and
men stand as if in a cave with spectacles on the nose and torch in hand,
shutting their eyes to spiritual truths, which are in the light of
heaven, and opening them to sensual truths belonging to the fatuous
light of the bodily senses. And it is the same afterwards when the Word
is read; the mind is then asleep to truths and awake to falsities, and
becomes like the beast described as rising up out of the sea: With a
mouth like that of a lion, a body like that of a leopard, and feet like
those of a bear (Apoc. 13:2). It is said in heaven that when the Nicene
Council had finished its work, that had come to pass which the Lord
foretold to His disciples: The sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall
not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers
of the heavens shall be shaken (Matt. 24:29); and in fact the Apostolic
church was like a new star appearing in the starry heaven. But the
church after the two Nicene councils became finally like the same star
darkened and lost to view, as has sometimes happened, according to the
observation of astronomers, in the natural world. We read in the Word
that: Jehovah God dwells in light unapproachable (1 Tim. 6:16). Who,
then, can approach Him, unless He take up His abode in light that is
approachable, that is, unless He come down and assume a Human, and in it
become the light of the world (John 1:9; 12:46)? Anyone can see that to
get near to Jehovah the Father in His own light is as impossible as to
take the wings of the morning and fly on them to the sun, or to feed
upon the sun's rays instead of material food, or as for a bird to fly in
the ether, or a stag to run on air.

<span class="margnote"><span id="177.">177.</span></span>

\(6\) From the Nicene Trinity and the Athanasian Trinity together a
faith arose by which the whole Christian church has been perverted. That
both the Nicene and Athanasian trinities are a trinity of Gods can be
seen from the creeds above quoted (n. 172). From these the faith of the
present church has arisen, which is a faith in God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Spirit, in God the Father that He will impute the
righteousness of His Son the Savior and ascribe it to man, in God the
Son that He will intercede and covenant, and in the Holy Spirit that He
will in reality inscribe upon man the Son's imputed righteousness, and
confirm it with a seal, by justifying, sanctifying, and regenerating
him. This is the faith of the present day; and it is sufficient evidence
that a trinity of Gods is what is acknowledged and worshiped. \[2\] From
the faith of any church flow forth not only all its worship but also all
its dogmas; thus it may be said that such as its faith is such is its
doctrine. From this it follows that inasmuch as the faith of the present
church is a faith in three Gods, it has perverted all things belonging
to the church, for faith is the first principle and doctrinals are
derivatives; and derivatives derive their essence from the first
principle. If anyone will put these doctrinals one by one under
examination, as the doctrine of God, of the person of Christ, of
charity, repentance, regeneration, freewill, election, and the use of
the sacraments, baptism and the Holy Supper, he will see plainly that
there is a trinity of Gods within each one; and even if it does not
actually appear within each, they all flow from it as from their
fountain. But as such an examination cannot here be made (and yet in
order that man's eyes may be opened it is well worth making), an
Appendix shall be added to this work in which this will be shown. \[3\]
The faith of the church respecting God is like the soul in the body, and
doctrinals are like the members of the body. Or again, faith in God is
like a queen, and dogmas like the officers of her court; and as these
all hang upon the word of the queen, so do dogmas upon the utterance of
faith. Solely from the faith of a church it can be seen how the Word is
understood in that church; for a faith inwardly adapts and draws to
itself, as if by cords, whatever things it can. If the faith is false it
plays the harlot with every truth therein, and perverts and falsifies
it, and in the spiritual things makes man insane. But if the faith is
true the whole Word sustains it; and the God of the Word, who is the
Lord God the Savior, pours light upon it and breathes upon it His Divine
assent and makes man wise. \[4\] It will also be seen in the Appendix
that the faith of the present day (which in its inward form is a faith
in three Gods, but in its outward form a faith in one God) has quenched
the light in the Word and taken away the Lord from the church, and has
thus changed its morning into night. This was done by heresies before
the council of Nice, and further by heresies arising from that council
and after it. But what confidence is to be placed in councils which:
Enter not through the door into the sheepfold but climb up some other
way (according to the Lord's words in John 10:1, 9)? Their deliberation
is not unlike the walking of a blind man in the daytime or of a man not
blind at night, neither of whom sees a ditch until he has tumbled into
it. What confidence, for example, can be placed in councils that
established the vicarship of the pope, the canonization of the dead, the
invocation of the dead as deities, the worship of their images, the
granting of indulgences, the division of the Eucharist, and other
things? Or what confidence is to be placed in a council that established
the unspeakable doctrine of predestination, and hung it up before its
church buildings as the palladium of religion? But, my friend, go to the
God of the Word, and thus to the Word itself, and so enter through the
door into the sheepfold, that is, into the church, and you will be
enlightened; and then as from a mountain top you will see for yourself
the goings and wanderings, not only of the many but your own also
previously in the gloomy forest below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="178.">178.</span></span>

The faith of every church is like the seed from which all its dogmas
spring. It may be compared to the seed of a tree, out of which grows
everything belonging to the tree, even to its fruit; and also to the
seed of man, from which offspring and families are begotten in
successive series. Therefore as soon as its leading tenet, which from
its predominance is called saving, is known, the character of a church
is known. This may be illustrated by the following example. Suppose the
faith to be that nature is the creator of the universe; it will follow
from this faith that the universe is called God, that nature is its
essence, that the ether is the supreme Deity whom the ancients called
Jove, that the air is the goddess they called Juno and made the wife of
Jove; that the ocean is a god below these, which after the manner of the
ancients may be called Neptune; and as the Divinity of nature reaches to
the earth's very center, there is a god there also, who, as with the
ancients, may be called Pluto; that the sun is the court of all the
gods, where they meet whenever Jupiter calls a council; moreover, that
fire is life from God; and thus the birds fly in God, the beasts walk in
God, and the fishes swim in God. It follows also that thoughts are
merely modifications of the ether, as the words flowing from them are
modulations of air; and that love's affections are occasional changes of
state caused by the influx into them of the sun's rays; and along with
these notions, that the life after death, together with heaven and hell,
is a fable concocted by the clergy for the purpose of acquiring honors
and wealth, which, although a fable, is useful, and not to be ridiculed
openly, since it serves the public interest by keeping simple minds in
the bonds of obedience to magistrates; but those that are inveigled by
religion are in fact often devoted to abstractions, their thoughts are
fantasies, their actions ludicrous, and they themselves drudges of the
priests, believing in what they see not, and seeing what transcends the
sphere of their minds. The belief that nature is the creator of the
universe includes these consequences, and many more like them, and they
proceed from that belief when it is laid open. They are presented here
to show that within the faith of the present church, which in its
internal form is a faith in three Gods and in its external form a faith
in one, there are swarms of falsities, and that as many falsities can be
drawn out of it as there are little spiders in the egg-sac of a single
spider. Who that has a mind truly rational does not see this by light
from the Lord; and how can any other mind see it so long as the door to
that faith and its offshoots is shut and bolted by the decree that it is
unlawful for reason to look into its mysteries?

<span class="margnote"><span id="179.">179.</span></span>

\(7\) This is the source of that "abomination of desolation, and that
tribulation such as has not been nor ever shall be," which the Lord
foretold in Daniel, and in the Gospels, and in the Apocalypse. In Daniel
we read: Upon the bird of abominations shall be desolation even until
the consummation and decision, it shall drop upon the devastation
(9:27). In the gospel of Matthew the Lord says: Many false prophets
shall arise and shall lead many astray. When, therefore, ye shall see
the abomination of desolation predicted by Daniel the prophet standing
in the holy place, let him that readeth note it well (24:11, 15); and
afterwards in the same chapter: Then shall be great tribulation, such as
hath not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever
shall be (verse 21). This tribulation and that abomination are treated
of in seven chapters of the Apocalypse; they are what are meant: By the
black horse, and the pale horse going out of the book, the seal of which
the Lamb opened (6:5-8). Also by: The beast coming up out of the abyss
which made war upon the two witnesses and killed them (11:7 seq.). Also
by: The dragon which stood before the woman about to be delivered, that
he might devour her child, and which pursued her into the desert and
there from his mouth cast out water as a river that he might drown her
(12). Also by: The beasts of the dragon, one from the sea and the other
from the earth (13). Again: By the three green spirits like frogs which
went forth out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the
beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet (16:13). And finally by
this: That after the seven angels had poured out the bowls of the wrath
of God, in which were the seven last plagues, into the earth, the sea,
the fountains and rivers, upon the sun, upon the seat of the beast, upon
the Euphrates, and at length into the air, there was a great earthquake,
such as was not since there were men upon the earth (16). The
"earthquake" means the overturning of the church, which is done by
falsities and falsifications of truth, and this is signified also by:
The great tribulation, such as hath not been from the beginning of the
world (Matt. 24:21). The following words have a like meaning: And the
angel thrust in his sickle and gathered the vineyard of the earth, and
cast it into the great wine-press of the anger of God; and the
wine-press was trodden and there went out blood even unto the bridles of
the horses for a thousand and six hundred furlongs (Apoc. 14:19, 20);
"blood" signifying truth falsified. Besides other things contained in
those seven chapters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="180.">180.</span></span>

In the Gospels (Matt. 24; Mark 13; and Luke 21) the successive states of
decline and corruption in the Christian church are described; and "the
great tribulation such as hath not been since the beginning of the
world, nor ever shall be" which is there mentioned means (as in many
other places in the Word) the infestation of truth by falsities, even
until no truth remains that is not falsified and consummated. This also
is meant by "the abomination of desolation" there mentioned; and again
by "the desolation upon the bird of abominations" and by "the
consummation and decision" in Daniel; and the same thing is described in
the Apocalypse in the passages just quoted from that book. This has come
to pass because the church, instead of acknowledging the unity of God in
trinity and His trinity in unity in one person, has acknowledged these
in three persons; and in consequence the church has been based in the
mind upon the idea of three Gods, and on the lips upon the confession of
one God; and thus men have separated themselves from the Lord, and at
length to such an extent that no idea of Divinity in His Human nature is
left with them, when in fact He is God the Father in the Human, and
therefore He is called: The Father of eternity (Isa. 9:6) And He said to
Philip, He that seeth Me seeth the Father (John 14:7, 9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="181.">181.</span></span>

But it may be asked, Whence is the very stream of that fountain from
which has come forth an abomination of desolation such as is described
in Daniel (9:27), and a tribulation such as was not nor shall be (Matt.
24:21)? The answer is, that it comes from that same universal faith of
the Christian world, and from its influx, operation, and imputation
according to traditions. Wonderful it is that the doctrine of
justification by that faith alone (which, however, is no faith but only
a chimera) controls every point of doctrine in Christian churches; that
is, with the clerical order it rules as almost the sole theological
principle. It is what all students of divinity eagerly learn in the
schools and drink in and absorb; and afterwards, seemingly inspired by
heavenly wisdom, they teach it in the churches and publish it in books;
and by it they strive after and acquire a reputation and fame and praise
for superior learning; and on account of it, diplomas, degrees, and
prizes are bestowed upon them; and all this is done, although by that
same faith alone the sun at this day is darkened, the moon is robbed of
her light, the stars have fallen from heaven, and the powers of the
heavens have been shaken, according to the words of the Lord's prophecy
in Matthew (24:29). It has been proved to me that the doctrine of this
faith has today so darkened men's minds that they are not willing, and
therefore as it were not able, to see any Divine truth inwardly, either
in the light of the sun or in the light of the moon, but only outwardly
on the mere rough surface by the light on a hearth at night; and I am
therefore able to declare, that if Divine truths respecting the real
conjunction of charity and faith, respecting heaven and hell, the Lord,
life after death, and eternal happiness, were sent down from heaven
written in letters of silver, those who hold to justification and
sanctification by faith alone would not deem them worth reading. But it
would be wholly different if a treatise on justification by faith alone
were sent up from the hells; this they would receive, and would kiss it
and carry it home in their bosoms.

<span class="margnote"><span id="182.">182.</span></span>

\(8\) So, too, unless a new heaven and a new church were established by
the Lord there could no flesh be saved. It is said in Matthew: Then
shall be great tribulation, such as hath not been from the beginning of
the world until now, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days be
shortened no flesh would be saved (24:21, 22). This chapter treats of
"the consummation of the age," by which the end of the present church is
meant; therefore "to shorten those days" means to bring that church to
an end and establish a new one. Who does not know that unless the Lord
had come into the world and wrought redemption no flesh could have been
saved? To work redemption means to found a new heaven and a new church.
That the Lord would again come into the world He foretold in the
Gospels, Matt. 24:30, 31; Mark 13:26; Luke 12:40; 21:27; and in the
Apocalypse, particularly in the last chapter. That He is also effecting
a redemption at this day by founding a new heaven and establishing a new
church to the end that man may be saved, has been shown above in the
chapter on Redemption. \[2\] The great mystery that unless a new church
is established by the Lord no flesh can he saved, is this: That so long
as the dragon with his horde remains in the world of spirits into which
he has been cast, no Divine truth united to Divine good can pass through
that world to men on earth without being perverted and falsified, or
without its perishing. This is what is meant in the Apocalypse by the
words: The dragon was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast
out with him. Woe to those that inhabit the earth and the sea, for the
devil has come down unto them having great anger (12:9, 12, 13). But
when the dragon had been cast into hell (10:10), John saw a new heaven
and a new earth, and he saw the New Jerusalem coming down from God out
of heaven (21:1, 2); "the dragon" meaning those who are in the faith of
the present church. \[3\] In the spiritual world I have several times
talked with those who believe that men are justified by faith alone; and
I have told them that their doctrine is both erroneous and absurd, and
induces upon men security, blindness, sleep, and in spiritual things a
night, and consequently death to the soul; and I have exhorted them to
discard it; but I received the answer, "Why discard it? Does not the
superiority of the learning of the clergy over that of the laity hang
upon that sole doctrine?" I replied, "In that case they do not regard
the salvation of souls as any object, but the superiority of their own
reputation; and as they have adapted the truths of the Word to their
false principles, and have thus adulterated them, they are those angels
of the abyss, called Abaddons and Apollyons (Apoc. 9:11), who signify
those that destroy the church by a total falsification of the Word." But
they made answer, "What do you mean? By our knowledge of the mysteries
of that faith we are oracles, and from it as from a sanctuary we give
responses; therefore we are not Apollyons but Apollos." Indignant at
this reply I said, "If you are Apollos you are also leviathans - your
leaders the crooked leviathans, and the rest of you the stretched-out
leviathans, whom God will visit with His sore and great sword" (Isa.
27:1). But at this they laughed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="183.">183.</span></span>

\(9\) From a Trinity of Persons, each one of whom singly is God,
according to the Athanasian creed, many discordant and heterogeneous
ideas respecting God have arisen, which are phantasies and abortions.
From the doctrine of three Divine persons from eternity, which in itself
is the head of all the doctrinals in the Christian churches, there have
arisen many ideas of God that are unbecoming and unworthy of the
Christian world, which, on the subject of God and His oneness ought to
be and might be a light to all peoples and nations in the four quarters
of the globe. All who dwell outside the Christian church, both
Mohammedans and Jews, and besides these the Gentiles of every cult, are
averse to Christianity solely on account of its belief in three Gods.
This its propagandists know; and therefore they are very cautious about
divulging the doctrine of a trinity of persons as it is taught in the
Nicene and Athanasian creeds; for if they did they would be shunned and
ridiculed. \[2\] The absurd, ludicrous, and frivolous ideas that have
sprung up out of the doctrine of three Divine persons from eternity, and
that still spring up in every man who retains a belief in the words of
that doctrine, rising from his ears and eyes into the sight of his
thought, are as follows: That God the Father sits on high overhead; the
Son at His right hand; and the Holy Spirit before them listening, and
forthwith traversing the whole world, dispensing according to their
decision the gifts of justification, inscribing them upon men and
changing men from children of wrath to children of grace, and from being
damned to being elect. I appeal to the learned of the clergy and
well-informed of the laity, whether in their minds they cherish any
other visual image than this, for this flows of itself from the same
doctrine (see Memorable Relation, n. 16). \[3\] There flows from it also
a curiosity for conjecturing what they conversed about before the world
was made, whether about making the world, or perchance about those who
according to the Supralapsarians were to be predestined and justified,
or also about redemption; likewise what they have been conversing about
among themselves since the world was created - the Father from His
authority and power to impute, the Son from His power to mediate;
moreover that imputation, which is election, is from the mercy of the
Son who intercedes for all in general and for some individually, and
that the Father, being moved by love to the Son and by the agony
witnessed in Him when on the cross, has grace for such. But who cannot
see that such things are silly conceits about God? And yet in the
Christian churches these are the very sanctities, which are to be kissed
with the lips, but not looked into by any mental vision because they are
above the reason, and if they were lifted out of the memory into the
understanding man would become insane. This, however, does not take away
the idea of three Gods but induces a stupid faith, because of which a
man, when thinking about God, may be likened to a sleep-walker wandering
about in the darkness of night, or to one blind from birth wandering in
the light of day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="184.">184.</span></span>

That a trinity of Gods is fixed in the minds of Christians, although
from shame they deny it, is very evident from the ingenuity of many of
them in demonstrating by means of various things in plain and solid
geometry, in arithmetic, and in physics, and also by foldings of cloth
and paper, that the three are one and the one is three. Thus they play
with the divine trinity as jugglers play with each other. Their juggling
on this subject may be compared to the visions of those suffering from
fever, who see one object (whether a man, or a table or a candle) as
three, or three as one. It may also be compared to the tricks of those
who work soft wax with their fingers and mould it into various shapes,
now making it triangular to exhibit the trinity, and again spherical to
exhibit the unity, meanwhile asking, "Is not the substance still one and
the same?" And yet the Divine trinity is like the one pearl of great
value, but when divided into persons it is like that pearl divided into
three parts, whereby it is utterly and manifestly ruined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="185.">185.</span></span>

To this shall be added the following Memorable Relations. First: In the
spiritual world there are climates and zones just as in the natural
world. Nothing exists in this world that does not also exist in that;
yet in origin they differ. In the natural world climates vary according
to the distance of the sun from the equator; in the spiritual world they
vary according to the distances of the will's affections and the
consequent thought of the understanding from true love and true faith;
for of these latter all things in that world are correspondences. In the
frigid zones of the spiritual world things appear similar to those in
the frigid zones of the natural world; lands and waters alike are bound
in ice with snow upon them. Those come hither and dwell here who in the
world had lulled their understanding to sleep by their indolence in
thinking of spiritual things, and who were consequently indolent in
doing anything useful. Such are called boreal spirits. \[2\] On one
occasion I had a strong desire to see some region of the frigid zone
where these boreal spirits dwell. I was therefore conducted in spirit
northward to a region where the whole earth appeared to be covered with
snow and all the water frozen. It was the Sabbath day; and I saw men,
that is, spirits similar in stature to the men of our world, with their
heads, owing to the cold, covered with lions' skins, the mouth of the
skin fitted to their own; while before and behind and down to the loins
their bodies were clad with leopard skins and their feet with bear skin.
I also saw many riding in chariots, and some in chariots carved in the
form of a dragon with the horns projecting forward. The chariots were
drawn by small horses with their tails clipped, which ran like frightful
wild creatures, the driver holding tight the reins and continually
speeding and whipping them to a run. At length I saw that the crowds
were flocking towards a temple, which was invisible because it was
buried in snow; but the caretakers of the temple were shoveling away the
snow and digging a path for the coming worshipers, who descended and
entered. \[3\] I was permitted to see the inside of the temple. It was
lighted with an abundance of lamps and torches. There was an altar of
hewn stone, behind which hung a tablet with the inscription, The Divine
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, who are essentially one God, but
personally three. At length a priest who stood at the altar, after
kneeling thrice before the tablet, went up into the pulpit with a book
in his hand and began a discourse on the Divine trinity. "O how great
the mystery," he exclaimed, "that God in the highest begot a Son from
eternity, and through Him sent forth the Holy Spirit, the three
conjoining themselves by their essence but dividing themselves by their
properties, which are imputation, redemption, and operation! But if we
look upon these things from reason our vision grows obscure, and a spot
comes before it such as appears before the eye of one who fixes his gaze
upon the naked sun. Therefore, my hearers, in this matter let us keep
the understanding under obedience to faith." \[4\] Again he exclaimed,
"O how great a mystery is our holy faith, that God the Father imputes
the righteousness of His Son and sends the Holy Spirit, who from that
imputed righteousness works out the evidences of justification! These in
brief are forgiveness of sins, renovation, regeneration, and salvation,
of the influx of action of which a man is no more conscious than the
statue of salt into which Lot's wife was turned; and of the indwelling
or the state of which he is no more conscious than a fish in the sea.
But, my friends, in this faith there lies a treasure so enclosed and
hidden that not a particle of it can be seen; therefore in this matter
also let us keep the understanding under obedience to faith." \[5\]
After some deep sighs he again exclaimed, "O how great is the mystery of
election! He becomes one of the elect to whom God imputes that faith,
which He imparts, at His good pleasure and out of pure grace, to
whomsoever He wills and when He wills, and while it is being poured into
him man is like a stock, but when this has been done he becomes like a
tree. It is true that there are fruits, that is, good works, hanging
upon the tree (which in a representative sense is our faith); but the
fruit does not cling to it, and therefore the worth of the tree is not
in the fruit. Yet as this sounds heterodox, although it is a mystical
verity, let us, my brethren, keep the understanding under obedience to
faith in it." \[6\] Then again, after a brief pause, standing as if he
would produce something further from his memory, he continued, "From the
mass of mysteries I will present one more, namely, that in spiritual
things man has not a grain of free-will. For the primates and rulers of
our order say in their theological canons that in matters pertaining to
faith and salvation, which are especially called spiritual, man has no
ability to will, think or understand anything, nor even adapt or apply
himself to their reception. Therefore of myself I say, that a man is no
better able than a parrot or a magpie or a raven to think about these
things from reason and talk about them from thought; so that in
spiritual things man is in fact an ass, and only in natural things is he
a man. But, my friends, lest this should annoy your reason, let us in
this as in the others keep the understanding under obedience to faith.
For our theology is a bottomless abyss, and if you let your intellectual
vision down into it you will be overwhelmed, and will perish as by
shipwreck. And yet keep this in mind: we are none the less in the true
light of the Gospel, which is shining far above our heads; but sad to
say, the hairs of our heads and the bones of our skulls stand in the way
and keep the light from penetrating the recesses of our understanding."
\[7\] Having said this he came down from the pulpit; and when he had
offered a prayer at the altar and the service was over I approached some
who were talking together, among whom was the priest; and those standing
around him said, "We give you everlasting thanks for a discourse so
magnificent and so rich in wisdom." But I said to them, "Did you
understand anything?" And they answered, "We took in everything with
full ears; but why do you ask whether we understand? Is not the
understanding benumbed by such matters?" And to this the priest added,
"Forasmuch as you have heard and have not understood you are blessed,
for thereby you have salvation." \[8\] Afterwards I talked with the
priest and asked him whether he had a degree. He answered, "I am a
laureled Master." I then said, "Master, I have heard you preaching
mysteries; if you know of the mysteries but know nothing that they
contain, you know nothing; for they are like chests locked with triple
bolts; and unless you open them and look inside, which must be done by
the understanding, you do not know whether the contents are precious or
whether they are worthless, or are hurtful. They may contain vipers'
eggs or spiders' webs, according to the description in Isaiah" (59:5).
At this the priest looked at me grimly; and the worshipers withdrew and
entered their chariots, drunken with paradoxes, muddled with empty
words, and enveloped in darkness respecting all things of faith and the
means of salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="186.">186.</span></span>

Second Memorable Relation: I was engaged in thought about what region of
the mind in man is occupied with theological matters. At first I
supposed that being spiritual and heavenly they occupy the highest
region. For the human mind is divided into three regions, as a house
into three stories, or the angelic abodes into three heavens. Then an
angel standing near said, "With those who love truth because it is true,
theological matters rise even into the highest region of the mind,
because in that region is their heaven, and they are in the light in
which angels dwell. But moral subjects theoretically examined and
perceived have their place in a second region beneath these, because
they communicate with things spiritual. Beneath these in a first region
political subjects have their place; while scientific matters, which are
manifold, and may be referred to genera and species, form a door to
these higher matters. Those with whom things spiritual, moral,
political, and scientific are thus subordinated, think what they think
and do what they do from justice and judgment. This is because the light
of truth, which is also the light of heaven, illuminates from the
highest region all things that follow, as the light of the sun, passing
in turn through the ethers and through the atmospheres, illumines the
eyes of men and beasts and fishes. It is different, however, in matters
of theology with those who love truth not because it is true, but only
for the glory of their reputation. With them theological subjects have
their seat in the lowest region along with scientific subjects; with
some the former are mingled with the latter; with others the two cannot
be so mingled. In the same region but still lower are political
subjects, and beneath these again moral subjects, for in such persons
the two higher regions are not opened on the right hand; and in
consequence they have no interior reason from judgment and no affection
for justice, but only a cleverness which enables them to talk on every
subject as if from intelligence and to confirm whatever presents itself
as if from reason; but the objects of reason which they chiefly love are
falsities, because these adhere to the fallacies of the senses. This is
why there are so many in the world who no more see truths of doctrine
from the Word than those blind can see; and when such hear truths they
hold their nostrils, lest the scent of the truths should disturb them
and excite nausea; while on the other hand, they open all their senses
to falsities and drink them in as whales drink in water."

<span class="margnote"><span id="187.">187.</span></span>

Third Memorable Relation: Once when I was meditating about the dragon
and the beast and the false prophet spoken of in the Apocalypse, an
angelic spirit appeared to me and asked, "What are you meditating
about?" And I said, "About the false prophet." Then he said, "I will
take you to the place where those are who are meant by the false
prophet;" and he added that they are the same as are meant in the
thirteenth chapter of the Apocalypse by "the beast rising up out of the
earth," which had two horns like a lamb, and which spoke like a dragon.
I followed him, and lo, I saw a great crowd, in the midst of which were
leaders of the church who taught that nothing saves man but faith in the
merit of Christ; and that works are good, but contribute nothing to
salvation, and yet should be taught from the Word in order that the
laity, especially the simple, may be held more firmly in the bonds of
obedience to magistrates, and may be compelled as if from religion, and
thus from within, to practice moral charity. \[2\] Then one of them,
seeing me, said, "Would you like to see our temple, in which there is an
image representative of our faith?" I approached and looked, and behold
the temple was magnificent. In the center of it was an image of a woman
clad in scarlet robes, holding in her right hand a golden coin, and in
her left a chain of pearls. But both the image and the temple were
produced through phantasy; for through phantasies infernal spirits are
able to represent magnificent things by closing up the interiors of the
mind and opening the exteriors only. When, however, I observed that
these things were such juggleries, I prayed to the Lord, and immediately
the interiors of my mind were opened, and then in place of a magnificent
temple I saw a house full of chinks from top to bottom, tumbling all to
pieces; and in place of the woman, I saw hanging within the building a
figure with a head like a dragon's, a body like a leopard's, its feet
like bear's feet, and its mouth like that of a lion, thus precisely like
the beast described as rising up out of the sea (Rev. 13:2); and for a
floor there was a bog with a multitude of frogs in it, and I was told
that underneath the bog was a large hewn stone, with the Word hidden
deep below it. Seeing this I said to the juggler, "Is this your temple?"
And he said, "It is." But suddenly he, too, had his inner sight opened,
and from it he saw the same things that I did, and he cried out loudly,
"What is this, and whence is it?" And I said, "It is from the light of
heaven, which discloses the quality of every outward shape, and thus the
quality of your faith separate from spiritual charity." \[3\] And
presently a wind blew up from the east and swept away the temple and the
image and dried up the bog and thus laid bare the stone beneath which
the Word was lying. And then a warmth like that of spring breathed upon
it from heaven, and behold in the same place a tabernacle simple in
outward form appeared. And the angels who were with me said, "Behold the
tabernacle of Abraham, as it was when the three angels came to him and
foretold the birth of Isaac. To the eye it appears simple, but it
becomes more and more magnificent according to the influx of light from
heaven." It was granted them to open the heaven occupied by spiritual
angels, who are in wisdom. And at once from the light flowing in from
that heaven the tabernacle appeared like a temple similar to that at
Jerusalem. And when I looked inside I saw the foundation-stone under
which the Word was deposited, set about with precious stones, and from
these a kind of effulgence beamed upon the walls, on which were figures
of cherubim, and the glow beautifully variegated the walls with colors.
\[4\] While I wondered at these things the angels said, "You shall see
something still more wonderful." And it was granted them to open the
third heaven, where celestial angels dwell who are in a state of love;
and then because of the flamy light flowing in from that heaven the
whole temple vanished, and in its place the Lord alone was seen standing
upon the foundation-stone, which was the Word, appearing in the same
form in which He appeared to John (Rev. 1). But as the interiors of the
angels' minds were then filled with a holiness which impelled them to
fall down upon their faces, the way by which the light came from the
third heaven was immediately closed by the Lord, and a way was opened
for light from the second heaven, and this caused the temple to assume
its former aspect, and also the tabernacle, which was now in the center
of the temple. This was an illustration of what is meant in the
Apocalypse by these words: Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men,
and He shall dwell with them (21:3). And by these words: I saw no temple
in the New Jerusalem, for the Lord God the Almighty is the temple
thereof, and the Lamb (21:22).

<span class="margnote"><span id="188.">188.</span></span>

Fourth Memorable Relation: As I have been permitted by the Lord to
behold wonderful things in the heavens and beneath the heavens, it
behooves me, as commanded, to relate what has been seen. There was seen
a magnificent palace, and in the innermost parts of it a temple, and in
the center of the temple a golden table upon which the Word was lying,
and two angels stood beside it. Around the table were seats in triple
rows. The seats of the first row were covered with cloth of pure silk,
purple colored; those of the second row with cloth of sky-blue silk; and
those of the third row with white cloth. Beneath the roof, high above
the table, a wide canopy was seen ablaze with precious stones, from the
glow of which shone a rainbow, such as is seen when the sky is clearing
after a shower. Presently a number of the clergy equal to the number of
the seats appeared and occupied the seats, all clothed in the garments
of the priestly office. At one side was a wardrobe where an angel keeper
stood; and within it arranged in beautiful order splendid robes were
lying. This was a council called together by the Lord; and I heard a
voice from heaven saying, "Deliberate." But they asked, "On what
subject?" It was said, "On the Lord the Savior, and on the Holy Spirit."
But when they began to meditate on these subjects they were not in a
state of enlightenment; therefore they prayed, and a light then flowed
down from heaven; and first the back part of their heads were lighted
up, then their temples and at last their faces. Then they began to
deliberate, and first, as bidden, in regard to the Lord the Savior.
\[2\] And the first point proposed and discussed was, Who assumed the
Human in the Virgin Mary? And the angel standing beside the table upon
which was the Word, read to them the following from Luke: The angel said
to Mary, Behold thou shalt conceive in the womb, and bring forth a Son,
and shalt call His name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called
the Son of the Most High. And Mary said to the angel, How shall this
thing be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel answered and said unto
her, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most
High shall overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing that is born of
thee shall be called the Son of God (1:31, 32, 34, 35). Then he read the
following from Matthew: The angel said to Joseph in a dream, Joseph,
thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy bride, for that
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. And Joseph knew her not
until she had brought forth her firstborn son and he called His name
Jesus (Matt. 1:20, 25). We also read other passages from the Gospels (as
Matt. 3:17; 17:5; John 1:18; 3:16; 20:31); and many others elsewhere, in
which the Lord in respect to His Human is called the Son of God, and
where from His Human He calls Jehovah His Father. We read also from the
Prophets, where it is foretold that Jehovah Himself would come into the
world; among them these two passages from Isaiah: It shall be said in
that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for Him that He may
deliver us; this is Jehovah; we have waited for Him; let us exult and be
glad in His salvation (25:9). The voice of one crying in the desert,
Prepare ye the way of Jehovah; make level in the wilderness a highway
for our God. For the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, and all flesh
shall see it together. Behold, the Lord Jehovah cometh in strength, He
shall feed His Bock like a shepherd (40:3, 5, 10, 11). \[3\] And the
angel said, "Because Jehovah Himself came into the world and assumed the
Human He is called in the Prophets Savior and Redeemer. Then he read to
them the following passages: Among Thee alone is God, and there is no
God besides. Surely Thou art a hidden God, O God of Israel, the Savior
(Isa. 45:14, 15). Am not I Jehovah? And there is no God else beside Me;
a just God and a Savior, there is none beside Me (Isa. 45:21, 22). I am
Jehovah, and beside Me there is no Savior (Isa. 43:11). I am Jehovah thy
God, and thou shalt acknowledge no God beside Me, and there is no Savior
beside Me (Hos. 13:4). That all flesh may know that I Jehovah am thy
Savior and thy Redeemer (Isa. 49:26; 60:16). As for our Redeemer,
Jehovah of Hosts is His name (Isa. 47:4). Their Redeemer is strong,
Jehovah of Hosts is His name (Jer. 50:34). O Jehovah, my Rock and my
Redeemer (Ps. 19:14). Thus said Jehovah thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel, I am Jehovah thy God (Isa. 48:17; 43:14; 49:7; 54:8). Thou,
Jehovah, art our Father; our Redeemer from everlasting is Thy name (Isa.
63:16). Thus said Jehovah thy redeemer, I am Jehovah that maketh all
things, even alone by Myself (Isa. 44:24). Thus said Jehovah the King of
Israel, and His Redeemer Jehovah of hosts, I am the first, and I am the
last; and besides Me there is no God (Isa. 44:6). Jehovah of Hosts is
his name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; the God of the whole
earth shall He be called (Isa. 54:5). Behold the days come, when I shall
raise up unto David a righteous branch, and He shall reign as king, and
this is His name, Jehovah, our Righteousness (Jer. 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16).
In that day Jehovah shall be king over all the earth; in that day
Jehovah shall be one, and His name one (Zech. 14:9). \[4\] Strengthened
in belief by all these passages, those that sat upon the seats
unanimously declared, that Jehovah himself assumed the Human that He
might redeem and save men. And thereupon from some Roman Catholics who
had hidden themselves behind the altar a voice was heard saying, "How
can Jehovah God become a man? Is He not the creator of the universe?"
And one of those on the second row of seats turned about and said, "Who
then was it?" And he who had been behind the altar and was now standing
near it said, "The Son from eternity." But he received the reply, "Is
not the Son from eternity, according to your confession of faith, also
the Creator of the universe? Moreover, what is a Son and a God born from
eternity? And how can the Divine essence, which is one and indivisible,
be separated, and one part of it descend and not the whole at once?"
\[5\] The second subject of discussion about the Lord, was whether the
Father and He are thus one as soul and body are one; and they said that
this follows, because the soul is from the father. Then one of those who
sat on the third row of seats read from what is called the Athanasian
Creed as follows, "Although our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is
God and man, yet these are not two, but one Christ; yea, one altogether;
He is one person; since as the soul and body make one Man, so God and
Man is one Christ." The reader said that this creed, in which these
words are found, is accepted throughout the Christian world, even by the
Roman Catholics. The others said, "What more is needed? God the Father
and He are one as soul and body are one." And they said, "This being so,
we see that the Lord's Human is Divine because it is the Human of
Jehovah; also that it is the Lord as to His Divine human who is to be
approached, and that thus and in no other way can the Divine which is
called the Father be approached." \[6\] This conclusion of theirs the
angel confirmed by many passages from the Word, among which were the
following: Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; and His
name, Wonderful, Counselor, God, Mighty, Father of Eternity, Prince of
Peace (Isa. 9:6). Abraham knoweth us not, and Israel doth not
acknowledge us; Thou, Jehovah, art our Father, our Redeemer from
everlasting is Thy name (Isa. 63:16). And in John: Jesus said, He that
believeth in Me believeth in Him that sent Me; and he that seeth Me
seeth Him that sent me (John 12:44, 45). Philip said to Jesus, Show us
the Father, Jesus saith unto him, he that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father; how sayest thou then, Show us the Father? Believest thou not
that I am in the Father and the Father in Me? Believe Me that I am in
the Father, and the Father in Me (John 14:8-11). Jesus said, I and My
Father are one (John 10:30). All things that the Father hath are Mine;
and all Mine are the Father's (John 16:15; 17:10). Jesus said, I am the
way, the truth, and the life; no one cometh unto the Father but by Me
(John 14:6). To all this the reader added, that things like those here
said by the Lord about himself and his Father might also be said by man
about himself and his own soul. Having heard this they all with one
voice and one heart declared that the Lord's human is Divine, and that
this human must be approached in order to approach the Father, since by
means of it Jehovah God sent himself thus accessible. To the ancients in
like manner He made Himself visible, and thus accessible in a Human
Form; but then through an angel. But as that form was representative of
the Lord who was to come, so with the ancients all things pertaining to
the church were representative. \[7\] This was followed by a
deliberation about the Holy Spirit. In the first place there was set
forth the idea of many respecting God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, namely, that God the Father sits on high with the Son at His
right hand, and that the two send forth from themselves the Holy Spirit
to enlighten, teach, justify and sanctify mankind. Then a voice from
heaven was heard saying, "That idea of thought is to us unbearable. Who
does not know that Jehovah God is omnipresent? And whoever knows and
acknowledges this must acknowledge that He Himself enlightens, teaches,
justifies, and sanctifies; and that there is no mediating God distinct
from Him, still less a God distinct from two Gods, as one person from
another person. Therefore have done with the former idea, which is
foolish, and let this which is the right idea be accepted, and you will
see the matter clearly." \[8\] Then a voice from the Roman Catholics who
were standing near the altar of the temple was heard saying, "What,
then, is the Holy Spirit which is mentioned in the Word in the Gospels
and in Paul, by which so many learned men of the clergy, especially our
own, say they are led? Who at this day in the Christian world denies the
Holy Spirit and its operations?" At these words one of those sitting on
the second row of seats turned about and said, You say that the Holy
Spirit is a person by Himself and a God by Himself; but what is a person
going out of and forth from a person but an operation going out and
forth? One person cannot go out of or forth from another, but operation
can. Or what is a God going out of or proceeding from God, but an
outgoing and proceeding Divine? One God cannot go out of or forth from
another God, and through still another, but the Divine can go out and
forth from one God." \[9\] On hearing these words those sitting on the
seats unanimously concluded that the Holy Spirit is not a person by
itself, nor thus a God by itself, but is the Holy Divine going out of
and forth from the one only and omnipresent God, who is the Lord. At
this the angels who stood near the golden table upon which was the Word
said, "It is well. Nowhere does one read in the Old Covenant that the
prophets spoke the Word from the Holy Spirit, but from Jehovah; and in
the new Covenant wherever the Holy Spirit is mentioned it means the
Divine going forth, which is the Divine enlightening, teaching,
vivifying, reforming, and regenerating." \[10\] After this another
discussion about the Holy Spirit followed on this point, From whom does
the Divine that is meant by the Holy Spirit go forth, whether from the
Father or from the Lord? While they were discussing this subject a light
from heaven beamed upon them by which they saw that the Holy Divine,
which is meant by the Holy Spirit, does not go forth out of the Father
through the Lord, but out of the Lord from the Father, comparatively as
man's activity goes forth, not from the soul through the body, but out
of the body from the soul. The angel who stood near the table confirmed
this by the following passages from the Word: He whom God hath sent,
speaketh the words of God; for not by measure doth God give the Spirit
unto Him. The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His
hand (John 3:34, 35). And there shall go forth a Shoot out of the stock
of Jesse, and the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon Him, the spirit of
wisdom and of understanding; the spirit of counsel and might (Isa. 9:1,
2). That the Spirit of Jehovah was put upon Him and was in Him (Isa.
42:1, 49:19, 20; 51:1; Luke 4:18). When the Holy Spirit is come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father (John 15:26). He shall glorify Me,
for He shall take of Mine and shall declare it unto you. All things
whatsoever the Father hath are Mine therefore said I that He shall take
of Mine and shall declare it unto you (John 16:14, 15). If I go away I
will send the Comforter unto you (John 16:7). That the Comforter is the
Holy Spirit (John 14:26). The Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was
not yet glorified (John 8:39). But after the glorification: Jesus
breathed upon the disciples, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy
Spirit (John 20:22). And in the Apocalypse: Who shall not glorify Thy
name, O Lord? for Thou alone art holy (15:4). \[11\] As the Holy Spirit
means the Lord's Divine operation from His Divine omnipresence, so when
He spoke to His disciples about the Holy Spirit whom He would send from
the Father He also said: I will not leave you orphans. I go away and I
come unto you. And in that day ye shall know that I am in My Father, and
ye in Me, and I in you (John 14:18, 20, 28). And just before He left the
world He said: Lo, I am with you all the days, even unto the
consummation of the age (Matt. 28:20). Having read these passages to
them the angel said, "From these and many other passages from the Word
it is clear that the Divine which is called the Holy Spirit goes forth
out of the Lord from the Father." Hereupon those who sat upon the seats
said, "This is Divine truth." \[12\] Finally the following decree was
adopted: "From the deliberation of this council we have clearly seen and
therefore acknowledge as holy truth, that in the Lord God the Savior
Jesus Christ there is a Divine trinity, namely, the Divine from which (a
quo), which is called the Father, the Divine Human which is called the
Son, and the Divine going forth which is called the Holy Spirit;" and
together they cried out that: "In Christ dwelleth all the fulness of
Divinity bodily (Col. 2:9). Thus in the church God is one." \[13\] When
this conclusion had been reached in that magnificent council the members
arose; and an angel keeper came from the wardrobe bringing to each one
of those occupying the seats splendid garments interwoven here and there
with golden threads; and he said, "Accept these wedding garments." And
they were conducted in glory to the new Christian heaven, with which the
Lord's church on earth, which is the New Jerusalem, will be conjoined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="189.">189.</span></span>

CHAPTER 4 THE SACRED SCRIPTURE OR WORD OF THE LORD I. THE SACRED
SCRIPTURE OR THE WORD IS DIVINE TRUTH ITSELF. It is on everyone's lips
that the Word is from God, is Divinely inspired, and is therefore holy;
and yet it has not been known heretofore where in the Word its Divinity
resides. For in its letter the Word appears like ordinary writing,
foreign in style, neither lofty nor brilliant as the writings of the
present time are in appearance. For this reason the man who worships
nature instead of God or more than God, and whose thought therefore is
from himself and his selfhood and not from the Lord out of heaven, may
easily fall into error respecting the Word, and into contempt for it,
and when reading it may say to himself, What does this and that mean? Is
this Divine? Can God, whose wisdom is infinite speak thus? Wherein and
wherefrom is its holiness, except from some religious notion and
consequent persuasion?

<span class="margnote"><span id="190.">190.</span></span>

But he who so thinks does not consider that Jehovah the Lord, who is the
God of heaven and earth, spoke the Word through Moses and the prophets,
and therefore it cannot be other than Divine truth, for what Jehovah the
Lord Himself speaks must be such. Neither does he consider that the Lord
the Savior, who is the same with Jehovah, spoke the Word in the Gospels,
much of it by His own mouth, and the rest of it by the breath of His
mouth, which is the Holy Spirit, through His twelve disciples; whence it
is, as He says, that in His words there is spirit and there is life, and
that He is the Light that enlightens, and that He is the Truth; as is
evident from the following passages: Jesus said, The words that I speak
unto you are spirit and are life (John 6:63). Jesus said to the woman at
Jacob's well, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith
to thee Give me to drink, thou wouldst have asked of Him and He would
give thee living water. Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall
give him shall never thirst but the water that I shall give him shall
become in him a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life
(John 4:6, 10, 11, 14); "Jacob's well" signifying the Word. (As also in
Deut. 33:28). Therefore the Lord, because He is the Word, sat there and
talked with the woman. "Living water" signifies the truth of the Word:
Jesus said, If any man thirst let him come unto Me and drink. He that
believeth on Me, as the Scripture saith, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water (John 7:37, 38). Peter said to Jesus, Thou hast
the words of eternal life (John 6:68). Jesus said, Heaven and earth
shall pass away, but My words shall not pass away (Mark 13:31). The
Lord's words are Truth and Life because He is the Truth and the Life, as
He teaches in John: I am the Way, the Truth and the Life (14:6); and in
the same: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
God was the Word. In Him was life, and the life was the light of men
(1:1, 4). "The Word" means the Lord in respect to Divine truth, in whom
alone there is life and there is light. For this reason the Word, which
is from the Lord and which is the Lord, is called: The fountain of
living waters (Jer. 2:13; 17:13; 31:9) The fountain of salvation (Isa.
12:3) A fountain (Zech. 13:1) And the river of the water of life (Apoc.
22:1); and it is said that: The Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, and shall guide them unto living fountains of waters
(Apoc. 7:17) with other things also in passages where the Word is also
called "a sanctuary" and "a tabernacle," wherein the Lord dwells with
man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="191.">191.</span></span>

Nevertheless, all this does not convince the natural man that the Word
is Divine truth itself, in which there is Divine wisdom and Divine life;
for he estimates it by its style, in which these are not seen by him.
Yet the style of the Word is the Divine style itself, with which no
other style can be compared, however sublime and excellent it may seem.
The style of the Word is such that there is a holiness in every sentence
and in every word, and even in some places in the very letters, and
thereby the Word conjoins man with the Lord and opens heaven. There are
two things that go forth from the Lord, Divine love and Divine wisdom,
or what is the same thing, Divine good and Divine truth. In its essence
the Word is both of these; and because, as just said, it conjoins man
with the Lord and opens heaven, it fills man with the goods of love and
the truths of wisdom-his will with the goods of love and his
understanding with the truths of wisdom; thus by means of the Word man
has life. But it must be clearly understood that those only have life
from the Word who read it for the purpose of drawing from it Divine
truths as from their proper fountain, and at the same time for the
purpose of applying to the life the truths drawn therefrom; while with
those who read the Word solely with a view to gaining worldly honors and
riches the opposite effect follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="192.">192.</span></span>

Any man who does not know that there is a certain spiritual sense
contained in the Word, like a soul in its body, must needs judge of it
from the sense of its letter; when yet this sense is like an envelope
enclosing precious things, which are its spiritual sense. Therefore when
this internal sense is unknown the Divine holiness of the Word can be
estimated only as when a precious stone is estimated from the matrix
enclosing it, which often appears like an ordinary stone; or only as
when from a casket made of jasper, lapis-lazuli, amianthus, or agate,
one estimates the diamonds, rubies, sardonyxes, oriental topazes, and so
on, lying in order within it. So long as its contents are unknown it is
not strange that the casket is esteemed only according to the value of
its material which is visible. The same is true of the Word in respect
to the sense of its letter. That men, therefore, may not continue to
doubt whether the Word is Divine and most holy, the Lord has revealed to
me its internal sense, which in its essence is spiritual, and which is
within the external sense, which is natural, as the soul is in the body.
That sense is the spirit that gives life to the letter; consequently
that sense can bear witness to the Divinity and holiness of the Word,
and convince even the natural man, if he is willing to be convinced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="193.">193.</span></span>

II\. IN THE WORD THERE IS A SPIRITUAL SENSE HITHERTO UNKNOWN. When it is
asserted that inasmuch as the Word is Divine it is in its bosom
spiritual, who does not acknowledge and assent to the statement? But who
has known as yet what the spiritual is, and where in the Word it is
stored up? What the spiritual is will be made clear in the Memorable
Relation at the end of this chapter; and where it is hidden in the Word
shall be shown in what now follows. The Word in its bosom is spiritual,
because it descended from Jehovah the Lord, and passed through the
angelic heavens; and in its descent the Divine itself, which in itself
is ineffable and unperceivable, became adapted to the perception of
angels, and finally to the perception of men. From this is the spiritual
sense, which is inwardly in the natural, as the soul is in man, as the
thought of the understanding is in speech, and as the will's affection
is in action; and if it is permissible to compare it with such things as
appear to the eye in the natural world, the spiritual sense is in the
natural sense as the whole brain is within its meninges or matres, or as
a tree's branches are within their barks and coats, or as all things
needful for the production of a chick are within the shell of the egg,
and so on. But that there is such a spiritual sense of the Word in its
natural sense no one as yet has divined; and for that reason it is
necessary that this arcanum (which in itself stands pre-eminent over all
arcana hitherto disclosed) should be made clear to the understanding, as
it will be when explained in the following order: (1) What the spiritual
sense is. (2) This sense is in each and every part of the Word. (3) It
is because of this sense that the Word is Divinely inspired, and holy in
every word. (4) Heretofore this sense has been unknown. (5) Henceforth
it will be given only to such as are in genuine truths from the Lord.
(6) Wonderful things respecting the Word, from its spiritual sense.
These propositions will now be unfolded separately.

<span class="margnote"><span id="194.">194.</span></span>

\(1\) What the spiritual sense is. The spiritual sense is not the sense
that shines forth from the sense of the letter of the Word when one is
studying it and so construing it as to confirm some dogma of the church.
That may be called the literal and ecclesiastical sense of the Word. The
spiritual sense is not apparent in the sense of the letter; it is
interiorly within it as the soul is in the body, as the thought of the
understanding is in the eyes, or the love's affection in the face. It is
that sense chiefly that makes the Word spiritual, not only for men but
for angels also; and therefore by means of that sense the Word has
communication with the heavens. As the Word is inwardly spiritual it was
written purely by correspondences; and because it was written by
correspondences in its outmost sense it was written in a style like that
of the Prophets, the Gospels, and the Apocalypse, which, although
commonplace in appearance, still conceals within it Divine wisdom and
all angelic wisdom. What correspondence is can be seen in the work on
Heaven and Hell, (published in London, 1758), in the chapter on The
Correspondence of all things of Heaven with all things in Man (n.
87-102); and on The Correspondence of all things of Heaven with all
things on Earth (n. 103-115); and it will be further explained by
examples from the Word cited below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="195.">195.</span></span>

From the Lord the Divine Celestial, the Divine Spiritual, and the Divine
Natural go forth one after the other. Whatever goes forth from the
Lord's Divine love is called the Divine Celestial, everything of which
is good; whatever goes forth from His Divine wisdom is called the Divine
Spiritual, everything of which is truth; the Divine Natural is from both
of these and is their complex in the outmost. The angels of the
celestial kingdom, who constitute the third or highest heaven, are in
that Divine going forth from the Lord which is called celestial, since
they are in good of love from the Lord. The angels of the Lord's
spiritual kingdom, who constitute the second or middle heaven, are in
that Divine going forth from the Lord which is called spiritual, since
they are in Divine wisdom from the Lord. The angels of the Lord's
natural kingdom, who constitute the first or lowest heaven, are in that
Divine going forth from the Lord which is called the Divine natural, and
they are in the faith of charity from the Lord. Men of the church are in
some one of these kingdoms according to their love, their wisdom, and
their faith; and whichever one they are in, that they enter into after
death. Such as heaven is such also is the Lord's Word; in its outmost
sense it is natural, in its interior sense spiritual, and in its inmost
sense celestial, and in each of these senses it is Divine. Thus is it
adapted to the angels of the three heavens, and also to man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="196.">196.</span></span>

\(2\) The spiritual sense is in each and every part of the Word. This
can be best seen by example, as in the following. In the Apocalypse John
says: I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and He that sat
upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness He doth
judge and make war. And His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on His
head are many diadems, having a name written that no man but Himself
knoweth. And He was clothed in a garment dyed in blood and His name is
called The Word of God. His armies in heaven were following Him upon
white horses, and were clothed in fine linen, white and clean. He hath
on His garment and on His thigh a name written King of kings and Lord of
lords. I saw also an angel standing in the sun, who cried with a loud
voice, Come and be gathered together unto the great supper; that ye may
eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of commanders of thousands and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of those that sit on
them, and the flesh of all, free and bond, small and great (19:11-18).
What these words signify no one can see except from the spiritual sense
of the Word; and no one can see the spiritual sense except from a
knowledge of correspondences for all these words are correspondences,
and not one of them is void of meaning. The science of correspondences
teaches the significance of "the white horse," of "Him who sat upon
him," of "His eyes" which were "like a flame of fire," of "the diadems
on His head," "the garment dyed in blood," "the white linen" with which
those were clothed who belonged to His army in heaven, of "the angel
standing in the sun," of "the great supper" to which the fowls of heaven
"came and were gathered together" and of "the flesh of kings and
commanders of thousands" and many others whose flesh they were to eat.
\[2\] But what each particular thing signifies in the spiritual sense
can be seen explained in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 820-838) and also
in the little work on The White Horse; therefore further explanation of
them is unnecessary. It is there shown that it is the Lord as to the
Word who is described; and that by "His eyes which were like a flame of
fire" the Divine wisdom of His Divine love is meant; and by "the diadems
on His head" and "the name which no one but Himself knew" the Divine
truths of the Word from Him are meant, and that the nature of the Word
in its spiritual sense is seen by none but the Lord and him to whom He
reveals it; also by "His garment dyed in blood" the natural sense of the
Word is meant, which is the sense of the letter, to which violence has
been done. It is very clear that it is the Word that is thus described,
for it is said, "His name is called the Word of God." That it is the
Lord who is meant is equally clear, for it is said that the name of the
One sitting upon the white horse was, "King of kings and Lord of lords,"
the same as in Apoc. 17:14, where it is said, "And the Lamb shall
overcome them; for He is Lord of lords and King of kings." \[3\] That
the spiritual sense of the Word is to be opened at the end of the church
is signified not only by what is said of the white horse and Him who sat
upon it, but also by the great supper to which the angel standing in the
sun invited all \[the fowls of heaven\] to come, and to eat the flesh of
kings, of commanders of thousands, and so forth; by which is signified
the appropriation of all goods from the Lord. All these expressions
would be empty words, and without life and spirit, if there were no
spiritual sense with in them like the soul in the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="197.">197.</span></span>

In the Apocalypse the New Jerusalem is thus described: That in her there
was light like unto a stone most precious, as it were a jasper atone
shining like crystal. And she had a wall great and high, having twelve
gates, and above the gates twelve angels, and the names of the twelve
tribes of the sons of Israel written thereon. That the wall was a
hundred and forty and four cubits, which was the measure of a man, that
is, of an angel. That the building of the wall was of jasper, and its
foundations were of every precious stone, jasper, sapphire, chalcedony,
emerald, sardonyx, sardius, chrysolite, beryl, topaz, chrysoprase,
hyacinth, and amethyst. That the gates were twelve pearls. That the city
itself was pure gold like pure glass, and was four square and her
length, breadth, and height were equal, twelve thousand furlongs; and so
forth (21:11, 12, 16-21). That all this is to be understood spiritually
can be seen from what is set forth in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 880),
that "the New Jerusalem" means a new church that is to be established by
the Lord. And since "Jerusalem" here signifies the church it follows
that everything said of it as a city, of its gates, its wall, the
foundations of its wall, and also its dimensions contains a spiritual
sense, for whatever relates to the church is spiritual. What these
things signify has been shown in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 896-925);
therefore further explanation would be superfluous. It is sufficient to
know from this that there is a spiritual sense in every particular of
the above description, like the soul in the body, and without that sense
nothing relating to the church could be seen in what is there written;
as, that the city was of pure gold, its gates of pearls, its wall of
jasper, the foundations of the wall of precious stones; that the wall
was one hundred and forty-four cubits, which is the measure of a man,
that is, of an angel; that the city was twelve thousand furlongs in
length, breadth, and height; and so on. But all this is understood by
anyone who from a knowledge of correspondences is acquainted with the
spiritual sense; as, that the wall and its foundations signify the
doctrinals of that church drawn from the sense of the letter of the
Word; also that the numbers twelve, one hundred and forty-four, and
twelve thousand, signify all things of the church, that is, its truths
and goods in one complex.

<span class="margnote"><span id="198.">198.</span></span>

Where the Lord talks to His disciples about the end of the age, that is,
the last time of the church, He says, at the close of His predictions
respecting its successive changes of state: Immediately after the
tribulation of those days the sun shall be darkened, the moon shall not
give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of
the heavens shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son
of man in heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth wail, and
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory. And He shall send forth the angels with a great sound
of a trumpet, and they shall gather together His elect from the four
winds, from the end of the heavens even to the end thereof (Matt.
24:29-31). When understood spiritually this does not mean that the sun
and moon would be darkened, that the stars would fall from heaven, and
that the sign of the Lord was to appear in the heavens, and that they
were to see Him in the clouds, and also angels with trumpets; but by
each particular word here something spiritual pertaining to the church
is meant, the state of the church at its end being here treated of. For
in the spiritual sense "the sun" that shall be darkened means love to
the Lord; "the moon" that shall not give her light means faith in the
Lord; "the stars" that shall fall from heaven mean knowledges of what is
true and good; "the sign of the Son of man in heaven" means the
appearing of Divine truth in the Word from Him; that "the tribes of the
earth shall wail" means a failing of all truth pertaining to faith, and
of all good pertaining to love; "the coming of the Son of man in the
clouds of heaven with power and glory" means the Lord's presence in the
Word and revelation; "the clouds of heaven" signify the sense of the
letter of the Word, and "glory" signifies its spiritual sense; "angels
with the great sound of a trumpet" mean heaven from whence comes Divine
truth; "the gathering together of the elect from the four winds, from
the end of the heavens even to the end thereof" means a new heaven and a
new church formed of those who have faith in the Lord and who live
according to His commandments. That this does not mean the darkening of
the sun and moon and the falling of the stars to the earth, is very
clear from like statements in the prophets respecting the state of the
church, when the Lord was about to come into the world; as in Isaiah:
Behold the day of Jehovah shall come, cruel and of the burning of anger.
The stars of the heavens and the constellations thereof shall not give
their light; the sun shall be darkened in its rising, and the moon shall
not make its light to shine. I will visit malice upon the world
(13:9-11; 24:21, 23). In Joel: The day of Jehovah cometh, a day of
darkness and of thick darkness; the sun and moon shall be blackened, and
the stars shall withdraw their shining (2:1, 2, 10; 3:15). In Ezekiel: I
will cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover
the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not make her light to shine.
All the luminaries of light will I make dark, and I will set darkness
upon the land (32:7, 8). By "the day of Jehovah" the coming of the Lord
is meant, which took place when there no longer remained in the church
any good of love or truth of faith, or any knowledge of the Lord;
therefore it is called "a day of darkness and of thick darkness."

<span class="margnote"><span id="199.">199.</span></span>

That the Lord when in the world spoke by correspondences, that is, when
He spoke naturally He also spoke spiritually, can be seen from His
parables, in each word of which there is a spiritual meaning. Take for
example the parable of the ten virgins. He said: The kingdom of heaven
is like ten virgins, who took their lamps and went forth to meet the
bridegroom. Five of them were wise, but five were foolish. They that
were foolish taking their lamps took no oil; but the wise took oil in
their lamps. While the bridegroom tarried they all slumbered and slept.
But at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go
ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their
lamps. But the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil for our
lamps are going out. But the wise answered saying Peradventure, there
will not be enough for us and you; go ye rather to them that sell, and
buy for yourselves. But while they went away to buy, the bridegroom
came, and they that were ready went in with Him to the wedding, and the
door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying Lord, Lord,
open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you
not (Matt. 25:1-12). That in all these particulars there is a spiritual
sense and therefore a Divine holiness, no one sees except he who knows
that the Word has a spiritual sense and who knows what that sense is. In
the spiritual sense "the kingdom of the heavens" means heaven and the
church; "the bridegroom" means the Lord; "the wedding" means the
marriage of the Lord with heaven and the church, through good of love
and truth of faith; "the virgins" mean those who constitute the church;
"ten" means all; "five" some portion; "lamps" things pertaining to
faith; "oil" things pertaining to good of love; "to sleep" and "to
arise" means man's life in the world which is natural, and his life
after death which is spiritual; "to buy" means to procure for oneself;
"going to those who sell and buying oil" means to procure for oneself
good of love from others after death; and because good of love is then
no longer to be procured, although they came to the door where the
wedding feast was with their lamps and the oil they had bought, still
the bridegroom said to them, "I know you not;" this is because man,
after his life in the world, remains such as he had lived in the world.
From all this it is clear that the Lord spoke solely by correspondences,
and this because He spoke from the Divine that was in Him and was His.
As "virgins" signify those who constitute the church, so the terms
virgin and daughter of Zion, of Jerusalem, of Judah, and of Israel, are
frequently used in the prophetic Word. And because "oil" signifies good
of love, all the sacred things of the church were anointed with oil. It
is the same with the other parables, and with all the words spoken by
the Lord. This is why the Lord says that His words are spirit and are
life (John 6:63).

<span class="margnote"><span id="200.">200.</span></span>

\(3\) It is because of its Spiritual Sense that the Word is Divinely
inspired, and holy in every word. In the church it is said that the Word
is holy for the reason that Jehovah the Lord spoke it; but inasmuch as
its holiness is not apparent in the mere sense of the letter, whoever is
once led on that account to doubt its holiness confirms his doubts when
he subsequently reads the Word by many things therein; for he says to
himself, Can this be holy? Can this be Divine? Lest, therefore, such
thoughts should enter the minds of many, and afterwards grow stronger,
and in consequence the Word should be rejected as a worthless writing,
and by this means the conjunction of the Lord with man be destroyed, it
has pleased the Lord to reveal now its spiritual sense, that it may be
known where in the Word the Divine holiness lies concealed. But let
examples illustrate. The Word treats sometimes of Egypt, sometimes of
Assyria, and again of Edom, of Moab, of the sons of Ammon, of the
Philistines, of Tyre and Sidon, and of Gog. He who does not know that
these names signify things pertaining to heaven and the church may be
led into the error that the Word has much to say about peoples and
nations and but little about heaven and the church, thus much about
worldly things and but little about heavenly things. But when he knows
what those nations and their names signify he may be led back from error
to the truth. \[2\] Likewise when he sees that gardens, groves, forests,
and their trees, as the olive, the vine, the cedar, the poplar, the oak,
are so frequently mentioned in the Word, also the lamb, the sheep, the
goat, the calf, the ox; also mountains, hills, and valleys, and their
fountains, rivers, and waters, and many other such things, one who knows
nothing about the spiritual sense of the Word cannot but believe that
these objects alone are meant; for he does not know that "a garden," "a
grove," and "a forest," mean wisdom, intelligence and knowledge; that
"the olive," "the vine," "the cedar," "the poplar," and "the oak," mean
the good and truth of the church, celestial, spiritual, rational,
natural, and sensual; that "a lamb," "a sheep," "a goat," "a calf," and
"an ox," mean innocence, charity, and natural affection; and that
"mountains," "hills," and "valleys," mean the higher, the lower, and the
lowest things of the church. \[3\] Also be does not know that "Egypt"
signifies the scientific, "Assyria" the rational, "Edom" the natural,
"Moab" the adulteration of good, "the sons of Ammon" the adulteration of
truth, "the Philistines" faith separate from charity, "Tyre and Sidon"
knowledges of good and truth, and "Gog" external worship apart from
internal. In general "Jacob" means in the Word the natural church,
"Israel" the spiritual church, and "Judah" the celestial church. When
man knows all this he is able to see that the Word treats of nothing but
heavenly things, and that these worldly things are merely the subjects
which contain the heavenly. Let this be illustrated by an example from
the Word. \[4\] We read in Isaiah: In that day shall there be a highway
out of Egypt to Assyria, that Assyria may come into Egypt and Egypt into
Assyria, and the Egyptians may serve with the Assyrians. In that day
shall Israel be a third to Egypt and to Assyria, a blessing in the midst
of the land; whom Jehovah of Hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be My
people Egypt, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel Mine
inheritance (19:23-25). In the spiritual sense this means that at the
time of the Lord's coming the scientific, the rational and the spiritual
will make one, and that the scientific will then serve the rational, and
both the spiritual; for, as said before, "Egypt" signifies the
scientific, "Assyria" the rational, and "Israel" the spiritual. "That
day" twice mentioned, means the first and the second coming of the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 201-250](tcr05)
