[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tcr17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930985/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*True Christian Religion*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1771\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1906\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### True Christian Religion

<span class="margnote"><span id="851.">851.</span></span>

I foresee that many who read the Memorable Relations annexed to the
chapters in this work will believe them to be inventions of the
imagination. But I affirm in truth that they are not inventions, but
were truly seen and heard; not seen and heard in any sleeping state of
mind, but in a state of full wakefulness. For it has pleased the Lord to
manifest Himself to me, and to send me to teach those things which will
belong to His New Church, which is meant by "the New Jerusalem" in the
Apocalypse. For this purpose He has opened the interiors of my mind or
spirit, whereby I have been permitted to be in the spiritual world with
angels, and at the same time in the natural world with men, and this now
during twenty-seven years. Who in the Christian world could have known
anything about Heaven and Hell, had it not pleased the Lord to open the
sight of someone's spirit, and show and teach him? That such things as
are described in the Memorable Relations do appear in the heavens is
made clear by the like things seen and described by John in the
Apocalypse, also in the Word of the Old Testament by the prophets. \[2\]
In the Apocalypse are the following: John saw the Son of man in the
midst of the seven candlesticks; he saw in heaven the tabernacle, the
temple, the ark, and the altar; he saw a book sealed with seven seals;
he saw this opened, and horses going out of it; he saw four animals
round about the throne; twelve thousand chosen out of each tribe;
locusts ascending from the abyss a woman bringing forth a male child,
and fleeing into the desert on account of the dragon; two beasts, one
going up out of the sea and the other out of the earth; an angel flying
in the midst of heaven having an eternal Gospel; a sea of glass mingled
with fire; seven angels having the seven last plagues; bowls poured out
by them on the earth, the sea, the rivers, the sun, the throne of the
beast, the Euphrates, and the air; a woman sitting on a scarlet beast;
the dragon cast into a lake of fire and brimstone; a white horse; a
great supper; a new heaven and a new earth; the holy Jerusalem coming
down out of heaven, the gates, walls, and foundations of which he
describes; also the river of the water of life, and trees of life
bearing fruit every month; with many other things, all of which were
seen by John, and seen when as to his spirit he was in the spiritual
world and in heaven. Add what was seen by the apostles after the Lord's
resurrection, and later by Peter (Acts 11), and what was seen and heard
by Paul; and still further what was seen by the prophets in the Old
Testament, as by Ezekiel, That he saw four living creatures, which were
cherubs (Ezek. 1 and 10). A new temple and a new earth, and an angel
measuring them (40-48). He was carried away to Jerusalem and saw the
abominations there, and also into Chaldea (8 and 11). \[3\] With
Zechariah like things occurred: He saw a man riding among myrtle trees
(Zech. 1:8-11). He saw four horns; and afterward a man with a measuring
line in his hand (1 and 2). He saw a flying roll and an ephah (5:1, 6).
He saw four chariots between two mountains, and horses (6:1-8). Likewise
with Daniel: He saw four beasts coming up out of the sea (Dan. 7:1-8).
He saw the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, whose dominion
shall not pass away, and whose kingdom shall not be destroyed (7:13,
14). He saw the battles between the ram and the he-goat (8:1-27). He saw
the angel Gabriel, and he talked with him (9). The servant of Elisha saw
chariots and horses of fire round about Elisha, and saw them when his
eyes were opened (2 Kings 6:17). From these and many other passages in
the Word it is evident that those things which exist in the spiritual
world have appeared to many, both before and since the Lord's coming.
What marvel, then, that they should be seen now also, when a New Church
is commencing, or when the New Jerusalem is descending from heaven? A
THEOREM PROPOSED BY A CERTAIN DUKE, AN ELECTOR IN GERMANY, WHO ALSO
ENJOYED THE HIGHEST ECCLESIASTICAL DIGNITY. I once saw in the spiritual
world a certain duke, an elector in Germany, who also enjoyed the
highest ecclesiastical dignity, and near him two bishops and two
ministers, and from a distance I heard their conversation. The electoral
duke asked the four bystanders whether they knew what constitutes the
head of religion in Christendom. The bishops replied, "The head of
religion in Christendom is faith alone justifying and saving." Again he
asked, "Do you know what lies concealed within that faith? Open it, look
into it, and tell me." They replied, "That there was nothing concealed
within it but the merit and righteousness of the Lord the Savior." To
this the electoral duke answered, "Is there not concealed in it, then,
the Lord the Savior in His Human, in which He is called Jesus Christ,
because He alone in His Human is Righteousness?" To this they replied,
"That certainly and inseparably follows." The electoral duke persisted,
saying, "Open that faith, look into it further, examine it well, and see
whether there is not something else in it." And the ministers said, "The
grace of God the Father is also concealed in it." To this the electoral
duke answered, "Obtain a right conception and perception of the subject,
and you will see that it is the Son's grace with the Father, for the Son
begs and intercedes. Therefore I say to you, since you confess, revere,
and kiss that faith alone of yours, you ought by all means to confess,
revere, and kiss the Lord the Savior in His Human alone; for, as just
said, He in His Human was and is Righteousness. That in this Human He is
also Jehovah and God I saw in the Sacred Writings from the following
passages: Behold, the days will come, when I will raise unto David a
righteous Branch, and He shall reign as a King and prosper; and this is
His name whereby He shall be called, Jehovah our Righteousness (Jer.
23:5, 6; 33:15, 16). In Paul: In Jesus Christ dwelleth all the fullness
of Deity bodily (Col. 2:9). And in John: Jesus Christ is the true God
and eternal life (1 Epistle 5:20). Wherefore He is also called: The God
of faith (Phil. 3:9). INDEX TO THE MEMORABLE RELATIONS \[This is the
Author's Index. The figures refer to the numbered paragraphs\] I. I
heard certain new-comers in the spiritual world talking together about
three Divine persons from eternity; and then a certain one who in the
world had been a primate opened the ideas of his thought respecting that
mystery, saying that it had been and still was his opinion that the
three sit upon high thrones in heaven, God the Father upon a throne of
the finest gold, with a scepter in His hand; God the Son at His right
hand, upon a throne of the purest silver with a crown on His head; and
God the Holy Spirit upon a throne of shining crystal, holding in His
hand a dove, in the form of which He appeared when Christ was baptized,
with lamps hanging around about them in triple order, glittering with
precious stones; while at a distance innumerable angels were standing in
a circle, worshiping and singing praises. He also spoke of the Holy
Spirit, how He introduces faith, purifies and justifies. He said that
many of his order favored his ideas, and he trusted that I also as a
layman gave them credit. But as an opportunity to speak was then given
me, I said that from my childhood I have cherished the idea that God is
one. I therefore explained to him what the trinity involves, and what is
signified by throne, scepter, and crown, where these in the Word are
ascribed with God. To this I added that all who believe in three Divine
persons from eternity must necessarily believe in three Gods; and,
furthermore, that the Divine essence cannot be divided (n. 16). II. A
discourse of the angels about God,-that His Divine is the Divine Being
(Esse) in itself, and not from itself; and that it is One, the Same, the
Itself, and Indivisible; also that God is not in place, but is present
with those who are in place; and that His Divine love appears to the
angels as a sun, the heat from it being in its essence love, and the
light therefrom in its essence wisdom (n. 25). That the proceeding
Divine attributes which are creation, redemption, and regeneration, are
attributes of one God, and not of three (n. 26). III. Perceiving that
avast multitude of men are in the persuasion that all things belong to
nature, and consequently that nature is the creator of the universe, in
a certain gymnasium where there were persons of this kind I spoke with a
certain gifted man respecting these three things: (1) Whether nature is
a property of life, or life of nature; (2) Whether the center is from
the expanse, or the expanse is from the center; (3) Respecting the
center and the expanse of nature and of life; that the center of nature
is the sun of the natural world, and the expanse itself of that center
is its world; and that the center of life is the sun of the spiritual
world, and the expanse itself of that center is its world. These
propositions were discussed on both sides, and lastly it was shown what
the truth is (n. 35) 5) IV. I was conducted to a kind of theater of
wisdom where angelic spirits from the four quarters were assembled with
an injunction from heaven to discuss three arcana: (1) What is the image
of God, and what is the likeness of God. (2) Why is not man born into
the knowledge proper to any love, when even the beasts and the birds are
born into the knowledge proper to all their loves. (3) What do the tree
of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil signify. And
further, they were to unite the answers to these three in one opinion,
and refer this to the angels of heaven; this was done, the opinion was
referred, and was accepted by the angels (n. 48). V. From evil spirits
who were just above hell a sound was heard like the roaring of the sea;
which was from a tumult that arose among them from their hearing it said
above them that the Almighty God had bound Himself to order. A certain
one ascending therefrom, addressed me sharply on the matter, saying that
as God is omnipotent He is not bound to any order. And on being
questioned about order, I said: (1) God is Order itself. (2) He created
man from order, in order, and for order. (3) He created man's rational
mind in accordance with the order of the spiritual world, and his body
in accordance with the order of the natural world. (4) Therefore it is a
law of order that man from his little spiritual world or little heaven
should govern his little cosmos or little natural world, just as God
from His great heaven or spiritual world governs His great cosmos or
natural world. (5) Many other laws of order flow forth from these, some
of which are recited. What afterward befell those spirits is described
(n. 71). VI. Concerning the reasoning between certain Dutch and British
in the spiritual world on the subject of imputation and predestination;
on the one side, why God, since He is omnipotent, does not impute the
righteousness of His Son to every man, and thus make them redeemed, for
being omnipotent, He is able to make all the satans of hell angels of
heaven; and even, if it be His good pleasure, He can make Lucifer, the
dragon, and all the goats, to be archangels; and what is needed for this
but a little word? On the other side, that God is Order itself, and that
He can do nothing contrary to the laws of His order; because to act
contrary to them would be to act contrary to Himself. Also much beside,
about which they contended on this subject (n. 72). VII. I afterward
spoke with others who had believed in predestination, deducing it from
God's absolute power or omnipotence; saying that otherwise God would
have less power than a king in the world who is a despot, and who can as
easily change the laws of justice as he can turn his hands, and can act
without restriction, like Octavius Augustus and also like Nero. To which
it was answered, that God created the world and each and all things
thereof, from Himself as Order, and thus impressed order upon them; also
that the laws of His order are just as many as are the truths in the
Word. Some of the laws of order were then recited, - what they are, and
the nature of them, on God's part, and also on man's part. These cannot
be changed, because God is Order itself: and man was created an image of
His order (n. 73). VIII. I spoke with clergymen and laymen who had
gathered together, concerning the Divine omnipotence; and they said that
omnipotence is unlimited, and that limited omnipotence is a
contradiction. To this it was answered, that there is no contradiction
in acting omnipotently according to laws of justice with judgment. It is
said in David that "Justice and judgment are the support of God's
throne" (Ps. 89:14); and that there is no contradiction in acting
omnipotently according to the laws of love and wisdom; but there is a
contradiction in God's being able to act contrary to the laws of justice
and love; which would be to act from what is not judgment and wisdom;
and such contradiction is implied in the faith of the church of the
present day, which is that God is able to make an unjust man just, and
endow the impious with all the gifts of salvation and the rewards of
life. With much more concerning this faith and concerning omnipotence
(n. 74). IX. When I was once meditating upon the creation of the
universe by God, I was led in the spirit to certain wise ones who at
first complained of the ideas they had acquired in the world which
related to the creation of the universe out of chaos, and creation out
of nothing; because these ideas obscure meditation upon the creation of
the universe by God, and degrade and pervert it. Therefore when asked
for my opinion, I replied that it is idle to try to form any but a
speculative conclusion about the creation of the universe, unless it is
known that there are two worlds, the spiritual and the natural, and that
in each of these is a sun; and that the sun of the spiritual world, in
the midst of which is God, is nothing but love, and that from it are all
spiritual things, which in themselves are substantial; while the sun of
the natural world is nothing but fire, and from it are all natural
things, which in themselves are material. From these knowledges it can
be concluded in regard to the creation of the universe, that it is from
God, and how. This was also slightly traced out (n. 76). X. Some satans
of hell desired to talk with the angels of heaven, for the purpose of
convincing them that all things are from nature, and that God is a mere
word unless nature is meant. They were permitted to ascend. Then certain
angels descended from heaven into the world of spirits to hear them.
When the satans saw the angels they ran up to them furiously and said,
"You are called angels because you believe that there is a God, and that
nature is relatively nothing; this you believe although it is contrary
to every sense; for which of your five senses has a sensation of
anything but nature?" After these and many other bitter words, the
angels called to the remembrance of the satans that they were then
living after death, although formerly they had not even believed that
they would so live; and then they caused them to see the beautiful and
splendid things of heaven, and told them that these were there because
all there believe in God; and afterward they caused them to see the vile
and filthy things of hell, and told them that these were there because
those there believe in nature. From seeing these things the satans were
at first convinced that there is a God and that He created nature; but
as they descended, the love of evil returned and closed their
understanding from above; and when this was closed they believed as
before, that all things are of nature, and nothing of God (n. 77). XI. A
type of the creation of the universe was shown me in a living way, by
angels. I was conducted into heaven; and it was granted me to see there
all things of the animal kingdom, of the vegetable kingdom, and of the
mineral kingdom, which were in every respect like the objects of those
three kingdoms in the natural world. And then they said, All these
things in heaven are created in a moment by God, and they continue to
exist as long as the angels are interiorly as to their thought in a
state of love and faith; and this instantaneous creation furnishes a
clear proof of the creation of similar things, and even a similar
creation, in the natural world, with the sole difference that natural
things invest spiritual things, and that this clothing was provided by
God for the sake of generations one from another, by which creation is
perpetuated. Consequently, the creation of the universe was effected in
a way similar to that in which it is effected every moment in heaven.
Nevertheless, all the noxious and hideous things in the three kingdoms
of nature (which are enumerated), were not created by God, but sprang up
along with hell (n. 78). XII. In a conversation relating to the creation
of the universe, with some who when in the world had been celebrated for
learning, these spoke from the same ideas that they had formerly
entertained. One of them said that nature created itself; another, that
nature gathered its elements into vortices, and that by the collision of
these the earth was formed; and a third that the origin of all things
was chaos which in extent had equalled a great part of the universe; and
that first there burst forth therefrom the purest elements, of which the
sun and stars were formed; and afterwards those less pure, of which the
atmospheres were formed; and at last the grosser matters, of which the
terraqueous globe was formed. To the question, "What was the origin of
human souls?" they answered, that the ether gathered itself into little
individual globules, and that these infuse themselves into those who are
about to be born, and make their souls; and that after death these
globules fly away to their former company in the ether, and afterward
return into others according to the doctrine of metempsychosis of the
ancients. After this a certain priest, by solid arguments in favor of
the creation of the universe by God showed all the things which they had
said to be an absurd medley, and put them to shame. But still they held
to their former delusions (n. 79). XIII. A conversation with a certain
satan about God, and the angelic heaven, and religion; who, not knowing
that he was not still in the former world, declared that God is the
universe, and that the angelic heaven is the atmospheric firmament, and
that religion is nothing but a bewitchment of the common people, besides
other follies. But when it was brought to his remembrance that he was
then living after death, and that he formerly did not believe in that
life, for the moment he confessed that he was insane; but as soon as he
turned and went away he was as insane as before (n. 80). XIV. I saw by
night an ignis fatuus, often called a dragon, falling toward the earth.
I noticed the place where it fell; the ground there was sulphurous,
mixed with iron dust. And looking there in the morning, I saw two tents;
and just then a spirit fell from heaven. I went to him and asked why he
had fallen down from heaven. He replied that he was cast down by the
angels of Michael, for saying that God the Father and His Son are two,
and not one. He also said that the whole angelic heaven believes that
God the Father and His Son are one, as soul and body are one, and that
they prove this by many things from the Word and still further from the
reason, that the soul of a son is from the father only, and that this is
a likeness of the father and from it the likeness is in the body. And he
added that he indeed had confessed in heaven, as before on earth, that
God is one; but because the confession of the mouth and the thought of
the mind disagreed in regard to this, they said in heaven that he did
not believe in any God, because the confession and the thought dissipate
each other; and he said that this was the cause of his being cast down.
Returning the next day to the same place, instead of the two tents I saw
two statues composed of the same sort of dust, which was a mixture of
sulphur and iron. One of these represented the faith and the other the
charity of the church of the present day, both beautifully clothed; but
the garments were induced by fantasies. And because they were made of
dust, when the rain descended from heaven both of them began to
effervesce and burn (n. 110). XV. In the spiritual world it is unlawful
to say anything except what one thinks; if he does, the hypocrisy is
distinctly manifest to the ear. In hell, therefore, no one can utter the
name Jesus, because Jesus signifies salvation. In this way an experiment
was made to ascertain how many in the Christian world at this day
believe that Christ even as to His Human is God. Therefore, when many of
the clergy and laity were assembled, it was proposed that they say
"Divine Human;" but there were scarcely any who were able to draw forth
from the thought these two words at once, and so to utter them. It was
proved in their presence by many things out of the Word, that the Lord
even as to His Human is God as by the following: (Matt. 28:18; John 1:1,
2, 14; 17:2; Col. 2:9; 1 John 5:20; and in other places also); still
they were not able to utter the words Divine Human,- and, what seemed
surprising, neither were the Evangelicals able to do this, although
their orthodoxy teaches that in Christ God is Man and Man is God; and
still more, neither could the monks, although they most devoutly adore
the Body of Christ in the Eucharist. From all this it was ascertained
that Christians at the present day for the most part are interiorly
either Arians or Socinians; and that these, if they adore Christ as God,
are hypocrites (n. 111). XVI. An altercation about a little book
entitled, A Brief Exposition of the Doctrine of the New Church,
published by me at Amsterdam; and especially about this doctrine in it,
that not God the Father, but the Lord God the Redeemer is to be
approached and worshiped. It was argued that on the other hand it is
said in the Lord's Prayer, "Our Father, Who art in the heavens, hallowed
be Thy name: Thy kingdom come," And that consequently it is God the
Father who is to be approached. I was summoned to end this strife; and I
then showed that God the Father cannot be approached in His Divine, but
only in His Human; and as the Divine and Human in Him are one Person,
that the Lord is that Father. This also was proved by the Word; both by
the Word of the Old Testament, where the Son of God is called Father of
Eternity, and in many places called Jehovah the Redeemer, Jehovah our
Righteousness, and the God of Israel, and from many passages in the Word
of the New Testament; consequently when the Lord the Redeemer is
approached, the Father is approached; and then His name is hallowed, and
His kingdom comes. With much beside (n. 112). XVII. I saw an army on red
and black horses, with the faces of all the riders turned to the horses'
tails, and with the hinder part of the head turned towards the horses'
heads; they were crying out for battle against those who were riding on
white horses. This ludicrous army was from the place called Armageddon
(Apoc. 16:16), and consisted of those who in youth had become imbued
with the dogmas relating to justification by faith alone, but who
afterwards, when they had been promoted to prominent offices, had
rejected all things pertaining to faith and religion from the internals
of their minds to the externals of their bodies, where at last they
disappeared. A description of those who were seen in Armageddon; and it
was heard that they wished to meet and contend with the angels of
Michael; which was permitted, although at some distance from that place.
The contention was about the meaning of these words in the Lord's
Prayer; "Our Father, Who art in the heavens, hallowed be Thy name; Thy
kingdom come." It was then said by the angels of Michael that the Lord
the Redeemer and Saviour is Father to all in the heavens; since He
taught, that the Father and He are one; that the Father is in Him, and
He in the Father; and that he that sees Him sees the Father: that all
things of the Father are in Him; also that it is the will of the Father
that men should believe in the Son, and that those who believe not the
Son shall not see life, but that the wrath of God will abide on them;
also, that He has all power in heaven and on earth; and that He has
power over all flesh; and moreover, that no one has seen or can see God
the Father, except the Son only who is in the bosom of the Father; and
more besides. After this combat, some of the vanquished Armageddons were
cast into the abyss mentioned in Apoc. 9, and some of them were banished
into a desert (n. 113). XVIII. I was in a temple in which there were no
windows, but a large opening in the roof, and those assembled there were
conferring about Redemption, saying unanimously that redemption was
wrought by the passion of the cross. But while they were engaged in that
conversation, a black cloud covered the opening in the roof, and because
of this it became dark in the temple; but a little after that cloud was
dispelled by angels descending from heaven, who then sent down one of
their number into the temple to instruct them about redemption. He said
that the passion of the cross was not redemption, but redemption was the
subjugation of the hells, the restoration of order in the heavens, and
thus the restitution of all things which were in disorder both in the
spiritual world and in the natural world, and that without it no flesh
could have been saved. And of the passion of the cross he said, that by
it was completed the inmost union with the Father; and that when it is
taken for redemption many things unworthy of God, and even unfit to be
spoken, follow as consequences; as that He passed sentence of damnation
upon the whole human race, and that the Son took that damnation upon
Himself, and that thus He propitiated the Father, and by intercession
brought Him back to His Divine essence, which is love and mercy; besides
many other things, which it is scandalous to attribute to God (n. 134).
XIX. The sun of the spiritual world was seen, wherein is Jehovah God in
His Human. Presently there was heard from heaven, that God is One. But
when this descended into the world of spirits it was changed according
to the forms of the minds there, and finally into the expression three
Gods. This was confirmed by one there by this reasoning: that there is
one who created all things, another who redeemed all, and a third who
operates all things; also that there is one who imputes, another who
mediates, and a third who inscribes, and thus implants faith in man, by
which He justifies him. But because the belief in three Gods had
perverted the whole Christian church, from a perception granted me I
disclosed to them what, with the one God, is meant by mediation,
intercession, propitiation, and expiation; namely, that these four are
attributes of the Human of Jehovah God; that because Jehovah God without
the Human cannot approach man, nor be approached by man, mediation means
that the Human is the intermediary; that intercession means that it
mediates perpetually; that propitiation means that an approach is
mercifully opened for every man to God; and that expiation means that
this is also for sinners; and all these through the Human (n. 135). XX.
I entered a gymnasium, where they were discussing what is meant where it
is said of the Son of God, that He sits at the right hand of the Father.
Concerning this there were various opinions; yet it was the opinion of
all that the Son actually sits thus; but they were discussing why it was
so. Some supposed that it was done on account of redemption; some that
it was from love; some, that He might be a counselor; some, that He
might have honor from the angels; some, because it was given Him to
reign instead of the Father; some, that His right ear may hear those for
whom He intercedes. They further discussed whether it was the Son of God
from eternity who sits thus, or the Son of God born in the world. Having
heard these things, I raised my hand, requesting that I might be
permitted to say something, and to tell what is meant by sitting at the
right hand of God. I said that it is the omnipotence of God, by means of
the Human which He assumed that is meant; for by means of this He
wrought redemption, that is, subjugated the hells, created a new angelic
heaven, and established a new church. That this is meant by sitting at
the right hand, I proved from the Word, in which "the right hand"
signifies power; and afterwards it was confirmed from heaven, by the
appearance of a right hand over them, from the power of which and the
terror therefrom they all became almost lifeless (n. 136). XXI. I was
conducted in the spiritual world to a certain synod at which were
assembled celebrated persons who lived before the Nicene council, and
who were called Apostolic Fathers; also men renowned in the ages after
that council; and I saw that some of the latter appeared with beardless
chins, and in curled wigs of women's hair; but all the former with
bearded chin, and in natural hair. In front of them stood a man, a judge
and critic of the writings of the present century, who began by a kind
of lamentation, saying, "A man from the laity has risen up, who has
dragged down our faith out of its sanctuary, which yet is a star shining
day and night before us; but this is done because that man is blind to
the mysteries of that faith, and does not see in it the righteousness of
Christ, and thus not the wonders of its justification; and yet that
faith is a faith in three Divine persons, and thus in the whole Deity;
and because He has transferred his faith to the second Person, and not
even to Him, but to His Human, it cannot be otherwise than that
naturalism should flow from it." Those who lived after the Nicene
council favored his speech, saying, that it is impossible that there
should be any other faith, or from any other source. But the Apostolic
Fathers, who had lived before that age, being indignant, related many
things which are said in heaven respecting the Nicene and Athanasian
faith, which may be seen \[in the text\]. But because the president of
the council was affiliated in spirit with that writer in Leipsic, I
addressed him, and showed from the Word that Christ, even as to the
Human, is God; and also from the dogmatic book of the Evangelicals
called Formula Concordiae, "That in Christ God is Man, and Man God;" as
also that the Augsburg Confession especially approves of the worship of
Christ; besides other things; at which he was silent, and turned away.
Afterwards I spoke with a certain spirit who was affiliated with an
eminent man in Gottenburg, who defiled the worship of the Lord with a
still greater reproach. But at length both of these slanders were
declared to be lies craftily invented to turn away men's wills and deter
them from the holy worship of the Lord (n. 137). XXII. There appeared a
smoke ascending from the lower earth, and it was said that smokes are
nothing else than falsities collected together. And then certain angels
were seized with a desire to ascertain what the falsities were that thus
smoked; and they descended, and found four crowds of spirits, two of
which were of the learned and unlearned of the clergy, and two of the
learned and unlearned of the laity, who were all proving to each other
that an invisible God is to be worshiped, and that the worshipers then
secure holiness and a hearing. It is otherwise when a visible God is
worshiped. Holiness and a hearing from an invisible God they proved by
various things; for which reason they acknowledge three Gods from
eternity, who are invisible. But it was shown that the worship of an
invisible God, and still more of three invisible ones, is no worship. To
confirm this, Socinus and Arius with some of their followers, all of
whom had worshiped an invisible Divinity, were brought forth from below;
and when these spoke from the natural or external mind, they said that
there is a God, although He is invisible; but when their external mind
was closed, and the internal mind was opened, and from that mind they
were compelled to avow their belief respecting God, they said, "What is
God? We have neither seen His shape, nor heard His voice. What then is
God, but a figment of reason or nature?" But they were taught that it
had pleased God to descend and assume the Human, that they might see His
shape and hear His voice. But this was said to them in vain (n. 159).
XXIII. First concerning the stars in the natural world; that perhaps
they were of the same number as the angelic societies in heaven, since
every society there sometimes shines like a star. Afterwards, I spoke
with the angels about a certain way that appears crowded with
innumerable spirits, that it is the way by which all who depart out of
the natural world pass into the spiritual world. I went in company with
angels towards that way, and we called from that way twelve men, and
asked them what they believed about heaven and hell and a life after
death. And because they were recently from the world, and did not know
but what they were still in the natural world, they answered from the
idea which they brought with them The First. That all who live a moral
life go to heaven; and as all do live a moral life no one goes to hell.
The Second, That God rules heaven, and the devil rules hell; and because
they are opposite, one calls good what the other calls evil; and that
the man who is a dissembler, because he sides with both, can live
equally under the dominion of the one and of the other. The Third, That
there is no heaven, and no hell. "Who has come thence and told us?" The
Fourth, That no one is able to come back and tell, because man, when he
dies, is either a ghost or a wind. The Fifth, That we must wait till the
day of the last judgment, and then it will be told, and you will know
all about it. But when he said this he laughed in his heart. The Sixth,
"How can the soul of man, which is only a wind, re-enter its body that
has been eaten up by worms, or be clothed with a skeleton that has
either been dried up or has crumbled into dust? "The Seventh, That men
can no more live after death than beasts and birds, are not these
equally rational? The Eighth, "I believe that there is a heaven, but I
do not believe that there is a hell, because God is omnipotent, and is
able to save all. "The Ninth, That God, because He is gracious, cannot
send any one into eternal fire. The Tenth, That no one can go to hell,
because God sent His Son, who has made expiation for all, and taken away
the sins of all. What can the devil do against that? The Eleventh, who
was a priest, That those only are saved, who have attained to faith, and
that election is according to the will of the Almighty. The Twelfth, who
was a politician, "I do not say anything about heaven and hell; but let
the priests preach about them, that the minds of the common people may
be kept bound by an invisible bond to the laws and rulers." On hearing
these things the angels were astonished; but they waked up the twelve by
teaching them that they were already living after death; and they
conducted them into heaven, but they did not stay there long, because.
it was found that they were merely natural, and that from this the
hinder part of their heads was hollow; concerning which hollowness and
the cause of it, something is lastly said (n. 160). XXIV. There was
heard a noise like that of a mill, and following the noise I saw a house
full of chinks, to which there was an entrance opening under ground, and
in it a man collecting from the Word and books many things concerning
justification by faith alone; and at his side copyists were writing his
collections upon paper; and when asked what he was now collecting, he
said, "This, that God the Father ceased to be gracious towards the human
race, and that He therefore sent the Son to make expiation and
propitiation. "To which I answered, that it is contrary to Scripture and
contrary to reason, that God could fail of grace, for this would be also
failing of His essence, and thus He would not be God. And when I
demonstrated this even to conviction, he grew warm, and ordered his
copyists to cast me out. But when I had gone out of my own accord, he
threw after me a book that he happened to lay hand upon; and that book
was the Word (n. 161). XXV. There was a discussion among spirits whether
one can see any genuine truth in the Word unless he goes immediately to
the Lord who is the Word itself. But as some objected to this an
experiment was made; and therein those who went to God the Father, did
not see any truth; but all who went to the Lord saw. During this
discussion some spirits ascended from the abyss (see Apoc. 9), where
they discuss the mysteries of justification by faith alone, saying that
they go to God the Father and see their mysteries in clear light. But it
was answered that they see them in fatuous light, and that they have not
even a single truth; at which, being nettled, they brought forth from
the Word many things which were true; but they were told that while
these were true in themselves, they were falsified in them. That this
was so, was proved by their being led into a house where there was a
table upon which light from heaven flowed directly; and they were told
to write those truths which they had brought forth from the Word upon
paper, and lay it upon that table; and when this was done, the paper on
which the truths had been written shone like a star; but when they came
up and fixed their gaze upon it, the paper appeared blackened as if by
soot. Afterwards they were led to another similar table, upon which lay
the Word encircled with a rainbow; and when a certain champion of the
doctrine of faith alone touched this with his hand there was an
explosion as if from a gun, and he was cast into a corner of the room,
and lay as (lead for half an hour. From all this they were convinced
that all the truths that they had from the Word were true in themselves
but falsified in them (n. 162). XXVI. There are climates in the
spiritual world, as in the natural world; thus also there are northern
zones where are snow and ice. On one occasion, being brought thither in
spirit, I entered a temple then covered over with snow, illuminated
within by lamps, and behind the altar there was seen a tablet, upon
which was written this, The Divine Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, who are essentially one, but personally three. And I heard a
priest preaching about four mysteries of faith respecting which the
understanding is to be kept under obedience to faith, which may be seen
\[in the text\]. After the discourse, the hearers thanked the priest for
his sermon so rich in wisdom. But when I asked them whether they
understood anything, they answered, "We took in everything with full
ears; why do you ask whether we understood? Is not the understanding
benumbed by such matters?" To this the priest who was present added,
"Forasmuch as you have heard and have not understood, you are blessed,
for thereby you have salvation." And other things (n. 185). XXVII. The
human mind is divided into three regions, like the heaven in which
angels dwell; and in those who love truths because they are truths
theological matters have their seat in the highest region of the mind;
and under these, in the middle region, moral subjects, and beneath these
in the lowest region, political subjects; and the various sciences
constitute the door. But theological matters with those who do not love
truths have their seat in the lowest region, and mingle themselves there
with what is man's own, and thus with the fallacies of the senses; and
for this reason some cannot perceive theological principles at all (n.
186). XXVIII. I was brought to a place where those were who are meant by
"the false prophet" in the Apocalypse; and I was invited by those there
to see their temple. I followed and saw it, and in it the image of a
woman clad in a scarlet robe, holding in her right hand a golden coin,
and in her left a chain of pearls; but these appearances were produced
through fantasy. But when the interiors of my mind were opened by the
Lord, instead of the temple there was seen a house full of chinks; and
instead of the woman there was seen a beast, such as is described in the
Apocalypse (13:2); and under the floor there was a bog, in which lay the
Word, deeply concealed. But presently, an east wind springing up, the
temple was carried away, and the bog was dried up, and the Word lay
exposed; and then, by the light from heaven, there appeared there a
tabernacle like that of Abraham when the three angels came slid foretold
to him the birth of Isaac; and afterwards, light being sent forth from
the second heaven, instead of the tabernacle there appeared a temple
similar to that of Jerusalem; and after this a light shone upon it from
the third heaven, and then the temple disappeared, and the Lord alone
was seen standing upon the foundation stone where the Word was. But
because an overpowering sanctity then filled their minds this light was
withdrawn, and in place of it light from the second heaven was let in,
which caused the previous view of the temple to return, and also that of
the tabernacle within it (n. 187). XXIX. There was seen a magnificent
palace, in which there was a temple, and in this seats were placed in
triple order. In it there was a council convoked by the Lord, in which
they were to deliberate concerning the Lord the Saviour, and concerning
the Holy Spirit. When as many of the clergy were present as there were
seats, they began the council. And because they were to consult in
regard to the Lord, the first proposition was, Who assumed the Human in
the virgin Mary? And then the angel standing beside the table read
before them what the angel Gabriel said to Mary, "The Holy Spirit shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee;
and the holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of
God" (Luke 1:35; and also from Matt. 1:20, 25); and many other things
from the Prophets, that Jehovah Himself was to come into the world, and
that Jehovah Himself is called Saviour, Redeemer and Righteousness; from
which it was concluded that Jehovah Himself assumed the Human. Another
deliberation concerning the Lord, was, Whether the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ are not thus one, as soul and body are one; and this was
proved by many passages in the Word, and also from the creed of the
present church; from which it was concluded that the soul of the Lord is
from God the Father, and consequently that His Human is Divine; and that
the Human is to be approached that the Father may be approached, since
by means of it Jehovah God sent Himself into the world and made Himself
seen before the eyes of men, and thus accessible. This was followed by a
third deliberation concerning the Holy Spirit; and then first the idea
respecting three Divine persons from eternity was discarded, and it was
proved from the Word that the Holy Divine, which is called the Holy
Spirit, goes forth out of the Lord from the Father. At length, from the
deliberations of this council, this conclusion was reached: That in the
Lord the Saviour there is a Divine Trinity, namely, the Divine from
which (a quo) which is called the Father the Divine Human which is
called the Son, and the Divine going forth which is called the Holy
Spirit; and that therefore in the church God is one. When the council
was ended, splendid garments were given to those who sat in it and they
were conducted to the new heaven (n. 188). XXX. I saw in a certain
stable large purses, in which there was silver in great abundance, and
near them young men as guards; in the next room, modest virgins with a
chaste wife; and also in another room, two little children; and at last
a harlot and dead horses. And afterwards I was taught what each of those
things signified; and that by them was represented and described the
Word as it is in itself and as it is at this day (n. 277). XXXI. Writing
was seen, such as there is in the highest or third heaven, which
consisted of inflected letters with little curves turning upwards; and
it was said that the Hebrew letters in the most ancient time were
somewhat like these when they were more curved than they are at this
day, and that the letter h, which was added to the names of Abram and
Sarai, signifies the infinite and the eternal. They explained before me
the sense of some words in Psalm 32:2, from the letters or syllables
alone there, which is, that the Lord is merciful even to those who do
evil (n. 278). XXXII. Before the Israelitish Word there was a Word, the
prophetical books of which were called Enunciations, and the historical,
the Wars of Jehovah; and besides these, also one called the book of
Jasher; which three are mentioned in our Word; and this ancient Word was
in the land of Canaan, Syria, Mesopotamia, Arabia, Assyria, Chaldea,
Egypt, Tyre, Sidon, and Nineveh; but because it was full of such
correspondences as remotely signify celestial and spiritual things,
which gave occasion for idolatries, this Word, through Divine
Providence, disappeared. I have heard that Moses transcribed from this
Word the things which he related concerning the Creation, Adam and Eve,
the Flood, and Noah and his three sons, but no further. And I was told
in the spiritual world by the angels from Great Tartary that this same,
Word is still preserved among that people, and that they draw from it
the precepts of their faith and life (n. 279). XXXIII. On account of the
distinction between spiritual and natural, or what is the same, between
the substantial and the material, those who are in the spiritual world
cannot be seen by those who are in the natural world, nor conversely;
thus spirits and angels cannot be seen by men, nor men by spirits and
angels. From this is the fact that spirits and angels have altogether a
different language, different writing, and also different thought from
what men have. That this is so, was made evident by living experience,
which was done by their going in turn to their associates, and returning
to me, and thus comparing. In this way it was discovered, that there is
not even one word of spiritual language that is like any word of natural
language; and that their writing consists of syllables, each of which
involves a meaning pertaining to the subject; and that the ideas of
their thought do not fall into the ideas of natural thought. The cause
of these differences is, that spirits and angels are in principles, but
men in derivatives; or that the former are in prior things which as
causes are the origin of posterior things, and that men are in posterior
things from those that are prior. It was said that there is a like
difference between the languages, writings, and thoughts, of the angels
of the third heaven and those of the angels of the second (n. 280).
XXXIV. On the state of men after death, in general, and the state of
those who have confirmed themselves in falsities, in particular. In
regard to all of these the following things were observed: (1) For the
most part men are commonly resuscitated the third day after death, and
then they do not know but that they are still living in the former
world. (2) All go to the world which is intermediate between heaven and
hell, which is called the world of spirits. (3) There they are
transferred into various societies, and thus their characters are
ascertained. (4) There the good and faithful are prepared for heaven,
and the evil and unfaithful for hell. (5) After the preparation, which
continues for some years, a way is opened for the good to some society
in heaven where they are to live forever, but a way for the evil into
hell; besides many more things. Afterwards the nature of hell is
described; and it is stated that those there who are in falsities from
confirmation are called satans and those who are in evils of life are
called devils (n. 281). XXXV. From the lower earth, which is next above
hell, I heard shouts, "0 how just! 0 how learned! 0 how wise!" and
because I wondered how there could be any just, learned, and wise
persons in hell, I descended, and first went to the place where they
were crying, "0 how just!" and I saw there, as it were, a tribunal, and
in it unjust judges who could skillfully pervert the laws, and turn
judgments to the favor of any one whatever; and that thus their
judgments were purely arbitrary judgments; and when the sentences were
carried out to the clients, they cried out for a long distance, "O how
just." Concerning these the angels afterwards said, that such are unable
to see any least particle of what is just. After a while these judges
were cast into hell, and their books were turned into playing-cards, and
instead of judging, they were assigned to the task of preparing paint,
with which they daubed the faces of harlots, and thus turned them into
beauties (n. 332). XXXVI. Afterwards I went to the place where they were
crying out, "0 how learned" and I saw a company of those who were
reasoning whether a thing is so or not, but not thinking that it is so;
and therefore they stopped at the first step concerning any subject
whatever; thus they merely touched it from without and did not enter
into it; so they also argue concerning God, whether there is a God. That
I might know for certain whether their character was such I put to them
the question, What kind of religion is necessary for the salvation of
man? They answered, "It must be considered (1) Whether religion is
anything. (2) Whether one religion is more efficacious than another. (3)
Whether there is any eternal life, and thus whether there is any
salvation. (4) Is there a heaven and a hell?" And then they began to
discuss the first, Whether religion is anything. And they said that this
required so much investigation that it could not be finished in the
space of a year; and one among them said, that it could not be finished
in a hundred years; to which I replied that in the meantime they would
be without religion. But still they discussed this first point so
skillfully that the company standing by cried, "0 how learned!" I was
told by the angels, that such appear like graven images; and that
afterwards they are sent out into deserts, where among themselves they
gabble and talk nothing but nonsense (n. 333). XXXVII. I went on further
to the third company, where I heard the cry, "0 how wise!" and I found
assembled there those who are unable to see whether truth is truth or
not, and yet are able to make whatever they wish seem true, and are
therefore called Confirmers. That they were such, I also saw from
various answers to propositions as that they could make it true that
faith is the all of the church, and afterwards that charity is the all
of the church, and also that faith and charity together are the all of
the church; and because they confirmed whichever of these they liked,
and adorned them with appearances so that they shone like truths,
therefore the by-standers cried, "0 how wise!" Afterwards some ludicrous
things, also, were proposed to them, that they might make them true; for
they say that there is nothing true, except what man makes true. The
ludicrous things were these: that light is darkness, and darkness light;
and also that a crow is white, and not black; which two they made to
appear as wholly true. The arguments for these may be seen in the text.
I was told by the angels that such do not possess a single grain of
understanding, since all that is above the rational with them is closed,
while all below the rational is open; and by this man can confirm
whatever he pleases, but cannot see any truth to be truth therefore,
this does not belong to a man of understanding, but it does belong to
him to be able to see that truth is truth and that falsity is falsity,
and to confirm it (n. 334). XXXVIII. I spoke with spirits who, in the
natural world, had been famed for erudition, who were disputing among
themselves about connate ideas, whether men have any, as beasts have;
and then a certain angelic spirit thrust himself in and said, "You are
disputing about goat's wool. Men have no connate ideas, neither have
beasts. "At which words all were enraged. But afterwards, opportunity to
speak being given, he spoke first concerning beasts, saying, "They have
no connate ideas; for the reason that they do not think, but only act
from instinct, which they have from their natural love, which makes in
them something analogous to a will, and this flows immediately into the
senses of their body and excites that which agrees with and favors the
love; and yet ideas are predicable only of thought. "That beasts have
sensation only and not thought, he confirmed by various things,
especially by the wonderful things which are known respecting spiders,
bees, and silk-worms, saying, "Does a spider think in its little head,
when it forms its web, that the web is to be so woven for the rake of
such or such uses? Does a bee think in its little head, 'From these
flowers I will suck honey, and from these I will gather wax, out of
which I will build compact rows of little cells, and in these I will put
honey in abundance that it may be sufficient also for the winter?'
besides other things. Does the silkworm think in its little head, 'Now I
will betake myself to spinning silk, and when I have spun it I will fly
forth and sport with my companions, and provide for myself posterity?'
besides like things with beasts and birds." Concerning men he said, that
every mother and nurse, and the father also, know that new-born infants
have no connate ideas, and that they have no ideas at all until they
have learned to think, and that then ideas arise and are produced
according to every kind of thought which they have imbibed by
instruction; and that this is so because man has nothing born in him
except a capacity to know, to understand and to be wise, and an
inclination to love not only himself and the world, but also the
neighbor and God. These things Leibnitz and Wolfe heard at a distance;
and Leibnitz favored, but Wolfe did not (n. 335). XXXIX. Once a certain
angelic spirit illustrated what faith and charity are, and what their
conjunction effects. He illustrated it by comparison with light and
heat, which meet together in a third; because the light in heaven in its
essence is the truth of faith, and the heat there in its essence is the
good of charity; therefore as light without heat, such as there is in
winter-time in the world, strips the trees of leaves and fruits, so is
faith separated from charity; and as light conjoined to heat, such as
there is in spring-time, vivifies all things, so is faith conjoined with
charity (n. 385). XL. Two angels descended, one from the eastern heaven
where love prevails, and the other from the southern heaven, where
wisdom prevails, and spoke concerning the essence of the heavens,
whether it is love or wisdom; and they agreed that it is love and wisdom
therefrom; consequently, that the heavens were created by God, from love
by means of wisdom (n. 386). XLI. After that, I entered a garden, where
I was led around by a certain spirit, and at length to a palace which
was called the Temple of Wisdom. This was four-square, the walls of
crystal, the roof of jasper, the substructure of various precious
stones. And he said that no one can enter it who does not believe that
what he knows, understands, and is wise in, compared with what he does
not know and understand and is not wise in, is relatively so little that
it is scarcely anything. And because I believed this, it was granted me
to enter; and it was seen that the whole of it was built to be a form of
light. In that temple I related what I had lately heard from the two
angels about love and wisdom; and they asked, "Did they not also speak
of a third, which is use?" And they said that love and wisdom apart from
use are merely ideal entities, but that in use they become real, and
that it is the same with charity, faith, and good works (n. 387). XLII.
One of the spirits of the dragon invited me to see the delights of his
love; and he led me to something like an amphitheater, upon the seats of
which sat satyrs and harlot, And then he said, "Now you shall see our
sport." And he opened a door, and let in, as it were, calves, rams,
kids, and lambs; and presently through another door he let in lions,
panthers, tigers, and wolves, which rushed upon the flock, tearing them
and slaughtering them. But all these things which were seen were induced
by means of fantasies. Having seen this I said to the dragonist, "After
a while you will see this theater turned into a lake of fire and
brimstone "The sport being finished, the dragonist went out, attended by
his satyrs and harlots, and saw a flock of sheep; from which he inferred
that one of the Jerusalemite cities was near by; on seeing which, he was
seized with the desire to take it and cast out the inhabitants; but
because it was surrounded by a wall, he planned to take it by stratagem.
And then he sent one skilled in incantation, who being admitted spoke
craftily with the citizens about faith and charity; especially as to
which of them is the primary, and whether charity contributes anything
to salvation. But the dragonist, enraged at the answer, went out and
gathered together many of his crew, and began to besiege the city; but
when he was endeavoring to reach and invade it, fire out of heaven
consumed them according to what is foretold in the Apocalypse (20:8, 9)
(n. 388). XLIII. A paper was once sent down from heaven, in which there
was an exhortation to acknowledge the Lord the Savior as the God of
heaven and earth, according to His words (Matt. 28:18). But two bishops
who were there were consulted as to what should be done. They said that
the paper should be sent back to heaven from which it came. When this
was done that society sank down, but not very deep. The next day some
ascended therefrom and told what lot they had met with there; also that
they went to the bishops there and reproved them for their advice, and
that they had talked much about the state of the church at this day, and
had censured the doctrine of the bishops regarding the Trinity, of
justifying faith, of charity, and other things which pertained to their
orthodoxy, and asked them to discard those doctrines because they were
contrary to the Word; but to no purpose. And because they called their
faith dead and diabolical, according to James in his Epistle, one of the
bishops took off the miter from his head, and laid it down upon the
table, saying that he would not resume it until the scoffing of his
faith had been avenged. But then a monster appeared coming up from
below, like the beast described in the Apocalypse (13:1, 2), which took
up the miter and carried it away (n. 389). XLIV. I went to a certain
house where those assembled were arguing one with another, whether the
good which a man does in the state of justification by faith is the good
of religion or not. There was an agreement that by the good of religion
the good which contributes to salvation is meant. But the opinion of
those prevailed who said that no good that is done by man contributes
anything to salvation; since no voluntary good of man can be conjoined
with what is free, because salvation is bestowed freely neither can any
good from man be conjoined with the merit of Christ, by which alone is
salvation possible; neither can the operation of man be conjoined with
the operation of the Holy Spirit, that does all things without the aid
of man. From which it was concluded that good works, even in the state
of justification by faith, contribute nothing to salvation; but faith
only. On hearing these things, two gentiles who stood at the door said
to each other, "These men have no religion. Who does not know that to do
good to the neighbor for God's sake, thus from God and with God, is
religion?" (n. 390). XLV. I heard the angels lamenting that there is
such spiritual destitution at this day in the church that they know
nothing else than that there are three Divine persons from eternity, and
that faith alone saves; and about the Lord they know only the historical
facts; and that they are profoundly ignorant of the things that are
taught in the Word respecting the Lord, His oneness with the Father, His
Divinity and power. And they said that a certain angel had been sent
down by them to discover whether there was such destitution at this day
among Christians; and that he asked a certain one what his religion was.
He answered, that it was faith. Then he asked him about redemption,
regeneration, and salvation. He answered that they were all matters of
faith; and also in regard to charity that it is in faith; also, whether
any one can do good from himself. Afterwards the angel said to him, "You
have answered like a man playing but one note on a flute; I hear only
faith; but if you know nothing else but that, you know nothing." Then he
led him to his companions in a desert, where there was not even grass.
Besides more (n. 391). XLVI. I saw five gymnasia encompassed by
different kinds of light, and with many others I entered into the first,
which was seen in flame-colored light. Many were assembled there, and
the president proposed that they should declare their opinions
respecting charity; and when they had begun, the first said that in his
opinion charity is morality inspired by faith. The second, that it is
pity inspired by commiseration. The third that it is doing good to
everyone, both virtuous and vicious alike. The fourth, that it is to
serve by every means one's relatives and friends. The fifth, that it is
giving alms to the poor and assisting the needy. The sixth, that it is
building hospitals, infirmaries, and orphans' homes. The seventh, that
it is to endow temples and to do good to their ministers. The eighth,
that it is the old Christian brotherhood. The ninth, that it is to
forgive every one his trespasses. Each of them fully confirmed his
opinion; which confirmations cannot be recited because they are many;
they may therefore be seen in the Memorable Relation itself. After this
there was given me an opportunity to express my opinion; and I said that
charity is to act with judgment from a love justice, in every employment
and office but from a love derived from no other source than the Lord
the Savior; and after this had been demonstrated, I added that all those
things which had been said before respecting charity by the nine
celebrated men were eminent examples of charity when done with judgment
from justice; and because justice and judgment are from no other source
than the Lord the Savior, they are to be done by man from Him. This was
approved by most of them in their internal man, but not as yet in the
external (n. 459). XLVII. At a distance there was heard something like
the gnashing of teeth, and mingled with this a kind of beating; and I
went toward the sounds, and saw a small house built of reeds plastered
together; and instead of the gnashing of teeth and the sound of
knocking, I heard within, in the little house, disputes about faith and
charity which of them is the essential of the church. And those who were
for faith brought forward their arguments, saying that faith is
spiritual because it is from God, but charity natural because it is from
man. On the other hand, those who were for charity said that charity is
spiritual and faith is natural unless it is conjoined to charity. To
these things a certain syncretist wishing to settle the dispute added to
this the proof that faith is spiritual and charity only natural. But it
was said that moral life is of two kinds, spiritual and natural, and
that in the man who lives from the Lord it is spiritual-moral but in the
man who does not live from the Lord it is natural-moral, such as exists
with the evil and sometimes with the spirits in hell (n. 460). XLVIII.
In spirit I was brought into a certain garden in the southern quarter,
and saw certain persons sitting there under a laurel, eating figs. I
asked them how they understood that man can do good from God, and yet do
it altogether as if from himself. And they answered that God works good
inwardly in man; but if man does it from his own will and from his own
understanding, he defiles it so that it is no longer good. But to this I
said that man is only an organ of life; and that if he believes in the
Lord he does good of himself from the Lord; but if he does not believe
in the Lord, and still more, if he does not believe in any God, he does
good of himself from hell; and further, that the Lord has given to man
freedom of choice in acting from the one or from the other. That the
Lord has given this freedom was proved from the Word, in that He
commanded man to love God and the neighbor, to perform the good works of
charity as a tree produces fruit, and to keep God's commandments that he
may be saved, and that everyone will be judged according to his deeds;
and that these things would not have been commanded if man could not do
good of himself from the Lord. When this had been said, I gave them
twigs from a vine, and the twigs in their hands put forth grapes. And
more beside (n. 461). XLIX. I saw a splendid dock-yard, and in it
vessels large and small, and on benches there were boys and girls, who
were waiting for tortoises to rise up out of the sea; and when they
emerged, I saw that they had two heads; one, which at pleasure they drew
back into the shell of the body, and another which appeared in form like
a man, and from this they spoke with the boys and girls: and these
caressed them, because of their elegant discourse and also gave them
presents. When these things had been seen an angel explained what they
signified; namely, that there are men in the world, and as many spirits
from the world after death, who say that in those who have acquired
faith God does not look at anything that they think and do, but only
looks at the faith which He has stored up in the interiors of their
minds; and that these same persons bring forth before the congregations
in temples, holy things from the Word just as others do, but this they
do from the greater head which appears as a man, into which they then
insert the little one, or draw it into the body. The same persons
afterwards were seen in the air in a vessel flying with seven sails, and
those in it were decorated with laurels and purple garments, and they
cried out that they were the chief of the wise of all the clergy. But
the things seen were images of pride flowing from the ideas of the minds
of such. And when they were upon the earth I spoke with them, first from
reason and afterwards from the Sacred Scripture; and by many means I
proved that their doctrine was unsound, and, being contrary to the
Sacred Scripture, was from hell; but the arguments by which I proved
this were too extended to be set forth here, but may be seen in the
Relation itself. Afterwards they were seen in a sandy place, in garments
of rags, and girt about the loins with network like fishers' nets,
through which their nakedness was visible; and at last they were sent
down into a society bordering on that of the Machiavelians (n. 462). L.
An assembly was called together which sat in a circular temple, in which
at the sides there were altars, and near these the members of the
assembly sat; but there was no president; therefore each one of himself
rushed forth into the midst and spoke out the feelings of his mind. A
discussion began about Freedom of Choice in spiritual things. The first
speaker, rushing forth, cried out that man has no more freedom of choice
in those things than Lot's wife when turned into a statue of salt; the
second, that he has no more than a beast or a dog; the third, that he
has no more than a mole, or than a bird of night in the day-time; the
fourth, that if man had freedom of choice in spiritual things he would
become a maniac and believe himself to be as a God who can regenerate
and save himself. The sixth read from a book of the Evangelical, called
Formula Concordiae that man has no more freedom of choice in spiritual
things than a stock or a stone, and that he has no ability whatever to
understand think, or will in respect to these things, or even to adapt
and accommodate himself to receive what is spiritual; besides other
things (of which above, n. 464). When this had been said, and there was
also given me an opportunity of speaking, I said, "What else is man,
without freedom of choice in spiritual things, than a brute? And without
it, of what use is anything theological?" But to this they replied,
"Read our theology, and you will not find therein anything spiritual;
you will find this so concealed within that not even a shadow of it
appears. Therefore, read what our theology teaches respecting
justification, that is, the remission of sins, regeneration,
sanctification and salvation; you will not see there anything spiritual,
because spiritual things flow in through faith, without any
consciousness on man's part. It has also removed charity far from what
is spiritual, and repentance also from contact with it. And besides, as
to redemption, it attributes to God purely natural human properties, as
that He included the human race under a universal damnation; that the
Son took that damnation upon Himself, and thus propitiated the Father;
and what else are intercession and mediation with the Father? From all
this it is clear that in all our theology there is nothing spiritual,
and not even what is rational, but merely what is natural below them."
But then suddenly a thunderbolt was heard from heaven, and the assembly,
seized with terror, rushed forth, and each fled to his own home (n.
503). LI. I talked with two spirits, one of whom loved good and truth,
and the other evil and falsity; and I found that both enjoyed the same
ability to think rationally. But when the one who loved evil and falsity
was left to himself, I saw a kind of smoke that arose from hell and
extinguished the lucidity which was above his memory; but when the one
who loved good and truth was left to himself, I saw, as it were, a
gentle flame descending from heaven and illuminating the region of his
mind above the memory, and from that the things below it. Afterwards I
spoke with the one who loved evil and falsity respecting freedom of
choice in spiritual things; and at the mere mention of it he fired up
and cried out that no one can move his foot or hand to do any spiritual
good, or his tongue and lips to speak any spiritual truth, and thus that
he cannot even adapt and accommodate himself to receive any such thing.
He said, "Is not man in such things dead, and merely passive? How can
what is dead or merely passive do good and speak truth of itself? Does
not our church so speak?" But the other, who loved good and truth spoke
thus respecting freedom of choice in spiritual things: "Without it what
would the whole Word be, or what the church, what religion, what the
worship of God, thus what the ministry? And from the light of my
understanding, I know that man without that spiritual freedom would not
be man but a beast; for man is man and not a beast because of that
freedom; and moreover, man without freedom of choice in spiritual things
would have no life after death, thus no eternal life, because no
conjunction with God; therefore, to deny this is the part of those who
are insane in spiritual things." Afterwards there was seen an appearance
of a fiery serpent upon a tree, which handed fruit therefrom to him who
denied freedom of choice in spiritual things; and when this had been
eaten a smoke appeared ascending from hell, which extinguished the light
in the higher part of his rational mind (n. 504). LII. There was heard a
grating sound like that of two mill-stones grinding on each other; and I
went up to where the sound began and saw a house in which were many
little cells, and in these the learned of this age were sitting and
confirming justification by faith alone; and going up to one, I asked
what he was now studying. He answered, "Concerning the Act of
Justification which is the head of all things of doctrine in our
orthodoxy." And I asked whether he knew any sign by which to tell when
justifying faith enters, and when it has entered. And he said, that this
is done passively, and not actively. To which I replied, "If you take
away what is active in it, you also take away receptivity; and thus that
act would be a purely ideal thing, such as is called a figment of
reason, thus nothing more than the state of Lot's wife, composed of mere
salt which tinkles when scratched by a scribe's pen or fingernail." The
man growing warm picked up a candlestick, to throw it at me; but the
light going out suddenly he threw it at his companion (n. 505). LIII.
There appeared two flocks, one of goats and the other of sheep; but when
they were viewed closely, in place of goats and sheep men were seen; and
it was perceived that the flock of goats consisted of those who make
faith alone saving, and the flock of sheep of those who make charity and
faith together saving. To the inquiry why they were there, those who
were seen as goats said that they were sitting as a council because it
had been disclosed to them that the saying of Paul, "That man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the law (Rom. 3:28)" is not
rightly understood; because by "faith" here is not meant the faith of
this day, but faith in the Lord the Savior; and by "the deeds of the
law" are not meant the deeds of the law of the Decalogue, but the deeds
of the Mosaic law which were rituals; which also was shown. And they
said that they had concluded that faith produces good works as a tree
produces fruit. This teaching was favored by those who constituted the
flock of sheep. Then an angel, standing between the two flocks, cried
out to the flock of sheep, "Do not listen, for they have not receded
from their former faith." And he divided the flock of sheep into two,
and said to those on the left, "Join yourselves to the goats; but I tell
you that a wolf is coming which will carry them off and you with them."
Then it was asked how they understood that faith produces good works as
a tree produces fruit; and it was found that their perception concerning
the conjunction of faith and charity was altogether different from that
comparison, and thus that it was a fallacious mode of speaking. When
these things were understood, the flocks of sheep reunited themselves
into one as before, to which some of the goats joined themselves,
confessing that charity is the essence of faith, and that thus faith
separate from charity is only natural, but conjoined to it it becomes
spiritual (n. 506). LIV. A discourse with angels concerning the three
loves, which are universal, and therefore with every man; which are,
Love of the neighbor, or the Love of uses, which in itself is spiritual;
the Love of the world, or the Love of possessing wealth, which in itself
is material: and the Love of self, or the Love of ruling over others,
which in itself is corporeal; and that when these three loves are
rightly subordinated in man, he is truly man; and that they are rightly
subordinated when love of the neighbor forms the head, love of the world
the body, and love of self the feet; it is altogether otherwise when
they become fixed in man in a contrary order. And it was shown what man
is when the love of the world forms the head, and what he is when love
of self; that then he is an inverted man; and in respect to the
interiors of his mind is a wild beast, and in respect to his exteriors
and the body is an actor. After this there was seen a certain devil
ascending from below, having a dusky face with a white circle around the
head; and he said that he was Lucifer, although he was not; and that in
his internals, he was a devil, but in his externals an angel of light;
and he declared when in externals he was moral among the moral, rational
among the rational, and even spiritual among the spiritual; and that
when he was in the world he had preached; and that then he accursed evil
doers of every kind, and this is why he was called "Son of the morning;"
and, what he himself wondered at, when he was in the pulpit he had no
other idea than that it was as he spoke; but otherwise when he was out
of the temple. This he said because in the temple he was in his
externals and then in the understanding only, but out of the temple in
his internals and then in the will; and thus he was raised into heaven
by his understanding while his will drew him down into hell; but that
the will prevails over the understanding, because it disposes the
understanding according to its beck and nod. After this the devil who
pretended to be Lucifer fell down into hell (n. 607). LV. There was seen
a round temple, the roof of which was crown-shaped, its walls continuous
windows of crystal, its door of a pearly substance. In it there was a
pulpit, on which was the Word enveloped in a sphere of light. In the
center of the temple was a sanctuary, before which was a veil, at that
time raised, where stood a cherub waving a sword in his hand. When this
had been seen it was explained to me what each particular signified;
which may be seen. Above the gate there was this inscription, Now it is
permitted; which signified, that now it is permitted to enter
understandingly into the mysteries of faith; and it was given me to
perceive that it exceedingly dangerous to enter with the understanding
into dogmas of faith which are from self intelligence and thus in
falsities, and still more to confirm these from the Word; therefore, by
the Divine Providence the Word had been taken away from the Roman
Catholics, and with Protestants it had been closed by their dogma that
the understanding is to be kept under obedience to their faith. But
because the dogmas of the New Church are all from the Word, it is
permitted to enter into these with the understanding, because they are
continuous truths from the Word, and also shine before the
understanding. This was what is meant by the writing above the gate, Now
it is permitted, and by the veil of the sanctuary being raised, within
which the cherub stood. After this there was brought to me a paper from
an infant who was an angel in the third heaven, on which was written,
Enter hereafter into the mysteries of the Word which has been heretofore
shut up; for the particular truths therein are so many mirrors of the
Lord (n. 508). LVI. I was seized with a grievous disease, from the smoke
that came in from the Jerusalem which is called Sodom and Egypt (Apoc.
11:8); and I was seen by those Who were in that city as dead; and they
said one to another that I was not worthy of burial, just as it is said
concerning the two witnesses in the same chapter in the Apocalypse; and
meanwhile I heard blasphemies in abundance from the citizens on account
of my having preached repentance, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
But as a judgment came upon them, I saw that the whole city fell down
and was overflowed with waters; and afterwards that they were running
about among the heaps of stones, and lamenting on account of their lot;
when their belief was that, by the faith of their church they were born
again and were thus righteous. But it was said to them that they were
anything else than such, since they had never performed any actual
repentance; and were therefore unaware of any damnable evil in
themselves. Afterwards it was said to them from heaven, that faith in
the Lord and repentance are the two means of regeneration and salvation;
and that this is very well known from the Word, and still further, from
the Decalogue, baptism, and the holy supper; concerning which see the
Relation (n. 567). LVII. All who after death come into the spiritual
world at first are kept in the externals in which they were in the
natural world; and because most men who are in externals live morally,
frequent churches and pray to God, they believe that they will certainly
come into heaven. But they are taught that every man after death
gradually puts off the external man, and the internal man is opened, and
then the man is known, as he is in himself, since man is man from his
will and understanding, and not merely from action and speech: and from
this it is that man can in externals appear like a sheep, although in
internals he is like a wolf, and that he is such in his internal man
unless he examines the evils of his will and of his intention therefrom,
and repents of them; with more besides (n. 568). LVIII. Every love
breathes forth delight. In the natural world the delights from love, are
but little felt, but in the spiritual world they are clearly felt; and
there they are sometimes turned into odors; and the nature of the
delights is then perceived and what love they are from; and the delights
from the love of good, such as are in the heavens, are perceived as
fragrance in gardens and flower-beds; and on the other hand, the
delights from the love of evil, such as are in hell, are perceived as
the pungent and fetid smells from stagnant waters and from cesspools;
and because they are so opposite, the devils are tortured when they are
sensible of any sweet odor from heaven, and on the other hand, the
angels are tortured when they are sensible of any ill-smelling odors
from hell. That it is so, was confirmed by two examples. This is why the
oil of anointing was prepared from fragrant things, and why it is said
of Jehovah that He smelled a sweet savor from the burnt-offerings; and
on the other hand, why it was commanded the sons of Israel that they
should carry unclean things out of their camps, and that they should
bury their excrements; for their camps represented heaven, and the
desert outside of the camps represented hell (n. 569). LIX. A certain
novitiate spirit, who in the world meditated much upon heaven and hell,
desired to know the nature of each; and it was said to him from heaven,
"Inquire what delight is, and you will know." Therefore going away he
inquired; but among spirits merely natural he inquired in vain. But he
was led to three companies in succession; to one where they searched out
ends and were therefore called wisdoms; to another where they
investigated causes, and were therefore called intelligences; and to a
third where they inquired into effects, and were therefore called
knowledges: and by all these he was taught that every angel, spirit, and
man has life from the delight of his love; and that the will and thought
cannot move a step except from a delight in some love; and this is to
everyone that which is called good; and still further that the delight
of heaven is a delight in doing good, and the delight of hell a delight
in doing evil. That he might be further taught, a devil providentially
ascended, and there before him described the delights of hell, that they
were the delights of revenge, fornication, plunder and blasphemy; and
these when perceived there as odors are perceived as balsams and
therefore he called them the delights of their nostrils (n. 670). LX. A
company of spirits was seen praying to God that He would send angels to
teach them about various things pertaining to faith, inasmuch as in most
things they were in doubt, because churches so differ one from another,
and all their ministers say "Believe us; we are the ministers of God,
and we know." And angels appeared, whom they questioned in regard to
charity and faith, repentance, regeneration, God, the immortality of the
soul, and baptism and the holy supper; about each of which the angels
gave such answers as fell into their understanding; saying further that
whatever does not fall into the understanding is like what is sown in
the sand which, however it may be watered by the rain, still withers
away; and the understanding when closed against religion, no longer sees
anything in the Word from the light therein from the Lord; and even if
the Word is read he becomes more and more blind in the things of faith
and salvation (n. 621). LXI. How man, when prepared for heaven, enters
it; namely, that after preparation he sees a path that leads to the
society in heaven in which he is to live to eternity; and near the
society there is a gate which is opened; and when he has entered an
examination is made whether he has in him the same light and the same
heat, that is, the same good and truth as are in the angels of that
society. When this is determined he goes about and inquires where his
house is; for there is for each novitiate angel a new house. When this
is found he is received and numbered as one among them. But those who
have not in them the light and heat, that is, the good and truth of
heaven, have this hard lot, that when they enter they are miserably
tortured, and because of the torture cast themselves down headlong. This
happens to them because of the sphere of the light and heat of heaven,
in the opposite of which they are; and afterwards they no longer desire
heaven, but are affiliated with their like in hell. From this it is
clear that it is idle to believe that gaining heaven is merely an
admission from favor, and that those who are admitted enter into the
fruition of the joys there, like those in the world who are admitted
into a house where there is a wedding (n. 622). LXII. Many who believe
that heaven is a mere matter of admission from grace, and after
admission there is eternal joy, were permitted to ascend into heaven;
but because they could not endure the light and heat, that is, the faith
and love there, they cast themselves down headlong; and they appeared to
those who stood below like dead horses. Among those who stood below and
who thus saw them, were boys with their master; and he taught them what
their appearing like dead horses signified, and who those are who so
appear at a distance, saying that they are those who when they read the
Word think materially and not spiritually about God, the neighbor, and
heaven; and that those think materially about God who think about
essence from person, and in regard to the neighbor about his quality
from the face and speech, and in regard to heaven about the state of
love there from place; but those think spiritually who think of God from
essence, and from essence of person; of the neighbor from his quality;
and from quality of his face and speech; and of heaven from the state of
love there and of place from that. And afterwards he taught them that a
horse signifies understanding of the Word; and because the Word with
those who think spiritually when they read it is a living letter, so
such appear at a distance as living horses; and on the other hand,
because the Word with those who think materially when they read it is a
dead letter, so those at a distance appear as dead horses (n. 623).
LXIII. An angel was seen descending from heaven into that world with a
paper in his hand, upon which was written the marriage of good and truth
and it was seen that in heaven the paper shone, but in its descent
gradually less and less, until neither the paper nor the angel was seen,
except before some unlearned ones who were simple-hearted. To these the
angel explained what the marriage of good and truth involves, namely,
that all and each of the things in the whole heaven and in the whole
world contain the two together, because in the Lord God the Creator good
and truth make one; and therefore nothing is anywhere possible which by
itself is good, nor anything which by itself is true; consequently in
each and everything there is a marriage of good and truth, and in the
church a marriage of charity and faith, since charity pertains to good
and faith to truth (n. 624). LXIV. When I was in profound thought about
the second coming of the Lord, I saw heaven from the east to the west
luminous, and heard a glorification and celebration of the Lord by the
angels, but from the Word, both the prophetic Word of the Old Testament
and the Apostolic Word of the New Testament. The passages themselves by
which the glorifications were made may be seen in the Relation (n. 625).
LXV. In the north-eastern quarter there, are Places of instruction, and
those who interiorly receive instruction there are called disciples of
the Lord. Once when in the spirit, I asked the teachers there whether
they knew the universals of heaven and the universals of hell; and they
answered that the universals of heaven are three loves, the love of
uses, the love of possessing the goods of the world from the love of
performing uses, and true marriage love; and that the universals of hell
are three loves opposite to those three, namely, the love of ruling from
the love of self, the love of possessing the goods of others from the
love of the world, and scortatory love. It is described afterwards what
the first infernal love is, which is the love of ruling from the love of
self; that it is such with the laity that, when loose rein is given to
it, they wish to rule over all things of the world, and with the clergy,
that they wish to rule over all things of heaven. That such a
hallucination possesses those who are in that love was proved by the
like in hell, where such are together in a certain valley, who find
enjoyment for their minds in the hallucinations that they are emperors
of emperors, or kings of kings; and elsewhere that they are gods; and it
was seen that at the sight of these latter, the former, whose minds were
so elated, fell upon their knees and worshiped. Afterwards I spoke with
two, one of whom was the prince of a certain society in heaven, and the
other was the high-priest there; who said that with those in that
society there are magnificent and splendid things, because their love is
not from the love of self, but from the love of uses; and that they are
surrounded by honors and that they accept them not for the sake of
themselves, but for the sake of the good of obedience. I then asked
them, "How can anyone know whether he does uses from the love of self or
the world, or from love of uses since uses are performed from all these
loves? Let it be supposed that there is a society consisting of satans
only and a society consisting of angels only, and I can imagine that the
satans, from the love of self and the world, would perform as many uses
in their society as the angels would in theirs. Who, then, can know from
which love the uses are?" To this the prince and priest replied that
satans perform uses for the sake of reputation, that they may be raised
to honors and acquire wealth, but angels perform uses for the sake of
uses. And the latter are distinguished from the former especially by
this, that all who believe in the Lord and shun evils as sins perform
uses from the Lord, and thus from the love of uses; but all who do not
believe in the Lord and do not shun evils as sins perform uses from
themselves and for the sake of themselves, thus from the love of self or
the world (n. 661). LXVI. I entered a certain grove and saw two angels
talking with each other. I drew near them and they were speaking of the
lust of possessing all things of the world, and it was said that many
who in actions appear moral and in conversation rational are in the
madness of that lust, and that that lust is turned into hallucinations
with those who let their minds dwell in ideas concerning it. And because
everyone in the spiritual world is permitted to delight himself in his
hallucination, provided he does no evil to another there are even
congregations of such in the lower earth; and as it was known where they
were, we descended and went to them; and we saw that they were sitting
at tables, upon which there was an abundance of gold coin, and they said
that this was the wealth of all in the kingdom; but it was only a vision
of the imagination which is called a hallucination, whereby such an
appearance was created. But when they were told that they were insane,
they turned away from the tables and confessed that it was so; but
because they were exceedingly delighted by the vision, they could not
help returning again and again, and indulging the allurements of their
senses. To this they added, that if anyone deprives another of his
goods, or otherwise harms him, he falls down into a kind of prison under
them, and is kept there at work for food, clothing, and some little
pieces of money; and if they also do evil there, they are deprived of
these and punished (n. 662). LXVII. A dispute was heard between an
ambassador of a kingdom and two priests, whether intelligence and
wisdom, and thus also prudence, are from God or from man. The ambassador
insisted that these are from man, but the priests that they are from
God; nevertheless it was perceived by certain angels that the priests
inwardly in themselves believed the same as the ambassador, namely, that
intelligence and wisdom, and prudence therefrom, are from man. That
this, therefore, might be made clear, the ambassador was requested to
lay aside the garments of his office, and to put on the garments of the
sacerdotal ministry, and when this was done the ambassador began to
prove by many things that all intelligence and also prudence are from
God. And afterwards the priests also were asked to lay aside their
garments, and to put on the garments of ministers of state; and when
this was done the priests spoke from their interior selves, saying that
all intelligence and prudence are from man. They so spoke because a
spirit thinks himself to be such as his dress is. After this the three
became hearty friends; and as they conversed together they went the way
that tended downwards; but afterwards I saw them brought back (n. 663).
LXVIII. First those are treated of who in the Word are called the elect,
and it is known that they are such as are found after death to have
lived a life of charity and faith, and who are separated from those who
have not lived that life; thus the elect mean those who are then elected
and prepared for heaven. Therefore to believe that only some, before
their birth or after it, are elected and predestined to heaven, and not
all, since all are called, would be to accuse God of impotence and also
of injustice (n. 664). LXIX. It was said in heaven, by a certain
new-comer that no one in the Christian world knows what conscience is;
and because the angels did not believe this, they said to a certain
spirit that he might call together with a trumpet the intelligent, and
ask them whether they know what conscience is. And it was so done; and
they came, and among them there were statesmen, scholars, physicians,
and priests. First, the statesmen were asked what conscience is. They
answered that it is a pain arising from fear anticipated or actual, of
the loss of honor or wealth; or from a hypochondriacal humor arising
from undigested substances in the stomach; and more besides. Afterwards,
they asked the scholars what they knew about conscience. They answered
that it is a sadness and anxiety infesting the body and from that the
head, or the head and from that the body, from various causes,
especially from applying the mind to one thing only, which is done
especially when the reigning love suffers; giving rise sometimes to
hallucinations and deliriums, and with some to a kind of brain sickness
in religious matters, which is called remorse of conscience. Next the
physicians were asked what conscience is. And they said that it is only
a pain arising from various diseases, which they enumerated in
abundance; also that they had cured many by means of drugs. The diseases
from which the pains called those of conscience spring may be seen
enumerated in the Relation. Finally the priests were asked what
conscience is. They said that it was the same with the contrition that
precedes faith, and that they had cured it by the gospel; moreover, that
there are conscientious persons of every religion, true as well as
fanatical, who make to themselves scruples about matters of salvation,
also about indifferent matters. The angel from hearing these things
perceived it to be true that no one knew what conscience is; therefore
they sent down one from themselves to teach. He standing in the midst
said that conscience is not a pain, as they had all imagined, but is a
life according to religion; and that that life is especially in those
who are in the faith of charity; and that those who have conscience
speak from the heart what they speak, and do from the heart what they
do. This he illustrated by examples. So, when it is said of anyone that
he has a conscience, it is meant that he is upright; and conversely.
When all this had been said, those who had been called together divided
themselves into four bodies; those who understood and favored the words
of the angel passed over into one; those who did not understand but
still favored, into another; those who had no wish to understand, saying
to each other, "What have we to do with conscience?" passed over into a
third; and those who scoffed, saying, "What is conscience but a breath
of wind?" passed over into the fourth. After this the two latter bodies
were seen to go aside to the left, and the two former to the right (n.
665). LXX. I was led to a place where the ancient Sophi dwelt who had
been in Greece, which place they called Parnassium; and I was told that
at times they send out some to fetch new-comers from the world that they
may inquire about wisdom, how it is at this day on earth. Then two
Christians were found and brought, who were presently asked, "What news
from earth?" And they answered that this was new there; that they had
found human beings in the woods, perhaps left there in early childhood;
and that they appeared from the face to be men, and yet they were not
men; and that from this it was concluded in the world that man is no
more than a beast, except that he can articulate sound, and thus speak;
and that a beast could in like manner become wise if endowed with the
ability to make articulate sounds; besides more. The Sophi from hearing
these things drew many conclusions respecting wisdom, what changes it
had undergone since their times; especially from this, that they do not
now know the distinction between the state of man and that of a beast,
nor even that man is born merely the form of a man, and becomes man by
instructions and such a man as the kinds of instruction he receives;
that he becomes wise from truths, unwise from falsities, and inwardly a
wild beast from evils; and that he is born merely a capacity to know.
understand, and become wise, in order that he might be a subject into
which God might inspire wisdom, from the first degree of it to the
highest. They said further that they understood from the new-comers that
wisdom which in their time was in its rise, is at this day setting.
Afterwards they instructed the new-comers how it is that man, created a
form of God, could be turned into the form of the devil. But concerning
all this the Relation may be seen (n. 692). LXXI. There was again a
meeting appointed in the place where the ancient Sophi were, since they
had heard from those sent out by them that they had found three
new-comers from the earth, one a priest, another a politician, and a
third a philosopher; these were brought and were presently asked, "What
news from earth?" And they replied, "This is new; we have heard that a
certain man says that he speaks with angels and spirits; and he relates
many things concerning their state and among them that man lives a man
after death as much as before, with this difference only, that he is
then clothed with a spiritual body, but before with a material body." On
hearing which they asked the priest what he had thought about those
things on earth. He replied that because he had believed that man was
not to live again as a man before the day of the last judgment, he with
the rest of his order were of the opinion that the things the man told
were visions, and afterwards fictions, and that at last he was in doubt.
Then he was asked whether the inhabitants of the earth could not see
from reason that man lives a man after death, and thus dissipate the
paradoxical notions concerning the state of souls in the mean time,
which are, that souls meanwhile are flying about like winds in the
universe, continually awaiting the last judgment that they may be
combined with their bodies; which lot would be worse than the lot of any
beast. To this the priest replied that they talk, but they do not
convince; and that they ascribe the combining or re-uniting of souls
with their bodies and skeletons in the sepulchre to the omnipotence of
God; and when they name omnipotence and also faith, all reason is
exiled. Afterwards the politician being questioned concerning the things
heard, replied that in the world he could not believe that man would
live after death, since all of man lies dead in the grave, and thus he
thought that that man saw specters and believed them to be angels and
spirits but that now for the first time he was convinced, by his very
senses, that he lives a man as before, and that he was therefore ashamed
of his former thoughts. The philosopher related nearly the same things
concerning himself, and concerning others of his school; saying,
moreover, that he referred those things which he had heard respecting
the things seen and heard by that man, to a place among the opinions and
hypotheses which he had collected from the ancients and moderns. On
hearing these things the Sophi were astonished, especially that
Christians, who are in light above others from revelation, should be in
such thick darkness respecting their life after death; when yet they and
the wise men of their time knew about and believed in that life; saying
further that they had noticed that the light of wisdom had lowered
itself since that age from the interior of the brain even to the mouth
under the nose, where it appears as a brightness of the lip, and in
consequence the speech of the mouth appears like wisdom. To this one of
the tyros added, "How stupid are the minds of those who now dwell on the
earth! Would that the disciples of Heraclitus who laughed at everything
and the disciples of Democritus who wept at everything were here, and we
should hear both great laughter and great weeping." After this there
were given to the new-comers plates of copper on which hieroglyphics
were engraved and they departed (n. 693). LXXII. New-comers from the
world were found, and were brought to the city under Parnassium, and
were asked, "What news from earth?" And they answered that in the world
they had believed that after death there would be rest from all kinds of
labor, and yet they had heard, when they were coming hither, that there
are here administrations, offices and employments, as in the former
world, and thus that there is not rest. To this the wise ones there
replied, "Thus you believed that now you are to live in mere idleness,
and yet idleness produces a languid, torpid, stupid and sleepy state of
the mind, and from that of the whole body, and this is death and not
life." And then they were led about in the city, and to the
administrators and workmen; on seeing which, they wondered that there
should be such things, since they had believed that there would be some
empty place in which souls were to live until the new heaven and new
earth came into existence. They were also taught that all the things
that here appear before the eyes are substantial and are called
spiritual; and that all things in their former world are material and
are called natural; and that there is this difference because they are
from different origins; namely, that all things in this world exist and
subsist from a sun which is pure love, and all things in that world
exist from a sun which is pure fire. They were also taught that in this
world there are not only administrations, but also pursuits of every
kind, and also writings and books. The new-comers were delighted with
what they were taught, and when they were going away, some virgins came
with pieces of needle-work and embroidery made with their own hands, and
gave these to them; and they sung before them an ode in which they
expressed in angelic melody the affection for useful labor and its
charms (n. 694). LXXIIII. I was introduced into an assembly where some
of the ancient philosophers were present, and was asked what they knew
in my world about influx. To which I answered, that the only influx they
knew about was that of the light and heat of their sun into the things
which are of nature, both into animate and into inanimate things; and
that they knew nothing about the influx of the spiritual world into the
natural world, although from that influx are all the wonderful things
which are beheld both in the animal kingdom there, and in the vegetable
kingdom (these were in part recounted). And because they are ignorant of
this influx, they confirm themselves in favor of nature, and become
naturalists, and at length atheists (n. 695). LXXIV. I spoke with the
followers of Aristotle, Descartes, and Leibnitz, concerning physical
influx, occasional influx, and pre-established harmony, and heard how
each confirmed his hypothesis; but as they were able to look into that
subject only with an understanding subordinated to confirmations, and
not superior to them, they ended the dispute by lot, which came out in
favor of spiritual influx, which to some extent coincides with
occasional influx (n. 696). LXXV. I was taken into a certain gymnasium
in which the young were initiated into various things pertaining to
wisdom, and this was done by the discussion of some subject which was
there proposed by the president; and the subject then under discussion
was, What is the soul, and what is its nature? There was a desk into
which those who were to answer ascended. And presently one ascended, who
said that no one since the creation of the world had been able to find
out what the soul is and what its nature is; but since it was known that
there is a soul in man, man had sought to know where it is. There was
one who held that it has its seat in man in a certain little gland which
is called the pineal gland, which is situated between the two brains in
the head; and that at first he had believed this; but as it was rejected
by many, he afterwards receded from this view. After this the second
ascended, and said that he believed the seat of the soul to be in the
head, because the understanding is there; but as he was unable to
conjecture where in the head it resided, he acceded now to the opinion
of those who said that its seat is in the three ventricles of the brain;
now to the opinion of those who said that it is in the striated bodies
there; now to the opinion of those who said that it is in the medullary
or the cortical substance, and now to the opinion of those who said that
it is in the dura mater; adding that he would leave it to everyone to
think what he liked. The third ascending said that the seat of the soul
is in the heart and thence in the blood; and this he confirmed from the
Word where it is said, heart and soul. The fourth next ascending said
that from his childhood he had believed with the ancients that the soul
is not in one part but in the whole, because it is a spiritual
substance, of which place cannot be predicated, but impletion; and
further, as soul and life mean the same thing, the life is in the whole.
The fifth ascending said that he believed the soul to be something pure,
like ether or air, and that he believed this because it is supposed that
the soul would be such after it had been separated from the body. But
the wise ones in the orchestra, perceiving that none of them knew what
the soul is, requested the president, who had proposed the problem, to
descend and teach. He therefore descending, said, "The soul is the very
essence of man; and because an essence without a form is not anything,
the soul is the form of man's forms; and this form is the truly human
form, in which wisdom with its perceptions and love with its affections
universally reside; and as you believed in the world that you would be
souls after death, you are now yourselves the souls;" besides more. And
this was confirmed by this declaration in the Book of Creation, "Jehovah
God breathed into the nostrils of Adam the soul if lives, and man became
a living soul" (Gen. 2:7) (n. 697). LXXVI. There was seen an angel with
a trumpet, with which he called together those celebrated for erudition
among Christians, that they might tell what they had believed in the
world concerning the joys of heaven and eternal happiness. This was done
because it had been said in heaven that no one in the Christian world
knew anything about them. And after about an hour there were seen six
companies coming from the learned Christians, who were asked what they
had known about the joys of heaven and eternal happiness. The first
company said that they had believed them to be merely an admission into
heaven, and then into its festive joys, as one is admitted into a house
where there is a wedding and into its festivities. The second company
said that they had believed them to be most cheerful companionship and
the sweetest conversations with angels. The third company said that they
had believed them to be feastings with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The
fourth company said that they had believed them to be paradisal
delights. The fifth company, that there would be supreme dominion,
boundless wealth, and more than royal magnificence. The sixth company,
that there would be a glorification of God and a festival enduring to
eternity. Therefore that these learned ones might know whether those
things which they had believed to be the joys of heaven were so, it was
granted them to enter into those their joys, each company by itself,
that they might learn by living experience whether those joys were
imaginary or real. This takes place with most of those who come from the
natural world into the spiritual (n. 731- 733). And then presently the
company that had thought the joys of heaven to be most cheerful
companionship and sweetest conversations with angels, were let into the
joys of their imagination; but because they were external joys and not
internal, after some days they were affected with weariness and departed
(n. 734). Afterwards those who had believed that the joys of heaven are
feasts with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were let into like things; but
because they perceived that such joys were only external and not
internal, they became weary and went away (n. 735). The same was done
with those who had believed that the joys of heaven and eternal
happiness consist in supreme dominion, boundless riches, and more than
royal magnificence (n. 736). Also with those who had believed that
heavenly joys, and consequently eternal happiness, are paradisal
delights (n. 737). Afterwards with those who had believed that heavenly
joys and eternal happiness are a perpetual glorification of God, and a
festival enduring for ever. These were finally taught what is meant in
the Word by the glorification of God (n. 738). Finally, the same was
done with those who had believed that they would enter into heavenly
joys and eternal happiness if only they were admitted into heaven; and
that they would then have joys like the joys of those who enter into the
house of a wedding, and join in the festivities there. But when they
were shown by living experience that there are no joys in heaven except
for those who have lived the life of heaven, that is, a life of charity
and faith, but instead, heaven is a torture to those who have led an
opposite life, they withdrew and affiliated themselves with their like
(n. 739). Because the angels perceived that as yet no one in the natural
world knows what the joys of heaven are, and thus what eternal happiness
is, the angel with the trumpet was told to choose ten from those who had
been called together, and introduce them into a society of heaven, that
they might see with their eyes and perceive with their minds what heaven
is and what the joys there are; and so it was done. And when they had
been admitted, it was granted them first to see the magnificent palace
of the prince there (n. 740). Then the paradise near it (n. 741).
Afterwards, the prince himself and his great men in splendid garments
(n. 742). Then, being invited to the table of the prince, they saw such
an entertainment as no eye had ever seen oil earth; and at the table
they heard the prince give instruction respecting heavenly joys and
eternal happiness, that they consist essentially in internal
blessedness, and from this in external enjoyments; and that internal
blessedness derives its essence from an affection for use (n. 743, 744).
After dinner, by command of the prince some wise men of the society were
sent for, who taught them fully about the nature and source of internal
blessedness, which is eternal happiness; and that this causes external
enjoyments to be joys; besides more concerning all these things (n. 745
746). After this they were permitted to see a wedding in that heaven,
(of which n. 747-749). And finally, to hear preaching (n. 750, 751).
When they had seen and heard all this, full of knowledge concerning
heaven and joyful in heart they descended (n. 752). LXXVII. Revelation
is here treated of. It has pleased the Lord to manifest Himself to me,
and to open the interiors of my mind and to enable me thereby to see the
things which are in heaven and hell and thus He has disclosed mysteries
which in excellence and dignity surpass all mysteries hitherto
disclosed. They are as follows. (i.) That, in each thing and all things
of the Word there is a Spiritual Sense, which does not appear in the
sense of the letter; and that consequently the Word was written by means
of the correspondences of spiritual things with natural. (ii.) The
Correspondences themselves, what they are has been explained. (iii.)
There has also been a revelation concerning the Life of men after Death.
(iv.) Also respecting Heaven and Hell, what the one is and what the
other is; also respecting Baptism and the Holy Supper. (v.) Respecting
the Sun in the spiritual world, that it is pure love from the Lord who
is in the midst of it, the light proceeding from which is wisdom, and
the heat proceeding from which is love; thus that faith and charity are
from it; and that all things that go forth from it are spiritual and
thus alive; also that the sun of the natural world is pure fire, and
therefore all things that are from the sun are natural, and thus dead.
(vi.) That there are three Degrees hitherto unknown. (vii.) And
furthermore, matters have been revealed relating to the Last Judgment;
the Lord the Savior as the God of Heaven and Earth; the New Church and
its Doctrine; the Inhabitants of the Planets, and the Earths in the
Universe (n. 846). (viii.) Also respecting Conjugial Love; that with the
spiritual it is spiritual with the natural it is natural, and with
adulterers it is carnal (n. 847). (ix.) The angels discerned by inquiry
that although these mysteries are more excellent than any mysteries
hitherto disclosed, still at this day they are regarded by many as of no
account (n. 848). (x.) A murmur was heard from some in the lower earth
that they would not believe those things unless Miracles were done; but
the answer was made that they would no more believe through miracles
than did Pharaoh and the Egyptians; or no more than the posterity of
Jacob when they danced about the golden calf in the desert; or no more
than the Jews when they saw the miracles done by the Lord Himself (n.
849). (xi.) Finally, why the Lord revealed these mysteries to me, and
not rather to some one of the ecclesiastical order (n. 850). The things
contained in the Memorable Relations which follow the chapters are true;
and like things were seen and heard by the prophets before the coming of
the Lord, and like things by the apostles after His coming, as by Peter,
Paul, and especially by John in the Apocalypse; which things are set
forth (n. 851).
