Reform Judaism

### A Centenary Perspective

Adopted at San Francisco, 1976

*Scanned (and uncorrected) from text provided by Ms. Emily Grotta,
director of communications for the Union of American Hebrew
Congregations*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Central Conference of American Rabbis has on special occasions
described the spiritual state of Reform Judaism. The centenaries of the
founding of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations and the Hebrew
Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion seem an appropriate time for
another such effort. We therefore record our sense of the unity of our
movement today.

#### **One Hundred Years: What We Have Taught**

We celebrate the role of Reform Judaism in North America, the growth of
our movement on this free ground, the great contributions of our
membership to the dreams and achievements of this society. We also feel
great satisfaction at how much of our pioneering conception of Judaism
has been accepted by the Household of Israel. It now seems self- evident
to most Jews: that our tradition should interact with modern culture;
that its forms ought to reflect a contemporary esthetic; that its
scholarship needs to be conducted by modern, critical methods; and that
change has been and must continue to be a fundamental reality in Jewish
life. Moreover, though some still disagree, substantial numbers have
also accepted our teachings: that the ethics of universalism implicit in
traditional Judaism must be an explicit part of our Jewish duty; that
women have full rights to practice Judaism; and that Jewish obligation
begins with the informed will of every individual. Most modern Jews,
within their various religious movements, are embracing Reform Jewish
perspectives. We see this past century as having confirmed the essential
wisdom of our movement.

#### **One Hundred Years: What We Have Learned**

Obviously, much else has changed in the past century. We continue to
probe the extraordinary events of the past generation, seeking to
understand their meaning and to incorporate their significance in our
lives. The Holocaust shattered our easy optimism about humanity and its
inevitable progress. The State of Israel, through its many
accomplishments, raised our sense of the Jews as a people to new heights
of aspiration and devotion. The widespread threats to freedom, the
problems inherent in the explosion of new knowledge and of ever more
powerful technologies, and the spiritual emptiness of much of Western
culture have taught us to be less dependent on the values of our society
and to reassert what remains perenially valid in Judaism's teaching. We
have learned that the survival of the Jewish people is of highest
priority and that in carrying out our Jewish responsibilities we help
move humanity toward its messianic fulfillment.

#### **Diversity Within Unity, the Hallmark of Reform**

Reform Jews respond to change in various ways according to the Reform
principle of the autonomy of the individual. However, Reform Judaism
does more than tolerate diversity; it engenders it. In our uncertain
historical situation we must expect to have far greater diversity than
previous generations knew. How we shall live with diversity without
stifling dissent and withou paralyzing our ability to take positive
action will test ou character and our principles. We stand open to any
position thoughtfully and conscientiously advocated in the spirit of
Reform Jewish belief. While we may differ in our interpretation and
application of the ideas enunciated here, we accept such differences as
precious and see in them Judaism's best hope for confronting whatever
the future holds for us. Yet in all our diversity we perceive a certain
unity and we shall not allow our differences in some particulars to
obscure what binds us together.

1.  *God* -- The affirmation of God has always been essential to our
    people's will to survive. In our struggle through the centuries to
    preserve our faith we have experienced and conceived of God in many
    ways. The trials of our own time and the challenges of modern
    culture have made steady belief and clear understanding difficult
    for some. Nevertheless, we ground our lives, personally and
    communally, on God's reality and remain open to new experiences and
    conceptions of the Divine. Amid the mystery we call life, we affirm
    that human beings, created in God's image, share in God's eternality
    despite the mystery we call death.

2.  *The People Israel* -- The Jewish people and Judaism defy precise
    definition because both are in the process of becoming. Jews, by
    birth or conversion, constitute an uncommon union of faith and
    peoplehood. Born as Hebrews in the ancient Near East, we are bound
    together like all ethnic groups by language, land, history, culture,
    and institutions. But the people of Israel is unique because of its
    involvement with God and its resulting perception of the human
    condition. Throughout our long history our people has been
    inseparable from its religion with its messianic hope that humanity
    will be redeemed.

3.  *Torah* -- Torah results from the relationship between God and the
    Jewish people. The records of our earliest confrontations are
    uniquely important to us. Lawgivers and prophets, historians and
    poets gave us a heritage whose study is a religious imperative and
    whose practice is our chief means to holiness. Rabbis and teachers,
    philosophers and mystics, gifted Jews in every age amplified the
    Torah tradition. For millennia, the creation of Torah has not ceased
    and Jewish creativity in our time is adding to the chain of
    tradition.

4.  *Our Religious Obligations: Religious Practice* -- Judaism
    emphasizes action rather than creed as the primary expression of a
    religious life, the means by which we strive to achieve universal
    justice and peace. Reform Judaism shares this emphasis on duty and
    obligation. Our founders stressed that the Jew's ethical
    responsibilities, personal and social, are enjoined by God. The past
    century has taught us that the claims made upon us may begin with
    our ethical obligations but they extend to many other aspects of
    Jewish living, including: creating a Jewish home centered on family
    devotion: lifelong study; private prayer and public worship; daily
    religious observance; keeping the Sabbath and the holy days:
    celebrating the major events of life; involvement with the
    synagogues and community; and other activities which promote the
    survival of the Jewish people and enhance its existence. Within each
    area of Jewish observance Reform Jews are called upon to confront
    the claims of Jewish tradition, however differently perceived, and
    to exercise their individual autonomy, choosing and creating on the
    basis of commitment and knowledge.

5.  *Our Obligations: The State of Israel and the Diaspora* -- We are
    privileged to live in an extraordinary time, one in which a third
    Jewish commonwealth has been established in our people's ancient
    homeland. We are bound to that land and to the newly reborn State of
    Israel by innumerable religious and ethnic ties. We have been
    enriched by its culture and ennobled by its indomitable spirit. We
    see it providing unique opportunities for Jewish self-expression. We
    have both a stake and a responsibility in building the State of
    Israel, assuring its security, and defining its Jewish character. We
    encourage *aliyah* for those who wish to find maximum personal
    fulfillment in the cause of Zion. We demand that Reform Judaism be
    unconditionally legitimized in the State of Israel.

    At the same time that we consider the State of Israel vital to the
    welfare of Judaism everywhere, we reaffirm the mandate of our
    tradition to create strong Jewish communities wherever we live. A
    genuine Jewish life is possible in any land, each community
    developing its own particular character and determining its Jewish
    responsibilities. The foundation of Jewish community life is the
    synagogue. It leads us beyond itself to cooperate with other Jews,
    to share their concerns, and to assume leadership in communal
    affairs. We are therefore committed to the full democratization of
    the jewish community and to its hallowing in terms of Jewish values.

    The State of Israel and the Diaspora, in fruitful dialogue, can show
    how a people transcends nationalism even as it affirms it, thereby
    setting an exampic for humanity which remains largely concerned with
    dangerously parochial goals.

6.  *Our Obligations: Survival and Service* -- Early Reform Jews, newly
    admitted to general society and seeing in this the evidence of a
    growing universalism, regularly spoke of Jewish purpose in terms of
    Jewry's service to humanity. In recent years we have become freshly
    conscious of the virtues of pluralism and the values of
    particularism. The Jewish people in its unique way of life validates
    its own worth while working toward the fulfillment of its messianic
    expectations.

    Until the recent past our obligations to the Jewish people and to
    all humanity seemed congruent. At times now these two imperatives
    appear to conflict. We know of no simple way to resolve such
    tensions. We must, however, confront them without abandoning either
    of our commitments. A universal concern for humanity unaccompanied
    by a devotion to our particular people is self-destructive; a
    passion for our people without involvement in humankind contradicts
    what the prophets have meant to us. Judaism calls us simultaneously
    to universal and particular obligations.

#### **Hope: Our Jewish Obligation**

Previous generations of Reform Jews had unbound confidence in humanity's
potential for good. We have lived through terrible tragedy and been
compelled to reappropriate our tradition's realism about the human
capacity for evil. Yet our people has always refused to despair. The
survivors of the Holocaust, being granted life, seized it, nurtured it,
and, rising above catastrophe, showed humankind that the human spirit is
indomitable. The State of Israel, established and maintained by the
Jewish will to live, demonstrates what a united people can accomplish in
history. The existence of the Jew is an argument against despair; Jewish
survival is warrant for human hope.

We remain God's witness that history is not meaningless. We affirm that
with God's help people are not powerless to affect their destiny. We
dedicate ourselves, as did the generations of Jews who went before us,
to work and wait for that day when "They shall not hurt or destroy in
all My holy mountain for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord as the waters cover the sea."

------------------------------------------------------------------------
