Solomon Schechter - Studies in Judaism - The Dogmas of Judaism

# The Dogmas of Judaism

Chapter VI of Schechter's *Studies in Judaism, First Series*, Copyright,
1896 by the Jewish Publication Society of America (in the public domain)

Note: Scanned in and uncorrected text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Index to this essay

[\[Introductory material\]](#intro) [\[The Bible: Are we commanded to
believe?\]](#bible) [\[The Mishnah - Sanhedrin as source for
dogma\]](#mishnah) [\[Caraite belief\]](#caraites) [\[Saadiah and the
beginning of Jewish dogma\]](#saadiah) [\[Maimonides and the 13
Articles\]](#maimonides) [\[The Anti-Maimonists\]](#anti) [\[Chasdai Ibn
Crescas\]](#chasdai) [\[Albo\]](#albo)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="intro">\[Introductory material\]</span>  
The object of this essay is to say about the dogmas of Judaism a word
which I think ought not to be left unsaid.

In speaking of dogmas it must be understood that Judaism does not
ascribe to them any saving power. The belief in a dogma or a doctrine
without abiding by its real or supposed consequences (eg. the, belief in
*creatio ex nihilo* without keeping the Sabbath) is of no value. And the
question about certain doctrines is not whether they possess or do not
possess the desired charm against certain diseases of the soul, but
whether they ought to be considered as characteristics of Judaism or
not.

It must again be premised that the subject, which occupied the thoughts
of the greatest and noblest Jewish minds for so many centuries, has been
neglected for a comparatively long time. And this for various reasons.
First, there is Mendelssohn's assertion, or supposed assertion, in his
*Jerusalem*, that Judaism has no dogmas -- an assertion which has been
accepted by the majority of modern Jewish theologians as the only dogma
Judaism possesses. You can hear it pronounced in scores of Jewish
pulpits; you can read it written in scores of Jewish books. To admit the
possibility that Mendelssohn was in error was hardly permissible,
especially for those with \[p. 148\] whom he enjoys a certain
infallibility. Nay, even the fact that he himself was not consistent in
his theory, and on another occasion declared that Judaism has dogmas,
only that they are purer and more in harmony with reason than those of
other religions; or even the more important fact that he published a
school-book for children, in which the so-called Thirteen Articles were
embodied, only that instead of the formula "I believe," he substituted
"I am convinced," -- even such patent facts did not produce much effect
upon many of our modern theologians. \[n. 1\] They were either
overlooked or explained away so as to make them harmonise with the great
dogma of dogmalessness. For it is one of the attributes of
infallibility, that the words of its happy possessor must always be
reconcilable even when they appear to the eye of the unbeliever as gross
contradictions.

Another cause of the neglect into which the subject has fallen is that
our century is an *historical* one. It is not only books that have their
fate, but also whole sciences and literatures. In past times it was
religious speculation that formed the favorite study of scholars, in our
time it is history with its critical foundation on a sound philology.
Now as these two most important branches of Jewish science were so long
neglected -- were perhaps never cultivated in the true meaning of the
word, and as Jewish literature is so vast and Jewish history so
far-reaching and eventful, we cannot wonder that these studies have
absorbed the time and the labour of the greatest and best Jewish writers
in this century.

There is, besides, a certain tendency in historical studies that is
hostile to mere theological speculation. The historian deals with
realities, the theologian with abstrac- \[p149\] tions. The latter likes
to shape the universe after his system, and tells us how things ought to
be, the former teaches us how they are or have been, and the explanation
he gives for their being so and not otherwise includes in most cases
also a kind of justification for their existence. There is also the
*odium theologicum*, which has been the cause of so much misfortune that
it is hated by the historian, whilst the superficial, rationalistic way
in which the theologian manages to explain everything which does not
suit his system is most repulsive to the critical spirit.

But it cannot be denied that this neglect has caused much confusion.
Especially is this noticeable in England, which is essentially a
theological country, and where people are but little prone to give up
speculation about things which concern their most sacred interest and
greatest happiness. Thus whilst we are exceedingly poor in all other
branches of Jewish learning, we are comparatively rich in productions of
a theological character. We have a superfluity of essays on such
delicate subjects as eternal punishment, immortality of the soul, the
day of judgment, etc., and many treatises on the definition of Judaism.
But knowing little or nothing of the progress recently made in Jewish
theology, of the many protests against all kinds of infallibility,
whether canonised in this century or in olden times, we in England still
maintain that Judaism has no dogmas as if nothing to the contrary had
ever been said. We seek the foundation of Judaism in political economy,
in hygiene, in everything except religion. Following the fashion of the
day to esteem religion in proportion to its ability to adapt itself to
every possible and impossible metaphysical and social system, we are
\[p. 150\] anxious to squeeze out of Judaism the last drop of faith and
hope, and strive to make it so flexible that we can turn it in every
direction which it is our pleasure to follow. But alas! the flexibility
has progressed so far as to classify Judaism among the invertebrate
species, the lowest order of living things. It strongly resembles a
certain Christian school which addresses itself to the world in general
and claims to satisfy everybody alike. It claims to be socialism for the
adherents of Karl Marx and Lassalle, worship of man for the followers of
Comte and St. Simon; it carefully avoids the word "God" for the comfort
of agnostics and sceptics, whilst on the other hand it pretends to hold
sway over paradise, hell, and immortality for the edification of
believers. In such illusions many of our theologians delight. For
illusions they are; you cannot be everything if you want to be anything.
Moreover, illusions in themselves are bad enough, but we are menaced
with what is still worse. Judaism, divested of every higher religious
motive, is in danger of falling into gross materialism. For what else is
the meaning of such declarations as "Believe what you like, but conform
to this or that mode of life"; what else does it mean but "We cannot
expect you to believe that the things you are bidden to do are commanded
by a higher authority; there is not such a thing as belief, but you
ought to do them for conventionalism or for your own convenience."

But both these motives -- the good opinion of our neighbours, as well as
our bodily health -- have nothing to do with our nobler and higher
sentiments, and degrade Judaism to a matter of expediency or diplomacy.
Indeed, things have advanced so far that well-meaning, but ill-advised
writers even think to render a service to Judaism \[p. 151\] by
declaring it to be a kind of enlightened Hedonism, or rather a moderate
Epicureanism.

I have no intention of here answering the question, What is Judaism ?
This question is not less perplexing than the problem, What is God's
world? Judaism is also a great Infinite, composed of as many endless
Units, the Jews. And these Unit-Jews have been, and are still, scattered
through all the world, and have passed under an immensity of influences,
good and bad. If so, how can we give an exact definition of the
Infinite, called Judaism?

But if there is anything sure, it is that the highest motives which
worked through the history of Judaism are the strong belief in God and
the unshaken confidence that at last this God, the God of Israel, will
be the God of the whole world; or, in other words, Faith and Hope are
the two most prominent characteristics of Judaism.

In the following pages I shall try to give a short account of the manner
in which these two principles of Judaism found expression, from the
earliest times down to the age of Mendelssohn; that is, to present an
outline of the history of Jewish Dogmas. First, a few observations on
the position of the Bible and the Talmud in relation to our theme.
Insufficient and poor as they may be in proportion to the importance of
these two fundamental documents of Judaism, these remarks may
nevertheless suggest a connecting link between the teachings of Jewish
antiquity and those of Maimonides and his successors.

#### <span id="bible">\[The Bible\]</span>

I begin with the Scriptures.

The Bible itself hardly contains a command bidding us *to believe*. We
are hardly ordered, *e.g.*, to believe in the existence of God. I say
hardly, but I do not altogether deny the existence of such a command. It
is true that we \[p. 152\] do not find in the Scripture such words as:
"You are commanded to believe in the existence of God." Nor is any
punishment assigned as awaiting him who denies it. Notwithstanding these
facts, many Jewish authorities -- among them such important men as
Maimonides, R. Judah Hallevi, Nachmanides -- perceive, in the first
words of the Ten Commandments, "I am the Lord thy God," the command to
believe in His existence. \[n. 2\]

Be this as it may, there cannot be the shadow of a doubt that the Bible,
in which every command is dictated by God, and in which all its heroes
are the servants, the friends, or the ambassadors of God, presumes such
a belief in every one to whom those laws are dictated, and these heroes
address themselves. Nay, I think that the word "belief" is not even
adequate. In a world with so many visible facts and invisible causes, as
life and death, growth and decay, light and darkness; in a world where
the sun rises and sets; where the stars appear regularly; where heavy
rains pour down from the sky, often accompanied by such grand phenomena
as thunder and lightning; in a world full of such marvels, but into
which no notion has entered of all our modern true or false explanations
-- who but God is behind all these things? "Have the gates," asks God,
"have the gates of death been open to thee? or hast thou seen the doors
of the shadow of death? . . .Where is the way where light dwelleth? and
as for darkness, where is the place thereof ? . . . Hath the rain a
father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew? . . . Canst thou bind the
sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion ? . . . Canst
thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?"
(Job xxxviii.). Of all these wonders, God, \[p. 153\] was not merely the
*prima causa*; they were the result of His direct action, without any
intermediary causes. And it is as absurd to say that the ancient world
believed in God, as for a future historian to assert of the nineteenth
century that it believed in the effects of electricity. We see them, and
so antiquity saw God. If there was any danger, it lay not in the denial
of the existence of a God, but in having a wrong belief. Belief in as
many gods as there are manifestations in nature, the investing of them
with false attributes, the misunderstanding of God's relation to men,
lead to immorality. Thus the greater part of the laws and teachings of
the Bible are either directed against polytheism, with all its low ideas
of God, or rather of gods; or they are directed towards regulating God's
relation to men. Man is a servant of God, or His prophet, or even His
friend. But this relationship man obtains only by his conduct. Nay, all
man's actions are carefully regulated by God, and connected with His
holiness. The 19th chapter of Leviticus, which is considered by the
Rabbis as the portion of the Law in which the most important articles of
the Torah are embodied, is headed, "Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord
your own God am holy." And each law therein occurring, even those which
concern our relations to each other, is not founded on utilitarian
reasons, but is ordained because the opposite of it is an offence to the
holiness of God, and profanes His creatures, whom He desired to be as
holy as He is. \[n. 3\]

Thus the whole structure of the Bible is built upon the visible fact of
the existence of a God, and upon the belief in the relation of God to
men, especially to Israel. In spite of all that has been said to the
contrary, the Bible does lay stress upon belief, where belief is
required. The \[p. 154\] unbelievers are rebuked again and again. "For
all this they sinned still, and believed not for His wondrous work,"
complains Asaph (Ps. lxxviii. 32). And belief is praised in such exalted
words as, "Thus saith the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy
youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness, in a land that was not sown" (Jer.ii. 2). The Bible,
especially the books of the prophets, consists, in great part, of
promises for the future, which the Rabbis justly termed the
"Consolations." \[n. 4\] For our purpose, it is of no great consequence
to examine what future the prophets had in view, whether an immediate
future or one more remote, at the end of days. At any rate, they
inculcated hope and confidence that God would bring to pass a better
time. I think that even the most advanced Bible critic -- provided he is
not guided by some modern Aryan reasons -- must perceive in such
passages as, "The Lord shall reign for ever and ever," "The Lord shall
rejoice n his works," and many others, a hope for more than the
establishment of the "national Deity among his votaries in Palestine."

We have now to pass over an interval of many centuries, the length of
which depends upon the views held is to the date of the close of the
canon, and examine what the Rabbis, the representatives of the prophets,
thought on this subject. Not that the views of the author of the *Wisdom
of Solomon*, of Philo and Aristobulus, and many others of the
Judaeo-Alexandrian school would be uninteresting for us. But somehow
their influence on Judaism was only a passing one, and their doctrines
never became authoritative in the Synagogue. We must here confine
ourselves to those who, even by the \[p. 155\] testimony of their
bitterest enemies, occupied the seat of Moses.

The successors of the prophets had to deal with new circumstances, and
accordingly their teachings were adapted to the wants of their times. As
the result of manifold foreign influences, the visible fact of the
existence of God as manifested in the Bible had been somewhat obscured.
Prophecy ceased, and the Holy Spirit which inspired a few chosen ones
took its place. Afterwards this influence was reduced to the hearing of
a Voice from Heaven, which was audible to still fewer. On the other hand
the Rabbis had this advantage that they were not called upon to fight
against idolatry as their predecessors the prophets had been. The evil
inclination to worship idols was, as the Talmud expresses it
allegorically, killed by the Men of the Great Synagogue, or, as we
should put it, it was suppressed by the sufferings of the captivity in
Babylon. This change of circumstances is marked by the following fact:
-- Whilst the prophets mostly considered idolatry as the cause of all
sin, the Rabbis show a strong tendency to ascribe sin to a defect in, or
a want of, belief on the part of the sinner. They teach that Adam would
not have sinned unless he had first denied the "Root of all" (or the
main principle), namely, the belief in the Omnipresence of God. Of Cain
they say that before murdering his brother he declared: "There is no
judgment, there is no judge, there is no world to come, and there is no
reward for the just, and no punishment for the wicked." \[n. 5\]

In another place we read that the commission of a sin in secret is an
impertinent attempt by the doer to oust God from the world. But if
unbelief is considered as \[p. 156\] the root of all evil, we may expect
that the reverse of it, a perfect faith, would be praised in the most
exalted, terms. So we read: Faith is so great that the man who possesses
it may hope to become a worthy vessel of the Holy Spirit, or, as we
should express it, that he may hope to obtain by this power the highest
degree of communion with his Maker. The Patriarch Abraham,
notwithstanding all his other virtues, only became "the possessor of
both worlds" by the merit of his strong faith. Nay, even the fulfilment
of a single law when accompanied by true faith is, according to the
Rabbis, sufficient to bring man nigh to God. And the future redemption
is also conditional on the degree of faith shown by Israel. \[n. 6\]

It has often been asked what the Rabbis would have thought of a man who
fulfils every commandment of the Torah, but does not believe that this
Torah was given by God, or that there exists a God at all. It is indeed
very difficult to answer this question with any degree of certainty. In
the time of the Rabbis people were still too simple for such a
diplomatic religion, and conformity in the modern sense was quite an
unknown thing. But from the foregoing remarks it would seem that the
Rabbis could not conceive such a monstrosity as atheistic orthodoxy.
For, as we have seen, the Rabbis thought that unbelief must needs end in
sin, for faith is the origin of all good. Accordingly, in the case just
supposed they would have either suspected the man's orthodoxy, or would
have denied that his views were really what he professed them to be.

#### <span id="mishnah">\[The Mishnah\]</span>

Still more important than the above cited Agadic passages is one which
we are about to quote from the tractate Sanhedrin. This tractate deals
with the constitution of the supreme law-court, the examination of the
witnesses, the functions of the judges, and the different punishment to
be inflicted on the transgressors of the law. After having enumerated
various kinds of capital punishment, the Mishnah adds the following
words:

> "These are (the men) who are excluded from the life to come: He who
> says there is no resurrection from death; he who says there is no
> Torah given from heaven, and the Epikurus. \[n. 7\]

This passage was considered by the Rabbis of the Middle Ages, as well as
by modern scholars, the *locus classicus* for the dogma question. There
are many passages in the Rabbinic literature which exclude man from the
world to come for this or that sin. But these are more or less of an
Agadic (legendary) character, and thus lend themselves to exaggeration
and hyperbolic language. They cannot, therefore, be considered as
serious legal dicta, or as the general opinion of the Rabbis.

The Mishnah in Sanhedrin, however, has, if only by its position in a
legal tractate, a certain Halachic (obligatory) character. And the fact
that so early an authority as R. Akiba made additions to it guarantees
its high antiquity. The first two sentences of this Mishnah are clear
enough. In modern language, and positively speaking, they would
represent articles of belief in Resurrection and Revelation. Great
difficulty is found in defining what was meant by the word *Epicurus*.
The authorities of the Middle Ages, to whom I shall again have to refer,
explain the Epikurus to be a man who denies the belief in reward and
punishment; others identify him with one who denies the belief in
Providence; while others again consider the Epikurus to be one who
denies Tradition. But the paral- \[p. 158\] lel passages in which it
occurs incline one rather to think that this word cannot be defined by
one kind of heresy. It implies rather a frivolous treatment of the words
of Scripture or of Tradition. In the case of the latter (Tradition) it
is certainly not honest difference of opinion that is condemned; for the
Rabbis themselves differed very often from each other, and even
Mediaeval authorities, did not feel any compunction about explaining
Scripture in variance with the Rabbinic interpretation, and sometimes
they even went so far as to declare that the view of this or that great
authority was only to be considered as an isolated opinion not deserving
particular attention. What they did blame was, as already said, scoffing
and impiety. We may thus safely assert that reverence for the teachers
of Israel formed the third essential principle of Judaism. \[n. 8\]

I have still to remark that there occur in the Talmud such passages as
"the Jew, even if he has sinned, is still a Jew," or "He who denies
idolatry is called a Jew." These and similar passages have been used to
prove that Judaism was not a positive religion, but only involved the
negation of idolatry. But it has been overlooked that the statements
quoted have more a legal than a theological character. The Jew belonged
to his nationality even after having committed the greatest sin, just as
the Englishman does not cease to be an Englishman -- in regard to
treason and the like -- by having committed a heinous crime. But he has
certainly acted in a very un-English way, and having outraged the
feelings of the whole nation will have to suffer for his misconduct. The
Rabbis in a similar manner did not maintain that he who gave up the
belief in Revelation and Resurrection, and treated irreverently the
teach- \[p. 159\] ers of Israel, severed his connection with the Jewish
nation, but that, for his crime, he was going to suffer the heaviest
punishment. He was to be excluded from the world to come.

Still, important as is the passage quoted from Sanhedrin, it would be
erroneous to think that it exhausted the creed of the Rabbis. The
liturgy and innumerable passages in the Midrashim show that they
ardently clung to the belief in the advent of the Messiah. All their
hope was turned to the future redemption and the final establishment of
the Kingdom of Heaven on earth. Judaism, stripped of this belief, would
have been for them devoid of meaning. The belief in reward and
punishment is also repeated again and again in the old Rabbinic
literature. A more emphatic declaration of the belief in Providence than
is conveyed by the following passages is hardly conceivable. "Everything
is foreseen, and free will is given. And the world is judged by grace."
Or, "the born are to die, and the dead to revive, and the living to be
judged. For to know and to notify, and that it may be known that He
(God) is the Framer and He the Creator, and He the Discerner, and He the
judge, and He the Witness," etc. \[n. 9\]

But it must not be forgotten that it was not the habit of the Rabbis to
lay down, either for conduct or for doctrine, rules which were commonly
known. When they urged the three points stated above there must have
been some historical reason for it. Probably these principles were
controverted by some heretics. Indeed, the whole tone of the passage
cited from Sanhedrin is a protest against certain unbelievers who are
threatened with punishment. Other beliefs, not less essential, but less
disputed, remain \[p. 160\] unmentioned, because there was no necessity
to assert them.

#### <span id="caraites">\[The Caraites\]</span>

It was not till a much later time, when the Jews came into closer
contact with new philosophical schools, and also new creeds which were
more liable than heathenism was to be confused with Judaism, that this
necessity was felt. And thus we are led at once to the period when the
Jews became acquainted with the teachings of the Mohammedan schools. The
Caraites came very early into contact with non-Jewish systems. And so we
find that they were also the first to formulate Jewish dogmas in a fixed
number, and in a systematic order. It is also possible that their
separation from the Tradition, and their early division into little
sects among themselves, compelled them to take this step, in order to
avoid further sectarianism.

The number of their dogmas amounts to ten. According to Judah Hadasi
(150), who would appear to have derived them from his predecessors,
their dogmas include the following articles:

1.  *Creatio ex nihilo*;
2.  The existence of a Creator, God;
3.  This God is an absolute unity as well as incorporeal;
4.  Moses and the other prophets were sent by God;
5.  God has given to us the Torah, which is true and complete in every
    respect, not wanting the addition of the so-called Oral Law;
6.  The Torah must be studied by every Jew in the original (Hebrew)
    language;
7.  The Holy Temple was a place elected by God for His manifestation;
8.  Resurrection of the dead;
9.  Punishment and reward after death;
10. The Coming of the Messiah, the son of David.

How far the predecessors of Hadasi were influenced by a certain Joseph
Albashir (about 950), of whom there exists a manuscript work, "Rudiments
of Faith," I am unable to \[p. 161\] say. The little we know of him
reveals more of his intimacy with Arabic thoughts than of his importance
for his sect in particular and for Judaism in general. After Hadasi I
shall mention here Elijah Bashazi, a Caraite writer of the end of the
fifteenth century. This author, who was much influenced by Maimonides,
omits the second and the seventh articles. In order to make up the ten
he numbers the belief in the eternity of God as an article, and divides
the fourth article into two. In the fifth article Bashazi does not
emphasize so strongly the completeness of the Torah as Hadasi, and omits
the portion which is directed against Tradition. It is interesting to
see the distinction which Bashazi draws between the Pentateuch and the
Prophets. While he thinks that the five books of Moses can never be
altered, he regards the words of the Prophets as only relating to their
contemporaries, and thus subject to changes. As I do not want to
anticipate Maimonides' system, I must refrain from giving here the
articles laid down by Solomon Troki in the beginning of the eighteenth
century. For the articles of Maimonides are copied by this writer with a
few slight alterations so as to dress them in a Caraite garb.

I must dismiss the Caraites with these few remarks, my object being
chiefly to discuss the dogmas of the Synagogue from which they had
separated themselves. Besides, as in everything Caraitic, there is no
further development of the question. As Bashazi laid them down, they are
still taught by the Caraites of to-day. I return to the Rabbanites.
\[n.10\]

#### <span id="saadiah">\[Saadiah\]</span>

As is well known, Maimonides (1130-1205), was the first Rabbanite who
formulated the dogmas of the Synagogue. But there are indications of
earlier attempts. R. Saadiah \[p. 162\] Gaon's (892-942) work, *Creeds
and Opinions*, shows such traces. He says in his preface, "My heart
sickens to see that the belief of my co-religionists is impure and that
their theological views are confused." The subjects he treats in this
book, such as

-   creation,
-   unity of God,
-   resurrection of the dead,
-   the future redemption of Israel,
-   reward and punishment,

and other kindred theological subjects might thus, perhaps, be
considered as the essentials of the creed that the Gaon desired to
present in a pure and rational form. R. Hannaneel, of Kairowan, \[n.
11\] in the first half of the eleventh century, says in one of his
commentaries that to deserve eternal life one must believe in *four*
things:

1.  in God,
2.  in the prophets,
3.  in a future world where the just will be rewarded,
4.  and in the advent of the Redeemer.

From R. Judah Hallevi's *Cusari*, written in the beginning of the
twelfth century, we might argue that the belief in the election of
Israel by God was the cardinal dogma of the author. \[n. 12\] Abraham
Ibn Daud, a contemporary of Maimonides, in his book *The High Belief*,
\[n. 13\] speaks of *rudiments*, among which, besides such metaphysical
principles as unity, rational conception of God's attributes, etc., the
belief in the immutability of the Law, etc., is included. Still, all
these works are intended to furnish evidence from philosophy or history
for the truth of religion rather than to give a definition of this
truth. The latter task was undertaken by Maimonides.

#### <span id="maimonides">\[Maimonides\]</span>

I refer to the thirteen articles embodied in his first work, *The
Commentary to the Mishnah*. They are appended to the Mishnah in
Sanhedrin, with which I dealt above. But though they do not form an
independent treatise, Maimonides remarks must not be considered as
merely incidental. \[p. 163\] That Maimonides was quite conscious of the
importance of this exposition can be gathered from the concluding words
addressed to the reader:

> "Know these (words) and repeat them many times, and think them over in
> the proper way. God knows that thou wouldst be deceiving thyself if
> thou thinkest thou hast understood them by having read them once or
> even ten times. Be not, therefore, hasty in perusing them. I have not
> composed them with out deep study and earnest reflection."

The result of this deep study was that the following Thirteen Articles
constitute the creed of Judaism. They are: --

1.  The belief in the existence of a Creator;
2.  The belief in His Unity;
3.  The belief in His Incorporeality;
4.  The belief in His Eternity;
5.  The belief that all worship and adoration are due to Him alone;
6.  The belief in Prophecy;
7.  The belief that Moses was the greatest of all Prophets, both before
    and after him;
8.  The belief that the Torah was revealed to Moses on Mount Sinai;
9.  The belief in the Immutability of this revealed Torah;
10. The belief that God knows the actions of men;
11. The belief in Reward and Punishment;
12. The belief in the coming of the Messiah;
13. The belief in the Resurrection of the dead.

The impulse given by the great philosopher and still ,greater Jew was
eagerly followed by succeeding generations, and Judaism thus came into
possession of a dogmatic literature such as it never knew before
Maimonides. Maimonides is the centre of this literature, and I shall
accordingly speak in the remainder of this essay of Maimonists and
Anti-Maimonists. These terms really apply to the great controversy that
raged round Maimonides *Guide of* \[p. 164\] *the Perplexed*, but I
shall, chiefly for brevity's sake, employ them in these pages in a
restricted sense to refer to the dispute concerning the Thirteen
Articles.

Among the Maimonists we may probably include the great majority of Jews,
who accepted the Thirteen Articles without further question. Maimonides
must indeed have filled up a great gap in Jewish theology, a gap,
moreover, the existence of which was very generally perceived. A century
had hardly elapsed before the Thirteen Articles had become a theme for
the poets of the Synagogue. And almost every country where Jews lived
can show a poem or a prayer founded on these Articles. R. Jacob Molin
(1420) of Germany speaks of metrical and rhymed songs in the German
language, the burden of which was the Thirteen Articles, and which were
read by the common people with great devotion. The numerous commentaries
and homilies written on the same topic would form a small library in
themselves. \[n. 14\] But on the other hand it must not be denied that
the Anti-Maimonists, that is to say those Jewish writers who did not
agree with the creed formulated by Maimonides, or agreed only in part
with him, form also a very strong and respectable minority. They deserve
our attention the more as it is their works which brought life into the
subject and deepened it. It is not by a perpetual Amen to every
utterance of a great authority that truth or literature gains anything.

#### <span id="anti">\[The Anti-Maimonists\]</span>

The Anti-Maimonists can be divided into two classes. The one class
categorically denies that Judaism has dogmas. I shall have occasion to
touch on this view when I come to speak of Abarbanel. Here I pass at
once to the second class of Anti-Maimonists. This consists of those who
agree with Maimonides as to the existence of dogmas \[p. 165\] in
Judaism, but who differ from him as to what these dogmas are, or who
give a different enumeration of them.

As the first of these Anti-Maimonists we may regard Nachmanides, who, in
his famous *Sermon in the Presence of the King*, speaks of three
fundamental principles:

-   Creation (that is, non-eternity of matter),
-   Omniscience of God, and
-   Providence.

Next comes R. Abba Mari ben Moses, of Montpellier. He wrote at the
beginning of the fourteenth century, and is famous in Jewish history for
his zeal against the study of philosophy. We possess a small pamphlet by
him dealing with our subject, and it forms a kind of prologue to his
collection of controversial letters against the rationalists of his
time. \[n. 15\] He lays down three articles as the fundamental teachings
of Religion:

1.  Metaphysical: The existence of God, including His Unity and
    Incorporeality;
2.  Mosaic: *Creatio ex nihilo* by God -- a consequence of this
    principle is the belief that God is capable of altering the laws of
    nature at His pleasure;
3.  Ethical: Special Providence -- *i.e.*, God knows all our actions in
    all their details.

Abba Mari does not mention Maimonides' Thirteen Articles. But it would
be false to conclude that he rejected the belief in the coming of the
Messiah, or any other article of Maimonides. The whole tone and tendency
of this pamphlet is polemical, and it is therefore probable that he only
urged those points which were either doubted or explained in an
unorthodox way by the sceptics of his time.

Another scholar, of Provence, who wrote but twenty years later than Abba
Mari -- R. David ben Samuel d'Estella (1320) -- speaks of the seven
pillars of religion. They are:

-   Revelation,
-   Providence,
-   Reward and Punishment, \[p. 166\]
-   the Coming of the Messiah,
-   Resurrection of the Dead,
-   Creatio ex nihilo, and
-   Free Will. \[n. 16\]

Of authors living, in other countries, I have to mention here R.
Shemariah, of Crete, who flourished at about the same time as R. David
d'Estella, and is known from his efforts to reconcile the Caraites with
the Rabbanites. This author wrote a book for the purpose of furnishing
Jewish students with evidence for what he considered the five
fundamental teachings of Judaism, viz.:

1.  The Existence of God;
2.  The Incorporeality of God;
3.  His Absolute Unity;
4.  That God created heaven and earth;
5.  That God created the world after His will 5106 years ago -- 5106
    (1346 A.C.), being the year in which Shemariah wrote these words.
    \[n. 17\]

In Portugal, at about the same time, we find R. David ben Yom-Tob Bilia
adding to the articles of Maimonides thirteen of his own, which he calls
the "Fundamentals of the Thinking Man." Five of these articles relate to
the functions of the human soul, that, according to him, emanated from
God, and to the way in which this divine soul receives its punishment
and reward. The other eight articles are as follows:

1.  The belief in the existence of spiritual beings -- angels;
2.  *Creatio ex nihilo*;
3.  The belief in the existence of another world, and that this other
    world is only a spiritual one;
4.  The Torah is above philosophy;
5.  The Torah has an outward (literal) meaning and an inward
    (allegorical) meaning;
6.  The text of the Torah is not subject to any emendation;
7.  The reward of a good action is the good work itself, and the doer
    must not expect any other reward;
8.  It is only by the "commands relating to the heart," for instance,
    the belief in one eternal God, the loving and fearing Him, and \[p.
    167\] not through good actions, that man attains the highest degree
    of perfection. \[n. 18\]

Perhaps it would be suitable to mention here another contemporaneous
writer, who also enumerates twenty-six articles. The name of this writer
is unknown, and his articles are only gathered from quotations by later
authors. It would seem from these quotations that the articles of this
unknown author consisted mostly of statements emphasising the belief in
the attributes of God: as, His Eternity, His Wisdom and Omnipotence, and
the like. \[n.19\]

More important for our subject are the productions of the fifteenth
century, especially those of Spanish authors. The fifteen articles of R.
Lipman Muhlhausen, in the preface to his well-known *Book of Victory*
\[n. 20\] (1410), differ but slightly from those of Maimonides. In
accordance with the anti-Christian tendency of his polemical book, he
lays more stress on the two articles of Unity and Incorporeality, and
makes of them four. We can therefore dismiss him with this short remark,
and pass at once to the Spanish Rabbis.

#### <span id="chasdai">\[Chasdai\]</span>

The first of these is R. Chasdai Ibn Crescas, who composed his famous
treatise, *The Light of God*, about 1405. Chasdai's book is well known
for its attacks on Aristotle, and also for its influence on Spinoza. But
Chasdai deals also with Maimonides' Thirteen Articles, to which he was
very strongly opposed. Already in his preface he attacks Maimonides for
speaking, in his *Book of the Commandments*, of the belief in the
existence of God as an "affirmative precept." Chasdai thinks it absurd;
for every commandment must be dictated by some authority, but on whose
authority can we dictate the acceptance of this authority? His general
objection to the Thirteen Articles \[p. 168\] is that Maimonides
confounded dogmas or fundamental beliefs of Judaism, without which
Judaism is inconceivable, with beliefs or doctrines which Judaism
inculcates, but the denial of which, though involving a strong heresy,
does not make Judaism impossible. He maintains that if Maimonides meant
only to count fundamental teachings, there are not more than seven; but
that if he intended also to include doctrines, he ought to have
enumerated sixteen. As beliefs of the first class -- namely, fundamental
beliefs -- he considers the following articles:

1.  God's knowledge of our actions;
2.  Providence;
3.  God's omnipotence -- even to act against the laws of nature;
4.  Prophecy;
5.  Free will;
6.  The aim of the Torah is to make man long after the closest communion
    with God.

The belief in the existence of God, Chasdai thinks, is an axiom with
which every religion must begin, and he is therefore uncertain whether
to include it as a dogma or not. As to the doctrines which every Jew is
bound to believe, but without which Judaism is not impossible, Chasdai
divides them into two sections: *(a)*

1.  Creatio ex nihilo;
2.  Immortality of the soul;
3.  Reward and Punishment;
4.  Resurrection of the dead;
5.  Immutability of the Torah;
6.  Superiority of the prophecy of Moses;
7.  That the High Priest received from God the instructions sought for,
    when he put his questions through the medium of the Urim and
    Thummim;
8.  The coming of the Messiah.

*(b)*Doctrines which are expressed by certain religious ceremonies, and
on belief in which these ceremonies are conditioned:

1.  The belief in the efficacy of prayer as well as in the power of the
    benediction of the priests to convey to us the blessing of God;
2.  God is merciful to the penitent;
3.  Certain days in the year -- for instance, \[p. 169\] the Day of
    Atonement -- are especially qualified to bring us near to God, if we
    keep them in the way we are commanded.

That Chasdai is a little arbitrary in the choice of his "doctrines," I
need hardly say. Indeed, Chasdai's importance for the dogma-question
consists more in his critical suggestions than in his positive results.
He was, as we have seen, the first to make the distinction between
fundamental teachings which form the basis of Judaism, and those other
simple Jewish doctrines without which Judaism is not impossible. Very
daring is his remark, when proving that Reward and Punishment,
Immortality of the soul, and Resurrection of the dead must not be
considered as the basis of Judaism, since the highest ideal of religion
is to serve God without any hope of reward. Even more daring are his
words concerning the Immutability of the Law. He says: "Some have argued
that, since God is perfection, so must also His law be perfect, and thus
unsusceptible of improvement." But he does not think this argument
conclusive, though the fact in itself (the Immutability of the Law) is
true. For one might answer that this perfection of the Torah could only
be in accordance with the intelligence of those for whom it was meant;
but as soon as the recipients of the Torah have advanced to a higher
state of perfection, the Torah must also be altered to suit their
advanced intelligence. A pupil of Chasdai illustrates the words of his
master by a medical parallel. The physician has to adapt his medicaments
to the various stages through which his patient has to pass. That he
changes his prescription does not, however, imply that his medical
knowledge is imperfect, or that his earlier remedies were ignorantly
chosen; the varying condition of the invalid was the cause of the
variation \[p. 170\] in the doctor's treatment. Similarly, were not the
Immutability of the Torah a "doctrine," one might maintain that the
perfection of the Torah would not be inconsistent with the assumption
that it was susceptible of modification, in accordance with our changing
and progressive circumstances. But all these arguments are purely of a
theoretic character; for, practically, every Jew, according to Chasdai,
has to accept all these beliefs) whether he terms them fundamental
teachings or only Jewish doctrines. \[n. 21\]

Some years later, though he finished his work in the same year as
Chasdai, R. Simeon Duran (1366-1444,) a younger contemporary of the
former, made his researches on dogmas. His studies on this subject form
a kind of introduction to his commentary on Job, which he finished in
the year I405. Duran is not so strongly opposed to the Thirteen Articles
as Chasdai, or as another "thinker of our people," who thought them an
arbitrary imitation of the thirteen attributes of God. Duran tries to
justify Maimonides; but nevertheless he agrees with "earlier
authorities," who formulated the Jewish creed in Three Articles -- The
Existence of God, Revelation, and Reward and Punishment -- under which
Duran thinks the Thirteen Articles of Maimonides may be easily classed.
Most interesting are his remarks concerning the validity of dogmas. He
tells us that only those are to be considered as heretics who abide by
their own opinions, though they know that they are contradictory to the
views of the Torah. Those who accept the fundamental teachings of
Judaism, but are led by their deep studies and earnest reflection to
differ in details from the opinions current among their co-religionists,
and explain certain passages \[p. 171\] in the Scripture in their own
way, must by no means be considered as heretics. We must, therefore,
Duran proceeds to say, not blame such men as Maimonides, who gave an
allegorical interpretation to certain passages in the Bible about
miracles, or R. Levi ben Gershom, who followed certain un-Jewish views
in relation to the belief in *Creatio ex nihilo*. Only the views are
condemnable, not those who cherish them. God forbid, says Duran, that
such a thing should happen in Israel as to condemn honest inquirers on
account of their differing opinions. It would be interesting to know of
how many divines as tolerant as this persecuted Jew the fifteenth
century can boast. \[n. 21\]

#### <span id="albo">\[Albo\]</span>

We can now pass to a more popular but less original writer on our theme.
I refer to R. Joseph Albo, the author of the *Roots*, \[n. 23\] who was
the pupil of Chasdai, a younger contemporary of Duran, and wrote at a
much later period than these authors. Graetz has justly denied him much
originality. The chief merit of Albo consists in popularising other
people's thoughts, though he does not always take care to mention their
names. And the student who is a little familiar with the contents of the
*Roots* will easily find that Albo has taken his best ideas either from
Chasdai or from Duran. As it is of little consequence to us whether an
article of faith is called "stem," or "root," or "branch," there is
scarcely anything fresh left to quote in the name of Albo. The late Dr.
Low, of Szegedin, was indeed right, when he answered an adversary who
challenged him -- "Who would dare to declare me a heretic as long as I
confess the Three Articles laid down by Albo?" with the words "Albo
himself." For, after all the subtle distinctions Albo makes between \[p.
172\] different classes of dogmas, he declares that every one who denies
even the immutability of the Law or the coming of the Messiah, which
are, according to him, articles of minor importance, is a heretic who
will be excluded from the world to come. But there is one point in his
book which is worth noticing. It was suggested to him by Maimonides,
indeed; still Albo has the merit of having emphasised it as it deserves.
Among the articles which he calls "branches" Albo counts the belief that
the perfection of man, which leads to eternal life, can be obtained by
the fulfilling of one commandment. But this command must, as Maimonides
points out, be done without any worldly regard, and only for the love of
God. When one considers how many platitudes are repeated year by year by
certain theologians on the subject of Jewish legalism, we cannot lay
enough stress on this article of Albo, and we ought to make it better
known than it has hitherto been. \[n. 24\]

Though I cannot enter here into the enumeration of the Maimonists, I
must not leave unmentioned the name of R. Nissim ben Moses of
Marseilles, the first great Maimonist, who flourished about the end of
the thirteenth century, and was considered as one of the most
enlightened thinkers of his age. \[n. 25\] Another great Maimonist
deserving special attention is R. Abraham ben Shem-Tob Bibago, who may
perhaps be regarded as the most prominent among those who undertook to
defend Maimonides against the attacks of Chasdai and others. Bibago
wrote *The Path of Belief* \[n.26\] in the second half of the fifteenth
century, and was, as Dr. Steinschneider aptly describes him, a
*Denkglaubiger*. But, above all, he was a believing Jew. When he was
once asked, at the table of King \[p. 173\] John II., of Aragon, by a
Christian scholar, "Are you the Jewish philosopher?" he answered, "I am
a Jew who believes in the Law given to us by our teacher Moses, though I
have studied philosophy." Bibago was such a devoted admirer of
Maimonides that he could not tolerate any opposition to him. He speaks
in one passage of the prudent people of his time who, in desiring to be
looked upon as orthodox by the great mob, calumniated the Teacher
(Maimonides), and depreciated his merits. Bibago's book is very
interesting, especially in its controversial parts; but in respect to
dogmas he is, as already said, a Maimonist, and does not contribute any
new point on our subject.

To return to the Anti-Maimonists of the second half of the fifteenth
century. As such may be considered R. Isaac Aramah, who speaks of three
foundations of religion:

-   *Creatio ex nihilo*,
-   Revelation (?),
-   and the belief in a world to come. \[n. 27\]

Next to be mentioned is R. Joseph Jabez, who also accepts only three
articles:

-   *Creatio ex nihilo,*
-   Individual Providence, and
-   the Unity of God. \[n. 22\]

Under these three heads he tries to classify the Thirteen Articles of
Maimonides.

#### <span id="abarbanel">\[Abarbanel\]</span>

The last Spanish writer on our subject is R. Isaac Abarbanel. His
treatise on the subject is known under the title *Top of Amanah* \[n.
29\] and was finished in the year 1495. The greatest part of this
treatise forms a defence of Maimonides, many points in which are taken
from Bibago. But, in spite of this fact, Abarbanel must not be
considered a Maimonist. It is only a feeling of piety towards
Maimonides, or perhaps rather a fondness for argument, that made him
defend Maimonides against Chasdai and others. His own view is that it is
a mistake \[p. 174\] to formulate dogmas of Judaism, since every word in
the Torah has to be considered as a dogma for itself. It was only, says
Abarbanel, by following the example of non-Jewish scholars that
Maimonides and others were induced to lay down dogmas. The non-Jewish
philosophers are in the habit of accepting in every science certain
indisputable axioms from which they deduce the propositions which are
less evident. The Jewish philosophers in a similar way sought for first
principles in religion from which the whole of the Torah ought to be
considered as a deduction. But, thinks Abarbanel, the Torah as a
revealed code is under no necessity of deducing things from each other,
for all the commandments came from the same divine authority, and,
therefore, are alike evident, and have the same certainty. On this and
similar grounds Abarbanel refused to acccept dogmatic articles for
Judaism, and he this became the head of the school that forms a class by
itself among the anti- Maimonists to which many of the great Cabbalists
belong. But it is idle talk to cite this school in aid of the modern
theory that Judaism has no dogmas. As we have seen, it was rather an
*embarras de riches* that prevented Abarbanel from accepting the
Thirteen Articles of Maimonides. To him and to the Cabbalists the Torah
consists of at least 613 Articles.

Abarbanel wrote his book with which we have just dealt, at Naples. And
it is Italy to which, after the expulsion of the Jews from Spain, we
have to look chiefly for religious speculation. But the philosophers of
Italy are still less independent of Maimonides than their predecessor in
Spain. Thus we find that R. David Messer Leon, R. David Vital, and
others were Maimonists.

#### <span id="delmedigo">\[Delmedigo\]</span>

\[p. 175\] Even the otherwise refined and original thinker, R. Elijah
Delmedigo (who died about the end of the fifteenth century) becomes
almost impolite when he speaks of the adversaries of Maimonides in
respect to dogmas. "It was only," he says, "the would-be philosopher
that dared to question the articles of Maimonides. Our people have
always the bad habit of thinking themselves competent to attack the
greatest authorities as soon as they have got some knowledge of the
subject. Genuine thinkers, however, attach very little importance to
their objections." \[n. 30\]

Indeed, it seems as if the energetic protests of Delmedigo scared away
the Anti-Maimonists for more than a century. Even in the following
seventeenth century we have to notice only two Anti-Maimonists. The one
is R. Tobijah, the Priest (1652), who was of Polish descent, studied in
Italy, and lived as a medical man in France. He seems to refuse to
accept the belief in the Immutability of the Torah, and in the coming of
the Messiah, as fundamental teachings of Judaism. \[n. 31\] The other,
at the end of the seventeenth century (1695), is R. Abraham Chayim
Viterbo, of Italy. He accepts only six articles:

1.  Existence of God;
2.  Unity;
3.  Incorporeality;
4.  That God was revealed to Moses on Mount Sinai, and that the prophecy
    of Moses is true;
5.  Revelation (including the historical parts of the Torah);
6.  Reward and Punishment.

As to the other articles of Maimonides, Viterbo, in opposition to other
half-hearted Anti-Maimonists, declares that the man who denies them is
not to be considered as a heretic ; though he ought to believe them.
\[n. 32\]

I have now arrived at the limit I set to myself at the beginning of this
essay. For, between the times of \[p. 176\] Viterbo and those of
Mendelssohn, there is hardly to be found any serious opposition to
Maimonides worth noticing here. Still I must mention the name of R. Saul
Berlin (died 1794); there is much in his opinions on dogmas which will
help us the better to understand the Thirteen Articles of Maimonides. As
the reader has seen, I have refrained so far from reproducing here the
apologies which were made by many Maimonists in behalf of the Thirteen
Articles. For, after all their elaborate pleas, none of them was able to
clear Maimonides of the charge of having confounded dogmas or
fundamental teachings with doctrines. It is also true that the Fifth
Article -- that prayer and worship must only be offered to God -- cannot
be considered even as a doctrine, but as a simple precept. And there are
other difficulties which all the distinctions of the Maimonists will
never be able to solve. The only possible justification is, I think,
that suggested by a remark of R. Saul. This author, who was himself --
like his friend and older contemporary Mendelssohn -- a strong
Anti-Maimonist, among other remarks, maintains that dogmas must never be
laid down but with regard to the necessities of the time. \[n. 33\]

Now R. Saul certainly did not doubt that Judaism is based on eternal
truths which can in no way be shaken by new modes of thinking or changed
circumstances. What he meant was that there are in every age certain
beliefs which ought to be asserted more emphatically than others,
without regard to their theological or rather logical importance. It is
by this maxim that we shall be able to explain the articles of
Maimonides. He asserted them, because they were necessary for his time.

\[p. 177\]We know, for instance, from a letter of his son and from other
contemporaries, that it was just at his time that the belief in the
incorporeality of God was, in the opinion of Maimonides, a little
relaxed. Maimonides, who thought such low notions of the Deity dangerous
to Judaism, therefore laid down an article against them. He tells us in
his *Guide* that it was far from him to condemn any one who was not able
to demonstrate the Incorporeality of God, but he stigmatised as a
heretic one who refused to believe it. This position might be paralleled
by that of a modern astronomer who, while considering it unreasonable to
expect a mathematical demonstration of the movements of the earth from
an ordinary unscientific man, would yet regard the person who refused to
believe in such movements as an ignorant faddist.

Again, Maimonides undoubtedly knew that there may be found in the Talmud
-- that bottomless sea with its innumerable undercurrents -- passages
that are not quite in harmony with his articles; for instance, the
well-known dictum of R. Hillel, who said, there is no Messiah for Israel
-- a passage which has already been quoted *ad nauseam* by every
opponent of Maimonides from the earliest times down to the year of grace
1896. Maimonides was well aware of the existence of this and similar
passages. But, being deeply convinced of the necessity of the belief in
a future redemption of Israel -- in opposition to other creeds which
claim this redemption exclusively for their own adherents -- Maimonides
simply ignored the saying of R. Hillel, as an isolated opinion which
contradicts all the consciousness and traditions of the Jew as expressed
in thousands of other passages, and \[p. 178\] especially in the
liturgy. Most interesting is Maimonides' view about such isolated
opinions in a letter to the wise men of Marseilles. He deals there with
the question of free will and other theological subjects. After having
stated his own view he goes on to say:

> "I know that it is possible to find in the Talmud or in the Midrash
> this or that saying in contradiction to the views you have heard from
> me. But you must not be troubled by them. One must not refuse to
> accept a doctrine, the truth of which has been proved, on account of
> its being in opposition to some isolated opinion held by this or that
> great authority. Is it not possible that he overlooked some important
> considerations when he uttered this strange opinion ? It is also
> possible that his words must not be taken literally, and have to be
> explained in an allegorical way. We can also think that his words were
> only to be applied with regard to certain circumstances of his time,
> but never intended as permanent truths. . . . No man must surrender
> his private judgment. The eyes are not directed backwards but
> forwards."

In another place Maimonides calls the suppression of one's own opinions
for the reason of their being irreconcilable with the isolated views of
some great authority -- a moral suicide.

By such motives Maimonides was guided when he left certain views
hazarded in the Rabbinic literature unheeded, and followed what we may
perhaps call the religious instinct, trusting to his own conscience. We
may again be certain that Maimonides was clear-headed enough to see that
the words of the Torah: "And there arose no prophet since in Israel like
unto Moses" (Deut. xxxiv. 10), were as little intended to imply a
doctrine as the passage relating to the king Josiah, "And like unto \[p.
179\] him was there no king before him that turned to the Lord with all
his heart . . . neither after him arose there any like him" (2 Kings
xxiii. 25). And none would think of declaring the man a heretic who
should believe another king to be as pious as Josiah. But living among
followers of the "imitating creeds" (as he calls Christianity and
Mohammedism), who claimed that their religion had superseded the law of
Moses, Maimonides, consciously or unconsciously, felt himself compelled
to assert the superiority of the prophecy of Moses. And so we may guess
that every article of Maimonides which seems to offer difficulties to us
contains an assertion of some relaxed belief, or a protest against the
pretensions of other creeds, though we are not always able to discover
the exact necessity for them. On the other hand, Maimonides did not
assert the belief in free will, for which he argued so earnestly in his
*Guide*. The common "man," with his simple unspeculative mind, for whom
these Thirteen Articles were intended, "never dreamed that the will was
not free," and there was no necessity of impressing on his mind things
which he had never doubted. \[n. 34\]

So much about Maimonides. As to the Anti-Maimonists, it could hardly
escape the reader that in some of the quoted systems the difference from
the view of Maimonides is only a logical one, not a theological. Of some
authors again, especially those of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, it is not at all certain whether they intended to oppose
Maimonides. Others again, as for instance R. Abba Mari, R. Lipman, and
R. Joseph Jabez, acted on the same principle as Maimonides, urging only
those teachings of Judaism which they thought endangered. One could now,
indeed, animated by the praiseworthy exam- \[p. 180\] ples given to us
by Maimonides, also propose some articles of faith which are suggested
to us by the necessities of our own time. One might, for instance,
insert the article, "I believe that Judaism is, in the first instance, a
divine religion, *not* a mere complex of racial peculiarities and tribal
customs." One might again propose an article to the effect that Judaism
is a proselytising religion, having the mission to bring about God's
kingdom on earth, and to include in that kingdom all mankind. One might
also submit for consideration whether, it would not be advisable to urge
a little more the principle that religion means chiefly a
*Weltanschauung* and worship of God by means of holiness both in thought
and in action. One would even not object to accept the article laid down
by R. Saul, that we have to look upon ourselves as sinners. Morbid as
such a belief may be, it would, if properly impressed on our mind, have
perhaps the wholesome effect of cooling down a little our self
importance and our mutual admiration that makes all progress among us
almost impossible.

But it was not my purpose to ventilate here the question whether
Maimonides' articles are sufficient for us, or whether we ought not to
add new ones to them. Nor do I attempt to decide what system we ought to
prefer for recitation in the Synagogue -- that of Maimonides or that of
Chasdai, or of any other writer. I do not think that such a recital is
of much use. My object in this sketch has been rather to make the reader
think about Judaism, by proving that it regulates not only our actions,
but also our thoughts. We usually urge that in Judaism religion means
life; but we forget that a life without guiding principles and thoughts
is a Life not worth living. At \[p. 181\] least it was so considered by
the greatest Jewish thinkers, and hence their efforts to formulate the
creed of Judaism, so that men should not only be able to do the right
thing, but also to think the right thing. Whether they succeeded in
their attempts towards formulating the creed of Judaism or not will
always remain a question. This concerns the logician more than the
theologian. But surely Maimonides and his successors did succeed in
having a religion depending directly on God, with the most ideal and
lofty aspirations for the future; whilst the Judaism of a great part of
our modern theologians reminds one very much of the words with which the
author of *Marius the Epicurean* characterises the Roman religion in the
days of her decline: a religion which had been always something to be
done rather than something to be thought, or believed, or loved.

Political economy, hygiene, statistics, are very fine things. But no
sane man would for them make those sacrifices which Judaism requires
from us. It is only for God's sake, to fulfil His commands and to
accomplish His purpose, that religion becomes worth living and dying
for. And this can only be possible with a religion which possesses
dogmas.

It is true that every great religion is "a concentration of many ideas
and ideals," which make this religion able to adapt itself to various
modes of thinking and living. But there must always be a point round
which all these ideas concentrate themselves. This centre is Dogma.
