[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap05) [Next](chap07)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER VI. </span>

THE CHRONLOGY OF THE ANCIENTS.--A KEY TO ITS MYSTERIES.--THE
ANTEDILUVIAN MONARCHS.--JOSEPHUS AND CHINESE CHRONOLOGY.--ABRAHAM ON
PHARAOH'S THRONE.--HE MAKES A TREATY ENDING A ONE HUNDREAD YEARS
WAR.--CHEOPS.

IN the seventh paragraph of the Book of Abraham we find the following:
"Now the first government of Egypt was established by Pharaoh, the
eldest son of Egyptus, the daughter of Ham, and it was after the manner
of the government of Ham, which was patriarchal, Pharaoh being a
righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely and
justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order established
by the fathers in the first generations, in the days of the *first
patriarchal reign,* even in the *reign of Adam, and also of Noah,* his
father, who blessed him with the blessings of the earth, and with the

blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to the priesthood."
The next paragraph is as follows: "Now Pharaoh being of that lineage by
which he could not have the priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs
would fain claim it from Noah, through Ham, therefore my father was led
away by their idolatry; but I shall endeavor, hereafter, to delineate
the chronology, running back from myself to the beginning of the
creation, for the records have come into my hands, which I hold unto
this present time."

We desire to draw attention to several ideas advanced in the above
quotations.

1st. That the early Egyptians were acquainted with events that occurred
before the flood.

2d. That the antediluvian patriarchs reigned in the midst of their
descendants as kings.

3d. That this form of government was the prevailing one, in the days
immediately succeeding the deluge.

4th. That the Egyptians established in their midst an imitation or bogus
priesthood, that rapidly carried the people into idolatry.

5th. That Abraham, and probably many others, possessed records running
back to the beginning of time.

Modern research has amply vindicated the statements of Abraham's record
with regard to the condition of society amongst the early dwellers on
the banks of the Nile. Listen to what Mr. Osborn states on this subject,
and, though in different wording, note how fully he bears out the
patriarch's assertions. Mr. O. remarks in his "Religions of the "World,"
that "Egyptian remains prove clearly that, while to all appearance the
first settlers in Egypt carried along with them some germinal forms of
very malignant religious error, they carried with them, in addition to
the mere ancestral or genealogical and historical knowledge, a most deep
experimental knowledge and conviction of the reality of divine being and
agency, and a knowledge also of that form in which, from the time of the
Fall, the revelation of the most important elements of religion appears
to have been imparted to mankind."

We shall not attempt to establish the ideas from the Book of Abraham,
above noticed, in the order in which they are placed, but before leaving
this branch of the subject, we believe that we shall be able to adduce
sufficient evidence to convince all who are willing to learn the truth,
that Abraham's statements as given by the Prophet Joseph are
historically correct.

The fact of Abraham coming in possession of certain genealogical records
may seem somewhat incredible to those who have not studied the subject.
Many are too apt to consider the people of those early ages as but one
step removed from barbarians, being, if we sense their idea correctly,
very much on a par with the modern Tartar or Bedouin Arab; and the
thought of such a people possessing a literature seems to be
inconceivable to the minds of many otherwise intelligent people. But
have such ever noticed that the Bible, in one of its very first
chapters, actually speaks of "the book of generations of Adam," (Genesis
v. 1,) and it is from that book apparently that Moses' genealogical
record of the antediluvians was transcribed. In confirmation of the
existence of such a book, Josephus states that those who lived before
the flood "noted down, with great accuracy, both the births and deaths
of illustrious men," (Josephus, book 1, chap. 3,) which record would
undoubtedly be preserved among the royal archives, and as such, being
deemed of the utmost value as giving the genealogy of the kings, be
saved by Noah in the ark, he, according to Abraham and Josephus, also
being the reigning sovereign at the time of the deluge. Josephus
specifically states that "that calamity happened in the six hundredth
year of Noah's government." (Josephus, book 1, chap. 3.) In fact
Josephus gives a list of the antediluvian monarchs, or patriarchs, as
they are termed in the Bible, but the fact that he recognized them as
the sovereigns of the antediluvian world is very strong corroborative
testimony of the statement of Abraham that Adam and Noah reigned as
kings over their fellow men. The following is Josephus' statement with
regard to this matter: (Josephus, book 1, chap. 3.)

"Seth was born when Adam was in his 230th year, who lived 930 years.
Seth begat Enoch in his 205th year, who, when he lived 912 years,
delivered the government to Canaan, his son, whom he had at his 119th
year. He lived 905 years. Canaan, when he had lived 910 years, had his
son Mahalaleel, who was born in his 170th year. This Mahalaleel, having
lived 895 years, died, leaving his son Jared, whom he begat when he was
at his 165th year. He lived 962 years and then his son Enoch succeeded
him, who was born when his father was 162 years old. Now he, when he had
lived 365 years, departed and went to God, whence it is that they have
not written down his death. Now Methuselah, the son of Enoch, who was
born to him when he was 165 years old, had Lamech for his son, when he
was 187 years of age, to whom he delivered the government when he had
retained it 969 years. Now Lamech, when he had governed 777 years,
appointed Noah, his son, to be the ruler of the people, who was born to
Lamech when he was 182 years old, and retained the government 950
years."

We here draw attention to a somewhat remarkable coincidence. It is that
the length of the reigns of these patriarchs, as given by Josephus,
agrees, with one exception, we believe, with the length of their lives
according to Bible chronology, but what makes this feature more
remarkable is that Josephus does exactly the same thing as the Chinese
do in their antediluvian chronology. "The Chinese account speaks of ten
dynasties of superior beings, who ruled in their country 1,000 years
each before the sky fell on the earth *(i.e.* the flood). It is not hard
to see that this is only a different and a singular manner of relating
the same facts. \* \* \* Moses informs us that each of these ten
generations did extend near a thousand years, but he let us know that a
son and his father walked much of their earthly race together. The
journey of each was long, but it was a simultaneous travel."
\[<a href="#foot1" id="text1">1</a>\]

Now, we think that the statement of Abraham turns a key by which a flood
of light is thrown on the early history of the first nations that came
into being after the flood, for instance, the Egyptian, the Chaldean,
and the Chinese. Scientists and religionists have been wrangling for
scores of years with regard to the chronology of these nations, both
parties, as a rule, seeming to take it for granted that these
chronological records should stop at the flood, presumedly for the
reason that all mankind but one family of eight were then destroyed. As
there is incontrovertible evidence that the ancients were acquainted
with facts and events relating to the earth and the heavens long
anterior to the generally accepted date of the deluge, skeptics have
loudly expressed their doubts as to the flood having occurred at all.
But when we take into consideration the fact that those who were saved
were the royal family--the king and queen, with their three sons and the
princesses, their wives--and that this king (Noah) ruled after as well
as before the flood, it remains no longer a wonder how these nations
traced their existence to years long anterior to that dire calamity. To
them it was a terrible disaster in the history of their nation, nothing
more; there was no break in the royal descent, the same king reigned
before and after it took place, the same dynasty remained in power, his
son succeeded to the throne; the royal records were preserved, and the
Egyptians, the Chaldeans, and the Chinese alike with natural national
pride all claimed the sovereigns who ruled from Adam to Noah as the
kings of their peculiar nation. Their records were like three converging
lines, centering at Noah, and from him continuing backward in one and
the same straight line to Adam. To illustrate: let us suppose a case. We
will imagine that a vast desolation sweeps over the empire of Germany.
The king and the three princes, with their families, alone are saved
from its fatal horrors. By and by, these three princes establish thrones
of their own, say, one in Prussia, one in Pomerania, and one in Hanover.
Would the national historians of future ages, when these three kingdoms
had become great and populous, stop in their respective national
histories at the date that this overwhelming catastrophe occurred? Would
it not be much more reasonable to conclude that they would accumulate
the histories of this and former epochs and continue their accounts
through this calamity to the earliest days their records would reach. We
think so, and in this way we discover an easy and reasonable solution to
the difficulties that beset Chinese and Egyptian chronology, and are
able to account for the interminable lists of kings that grace their
annals. In fact, so far as Egypt is concerned, it had no consecutive
chronology. This truth is now admitted by the most learned in that
branch of science. But they undoubtedly carried their records, in a
jumbled up way, back beyond the flood, (probably obtaining some
information thereon from the records in the possession of Abraham,) and
in postdiluvian days they, in vanity, inserted the names of scores of
princes who reigned contemporaneously in various parts of the Valley of
the Nile. Admit these two facts, and the solution is found to the
mysteries of Egyptian chronology, what they had of it. Again, why should
we permit the descendants of Shem, as in the case of the Hebrews, to
monopolize their antediluvian progenitors. These men were the fathers of
all mankind, and all had equal right to claim them as their own.

Considerable ridicule has been needlessly expended on the statement that
the sitting figure in Plate III, of the Book of Abraham, represents that
patriarch "sitting upon Pharaoh's throne by the politeness of the king."
It has been scoffed at as an idea entirely too silly to be met with calm
argument. To imagine that the great and mighty ruler of Egypt would
invite an "Arab Sheik," at best a shepherd prince, to sit upon his
throne, was altogether too absurd for a moment's serious consideration;
such extraordinary condescension would shame a Chesterfield. But we all
know that it is often as easy to ridicule as it is difficult to
disprove; so we will let the scoffer jest, whilst we bring forward our
"strong reasons" for believing this, as well as all other portions of
Abraham's divinely inspired record. Josephus writes (Antiquities, book
1, chap, viii,) that when Pharaoh discovered that the woman, Sarah, whom
he desired to take into his household, was the wife of Abraham, he made,
as an excuse for his action, that believing her to be the patriarch's
sister he wished to marry her, from his desire to be related to so
distinguished a personage as Abraham. This could not be irony; Pharaoh
was not in a condition to be ironical with his guest. It must have been
an excuse that bore upon its face the probability of truth, and one that
would be accepted as genuine by the powerful visitor from Canaan. Had it
been otherwise, it would have been adding insult to injury, and instead
of Abraham remaining in Egypt to become a teacher to its people, we
should probably learn that in anger he returned to his own land. Then,
accepting Pharaoh's own statement to be true, is it difficult to believe
that he who wished to be so nearly allied to Abraham, would, in the
fulness of Eastern politeness, think it any too great a condescension to
ask him to sit upon his throne, whilst he explained to him and to his
court the wonders of the numberless creations of God?

Nor is this all; we have yet other testimony of how powerful a man was
Abraham amongst the children of the Nile. Our readers will probably
recollect that we have already drawn attention to a statement of
Josephus, that at the time the patriarch visited Egypt, the people of
that country despised each other's sacred rites, and were very angry one
with another on that account; further, that Abraham proved to them that
their various reasonings were vain and void of truth. Modern research
has shown that Abraham did more than this. It appears that somewhat more
than one hundred years before Abraham's advent into Egypt, one of its
monarchs--Mencheres--attempted to establish the worship of Osiris over
all Egypt. As a result, a great religious war ensued, which continued
for a century. The history of the country at this time becomes involved
and obscure in the highest degree, but one fact is absolutely certain,
and that is, that this civil war was fierce, long continued and with
varying success. A late British historical text book states that in the
year 1984 B. C. (according to the best chronology, which is, however,
far from satisfactory)\[<a href="#foot2" id="text2">2</a>\] Abraham
visited and aided Achthoes \[Pharaoh\] in forming a treaty with his
rival to terminate the religious war. Then, if it be true that Abraham
was so great a power in his day that by his aid a civil war of one
hundred years' duration was brought to an amicable close, is there
anything incongruous in the idea that he, by politeness, sat upon the
throne of the ruler to whom he had been of so great service?

About this time, as near as can be told, a great change was effected in
the religion of the Egyptians, which we ascribe to the preaching, in
their midst, of the Gospel, by the Father of the Faithful. It appears
from Herodotus, that according to the story of the idolatrous Egyptian
priests of his day, that when Cheops ascended the throne he "closed the
temples of the false gods, and prohibited their
sacrifices"\[<a href="#foot3" id="text3">3</a>\] Cheops is said to have
reigned fifty years, and was succeeded by his brother Chepren, who also
kept the temples closed. In the succeeding reign the temples were again
opened, and the people returned to their old modes of worship. So hated
were these two sovereigns by the heathen dwellers by the Nile, of later
years, that Herodotus states that they would not even mention their
names, Mr. John Taylor, author of "The Great Pyramid; why was it built
and who built it?" from various evidences brought to his notice, infers
that these kings "might have been pre-eminently good, or were at all
events of different religious faith" from those who told the story to
Herodotus. Putting the various facts before stated together, that
Abraham taught holy principles to the Egyptians, that his teachings so
wrought upon them that they brought to a close a civil war of one
hundred years' duration, and that near this time the idolatrous temples
were closed, all forming parts of one harmonious whole, we are
irresistibly drawn to the conclusion that these changes were brought
about by the proclamation of the Gospel; more especially are we led
thereto by the hatred shown to the kings who accepted this message and
carried out these reforms, by the worshipers of Osiris in succeeding
generations. It so much resembles the course pursued by others in like
circumstances in other lands and at other times. Cheops is usually
credited with being the builder of the great pyramid, and to that mighty
structure we shall by and by appeal for testimony to prove that whoever
its builders were, they were acqainted with the sublime system of
astronomy revealed by Jehovah to Abraham, with instructions to teach it
to the Egyptians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text1" id="foot1">1</a>\] Nelson's "Infidelity, its Cause
and Cure."

\[<a href="#text2" id="foot2">2</a>\] Facts and Dates by Rev. A. Mackay,
Edinburgh, 1870.

\[<a href="#text3" id="foot3">3</a>\]Hartcourt's Doctrines of the
Deluge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](chap07)
