[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hod07)  [Next](hod09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXOHY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*History of the Devil*, by Paul Carus, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# ISRAEL.

*Azazel, the God of the Desert*.

THE PRIMITIVE STAGES of the Hebrew civilisation are not sufficiently
known to describe the changes and phases which the Israelitic idea of
the Godhead had to undergo before it reached the purity of the Yahveh
conception. Yet the Israelites also must have had a demon not unlike the
Egyptian Typhon, for the custom of sacrificing a goat to Azazel, the
demon of the desert, suggests that the Israelites had just emerged from
a dualism in which both principles were regarded as equal.

We read in Leviticus xvi.:

<span class="small">"And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one
for the Lord, and the other for Azazel. And Aaron shall bring the goat
upon which the Lord's lot fell, and offer him for a sin-offering. But
the goat on which the lot fell for Azazel, shall be presented alive
before the Lord, to make atonement with him and to let him go to Azazel
in the desert."</span>

The name *Azazel* is derived from *aziz*, which means strength, and
*El*, God. The god of war at Edessa is called *Asisos* (Ἄϩιϩος) the
strong one. *Bal-aziz* was the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

strong god, and *Rosh-aziz*, the head of the strong one, is the name of
a promontory on the Phœnician coast. *Azazel*, accordingly, means the
Strength of God.

The mention of Azazel must be regarded as a last remnant of a prior
dualism. Azazel, the god of the desert, ceased to be the strong god, and
became a mere shadow of his former power, for the scapegoat is no longer
a sacrifice. Yahveh's goat alone is offered for a sin-offering, while
the scapegoat carries out into the desert the curse of the people's sin,
and thus the worship of Azazel changed into a mere recognition of his
existence.

These sacrificial ceremonies, however, which, on account of their being
parts of religious performances, were only reluctantly discarded, are
the lingering vestiges in Hebrew literature of an older dualism in which
the power of evil received an equal share of worship with the power of
good.

*Superstitions*.

The Old Testament contains many noble ideas and great truths; indeed it
is a most remarkable collection of religious books, than which there is
none more venerable in the literature of the world. Yet there are tares
among the wheat, and many lamentable errors were, even by some of the
leaders of the old Israelites, regarded as essential parts of their
religion. The writers of the Bible not only made God responsible for,
and accessory to, the crimes which their own people committed, e. g.,
theft (Exodus xi.), and murder and rape (Numbers xxxi. 17-18); but they
cherished also the same superstitions that were commonly in vogue among
savages. Thus the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

custom of burying people alive under foundation stones is mentioned as
having been sanctioned by the God of Israel. When Jericho was destroyed
at the special command of God, all its inhabitants were slain, "both man
and woman, young and old, and ox and sheep and ass," with the sole
exception of Rahab, a disreputable woman who had betrayed the city into
the hands of the enemies of her countrymen. And Joshua adjured the
people, saying:

<span class="small">"Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up
and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in
his first born and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of
it."</span>

Jericho, however, was sure to be rebuilt sooner or later, for, being the
key to Palestine, and commanding the entrance into the country from the
desert routes, it was too important both for commercial and strategic
purposes to be left in ruins; and the man who undertook the work was
still superstitious and savage enough to heed Joshua's curse: We read in
the first Book of Kings, with reference to the reign of Ahab (Chap. xvi.
34):

<span class="small">"In his days, Hiel the Bethelite built Jericho; he
laid the foundation stones thereof in Abiram, his first born, and set up
the gates thereof in his youngest son, Segub, according to the word of
the Lord which he spake by Joshua, the son of Nun."</span>

The terrible witch-prosecutions which in the Middle Ages harassed
Christianity have their root in passages of the Old Testament.

The laws of Exodus (xxii. 18) provide capital punishment for witchcraft,
and the same command is repeated in Leviticus, where we read:

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

"The soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after
wizards, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off
from among his people." (Lev. xx. 6.)

"A man also or a woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard,
shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones: their
blood shall be upon them." (Lev. xx. 27.)

In spite of the severity of the law against wizards and witches, the
Israelites were always inclined to resort

<span id="img_06800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SAUL AND THE WITCH
OF ENDOR. (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/06800.jpg)  
SAUL AND THE WITCH OF ENDOR. (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)  
</span>

to their help. Saul, who had done his best to exterminate soothsayers (I
Sam. xxviii. 9), when in greatest anxiety, called on the witch of Endor.

It is evident from various passages that the Israelites believed in evil
spirits dwelling in darkness and waste places. (See Lev. xvii. 7; Deut.
xxx. 17,; *ib*. xxxii. 17;

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 2 Chron. xi. 15;
Isaiah xiii. 21; *ib*. xxxiv. 14; Jer. 1. 39; Psalms cvi. 37.) Their
names are *Seirim* (chimeras or goat-spirits), *Lilith* (the nightly
one), *Shedim* (demons). The *Seirim* remind us of Assyrian pictures
which represent evil spirits in the shape of goats. It is difficult to
say whether these various demons of the Hebrews

<span id="img_06900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ASSYRIAN GOAT
DEMONS. (Carvings on a boulder. After Lenormant.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/06900.jpg)  
ASSYRIAN GOAT DEMONS. (Carvings on a boulder. After Lenormant.)  
</span>

are to be regarded as the residuum of a lower religious stage preceding
the period of the monotheistic Yahveh cult, or as witnesses to the
existence of superstitions which certainly haunted the imagination of
the uncultured not less in those days than they do now in this age of
advanced civilisation.

Apparently the rise of a purer religion was slow and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

the habits of a savage age were long-lingering. The vestiges of
devil-worship with several of its most bestial rites and even human
sacrifices <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) continued to exist even
when a more radiant light began to shine in the world.

*Satan*.

When Azazel began to be neglected, Satan rose into existence. The belief
in a God of Evil was replaced by the belief in all evil demon. And
Satan, the tempter and originator of all evil, was naturally identified
with the serpent that "was more subtil than ally beast of the field"
(Genesis iii. 1).

Satan, the fiend, as a name in the sense of Devil, is rarely mentioned
in the Old Testament. The word Satan, which means "enemy" is freely
used, but, as a proper name, signifying the Devil, appears only five
times. And it is noteworthy that the same event is, in two parallel
passages, attributed, in the older one to Yahveh, and in the younger
one, to Satan.

We read in 2 Samuel xxiv. 1:

<span class="small">"The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel,
and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and
Judah."</span>

The same fact is mentioned in 1 Chron. xxi. 1:

<span class="small">"Satan stood up against Israel and provoked David to
number Israel."</span>

In all the older books of Hebrew literature, especially in the
Pentateuch, Satan is not mentioned at all. All acts of punishment,
revenge, and temptation are performed by Yahveh himself, or by his angel
at his direct

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

command. So the temptation of Abraham, the slaughter of the first-born
in Egypt, the brimstone and fire rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah, the
evil spirit which came upon Saul, the pestilence to punish David-all
these things are expressly said to have come from God. Even the perverse
spirit which made the Egyptians err (Isaiah xix. 14), the lying spirit
which was in the mouths of the prophets of Ahab (1 Kings xxii. 23; see
also 2 Chron. xviii. 20-22), ignorance and indifference (Isaiah xxix.
10), are directly attributed to acts of God.

The prophet Zechariah speaks of Satan as an angel whose office it is to
accuse and to demand the punishment of the wicked. In the Book of Job,
where the most poetical and grandest picture of the Evil One is found,
Satan appears as a malicious servant of God, who enjoys performing the
functions of a tempter, torturer, and avenger. He accuses unjustly, like
a State's attorney who prosecutes from a mere habit of prosecution, and
delights in convicting even the innocent, while God's justice and
goodness are not called in question.

It is noteworthy that Satan, in the canonical books of the Old
Testament, is an adversary of man, but not of God; he is a subject of
God and God's faithful servant.

The Jewish idea of Satan received some additional features from the
attributes of the gods of surrounding nations. Nothing is more common in
history than the change of the deities of hostile nations into demons of
evil. In this way Beelzebub, the Phoenician god, became another name for
Satan; and Hinnom (i. e. *Gehenna*), the place where Moloch had been
worshipped, in the valley of Tophet, became the Hebrew name for hell in

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

place of the word Sheol, the world of the dead under ground. The idol of
Moloch was made of brass, and its stomach was a furnace. According to
the prophets (Is. lvii. 5; Ez. xvi. 20; Jer. xix. 5), children were
placed in the monster's arms to be consumed by the heat of the idol. The
cries of the victims were drowned by drums, from which ("toph," meaning
drum) the place was called "Tophet." Even the king, Manasseh, long after
David, made his son pass through the fire of Moloch (2 Kings
xxi.). <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) Josiah endeavored to make an
end of this terrible practice by defiling Tophet, in the valley of the
children of Hinnom (2 Kings xxxiii 10).

Thus the very name of this foreign deity naturally and justly became
among the Israelites the symbol of abomination and fiendish
superstition.

The historical connexion of Israel's religion with the mythologies of
Assyria and Babylon, begins now to be better understood; since we have
learned to decipher the ancient cuneiform records. There are many most
significant reminiscences of Bel Merodach's combat with Tiamat left in
the Old Testament, and Hemann Gunkel after having given a literal
translation of the several passages with explanatory comments says
(*Schöpfung und Chaos*, p. 88):

<span class="small">"Nowhere in extant literature is the myth of
Yahveh's combat with the dragon actually narrated. Judaism, the
distinctive work of which was the collection of the canon, did not admit
myths that</span>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="small">savored of heathendom. Nevertheless, the fact that
in all the passages that speak of the dragon the myth is not portrayed
but simply presupposed, proves that it was very well known and very
popular with the people. The absence of the myth in the canon,--and this
in the interest of the Christian reader need not be deplored,--is
distinct and conclusive evidence that we possess in our Old Testament a
fragment only of the old religious literature.</span>

<span id="img_07300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE SEVEN-ARMED
CANDLESTICK SHOWING THE MONSTERS OF THE DEEP.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/07300.jpg)  
THE SEVEN-ARMED CANDLESTICK SHOWING THE MONSTERS OF THE DEEP.  
</span>

"The myth was from the very beginning in Israel a hymn to Yahveh. The
Yahveh-hymn therefore is the favorite place for making reference to the
dragon-myth,--of which we have a beautiful instance in Psalm lxxxix. The
poet that portrays Yahveh's oppression of humanity (Job xl. et seq.; ix.
13; xvi. 13; also Psalm civ.); the prophet that terrorises the sinning
people with pictures of Yahveh's omnipotence (Am. ix.); he that arouses
the people languishing under a foreign dominion (Isaiah li. 9 et seq.):
all make direct reference to Yahveh's power even over the dragon." <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

It is noteworthy that the seven-armed candlestick of the arch of Titus
contains on its base figures of dragons, which we may justly assume to
be Leviathan, Behemoth, and Rahab, the mythological monsters of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[70:1](hod08.htm#fr_33) See pp. 10-12 of this
book.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[72:1](hod08.htm#fr_34) There is no reason to
doubt the Biblical reports concerning Moloch, for Diodorus (20, 14)
describes the cult of the national god of Carthage, whom be identifies
with the Greek "Kronos," in the same way; so that in consideration of
the fact that Carthage is a Phoenician colony, we have good reasons to
believe this Kronos to be the same deity as the Ammonite Moloch, who was
satiated by the same horrible sacrifices.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[73:1](hod08.htm#fr_35) It may be added that the
references in the passages in question are absolutely unintelligible
unless interpreted by some such light as that given by Gunkel. To the
reader without a commentary they are sealed utterances, for the mere
translation in our Bible offers no help to their understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Brahmanism and Hinduism](hod09)
