[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hod04)  [Next](hod06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXOHY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*History of the Devil*, by Paul Carus, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# ANCIENT EGYPT.

SET, OR SETH, whom the Greeks called Typhon, the nefarious demon of
death and evil in Egyptian mythology, is characterised as "a strong god
(a-pahuti), whose anger is to be feared." The inscriptions call him "the
powerful one of Thebes," and "Ruler of the South." He is conceived as
the sun that kills with the arrows of heat; he is the slayer, and iron
is called the bones of Typhon. The hunted animals are consecrated to
him; and his symbols are the griffin (akhekh), the hippopotamus, the
crocodile, the swine, the tortoise, and, above all the serpent âpapi (in
Greek "apophis") who was thought to await the dying man in the domain of
the god Atmu (also called Tmu or Tum), who represents the sun below the
western horizon.

Set's pictures are easily recognised by his long, erect, and
square-tipped ears and his proboscis-like snout, which are said to
indicate the head of a fabulous animal called Oryx. The consort and
feminine counterpart of Set is called Taour or Taourt. The Greeks called
her Theouris. She appears commonly as a hippopotamus in erect posture,
her back covered with the skin and tail of a crocodile.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span id="img_01600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![APAPI (APOPHIS)
AND ATMU. (After Rawlinson)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01600.jpg)  
APAPI (APOPHIS) AND ATMU. (After Rawlinson)  
</span>

<span id="img_01601"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FORMS OF TAOURT.
(After Rawlinson)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01601.jpg)  
FORMS OF TAOURT. (After Rawlinson)  
</span>

<span id="img_01602"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SET (After
Brugsch)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01602.jpg)  
SET (After Brugsch)  
</span>

<span id="img_01603"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE SOUL VISITING
THE MUMMY. (From the Ani Papyrus)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01603.jpg)  
THE SOUL VISITING THE MUMMY. (From the Ani Papyrus)  
</span>

<span class="small">See page [24](#page_24).</span>

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Set is often contrasted with Osiris. Set was the deity of the desert, of
drought and feverish thirst, and of the sterile ocean; Osiris represents
moisture, the Nile, the fertilising powers and life. Plutarch says:

<span class="small">"The moon (representing Osiris) is, with his
fertilising and fecundative light, favorable to the produce of animals
and growth of plants; the sun, however (representing Typhon), is
determined, with its unmitigated fire, to overheat and parch animals; it
renders by its blaze a great part of the earth uninhabitable and
conquers frequently even the moon (viz., Osiris)."</span>

As an enemy to life, Set is identified with all destruction. He is the
waning of the moon, the decrease of the waters of the Nile, and the
setting of the sun. Thus he was called the left or black eye of the
decreasing sun, governing the year from the summer solstice to the
winter solstice, which is contrasted with the right or bright eye of
Hor, the increasing sun, which symbolises the growth of life and the
spread of light from the winter solstice to the summer solstice.

Set was not always nor to all Egyptians alike a Satanic deity. He was
officially worshipped in an unimportant province west of the Nile, but
this was the natural starting-point of the road to the northern oasis.
The inhabitants, who were mostly guides to desert caravans, had good
reasons to remain on friendly terms with Set, the Lord of the desert.

Further, we know that a great temple was devoted to Set, as the god of
war, in Tanis, near the swamps between the eastern branches of the
Delta, an important town of the frontier, and during the time of
invasion the probable seat of the foreign dominion of the Hyksos and

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the Hyttites, who identified their own god Sutech with the Egyptian Set.
But even among the Hyksos, Set was revered as the awful God of
irresistible power, of brute force, of war, and of destruction.

There is an old wall-picture of Karnak, belonging to the era of the
eighteenth dynasty, in which the god Set appears as an instructor of
King Thothmes III. in the science of archery. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

<span id="img_01800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SETH TEACHING THE
KING THE ART OF WAR. (After Erman.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01800.jpg)  
SETH TEACHING THE KING THE ART OF WAR. (After Erman.)  
</span>

Sety I., the second king of the nineteenth dynasty, the shepherd kings,
derives his name from the god Seta sign of the high honor in which he
was held among the shepherd kings; and indeed we are informed that they
regarded Set, or Sutech, as the only true God, the sole deity, who alone
was worthy of receiving divine honors.

If the time of the shepherd kings is to be identified with the
settlement of Jacob's sons in Egypt, and if the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

monotheism of the Hyksos is the root of Moses's religion, what food for
thought lies in the fact that the same awe of a fearful power that
confronts us in life, changes among the Egyptians into the demonology of
Set, and among the Israelites into the cult of Yahveh!

In spite of the terror which he inspired, Set was originally not merely
an evil demon but one of the great deities, who, as such, was feared and
propitiated.

Says Heinrich Brugsch (*Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter*, p.
706):

<span class="small">"The Book of the Dead of the ancient Egyptians and
the numerous inscriptions of the recently opened pyramids are, indeed,
nothing but talismans against the imagined Seth and his associates. Such
is also, I am sorry to say, the greater part of the ancient literature
that has come down to us."</span>

When a man dies, he passes the western horizon and descends through
Atmu's abode into Amenti, the Nether World. The salvation of his
personality depends, according to Egyptian belief, upon the preservation
of his "double," or his "other self," which, remaining in the tomb,
resides in the mummy or in any statue of his body.

The double, just as if it were alive, is supposed to be in need of food
and drink, which is provided for by incantations. Magic formulas satisfy
the hunger and thirst of the double in the tomb, and frustrate, through
invocations of the good deities, all the evil intentions of Set and his
host. We read in an inscription of Edfu (Brugsch, *Religion und
Mythologie der alten Aegypter*, p. 767):

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Hail Ra, thou art radiant in thy radiance,  
While there is darkness in the eyes of Apophis!  
Hail Ra, good is thy goodness,  
While Apophis is bad in its badness!"</span>

</div>

The dread of hunger, thirst, and other ills, or even of destruction
which their double might suffer in the tomb, was a perpetual source of
fearful anticipations to every pious Egyptian. The anxiety to escape the
tortures of their future state led to the embalming of the dead and to
the building of the pyramids. Yet, in spite of all superstitions and the
ridiculous pomp bestowed upon the burial of the body we find passages in
the inscriptions which give evidence that in the opinion of many
thoughtful people the best and indeed the sole means of protection
against the typhonic influences after death was a life of righteousness.
This is forcibly expressed in the illustration of Chapter CXXV. of the
Book of the Dead, which is here reproduced according to Lepsius's
edition of the Turin papyrus. (Republished by Putnam, Book of the Dead).

The picture of the Hall of Truth as preserved in the Turin papyrus shows
Osiris with the atef-crown on his head and the crook and whip in his
hands. Above the beast of Amenti we see the two genii Shai and Ranen,
which represent Misery and Happiness. The four funeral genii, called
Amset, Hapi, Tuamutef, and Kebhsnauf, hover over an altar richly laden
with offerings. The frieze shows twelve groups of uræus snakes, flames
and feathers of truth; on both sides scales are poised by a baboon who
is the sacred animal of Thoth, and in the middle Atmu stretches out his
hands over the right and

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="img_02100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE WEIGHING OF
THE HEART IN THE HALL OF TRUTH (After Lepsius's reproduction of the
Turin Papyrus)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/02100.jpg)  
THE WEIGHING OF THE HEART IN THE HALL OF TRUTH (After Lepsius's
reproduction of the Turin Papyrus)  
</span>

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

left eye, symbolising sunset and sunrise, death and resurrection.

Mâ, <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) the goddess of truth and "the
directress of the gods," decorated with an erect feather which is her
emblem, ushers the departed one into the Hall of Truth. Kneeling, the
departed one invokes the forty-two assessors by name and disclaims
having committed any one of the forty-two sins of the Egyptian moral
code. Omitting the names of the assessors, we quote here an extract of
the confession. The departed one says:

<span class="small">"I did not do evil.--I did not commit violence.--I
did not torment any heart.--I did not steal. I did not cause any one to
be treacherously killed.--I did not lessen the offerings.--I did not do
any harm.--I did not utter a lie.--I did not make any one weep.--I did
not commit acts of self-pollution. --I did not fornicate.--I did not
trespass.--I did not commit any perfidy.--I did no damage to cultivated
land.--I was no accuser.--I was never angry without sufficient
reason.--I did not turn a deaf ear to the words of truth.--I did not
commit witchcraft.--I did not blaspheme.--I did not cause a slave to be
maltreated by his master.--I did not despise God in my heart."</span>

Then the departed one places his heart on the balance of truth, where it
is weighed by the hawk-headed Hor and the jackal-headed Anubis, "the
director of the weight," the weight being shaped in the figure of the
goddess of truth. Thoth, the ibis-headed scribe of the gods, reads Hor's
report to Osiris, and if it announces that the weight of the heart is
equal to truth, Thoth orders it to be placed back into the breast of the
departed

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

one, which act indicates his return to life. If the departed one escapes
all the dangers that await him in his descent to Amenti, and if the
weight of his heart is not found wanting, he is allowed to enter into
"the boat of the sun,)' in which he is conducted to the Elysian fields
of the blessed.

Should the evil deeds of the departed one outweigh his good deeds, he
was sentenced to be devoured by Amemit (i. e., the devourer), which is
also called "the beast of Amenti," or was sent back to the upper world
in the shape of a pig.

While the double stays in the tomb, the soul, represented as a bird with
a human head, soars to heaven where it becomes one with all the great
gods. The liberated soul exclaims (Erman, *ib*., p. 343 et seq.):

"I am the god Atum, I who was alone,

"I am the god Ra at his first appearing,

"I am the great god who created himself, and created his name I Lord of
the gods, who has not his equal.'

"I was yesterday, and I know the to-morrow. The battlefield of the gods
-was made when I spoke.

"I come into my home, I come into my native city.

"I commune daily with my father Atum.

"My impurities are driven out, and the sin that was in me is conquered.

"Ye gods above, reach out your hands, I am like you, I have become one
of you.

"I commune daily with my father Atum.

Having become one with the gods, the departed soul suffers the same fate
as Osiris. Like him, it is slain by Set, and like Osiris, it is reborn
in Hor who revenges the death of his father. At the same time the soul
is supposed

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

frequently to visit the double of the departed man in the tomb, as
depicted in the tomb of the scribe Ani.

The Abode of Bliss (in Egyptian *Sechnit aanru*, also written *aahlu*),
as depicted in the Turin papyrus of the Book of the Dead, shows us the
departed one with his family, and Thoth, the scribe of the gods, behind
them, in the act of sacrificing to three gods, the latter being
decorated with the feather of truth. He then crosses the water. On the
other side, he offers a perfuming pan to his soul which appears in the
shape of a man-headed bird. There are also the three mummy-form gods of
the horizon, with an altar of offerings before the hawk, symbolising Ra,
"the master of heaven." In the middle part of the picture the departed
one ploughs, sows, reaps, threshes, stores up the harvest, and
celebrates a thanksgiving with offerings to the Nile. The lower part
shows two barks, one for Ra Harmakhis, the other one for Unefru; and the
three islands: the first is inhabited by Ra, the second is called the
regenerating place of the gods, the third is the residence of Shu,
Tefnut, and Seb.

A very instructive illustration of Egyptian belief is afforded us in the
well-preserved tomb of Rekhmara, the prefect of Thebes under Thothmes
III. of the eighteenth dynasty, the inscriptions of which have been
translated into French by Ph. Virey and were published in 1889 by the
*Mission Archéologique Française*.

The visitor to the tomb enters through a door on the eastern end; when
proceeding westward, we see Rekhmara on the left wall pass from life to
death. Here he attends to the affairs of the government, there he
receives in the name of Pharaoh the homage of foreign princes;

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span id="img_02500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE ABODE OF
BLISS. (After Lepsius's reproduction of the Turin
Papyrus)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/02500.jpg)  
THE ABODE OF BLISS. (After Lepsius's reproduction of the Turin
Papyrus)  
</span>

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

further on he organises the work of building magazines at Thebes. He
superintends the artists engaged at the Temple of Ammon and is then
buried in pomp. At last he assumes the appearance of the Osiris of the
West and receives sacrifices in his capacity as a god. We are now
confronted with a blind door through which Rekhmara-Osiris descends into
the West and returns to life toward the East as the Osiris of the East.
Through funeral sacrifices and incantations his double is again invested
with the use of the various senses; he is honored at a festival and
graciously received by Pharaoh; in a word, he acts as he did in life.
When we return to the entrance where we started, Rekhmara receives the
offerings of his family and inspects the progress of the works to which
he attended in life.

In the tomb of Rekhmara, Set receives offerings like other great gods.
The departed one is called the inheritor of Set (Suti), and is purified
by both Hor and Set. As an impersonation of Osiris, the departed one is
approached and slain by Set, who then is vanquished in the shape of
sacrificial animals which are slaughtered. But when the departed one is
restored to the use of his senses and mental powers, Set again plays an
important part, and appears throughout as one of the four points of the
compass, which are "Hor, Set, Thoth, and Seb." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

According to the original legend, Set represented the death of the sun,
and as a personality he is described as the murderer of Osiris, who was
finally reconciled with Hor. He remained, however, a powerful god, and
had important functions to perform for the souls of the dead.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Above all, he must bind and conquer the serpent Apophis (Apap), as we
read in the *Book of The Dead* (108, 4 and 5):

<span class="small">"They use Set to circumvent it \[the serpent\]; they
use him to throw an iron chain around its neck, to make it vomit all
that it has swallowed."</span>

1n the measure that the allegorical meaning of the Osiris legend is
obliterated, and that Osiris is conceived as a real person who as the
representative of moral goodness, succumbs in his struggle with evil and
dies, but is resurrected in his son Hor, Set is more and more deprived
of his divinity and begins to be regarded as an evil demon.

The reign of Men-Kau-Ra, the builder of the third pyramid of Gizeh
(according to Brugsch, 3633 B. C., and according to Mariette, 4100 B.
C.), must have changed the character of the old Egyptian religion. "The
prayer to Osiris on his coffin lid," says Rawlinson (Vol. II., p. 67),
"marks a new religious development in the annals of Egypt. The
absorption of the justified soul in Osiris, the cardinal doctrine of the
Ritual of the Dead, makes its appearance here for the first time."

According to the older canon Set is always mentioned among the great
deities, but later on he is no longer recognised as a god, and his name
is replaced by that of some other god. The Egyptians of the
twenty-second dynasty went so far as to erase Set's name from many of
the older inscriptions and even to change the names of former kings that
were compounds of Set, such as Set-nekht and others. The
crocodile-headed Ceb (also called. Seb or Keb) and similar deities, in
so far as their

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

nature was suggestive of Set, suffered a similar degradation; and this,
we must assume, was the natural consequence of an increased confidence
in the final victory of the influence of the gods of goodness and
virtue.

Plutarch, speaking of his own days, says (*On Isis and Osiris*, Chapter
XXX.) that:

<span class="small">"The power of Typhon, although dimmed and crushed,
is still in its last agonies and convulsions. The Egyptians occasionally
humiliate and insult him at certain festivals. They nevertheless
propitiate and soothe him by means of certain sacrifices."</span>

Set, the great and strong god of prehistoric times, was converted into
Satan with the rise of the worship of Osiris. Set was strong enough to
slay Osiris, as night overcomes the light of the sun; but the sun is
born again in the child-god Hor, who conquers Set and forces him to make
the old serpent of death surrender its spoil. As the sun sets to rise
again, so man dies to be reborn. The evil power is full of awe, but a
righteous cause cannot be crushed, and, in spite of death, life is
immortal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[18:1](hod05.htm#fr_7) See Lepsius, Denkmäler,
Vol. V., p. 36. The picture is reproduced in outline by Adolf Erman in
his *Life in Ancient Egypt*, Engl. trans., p. 282.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[22:1](hod05.htm#fr_8) Also called Maâ't, or "the
two truths," i. e., of the upper and of the nether world.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[26:1](hod05.htm#fr_9) *Le Tombeau de Rakhmara*,
by Ph. Virey. Paris: Le Roux. 1889.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Accad and the Early Semites](hod06)
