[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hod18)  [Next](hod20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXOHY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*History of the Devil*, by Paul Carus, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

# IN VERSE AND FABLE.

THE DEVIL in folklore is entitled to our ungrudging admiration for his
indefatigable energy. There are innumerable devil-stones thrown at
churches, there are devil-walls, devil-bridges, cathedrals, monasteries,
castles, dikes, and mills, built by him for the purpose of seducing and
gaining souls. He has had his finger in the pie everywhere and appears
to be all but omnipresent and omniscient.

In popular literature the Devil plays a most important role. While he is
still regarded as the incarnation of all physical and moral evil, his
main office has become that of a general mischief-worker in the
universe; without him there would be no plot, and the story of the world
would lose its interest. He appears as the critic of the good Lord, as
the representative of discontent with existing conditions, he inspires
men with the desire for an increase of wealth, power, and knowledge; he
is the mouth-piece of all who are anxious for a change in matters
political, social, and ecclesiastical. He is identified with the spirit
of progress so inconvenient to those who are satisfied with the existing
state of things, and thus

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

he is credited with innovations of all kinds, the aspiration for
improvement as well as the desire for the overthrow of law and order. In
a word, he is characterised as the patron of both reform and evolution.

*Devil-Stories*.

The literature of devil-stories is very extensive. We select from them a
number of the most representative tales.

Several legends indicate an origin by hallucination: For instance, St.
Hilarion when hungry, saw a number of exquisite dishes. St. Pelagia, who
had been an actress in Antioch, lived the life of a religious recluse in
a cave on the Mount of Olives. Once the Devil offered her a number of
rings, bracelets, and precious stones, which disappeared as quickly as
they came. Rufinus of Aquileja relates the story of a monk, a man of
great abstinence, living in a desert. One evening a beautiful woman
appeared at his hermitage asking for a night's shelter. She conducts
herself with modesty at first, but soon begins to smile, to stroke his
beard, and to caress him. The monk grows excited and embraces her
fervently, when, lo! the whole apparition vanishes, leaving him lonely
in his cell. He hears the laughter of devils in the air, and, despairing
of salvation, he goes back into the world and falls an easy prey to the
temptations of Satan.

While Christianity was still under the influence of orientalised
Gnosticism, the Church believed in the perversity of bodily existence,
and therefore clung to the notion that all nature was the work of the
Devil. Thus

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

the monk retired from the world, but he took with him into his solitude
the memory-pictures of his life. Memory-pictures are part of our soul,
and a man who suddenly cuts off all new impressions so that his present
life becomes a blank, will have hallucinations as naturally as a man who
falls asleep will have dreams. The darkness of the present throws into
strong relief the most vivid recollections of the past; the emptiness of
a solitary mode of existence causes the slumbering memory-images to
appear almost in bodily reality.

A very interesting letter of St. Jerome to the virgin Eustochia, which
exemplifies the truth of this explanation, is still extant. St. Jerome
writes:

<span class="small">"Alas! how often, when living in the desert, in that
dreary, sunburnt loneliness, which serves as an habitation to the monks,
did I believe myself revelling in the pleasures of Rome. I sat lonely,
my soul filled with affliction, clothed in wretched rags, my skin
sunburnt like an Ethiopian's. No day passed without tears and sighs, and
when sleep overcame me I had to lie on the naked ground. I do not
mention eating and drinking, for the monks drink, even if sick, only
water, and regard cooking as a luxury. And if I, who had condemned
myself from fear of hell to such a life, without any other society than
scorpions and wild beasts, often imagined myself surrounded by dancing
girls, my face was pale from fasting, but in the cold body the soul was
burning with desires, and in a man whose flesh was dead the flames of
lust were kindled. Then I threw myself helpless at the feet of Jesus,
wetted them with tears, dried them again with my hair, and subdued the
rebellious flesh by fasts of a whole week. I am not ashamed to confess
my misery; I am rather sorry for no longer being such as I was. I
remember still how often, when fasting and weeping, the night followed
the day, and how I did not cease to beat my breast until at the command
of God peace had returned."</span>

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

The legend of Merlin, as told by Bela in the old chronicles,
characterises a whole class of stories.

The defeated Satan proposes to regain his power by the same means by
which God has vanquished him. He decides to have a son who shall undo
Christ's work of redemption. All the intrigues of hell are used to ruin
a noble family until only two daughters are left. The one falls into
shame, while the other remains chaste and resists all temptations. One
night, however, she forgot to cross herself, and thus the Devil could
approach her,--even against her will. The pious girl underwent the
severest penance, and when her time came she had a son whose hairy
appearance betrayed his diabolical parentage. The child, however, was
baptised and received the name Merlin. The excitement in heaven was
great. What a triumph would it be to win the Devil's own son over to the
cause of Christ. The Devil gave to his son all the knowledge of the past
and the present; God added the knowledge of the future, and this proved
the best weapon against the evil attempts of his wicked father. When
Merlin grew up, he slighted his father and performed many marvellous
things. He was full of wisdom, and his prophecies were reliable. It is
generally assumed that after his death he did not descend into hell but
went to heaven.

Similar is the story of Robert the Devil, the hero of a modern opera.
The Duchess of Normandy, the old legend tells us, had no children.
Having implored the help of God in vain, she addressed herself to the
Devil who satisfied her wish at once. She had a son who was a rogue from
babyhood. Being very, courageous and

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

strong, he became the chief of a band of robbers. He was knighted, to
temper his malignity, but this appeal to his feeling of honor failed to
have any effect. In a tournament he slew thirty knights, then he went
out into the world to seek adventures. On his return he became a robber
again. One day, when he had just strangled all the nuns of a cloister,
he remembered that he had a mother and decided to visit her. But when he
made his appearance, her servants dispersed in wild fear. For the first
time in his life he was impressed with the idea that he had become
odious to his fellow-men, and becoming conscious of his evil nature, he
wanted to know why he was worse than others. With his sword drawn, he
forced his mother to confess the secret of his birth. He was
horror-struck, but did not despair. He went to Rome, confessed to a
pious hermit, submitted willingly to the severest penance and combated
the Saracens who happened to be laying siege to Rome. The emperor
offered him his daughter as a reward. And now the two records of
Robert's fate become contradictory. Not knowing the truth, we state both
impartially. Some say that Robert married the emperor's daughter who was
in love with him; others declare that he refused the match and crown,
and returned to his hermit confessor, into the wilderness where he died
blessed by God and mankind.

Not all the sons of the Devil, however, join the cause of the good Lord.
Eggelino, the tyrant of Padua, forces his mother to confess the secret,
that he and his brother Alberico were sons of Satan. Eggelino boasts
that he will live as befits the son of the Evil One. He succeeds with
the assistance of his brother in becoming the tyrant

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

of Padua, commits terrible crimes and dies at last in misery and
despair. The story is dramatised by Albertino Mussato in his *Eccerius*.

On the right side of the high altar of the church of St. Denys, near
Paris, a bas-relief illustrates the legend of St. Dagobert's death,
which proves the soul-saving power of Christian saints. We are told that
"a hermit on an island in the Mediterranean was warned in a vision to
pray for the Frankish King's soul. He then saw Dagobert in chains,
hurried along by a troop of fiends,

<span id="img_41200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DEMONS ON THE TOMB
OF DAGOBERT.&lt;br&gt; (On the right of the high altar in the church of
St. Denys, near Paris.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/41200.jpg.md)  
DEMONS ON THE TOMB OF DAGOBERT.  
(On the right of the high altar in the church of St. Denys, near
Paris.)  
</span>

who were about to cast him into a volcano. At last his cries to St.
Denys, St. Michael, and St. Martin, brought to his assistance those
three venerable and glorious persons, who drove off the devils, and with
songs of triumph conveyed the rescued soul to Abraham's bosom." <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_226.md)

Among the romances which represent the struggle of man with temptation
and the powers of evil Spenser's *Faerie Queene* and Bunyan's *Pilgrim's
Progress* are well

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

known and need no further comment. The underlying idea, however, is not
original with these authors of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
but dates back to the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries. A
manuscript-copy of *Le Romant des trois Pélerinages* by Guillaume de
Guillauille describes the adventures of a man in his pilgrimage through
life. In a deep valley the pilgrim meets covetousness, which
Didron <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_227.md) describes as follows:

<span id="img_41300"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![COVETOUSNESS.&lt;br&gt; (From the manuscript-copy in the Library of
St. Geneviève, Paris.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/41300.jpg.md)  
COVETOUSNESS.  
(From the manuscript-copy in the Library of St. Geneviève, Paris.)  
</span>

"The idol worn upon her head is 'the peny of gold or of silver whereon
is emprinted the figure of the hye Lord of the countree.' The false God
that blindeth him that turneth his eyes towards him and maketh fools to
bend their eyes downwards. This God by whom she hath been disfigured and
defamed is Avarice. The hands behind like griffin's claws are to
symbolise Rapine, Coutteburse, and Latrosynie.'

"In the next pair of hands she holds a bowl for alms, or for the money
she extorts through beggary, and a hook, with which she enters the house
of Christ and seizes his servants. Taking their croziers and shepherds'
crooks, she furnishes them with this devil's prong instead, fished up by
her out of the darkness of Hell, and this hand is named Simony. in the
next hands she holds a yard measure, purse, and scales. With the measure
she deals out false lengths, with the balances she weighs false measure,
and into

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

<span class="small">the purse she puts the ill-won gains of her
treachery, gambling, and dishonesty. Round her neck hangs a bag, and
nothing that is put therein can ever come out again; all things remain
there to rot.</span>

*Devil-Contracts*.

The Devil, fighting with God for the possession of mankind, was supposed
to have a special passion for

<span id="img_41400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FAUST SIGNING THE
CONTRACT WITH THE DEVIL IN BLOOD.&lt;br&gt; (By Franz
Simm)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/41400.jpg.md)  
FAUST SIGNING THE CONTRACT WITH THE DEVIL IN BLOOD.  
(By Franz Simm)  
</span>

catching souls. Being the prince of the world he could easily grant even
the most extravagant wishes, and was sometimes willing to pay a high
price when a man promised to be his for time and eternity. Thus
originated the idea of making compacts with the Devil; and it is worthy
of note that in these compacts the Devil is very careful

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

to establish his title to the soul of man by a faultless legal document.
He has, as we shall learn, sufficient reason to distrust all promises
made him by men and saints. Following the authority of the old legends,
we find that even the good Lord frequently lends his assistance to
cheating the Devil out of his own. He is always duped and the vilest
tricks are resorted to to cheat him. While thus the Devil, having
profited by experience, always insists upon having his rights insured by
an unequivocal instrument (which in later centuries is signed with
blood); he, in his turn, is fearlessly trusted to keep his promise, and
this is a fact which must be mentioned to his honor, for although he is
said to be a liar from the beginning, not one case is known, in all
devil-lore in which the Devil attempts to cheat his stipulators. Thus he
appears as the most unfairly maligned person, and as a martyr of
simple-minded honesty.

The oldest story of a devil-contract is the legend of Theophilus, first
told by Eutychian, who declares he had witnessed the whole affair with
his own eyes.

Theophilus, an officer of the church and a pious man, living in Adana, a
town of Cilicia, was unanimously elected by the clergy and by the laymen
as their bishop, but he refused the honor from sheer modesty. So another
man became bishop in his stead. The new bishop unjustly deprived
Theophilus of his office, who now regretted his former humility. But in
his humiliation Theophilus went to a famous wizard and made with his
assistance a compact with Satan, renouncing Christ and the Holy Virgin.
Satan at once causes the bishop to restore Theophilus to his position,
but now Theophilus

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

<span id="img_41600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE LEGEND OF
THEOPHILUS.&lt;br&gt; From Monk Conrad's illumined MS. (Thirteenth
Century; Monastery Scheiern Now in the Royal Library of
Munich.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/41600.jpg.md)  
THE LEGEND OF THEOPHILUS.  
From Monk Conrad's illumined MS. (Thirteenth Century; Monastery Scheiern
Now in the Royal Library of Munich.)  
</span>

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

repents and prays to the Holy Virgin for forgiveness. After forty days
of fasting and praying he is rebuked for his crime but not comforted; so
he fasts and prays thirty days more, and receives at last absolution.
Satan, however, refuses to give up his claim on Theophilus, and the Holy
Virgin then actually castigates the enemy of God and men so severely
that he at last surrenders the fatal document. Now Theophilus relates
the whole story in the presence of the bishop to the assembled
congregation in church; and after having divided all his possessions
among the poor dies peacefully and enters into the glories of Paradise.

Even popes are said to have made compacts with the Devil. An English
Benedictine monk, William of Malmesbury, says of Pope Sylvester II., who
was born in France, his secular name being Gerbert, that he entered the
cloister when still a boy. Full of ambition, he flew to Spain where he
studied astrology and magic among the Saracens. There he stole a
magic-book from a Saracen philosopher, and returned flying through the
air to France. Now he opened a school and acquired great fame, so that
the king himself became one of his disciples. Then he became Bishop of
Rheims, where he had a magnificent clock and an organ constructed.
Having raised the treasure of Emperor Octavian which lay hidden in a
subterranean vault at Rome, he became Pope. As Pope he manufactured a
magic head which replied to all his questions. This head told him that
he would not die until he had read Mass in Jerusalem. So the Pope
decided never to visit the Holy Land. But once he fell sick, and, asking
his magic head, was informed that the

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

church's name in which he had read Mass the other day was "The Holy
Cross of Jerusalem." The Pope knew at once that he had to die. He
gathered all the cardinals around his bed, confessed his crime, and, as
a penance, ordered his body to be cut up alive and the pieces to be
thrown out of the church as unclean.

Sigabert tells the story of the Pope's death in a different way. There
is no penance on the part of the Pope, and the Devil takes his soul to
hell. Others tell us that the Devil constantly accompanied the Pope in
the shape of a black dog, and this dog gave him the equivocal prophecy.

The historical truth of the story is that Gerbert was unusually gifted
and well educated. He was familiar with the, wisdom of the Saracens, for
Borrell, Duke of Hither Spain, carried him as a youth to his country
where he studied mathematics and astronomy. He came early in contact
with the most influential men of his time, and became Pope in 999. He
was liberal enough to denounce some of his unworthy predecessors as
"monsters of more than human iniquity," and as "Antichrist, sitting in
the temple of God and playing the part of God;" but at the same time he
pursued an independent and vigorous papal policy, foreshadowing in his
aims both the pretensions of Gregory the Great and the Crusades.

The most famous, most significant, and the profoundest story among the
legends of devil-contracts is the saga of Dr. Johannes Faustus. Whether
the hero of the Faust legend derives his name from the Latin *faustus*,
i. e., the favored one, or from the well-known Mayence goldsmith Fust,
the companion of Gensfleisch

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

vom Gutenberg, the inventor of printing, or whether he was no historical
personality at all, is an open question. Certain it is that all the
stories of the great naturalists and thinkers whom the people at the
time regarded as wizards were by and by attributed to him, and the
figure of Dr. Faustus became the centre of an extensive circle of
traditions. The tales about Albertus Magnus, Johannes

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_41900"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/41900.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="MEPHISTOPHELES MAKING HIS APPEARANCE IN FAUST&#39;S STUDY.&lt;br&gt; (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)" /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
MEPHISTOPHELES MAKING HIS APPEARANCE IN FAUST'S STUDY.<br />
(After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)<br />
</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_41901"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/41901.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="FAUST BEHOLDING THE EMBLEM OF THE MACROCOSM.&lt;br&gt; (After P. Rembrandt.)" /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
FAUST BEHOLDING THE EMBLEM OF THE MACROCOSM.<br />
(After P. Rembrandt.)<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Teutonicus
(Deutsch), Trithemius, Abbot of Sponheim, Agrippa of Nettesheim,
Theophrastus, and Paracelsus, were retold of Faust, and Faust became a
poetical personification of the great revolutionary aspirations in the
time immediately preceding and following the Reformation.

The original form of the Faust-legend represents the Roman Catholic
standpoint. Faust allies himself with

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

the Devil, works his miracles by the black art, and pays for its
practice with his soul. He begins, his career in Wittenberg, the
university at which Luther taught, and

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span id="img_42000"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42000.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="FAUST RIDING ON A BARREL OUT OF AUERBACH&#39;S CELLAR. Fresco." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
FAUST RIDING ON A BARREL OUT OF AUERBACH'S CELLAR. Fresco.<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span id="img_42001"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42001.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="THE SENSE-ILLUSIONS OF THE RIOTOUS STUDENTS AND FAUST&#39;S ESCAPE.&lt;br&gt; (After p. Cornelius.)" /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
THE SENSE-ILLUSIONS OF THE RIOTOUS STUDENTS AND FAUST'S ESCAPE.<br />
(After p. Cornelius.)<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

is the embodiment of natural science, of historical investigation, of
the Renaissance, and of modern discoveries and inventions. As such he
subdues nature, restores to

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

life the heroes of ancient Greece, gathers knowledge about distant
lands, and revives Helen, the ideal of classic beauty.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span id="img_42100"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42100.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="FAUST ENJOYING HIMSELF IN AUERBACH&#39;S CELLAR. Fresco." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
FAUST ENJOYING HIMSELF IN AUERBACH'S CELLAR. Fresco.<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span id="img_42101"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42101.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="MEPHISTOPHELES HAVING FAUST BURIED BY DEVILS. (After Retzsch.)" /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
MEPHISTOPHELES HAVING FAUST BURIED BY DEVILS. (After Retzsch.)<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

As the fall of the Devil is, according to Biblical authority, attributed
to pride and ambition, so progress and the spirit of investigation were
denounced as Satan's

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

work, and all inquiry into the mysteries of nature was regarded as
magic. Think only of Roger Bacon, that studious, noble monk, and a
greater scientist than his more famous namesake, Lord Bacon! In the
thirties of the thirteenth century, at the University of Paris, when
Roger Bacon, making some experiments with light, made the rainbow-colors
appear on a screen, the audience ran away from him terrified, and his
life was endangered because he was suspected of practising the black
art.

*The Faust Legend*.

Faust is the representative of scientific manliness. He investigates,
even though it may cost him the Christian's title to heavenly bliss; he
boldly studies nature, although he will be damned for it in hell; he
seeks the truth at the risk of forfeiting his soul. According to the
mediæval theology Satan fell simply on account of his manly ambition and
high aspiration, and yet Faust dares to break and eat of the forbidden
fruit of the tree of knowledge. According to Marlowe's Faustus, Lucifer
fell, not only by insolence, but first of all "by aspiring pride."
Mephistopheles seems to regret, but Faustus comforts him, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"What is great Mephistopheles so passionate,  
For being deprived of the joys of heaven?  
Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,  
And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess."</span>

</div>

The oldest Faust book, dated 1587 (called the *Volksbuch*) exists in one
single copy only which is now carefully preserved in Ulm, and Scheible
has re-published it

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

in his work *Dr. Johannes Faust* (3 Volumes, Stuttgart, 1846).

The preface of the *Volksbuch* states that the publisher had received
the manuscript from a good friend in Speyer, and that the original story
had been written in Latin. The contents of this oldest version of the
Faust legend are as follows:

Faust, the son of a farmer in Rod, near Weimar, studied theology at
Wittenberg. Ambitious to be omniscient and omnipotent like God, he dived
into the secret tore of magic, but unable to make much progress, he
conjured the Devil in a thick forest near Wittenberg. Not in the least
intimidated by the Devil's noisy behavior, he forced him to become his
servant. Faust, having gained mastery over demons, did not regard his
salvation endangered, and when the Devil told him that he should
nevertheless receive his full punishment after death, he grew extremely
angry with him and bade him quit his presence, saying: "For your sake I
do not want to be damned." When the Devil had left, Faust felt an
uneasiness not experienced before, for he had become accustomed to his
services. Accordingly, he ordered the Devil to return, who now
introduced himself as Mephistopheles. The name is derived from the Greek
, "not-the-light-loving," and was afterwards changed to Mephistopheles.
He now made a compact with the Devil who consented to serve him for
twenty-four years, Faust to allow him afterwards to deal with him as he
pleased. The contract was signed by Faust with his blood, which he drew
with a penknife from his left arm. The blood, running out of the wound,
formed

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

the words: *Homo fuge* (man, fly!). This startles Faust, but he remains
resolute.

Mephistopheles entertained his master with all kinds of merry illusions,
with music and visions. He brought him dainty dishes and costly clothes
stolen from royal households. Faust became luxurious and desired to
marry. The Devil refused, because marriage is a sacrament. Faust
insisted. Then the Devil appeared in his real shape which was so
terrific that Faust was frightened. He gave up the idea of marriage, but
Mephistopheles sent him devils who assumed the shape of beautiful women,
and made him dissolute.

Faust conversed with his servant about eschatological subjects, and
heard many things which greatly displeased his vanity. Mephistopheles
said, "I am a devil and act according to my nature. But if I were a man,
I would rather humiliate myself before God than before Satan."

Faust became sick of his empty pleasures. His ambition was to be
recognised in the world as a man who could explain nature, presage
future events, and so excite admiration. Having received sufficient
information concerning the other world, he wanted to come into direct
contact with it, and Mephistopheles introduced to him a number of
distinguished devils. When the visitors left, the house was so full of
vermin that Faust had to withdraw. However, he did not neglect his new
acquaintances on that account, but paid them a visit in their own home.
Riding upon a chair built of human bones, he visited hell and
contemplated with leisure the flames of its furnaces and the torments of
the damned.

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

Having safely returned from the infernal region, he was carried in a
carriage drawn by dragons up to heaven. He took a ride high in the air,
first eastwards over the whole of Asia, then upwards to the stars, until
they grew before his eyes on his approach into big worlds, while the
earth became as small as the yolk of an egg.

His curiosity being satisfied in that direction, he concentrated his
attention upon the earth. Mephistopheles assumed the shape of a winged
horse upon which he visited all the countries of our planet. He visited
Rome and regretted not having become Pope, seeing the luxuries of the
latter's life. He sat down invisible at the Pope's table and took away
his daintiest morsels, and the wine from his very lips. The Pope,
believing himself beset by a ghost, exorcised its poor soul, but Faust
laughed at him. In Turkey he visited the Sultan's harem, and introduced
himself as the prophet Mohammed, which gave him full liberty to act as
he pleased. Beyond India he saw at a distance the blest gardens of
Paradise.

Faust, being invited in his capacity of magician to visit the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, made Alexander the Great, the beautiful Helen, and
other noted persons of antiquity appear before the whole court. Faust
fell in love with Helen, so that he could no longer live without her. He
kept her in his company and had a child by her, a marvellous boy who
could reveal the future.

When the twenty-four years had almost elapsed, Faust grew melancholy,
but the Devil mocked him. At midnight, on the very last day, some
students who had been in his company heard a frightful noise, but did
not

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42600"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42600.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="STUDYING BLACK MAGIC." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
STUDYING BLACK MAGIC.<br />
</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42601"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42601.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" /><br />
Click to view</a></span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42602"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42602.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="SOME PLEASANTRIES OF BLACK MAGIC." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
SOME PLEASANTRIES OF BLACK MAGIC.<br />
</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42603"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42603.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="MIRACLES AND CONJURATIONS." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
MIRACLES AND CONJURATIONS.<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">WIDMAN's FAUST. (Reduced from Scheible's
Reproductions.)</span>

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

dare to enter his room. The next morning they found him torn to pieces.
Helen and her child had disappeared, and his famulus Wagner inherited
his books on magic art.

This briefly is the contents of the Volksbuch on Faust.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42700"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42700.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" /><br />
Click to view</a></span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42701"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42701.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" /><br />
Click to view</a></span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">LAST HOURS AND DEATH. (Widman's Faust.)</span> <span
id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_228.md)

A transcription of the Faust-legend in rhymes was published as early as
1587 in Tübingen. Another version by Widman appeared in Hamburg in 1599.
It is less complete than the first Faust-book and lacks depth of
conception while it abounds rather more in coarse incidents.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42800"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42800.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="WAGNER CONJURING THE DEVIL AUERHAN." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
WAGNER CONJURING THE DEVIL AUERHAN.<br />
</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42801"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42801.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="AUERHAN&#39;S SERVICES." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
AUERHAN'S SERVICES.<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42802"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42802.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="WAGNER&#39;S JOKES." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
WAGNER'S JOKES.<br />
</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_42803"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/42803.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="LAST HOURS AND DEATH." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
LAST HOURS AND DEATH.<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">CHRISTOPH WAGNER. (From an old popular edition,
illustrated by J. Nisle.)</span>

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Widmann's edition
became the basis of several further renderings, one in 1674 by Pfitzer
in Nuremberg, another in 1728 in Frankfort and Leipsic. Faust must have
appeared on the stage in the seventeenth century, for the clergy of
Berlin filed a complaint that Faust publicly abjured God on the stage.
The puppet-play Faust was compiled for the amusement of peasants and
children, in fairs and market places. Yet it was powerful enough to
inspire Goethe who saw it still performed when

<span id="img_42900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DEVIL IN THE
PUPPET PLAY](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/42900.jpg.md)  
THE DEVIL IN THE PUPPET PLAY  
</span>

a boy, to write the great drama which became the most famous work of his
life.

The Faust-legend found a continuation in the story of Christoph Wagner,
Faust's famulus and companion. The Wagner-story, however, contains
nothing new and is nothing but a bare repetition of Faust's adventures
and sorry end.

English editions appeared very early, and Marlowe, the greatest
pre-Shakespearian dramatist, used the Faust-story for one of his dramas,
which is still extant.

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

*Goethe's Faust*.

Goethe's conception of Faust represents the Protestant standpoint. Faust
allies himself with the spirit of negation and promises to pay the price
of his soul on condition that he shall find satisfaction; but Faust
finds no satisfaction in the gifts of the spirit that denies. However,
he does find satisfaction, after having abandoned the chase for empty
pleasures, in active and successful work for the good of mankind.
Goethe's Faust uses the Devil but rises above his negativism. However,
he inherits from the revolutionary movement of the age that gave birth
to the legend, the love of liberty. Says the dying Faust:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And such a throng I fain would see--  
Stand on free soil among a people free."</span>

</div>

This Faust cannot be lost. His soul is saved. Mephistopheles now ceases
to be a mere incarnation of badness; his negation becomes the spirit of
critique. The spirit of critique, although destructive, leads to the
positive work of construction; and thus Faust becomes a representative
of the bold spirit of investigation and progress which characterises the
present age.

The Devil of the *Volksbuch* is real; actors and spectators believe in
his power and are afraid to fall into his clutches. In Goethe's Faust
the mythology of the story is felt to be mere allegory and has become
part of the dramatic machinery. This is plainly seen in the Walpurgis
night scene which has become a satirical intermezzo of Goethe's time.

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

<span id="img_43100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WITCHES
CELEBRATING WALPURGIS NIGHT.&lt;br&gt; (By Franz
Simm.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/43100.jpg.md)  
WITCHES CELEBRATING WALPURGIS NIGHT.  
(By Franz Simm.)  
</span>

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

*Humorists*.

The figure of the Evil One began slowly to lose the awe which it
exercised during the Middle Ages upon the imagination of the people, and
Hans Sachs treats the Devil in his poems as a being of whom no
courageous man need be afraid. Thus the German halberdier, he says,
laughs at him, for Old Nick would not dare to admit a *Landsknecht* of
their rank into his kingdom.

<span id="img_43200"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/43200.jpg.md)</span>

The first man, however, who (so far as I am aware) was wise enough to
take, as a matter of principle, a humorous view of the Devil and hell
was Dionysius Klein. In his *Tragico-Comœdia*, published in the year
1622, he describes his trip both to heaven and to the infernal region,
which latter place is reported to be well equipped with water-power and
good machinery, as these were used in the beginning of the seventeenth
century.

In modern times the humorous character of Satan develops ill the degree
that he is no longer regarded as all individual being but changes to the
principle of evil.

In the British Islands where the majority of the people

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

still believe in a personal Devil, there exists all unwritten law which
reads, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Devil in vain." In Germany
and France, however, and in all other countries of the European
continent, people use the word freely in a way that must shock the
feelings of a well-bred Englishman.

<span id="img_43300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HELL ACCORDING TO
DIONYSIUS KLEIN'S TRAGICO-COMŒDIA.&lt;br&gt; (Reproduced from Bastian's
&lt;i&gt;Die Denkschöpfung&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/43300.jpg.md)  
HELL ACCORDING TO DIONYSIUS KLEIN'S TRAGICO-COMŒDIA.  
(Reproduced from Bastian's *Die Denkschöpfung*.)  
</span>

Victor Hugo uses the Devil as a setting for his political satire. No
more trenchant sarcasm in poetic form can be imagined than his lines on
Napoleon III. and Pope Pius IX. He says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"One day the Lord was playing  
For human souls (they're saving)  
With Satan's Majesty.  
And each one showed his art  
The one played Bonaparte,  
The other Mastaï.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"An abbot sly and keen,  
A princelet wretched mean,  
And a rascal, upon oath.  
God Father played so poorly,  
He lost the game, and surely  
The Devil won them both.

'Well, take them!' cried God Father,  
'You'll find them useless rather!'  
The Devil laughed and swore:  
'They'll serve my cause, I hope.  
The one I'll make a pope,  
The other emperor!'" <span id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_229.md)

\["Un jour Dieu sur la table  
Jouait avec le diable  
Du genre humain haï;  
Chacun tenait sa carte,  
L'un jouait Bonaparte  
Et l'autre Mastaï.

"Un pauvre abbé bien mince,  
Un méchant petit prince,  
Polisson hasardeux!  
Quel enjeu pitoyable  
Dieu fit tant que le diable  
Les gagna tous les deux.

"'Prends! cria Dieu le père,  
Tu ne sauras qu'en faire!'  
Le diable dit: 'erreur!  
Et, ricanant sous cape,  
Il fit de l'un un pape,  
De l'autre un empereur.'"\]

</div>

The Devil in the literature of to-day is of the same kind: a harmless
fellow at whose expense the reader enjoys

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

a hearty laugh. Lesage's novel *The Devil on Two Sticks* is a poor piece
of fiction, and Hauff's *Memoirs of Satan* are rather lengthy.

Heinrich Heine said jestingly:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Don't, my friend, scoff at the Devil,  
For the path of life is short  
And eternal reprobation  
Is not merely parson sport."

\["Freund verspotte nicht den Teufel,  
Kurz ist ja die Lebensbahn;  
Und die ewige Verdammniss  
Ist kein blosser Pöbelwahn."\]

</div>

In another poem Heine tells how he made the acquaintance of Satan and
what impression he made on the poet. According to Miss Emma Lazarus's
translation Heine says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I called the Devil and he came,  
His face with wonder I must scan  
He is not ugly, he is not lame,  
He is a delightful, charming man;  
A man in the prime of life, in fact,  
Courteous, engaging, and full of tact.  
A diplomat, too, of wide research  
Who cleverly talks about State and Church.  
A little pale, but that is *en règle*  
For now he is studying Sanskrit and Hegel.

He said he was proud my acquaintance to make  
And should prize my friendship, and bowed as he spake.  
And asked if we had not met before  
At the house of the Spanish ambassador.  
Then I noted his features line by line,  
And found him an old acquaintance of mine."

</div>

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

In modern times it has become quite customary in French, German, and
American papers to picture the Devil without fear and in good humor, and
few are they who would take offence at the sight.

*Hell Up to Date* is a genuine Chicago production of modern style. The
author introduces himself as a newspaper reporter who interviews "Sate,"
and is shown round the Inferno. He finds that "Hell is now run on

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_43600"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/43600.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="Satan stretching forth his hand from Devil&#39;s Island to disturb the peace of France--&lt;br&gt; From &lt;i&gt;El Hijodel Ahiuzote&lt;/i&gt; (Mexico)." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
Satan stretching forth his hand from Devil's Island to disturb the peace of France--<br />
From <em>El Hijodel Ahiuzote</em> (Mexico).<br />
</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p><span id="img_43601"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/43601.jpg"><img src="tn/generic.jpg" alt="“One captain escaped,” says the master of Devil&#39;s Island, “but in his place I&#39;ve got a handful of generals,”--From &lt;i&gt;Lustige Blütter&lt;/i&gt; (Germany)." /><br />
Click to view</a><br />
“One captain escaped,” says the master of Devil's Island, “but in his place I've got a handful of generals,”--From <em>Lustige Blütter</em> (Germany).<br />
</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="small">THE DEVIL IN MODERN SATIRICAL JOURNALS</span>.

the broad American plan." "Captain" Charon, who began his career as a
ferryman with a little tub of a "rowboat," is now running big steamers
on the Styx, "the only navigable river in hell." Judge Minos sits in
court, and an Irish policeman introduces the poor wretches one by one.
The lawyers are condemned to be gagged, and their objections are
overruled by Satan; the inventor of the barbwire fence is seated naked
oil a barbwire

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

<span id="img_43700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HELL UP TO
DATE.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/43700.jpg.md)  
HELL UP TO DATE.  
</span>

 <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_230.md)

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

fence; tramps are washed; policemen are clubbed until they see stars;
quack doctors are cured according to their own methods; poker fiends,
board of trade gamblers, and fish-story tellers are treated according to
their deserts; monopolists are baked like pop-corn, and clergymen are
condemned to listen to their own sermons which have been faithfully
recorded in phonographs.

\*      <sup>\*</sup>      \*

Devil-stories are myths in which Christian mythology is carried to the
extreme. Symbols are taken seriously, and from the literal belief of the
Christian dogma the imagination weaves these pictures which to our
ancestors were more than mere tales that adorn a moral.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[412:1](hod19.htm#fr_227.md) *Gesta Dagob*. (cc.
23, 44). Baronius (647, 5). D. Bouquet. *Rec. des histoires de France*,
t. ii. p. 593. Didron, *Christian Iconography*, ii. p. 132.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[413:1](hod19.htm#fr_228.md) A manuscript-copy of
an old English translation exists in the University Library of
Cambridge, England.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[427:1](hod19.htm#fr_229.md) Most of these
illustrations need no further comments. The last three represent the
storm that was raging during Faust's funeral, the inheritance of Wagner,
consisting of Faust's books and instruments, and also Helen and her son.
The last picture shows Faust's ghost haunting his old residence at
Wittenberg.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[434:1](hod19.htm#fr_230.md) Translation specially
made by E. F. L Gauss.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[437:1](hod19.htm#fr_231.md) By permission from A.
Young's *Hell Up to Date*. Copyright 1892 by F. J. Schulte.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Philosophical Problem of Good and Evil](hod20.md)
