[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hod11)  [Next](hod13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXOHY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*History of the Devil*, by Paul Carus, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

# EARLY CHRISTIANITY.

*Jesus and the New Testament*.

THE EVIL ONE played an important part in the imagination of the people
in the time of Christ. Satan is mentioned repeatedly by the scribes and
the people of Israel in the synoptic gospels, by the Apostles,
especially by St. Paul, and very often in the revelation of St. John.
Jesus follows the common belief of the time in attributing mental
diseases to the possession of demons, and we may assume that he shared
the popular view. Nevertheless, he speaks, upon the whole, less of the
Devil than do his contemporaries.

The Jesus of the Gospels is said to have been tempted by the Devil in
much the same way that Buddha was tempted by Mâra, the Evil One. Even
the details of the two stories of temptation possess many features of
resemblance.

Christ is very impressive in depicting the evil consequences of sin. He
compares the last judgment to the selection made by fishermen who gather
the good fishes into vessels, but cast the bad away (Math. xiii., 47).
He speaks of the reward of "the good and faithful"

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span id="img_15800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![JESUS CASTING OUT
DEVILS. (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15800.jpg.md)  
JESUS CASTING OUT DEVILS. (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)  
</span>

<span id="img_15801"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FIEND, SOWING
TARES AMONG THE WHEAT. (From a German Picture-Bible.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15801.jpg.md)  
THE FIEND, SOWING TARES AMONG THE WHEAT. (From a German
Picture-Bible.)  
</span>

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

while "the unprofitable servant" will be cast "into outer darkness where
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." Hell is described as "the
fire that shall never be quenched" and "the worm that dieth not." And
the wicked people are compared to goats to whom the Son of Man will say:
"Depart from me ye cursed ones, into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his angels."

Christ represents the Devil as the enemy that sows tares among the
wheat, and once addresses as Satan one of his favorite disciples who
speaks words that might lead him into temptation. We read in Mark,
viii., 33, and Matth., xvi., 23:

<span class="small">"He rebuked Peter, saying: 'Get thee behind me,
Satan, for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but the things
that be of men.'"</span>

This fact alone appears sufficient to prove that, while it is natural
that Christ used the traditional idea of Satan as a personification of
the evil powers to furnish him with materials for his parables, Satan to
him was mainly a symbol of things wicked or morally evil.

If the Gospel stories actually reflect the real views of the historical
Jesus, it appears that his idea of justice was based on the notion that
the future life would be an exact inversion of the present order of
things. According to the literal meaning of the language of the parable,
Dives is not punished for his sins, and Lazarus is not rewarded for his
good deeds: the future fate of the former in Hell and the latter in
Heaven is the result of an equalisation, as we read in Luke xvi. 25:

<span class="small">"But Abraham said, 'Son, remember that thou in thy
lifetime</span>

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span id="img_16000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DIVES, ENJOYING
LIFE, AND LAZARUS SUFFERING. (From a German
Picture-Bible.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16000.jpg.md)  
DIVES, ENJOYING LIFE, AND LAZARUS SUFFERING. (From a German
Picture-Bible.)  
</span>

<span id="img_16001"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DIVES TORMENTED IN
HELL. (From a German Picture-Bible.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16001.jpg.md)  
DIVES TORMENTED IN HELL. (From a German Picture-Bible.)  
</span>

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="small">receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus
evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.'"</span>

And as on earth Dives had the distress of Lazarus before his eyes, so
now Lazarus, seated in the bosom of Abraham, sees with complacency the
pains of Dives.

<span id="img_16100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CAST INTO OUTER
DARKNESS WHERE THERE SHALL BE WEEPING AND GNASHING OF TEETH.&lt;br&gt;
(From a German Picture-Bible.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16100.jpg.md)  
CAST INTO OUTER DARKNESS WHERE THERE SHALL BE WEEPING AND GNASHING OF
TEETH.  
(From a German Picture-Bible.)  
</span>

The keynote of the Christian sentiment of the apostolic age is expressed
in the second epistle to the Thessalonians, where St. Paul says:

"Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by our gathering together unto him,

"That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit,
nor by word, nor by letter as from us, that the day of Christ is at
hand."

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

St. Paul's belief "that the day of Christ is at hand is based upon
Christ's own utterances. We read in Mark ix. 1:

<span id="img_16200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DAY OF THE
LORD. (After Michelangelo.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16200.jpg.md)  
THE DAY OF THE LORD. (After Michelangelo.)  
</span>

<span class="small">"And he (Jesus) said unto them: 'Verily I say unto
you that there be some of them that stand here which shall not taste of
death till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power."</span>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

That in this passage the second advent of Christ is referred to there
can be no doubt, especially as there are parallel passages which are
written in the same spirit. In Matt. x. 23, Christ declares that his
disciples preaching the Gospel in Palestine and fleeing from one city to
another when persecuted for his name's sake, "shall not have gone over
the cities of Israel till the Son of Man be come."

St. Paul confidently expected that he himself would see the day of the
Lord, and in consideration of its nearness he deemed all worldly care
unnecessary. Having explained in his epistle to the Corinthians the
significance of the events in Jewish history and the punishments of
sinners, he adds:

<span class="small">"Now all these things happened unto them for
ensamples, and they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of
the world are come." <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) (I Cor. x.
ii.)</span>

When some of the Thessalonian Christians died, St. Paul comforted them
by declaring that those who sleep will be resurrected and taken together
up to heaven with those who survive. And the words of Paul expressly
implied that he himself, together with the Thessalonians whom be
addresses, will remain, of which fact he is so sure as to pronounce his
opinion as being "the word of the Lord." He says:

'But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span id="img_16400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE LAST
JUDGEMENT: Fresco in Campo Santo, Pisa.&lt;br&gt; Illustrating St.
Paul's prophecy: “The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of an archangel and with the trump of God; and the
dead in Christ shall rise first.”](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16400.jpg.md)  
THE LAST JUDGEMENT: Fresco in Campo Santo, Pisa.  
Illustrating St. Paul's prophecy: “The Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of an archangel and with the trump
of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first.”  
</span>

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

"For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also
which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

"For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them
which are asleep.

"For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first.

"Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be
with the Lord.

"Wherefore comfort one another with these words."

When the early disciples became more and more disappointed at the
non-appearance of the Lord in the clouds of heaven, a prominent leader
of the Christian Church wrote an epistle to revive their faith, which
was apt to suffer by the ridicule of those who did not share this
belief. We read in the second epistle of St. Peter:

"This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I
stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:

"That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the
holy prophets, and of the commandment of us, the apostles of the Lord
and Savior:

"Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts,

"And saying, 'Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation.'

". . . . The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.

"But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that
are therein shall be burnt up.

"Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,

"Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat?

"Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a
new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."

The present world remains in the power of Satan until the prophecy of
the second advent of Christ be fulfilled, and we had better be prepared
for meeting his onslaughts; as says the author of the first epistle of
St. Peter:

<span class="small">"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary, the
Devil, as a roaring lion walketh about, seeking whom he may
devour."</span>

In addition to his old names of Satan, Beelzebub, and Devil (which
latter appears first in Jesus Sirach), the Evil One is called in the New
Testament the prince of this world, the great dragon, the old serpent,
the prince of the devils, the prince of the power of the air, the spirit
that now worketh in the children of disbelief, the Antichrist. Satan is
represented as the founder of an empire that struggles with and
counteracts the kingdom of God upon earth. He is powerful, but less
powerful than Christ and his angels. He is conquered and doomed through
Christ, but he is still unfettered.

The newly discovered fourth book of Daniel <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) contains a story which characterises the
expectations of the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

early Church. We read of a certain man, holding the office of president
(προεστώς) in a Christian congregation of Syria:

<span class="small">"He persuaded many of the brethren, with their wives
and children, to go out into the wilderness to meet the Christ, and they
went wandering In the mountains and wastes, there losing their way; and
the end was that all but a few were apprehended as robbers and would
have been executed by the mayor of the city (ἡγεμών) had it not been
that his wife was a believer and that in response to her entreaties he
put a stop to the proceedings to prevent a persecution arising because
of them."</span>

Cases of this kind happened frequently. We read of another Christian
officer (also a προεστώς) in Pontus that he also preached the
approaching day of judgment:

<span class="small">"He brought the brethren to such a pitch of fear and
trembling that they abandoned their lands and fields, letting them
become waste, and sold, the most of them, their possessions."</span>

The belief in the imminent approach of the day of judgment waned during
the third century, but was temporarily revived in the year 1000, which
was commonly believed to be the end of the millennium prophesied by St.
John the Divine in the Revelation. The disorder and misery which
resulted from the foolish acts that people committed in anticipation of
the approaching day of judgment all over Christendom are beyond
description. Some squandered their property in order to enjoy the last
days of their lives; some sold all they had and gave to the poor; some
invested all their possessions in masses and Church donations; and thus
almost all who were filled with the belief in the coming of the Lord
fell a prey to the most wretched poverty and distress.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

*Jewish-Christian Eschatology*.

The Revelation of St. John, written between 68 and 70 A. D., after
Nero's death and before the destruction of Jerusalem, propounds the
eschatology of early Christianity, which closely follows such traditions
of the Jews as are preserved in the prophetic books of the Old Testament
Apocrypha.

The author of the Revelation is a Jew-Christian, who in the name of the
son of man informs the seven churches of Asia Minor that God hates the
Nicolaitanes (i., 6 and 15), an antinomistic sect among the Gnostics who
according to Irenaeus (I., Chap. 26) regarded the Mosaic law, the nomos,
as unessential to salvation. The warning given out against "those who
say that they are Apostles and are not" seems to be directed against St.
Paul, who, like the Nicolaitanes, is also known for his strong
antinomistic principles and finding no sin in eating with pagans, even
though the meat might have been offered as a sacrifice to idols. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_67.md)

An unpleasant denunciation of a follower of antinomistic, i. e., Pauline
Christianity in the city of Thyatira, is mentioned in chapter ii.,
verses 20-29, which probably has reference to Lydia, a seller of purple,
who was baptised by Paul (Acts xvi. 14-15). The great promises of the
Lord offered to the faithful through John the Divine, are strictly
limited to the Jew Christian, to him who keeps the law and holds fast to
it till Christ's second advent (ii. 25). As a reward Christ, according

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

to John the Divine's vision, allows him the great pleasure of destroying
the Gentiles, saying:

<span class="small">"And he that overcometh and keepeth my works (i. e.,
the law) unto the end, to him will I give the power over the
nations;</span>

<span id="img_16900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE CHRISTIAN
WORLD DISPENSATION ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN THE DIVINE.&lt;br&gt; (After
Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16900.jpg.md)  
THE CHRISTIAN WORLD DISPENSATION ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN THE DIVINE.  
(After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)  
</span>

<span class="small">and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: as the
vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers; even as I received
from my Father."</span>

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

St. John believes that the judgment of the world is near at hand. The
Lamb opens the seven seals, and four

<span id="img_17000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FOUR RIDERS OF
THE APOCALYPSE. Wall-painting on the Campo Santo, Berlin (By P. Von
Cornelius.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17000.jpg.md)  
THE FOUR RIDERS OF THE APOCALYPSE. Wall-painting on the Campo Santo,
Berlin (By P. Von Cornelius.)  
</span>

men on horseback, one with a crown, one with a sword, one with a pair of
balances, and the last one Death, followed by Hell, are let loose. The
martyrs of God receive

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

white robes, the sun becomes black as sackcloth, and the moon becomes as
blood. Then an angel pronounces a triple woe upon the inhabitants of the
earth. The pit is opened and four angels who had been bound are loosed
to slay the third part of men. A struggle ensues between a women that
travaileth and the dragon, but the dragon is cast down. A beast with
seven heads and ten horns appears; another beast follows and makes an
image of the first beast that should be worshipped by men. "The number
of the beast" is "six hundred and three score and six," which according
to cabalistic symbolism means "Nero." The Roman Emperor is thus regarded
as an incarnation of Satan, and for a short time power is given to the
pagan government over the world. But the victorious Lamb stands on Mount
Zion; the Gospel is preached, and the sickle of the harvest is ready for
gathering in the clusters of the vine. Then the seven vials of wrath are
poured out upon mankind. The city "which reigneth over the kings of the
earth" (i. e., Rome), the old Babylon, the mother of abominations, shall
fall, and the fowls of the air are called to fill themselves with the
flesh of the slain. Satan is bound for a thousand years, but let loose
again. In a final struggle, Gog and Magog are conquered, whereupon a new
heaven and a new earth are created. A heavenly Jerusalem descends upon
earth and the twelve tribes inhabit the city, which needs no sun because
God is its light. The pagan Christians remain outside: "The nations of
them which are saved shall walk in the light of it, and the kings of the
earth bring their glory and honor into it."

Such is briefly the contents of the Revelation of St.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span id="img_17200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE WOMAN OF
ABOMINATION. After the Revelation of St. John, (By Albrecht
Dürer.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17200.jpg.md)  
THE WOMAN OF ABOMINATION. After the Revelation of St. John, (By Albrecht
Dürer.)  
</span>

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> John the Divine,
which is a very important book, as it embodies the views of the early
Jew-Christians concerning God's plan in the history of the world, and
the powers of evil play in it a most important part.

The main prophecy of the Jewish Christian author of the revelation
remained unfulfilled. By a strange irony of fate Judaic Christianity
disappeared from the face of the earth, while Rome became the centre of
the Gentile Christianity, in which capacity she rose almost to more
glorious power than pagan Rome ever possessed through her political
superiority. Christianity was thoroughly Romanised and remained under
the sway of Rome until the Reformation split the Church in twain and
opened new possibilities for a progressive development of Christianity,
no longer subject to the dictates of a conclave of Italian cardinals and
a Roman pope.

*The Descent Into Hell*.

The belief in Satan and Hell form an essential part of early
Christianity, and Christ was believed immediately after his death on the
cross to have battled with and to have conquered the prince of hell.
Although the oldest manuscripts of the so-called Apostle's Creed do not
contain the passage "descended into hell," which is an addition of the
seventh century, there can be no doubt that the idea actually prevailed
as early as the second century. The Gospel of Nicodemus, which is
commonly regarded as a product of the third century, dwells on this part
of the Christian belief and offers a detailed account of Christ's
descent into Hell, which in Chapters xv-xvi reads as follows:

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

"Satan, the prince and captain of death, said to the prince of hell,
Prepare to receive Jesus of Nazareth himself, who boasted that he was
the Son of God, and yet was a man afraid of death, and said, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful even unto death. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68.md)
Besides he did many injuries to me and to many others; for those whom I
made blind and lame and those also whom I tormented with several devils,
he cured by his word; yea, and those whom I brought dead to thee, he by
force takes away from thee.

"To this the prince of hell replied to Satan, Who is that so powerful
prince, and yet a man who is afraid of death? For all the potentates of
the earth are subject to my power, whom thou broughtest to subjection by
thy power. But if he be so powerful in his nature, I affirm to thee for
truth, that he is almighty in his divine nature, and no man can resist
his power. When, therefore, he said he was afraid of death, he designed
to ensnare thee, and unhappy it will be to thee for everlasting ages.

"Then Satan, replying, said to the prince of hell, Why didst thou
express a doubt, and wast afraid to receive Jesus of Nazareth, both thy
adversary and mine? As for me, I tempted him and stirred up my old
people, the Jews, with zeal and anger against him. I sharpened the spear
for his suffering; I mixed the gall and vinegar, and commanded that he
should drink it; I prepared the cross to crucify him, and the nails to
pierce through his hands and feet; and now his death is near at hand, I
will bring him hither, subject both to thee and me.

"Then the prince of hell answering said, Thou saidst to me just now,
that he took away the dead from me by force. They who have been kept
here till they should live again upon earth were taken away hence, not
by their own power, but by prayers made to God, and their almighty God
took them from me. Who, then, is that Jesus of Nazareth that by his word
hath taken away the dead from me without prayer to God? Perhaps it is
the same who took away from me Lazarus, after he had been four days
dead, and did

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

both stink and was rotten, and of whom I had possession as a dead
person, yet he brought him to life again by his power.

"Satan, answering, said to the prince of hell, It is the very same
person, Jesus of Nazareth, which, when the prince of hell heard, he said
to him, I adjure thee by the powers which belong to thee and me, that
thou bring him not to me. For when I heard of the power of his word, I
trembled for fear, and all my impious company were at the same time
disturbed; and we were not able to detain Lazarus, but he gave himself a
shake, and with all the signs of malice he immediately went away from
us; and the very earth in which the dead body of Lazarus was lodged,
presently turned him out alive. And I know now that he is Almighty God
who could perform such things, who is mighty in his dominion, and mighty
in his human nature, who is the Saviour of mankind. Bring not,
therefore, his person hither, for be will set at liberty all those whom
I hold in prison under unbelief, and bound with the fetters of their
sins, and will conduct them to everlasting life.

"And while Satan and the prince of hell were discoursing thus to each
other, on a sudden there was a voice as of thunder and the rushing of
winds, saying, Lift up your gates, O ye princes; and be ye lift up, O
everlasting gates, and the King of Glory shall come in.

"When the prince of hell heard this, he said to Satan, Depart from me
and begone out of my habitations; if thou art a powerful warrior, fight
with the King of Glory. But what hast thou to do with him? And then he
cast him forth from his habitations. And the prince said to his impious
officers, Shut the brass gates of cruelty and make them fast with iron
bars, and fight courageously, lest we be taken captives.

"But when all the company of the saints heard this they spake with a
loud voice of anger to the prince of hell, Open thy gates that-the King
of Glory may come in.

"And the divine prophet David cried out, saying, Did not I when on earth
truly prophesy and say, O that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness and for his wonderful works to the children of men. For he hath
broken the gates of brass, and cut the

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span id="img_17600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRIST'S DESCENT
INTO HELL (By Sasha Schneider.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17600.jpg.md)  
CHRIST'S DESCENT INTO HELL (By Sasha Schneider.)  
</span>

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

bars of iron in sunder. He hath taken them because of their iniquity,
and because of their unrighteousness they are afflicted.

"After this another prophet, namely, holy Isaiah, spake in like manner
to all the saints, Did not I rightly prophesy to you when I was alive on
earth? The dead men shall live, and they shall rise again who are in
their graves, and they shall rejoice who are in earth; for the dew which
is from the Lord shall bring deliverance to them. And I said in another
place, O death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting?

"When all the saints heard these things spoken by Isaiah, they said to
the prince of hell, Open now thy gates, and take away thine iron bars,
for thou wilt now be bound, and have no power.

"Then there was a great voice, as of the sound of thunder, saying, Lift
up your gates, O princes; and be ye lifted up, ye gates of hell, and the
King of Glory will enter in.

"The prince of hell perceiving the same voice repeated, cried out as
though he had been ignorant, Who is that King of Glory? David replied to
the prince of hell, and said, I understand the words of that voice,
because I spake them by his spirit. And now, as I have above said, I say
unto thee, the Lord strong and powerful, the Lord mighty in battle: he
is the King of Glory, and he is the Lord in heaven and in earth. He hath
looked down to hear the groans of the prisoners, and to set loose those
that are appointed to death. And now, thou filthy and stinking prince of
hell, open thy gates, that the King of Glory may enter in; for he is the
Lord of heaven and earth.

"While David was saying this, the mighty Lord appeared in the Form of a
man, and enlightened those places which had ever before been in
darkness, and broke asunder the fetters which before could not be
broken; and with his invincible power visited those who sate in the deep
darkness by iniquity, and the shadow of death by sin. Impious Death and
her cruel officers hearing these things, were seized with fear in their
several kingdoms, when they saw the clearness of the light, and Christ
himself on a sudden appearing in their habitations; they cried out
therefore, and said,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

We are bound by thee; thou seemest to intend our confusion before the
Lord. Who art thou, who hast no sign of corruption. but that bright
appearance which is a full proof of thy greatness, of which yet thou
seemest to take no notice? Who art thou, so powerful and so weak, so
great and so little, a mean and yet a soldier of the first rank, who can
command in the form of a servant as a common soldier? The King of Glory,
dead and alive, though once slain upon the cross? Who layest dead in the
grave, and art come down alive to us, and in thy death all the creatures
trembled, and all the stars were moved, and now hast thou thy liberty
among the dead, and givest disturbance to our legions? Who art thou, who
dost release the captives that were held in chains by original sin, and
bringest them into their former liberty? Who art thou, who dost spread
so glorious and divine a light over those who were made blind by the
darkness of sin?

"In like manner all the legions of devils were seized with the like
horror, and with the most submissive fear cried out, and said, Whence
comes it, O thou Jesus Christ, that thou art a man so powerful and
glorious in majesty, so bright as to have no spot, and so pure as to
have no crime? Then the King of Glory trampling upon death, seized the
prince of hell, deprived him of all his power, and took our earthly
father Adam with him to his glory.

"Then the prince of hell took Satan, and with great indignation said to
him, O thou prince of destruction, author of Beelzebub's defeat and
banishment, the scorn of God's angels and loathed by all righteous
persons! What inclined thee to act thus? Why didst thou venture without
either reason or justice, to crucify him, and hast brought down to our
regions a person innocent and righteous, and thereby hast lost all the
sinners, impious and unrighteous persons in the whole world?

"While the prince of hell was thus speaking to Satan, the King of Glory
said to Beelzebub, the prince of hell, Satan the prince shall be subject
to thy dominion forever, in the room of Adam and his righteous sons, who
are mine. Then Jesus stretched forth his hand, and said, Come to me, all
ye saints, who are created

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="small">in my image, who were condemned by the tree of the
forbidden fruit, and by the devil and death; live now by the wood of my
cross; the devil, the prince of this world, is overcome, and death is
conquered."</span>

*Hell*.

The idea of Hell among the early Christians has found a detailed
description in the revelation of St. Peter, which was counted as
canonical by Clement of Alexandria who annotated it together with the
Catholic Epistles, while the Muratorian Fragment mentions it as,!. book
of the New Testament. According to the testimony of Sozomenos it was
read in some of the churches of Palestine annually, as a preparation for
the celebration of Easter in about 440 A. D. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69.md) It was used in Rome and Alexandria at the
end of the second century, together with the revelation of St. John,
where, according to Eusebius, both writings belonged to the contested
canonical books, that is to say, they were received as canonical but not
without protest in some quarters.

According to the revelation of St. Peter, Heaven and Hell are places.
Heaven is described by St. Peter as follows: <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_70.md)

<span class="small">"And I spake to him (the Lord): 'And where are the
just, and what is their æon in which, they that possess this glory
live?' And the Lord showed me a large space outside of this world
overflowed with light, and the air there was illuminated all through by
the rays of the sun. And the earth itself was blooming with unfading
flowers, and filled with sweet odors, and grandly blossoming and
imperishable and blessed fruit-bearing plants. Such was the
fulness</span>

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="small">of flowers that the sweet odor thence penetrated
even unto us. The inhabitants of that space were clothed with the robes
of radiant angels; and similar were their robes to their surroundings.
Angels were hovering about them. The glory of all who lived there was
the same, and with one voice they sang in gladness responsive hymns of
praise to God the Lord in that place. Said the Lord to us That is the
place of your high priests, of the just people.'"</span>

<span id="img_18000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRISTIAN
REPRESENTATION OF THE LAST JUDGMENT.&lt;br&gt; Sculptures on the main
entrance of the Cathedral at Bourges, France. Fourteenth century.
(Reproduced from &lt;i&gt;Klassischer
Skulpturenschatz&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/18000.jpg.md)  
CHRISTIAN REPRESENTATION OF THE LAST JUDGMENT.  
Sculptures on the main entrance of the Cathedral at Bourges, France.
Fourteenth century. (Reproduced from *Klassischer Skulpturenschatz*.)  
</span>

Hell is described in the following words:

<span class="small">"And I saw another place right opposite, rough and
being the place of punishment. And those who are punished there and the
punishing angels had their robes dark; as the color of the air of the
place is also dark: and some people were hung up by their tongues: they
were those who had blasphemed the path of righteousness; and underneath
them a bright baneful fire was lit. And</span>

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span class="small">there was a pit large and filled with burning dirt
(βόρβορος), in which several people stuck who had perverted justice, and
the avenging angels assaulted them. There were others there: women hung
up by their braids above the seething dirt. They were those who had
adorned themselves for adultery; but those who had soiled themselves
with the miasma of the adultery of those women were hung up by their
feet and had their heads in the dirt, and I said, 'I did not believe
that I should enter into this place.' I saw murderers</span>

<span id="img_18100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRISTIAN
REPRESENTATION OF HELL.&lt;br&gt; Sculptures on the main entrance of the
Cathedral at Bourges, France. Fourteenth century. (Reproduced from
Klassischer Skulpturenschatz.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/18100.jpg.md)  
CHRISTIAN REPRESENTATION OF HELL.  
Sculptures on the main entrance of the Cathedral at Bourges, France.
Fourteenth century. (Reproduced from Klassischer Skulpturenschatz.)  
</span>

<span class="small">and their accomplices thrown into a narrow place
filled with evil vermin and tormented by those animals and squirming
under this punishment. Worms like dark clouds assaulted them. The souls
of the murdered people, however, stood by and gazed at the punishment of
their murderers and said: 'O God, just is thy judgment.' But near unto
that place I saw a place of torment in which the blood and the stench of
the punished flowed down so as to</span>

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="small">make a pool, and there were women to whom the blood
reached up to the neck; opposite them many infants sat who had been
brought into the world before their season, and they were weeping. And
fiery rays proceeded from the children and bit the eyes of the women.
For they were the cursed ones who had conceived and made abortions. And
there were men and women standing in flames with half their bodies, and
they were thrown into a dark place and were scourged by evil spirits.
And they were devoured in their bowels by worms which do not die. They
were those who had persecuted the righteous and surrendered them; and
near by to those again were women and men who bit their lips and were
punished and received hot irons on their eyes. They were those who had
blasphemed and betrayed the path of righteousness. Opposite them were
other men and women who bit their tongues and had burning fire in their
mouths. They were those who bore false witness. In another place were
flints sharper than swords and lances, rendered burning hot, and women
and men in dirty rags were wallowing on them in torment. They were the
rich and those who relying on their riches had not taken compassion on
orphan,; and widows, who had a contempt for the commands of God. In
another large field with matter and blood and seething dirt were those
who take interest and interest on interest. Other men and women were
thrown from a high precipice, and having reached the bottom were urged
up again by their assaulters to climb the precipice, and were then again
thrown down, and they were given no respite from this torment. They were
those who had polluted their own bodies. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_71.md)... And by the side of this precipice was a
place which was filled entirely with fire, and there stood the people
who had made with their own hands carved images and worshipped them
instead of God, and near them were men and women with switches who beat
them and did not cease from this castigation. And again other women and
men stood near by, burning, and wriggling, and roasting. They were those
who had left the path of God."</span>

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

Another description of Hell according to the views of the Christian
Gnostics of the third century is contained in the *Pistis Sophia*, where
all the places of torment are described at considerable length in all
details. "It is remarkable," says Professor Harnack, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) "that the *Pistis Sophia* anticipates on
this subject as well as in many other respects the development of the
Catholic Church . It insists on the power of salvation of the
sacraments, of the mysteries, of penance, and ascetic practices. At the
same time it recognises Apostolic authority, and attempts in every
respect to base its doctrines on the canon of the Old and New
Testament." Its date has been fixed with great accuracy on the second
part of the third century. <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_73.md) This
strange book contains questions of Mary and of some of the apostles,
which Christ after his resurrection answers on the Mount of Olives, and
it is probably identical with a gnostic book [mentioned](errata.htm#0.md)
by Epiphanius under the title The Minor Questions of Mary. Harnack calls
attention to the fact that the book is an evidence of the astonishing
agreement of this later Gnosticism with later Catholic Christianity. The
author of the *Pistis Sophia* is apparently imbued with the spirit of
Syrian Gnosticism or Ophitism; but he wrote in Egypt where the Syrian
Gnostics exercised quite a powerful influence. The revelation of
mysteries culminates in the doctrine of Christ's identity with his
disciples, which is uttered repeatedly and with emphasis. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_74.md) The peculiarly

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gnostic features
of the book consist in the idea of reincarnation. So, for instance, St.
John is directly said to be a reincarnation of Elias, and the Apostles
are, as much as Christ, regarded as being possessed of a mystical
pre-existence.

The *Pistis Sophia* reveals all the mysteries of the world, among them
the mysteries of Hell, or, as the Egyptians called it, Amenti, which is
described as follows:

"And Mary continued further and said unto Jesus: 'Again, Master, of what
type is the outer darkness? How many regions of punishment are there
therein?'

"And Jesus answered and said unto Mary: 'The outer darkness is a huge
dragon, with its tall in its mouth; it is outside the world and
surroundeth it completely. <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) There are
many regions of punishment therein, for there are in it twelve \[main\]
dungeons of horrible torment.

"'In each dungeon there is a ruler; and the faces of the rulers are all
different from one another.

"'The first ruler, in the first dungeon, is crocodile-faced, and it hath
its tail in its mouth. From the jaws of this dragon there come forth
cold of every kind and freezing; and all diseases of every kind: it is
called by its authentic name, in its region, Enchthonin.

"'And the ruler in the second dungeon; its authentic face is a cat's it
is called, in its region, Charachar.

"'And the ruler in the third dungeon; its authentic face is a dog's: it
is called, in its region, Acharôch.

"'And the ruler in the fourth dungeon.; its authentic face is a
serpent's: it is called, in its region, Achrôchar.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span id="img_18500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE TYPICAL
CONCEPTION OF HELL.&lt;br&gt; German Woodcut of the age of the
Reformation.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/18500.jpg.md)  
THE TYPICAL CONCEPTION OF HELL.  
German Woodcut of the age of the Reformation.  
</span>

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

"'And the ruler in the fifth dungeon; its authentic face is a black
bull's: it is called, in its region, Marchour.

"'And the ruler in the sixth dungeon; its authentic face is a boar's: it
is called, in its region, Lamchamôr.

"'And the ruler in the seventh dungeon; its authentic face is a bear's:
it is called, in its region, by its authentic name, Louchar.

"'And the ruler in the eighth dungeon; its authentic face is a
vulture's: it is called, in its region, Laraôch.

"'And the ruler in the ninth dungeon; its authentic face is a
basilisk's: it is called, in its region, Archeôch.

"'And in the tenth dungeon are many rulers; each of them, in its
authentic face, hath seven dragons' heads: and that which is above them
all, in their region, is called Xarmarôch.

"'And in the eleventh dungeon, in this region also, are many rulers;
each of them, with authentic faces, hath seven cats' heads: and the
great one that is over them, is called, in their region, Rhôchar.

"'And in the twelfth dungeon there are also many rulers exceedingly
numerous, each of them in its authentic face, hath seven dogs' heads:
and the great one that is over them, is called in their region,
Chrêmaôr.

"'These rulers, then, of these twelve dungeons, which are in the inside
of the dragon of outer darkness, each hath a name for every hour, and
each of them changeth its face every hour.

"'And each of these dungeons hath a door which openeth to the height, so
that the dragon of outer darkness containeth twelve dungeons of
darkness, each of which hath a door that openeth to the height; and an
angel of the height watched at each of the doors of the dungeons.

"'These Ieou, <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76.md) the first man, the
overseer of the light, the ancient of the first statute, hath set to
watch over the dragon, lest

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

the dragon and its rulers should turn the dungeons that are in it,
upside down.'

"And when the saviour had thus spoken, Mary Magdalene answered and said:
'Master, are the souls, then, that are brought into that region, led
into it by these twelve doors, by each according to the judgment they
have merited?'

"The saviour answered and said unto Mary: 'No soul is brought into the
dragon by these doors; but the souls of blasphemers, and of them that
remain in the doctrines of error, and of those who teach such doctrines,
and also of them that have intercourse with males, of the polluted and
impious, atheists, murderers, adulterers, sorcerers, all souls, then, of
this kind, if they have not repented while still in life, and have
remained persistently in their sin, and all the other souls which have
remained without \[the light-world\], that is to say, who have exhausted
the number of the cycles apportioned to them in the sphere without
repenting,--they take hold of these souls, in their last cycle, them and
all the souls which I have just enumerated to you, and carry them
through the opening in the tail of the dragon into the dungeons of the
outer darkness. And when they have finished bringing those souls into
the outer darkness by the opening in its tail, it putteth back its tail
again into its mouth and shutteth them in. This is the way in which
souls are brought into the outer darkness. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_77.md)

"And the dragon of the outer darkness hath twelve authentic names which
are written on its doors, a name for the door of every dungeon; and
these-twelve names are all different from one another, but all twelve
are contained one in the other, so that he who uttereth one name will
utter all. And these will I tell you, when I explain the emanation of
the pleroma. This, then, is the way in which is the outer darkness,
which is also the dragon.'

"When the saviour had spoken these things, Mary answered

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

and said unto the saviour: I Master, are the torments of this dragon
terrible beyond the punishment of all the judgments?'

"The saviour answered and said unto Mary: 'Not only are they more
painful than all the chastisements of the judgments, but every soul that
shall be carried into that region shall be imprisoned in relentless
ice, <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) in the hail and scorching fire
which are therein. And in the dissolution of the world, that is to say,
in the ascension of the pleroma, these souls shall perish in the
relentless ice and scorching fire, and shall be non-existent for the
eternity.'

"Mary answered and said: 'Woe for the souls of sinners! Now, therefore,
O Master, whether is the fire in the world of human kind or the fire in
Amenti the fiercer?'

"The saviour answered and said unto Mary: 'Amen, I say unto thee, the
fire in Amenti scorcheth far more than the fire among men, nine times
more.

<span id="img_18800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WEIGHING THE EVIL
AND THE GOOD OF THE SOUL&lt;br&gt; Reminding one of similar notions
prevalent in ancient Egypt. (About 1150. From the cathedral in Auntun,
France.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/18800.jpg.md)  
WEIGHING THE EVIL AND THE GOOD OF THE SOUL  
Reminding one of similar notions prevalent in ancient Egypt. (About
1150. From the cathedral in Auntun, France.)  
</span>

"'And the fire which is in the punishments of the great chaos is nine
times fiercer than the fire in Amenti.

"'And the fire which is in the judgments of the rulers who are in the
way of the midst, is nine times fiercer than the fire of the punishments
which are in the great chaos.

"'And the fire which is in the dragon of outer darkness, and all the
torments which it containeth, are fiercer far than the fire

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

which is in the chastisements and judgments of the rulers who are in the
way of the midst,--this fire is fiercer than they seventy times.'

"And when the saviour had said this unto Mary, she smote her breast, she
cried out aloud, with tears, and all the disciples with her, saying:
'Woe for the sinners, for their torments are exceedingly great'"

<span id="img_18900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DOOM OF THE
DAMNED. (After Luca Signorelli.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/18900.jpg.md)  
THE DOOM OF THE DAMNED. (After Luca Signorelli.)  
</span>

The Gnostic Christian view of Doomsday and Hell embodies many ancient
traditions of Egyptian, Indian, and Persian mythology and foreshadows at
the same time the later Roman Catholic view as represented in mediæval
art, finding its poetical consummation in Dante's *Divina Comedia*.

Satan was regarded by the early Christians as the

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span id="img_19000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE TRINITY IDEAL
OF MEDIÆVAL CHRISTIANITY. (Old German.)&lt;br&gt; Representing God as
Emperor, Christ as King, and the Holy Ghost as the principle of light,
of order and good government. (Reproduced from
Muther.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/19000.jpg.md)  
THE TRINITY IDEAL OF MEDIÆVAL CHRISTIANITY. (Old German.)  
Representing God as Emperor, Christ as King, and the Holy Ghost as the
principle of light, of order and good government. (Reproduced from
Muther.)  
</span>

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prince of this
World, and this belief dominated in the Church as long as pagan
authorities remained in power. As soon as they were replaced by
Christian rulers, and when Christianity became established as the state
religion of the Roman Empire, Satan was gradually dethroned and God
reinstated in the government of the world.

The empire of the Cæsars broke to pieces under the repeated assaults of
Vandals, Huns, and Goths, but Charlemagne founded a new empire on its
ruins, which, being based upon the rising power of the Teutonic tribes,
the Franconians and the Germans, was called the "Holy Roman Empire of
German nationality," lasting about a thousand years, from 800 until
1806. This period (by Stahl actually regarded as the realisation of the
millennium of Revelation) is the age in which Christianity was
officially recognised and the attempt was made to apply its ethics by
all means to the private and public affairs of the people. It is natural
that the Trinity was now conceived after the pattern of the Imperial
government of the age; God was represented as the emperor, Christ as the
king, vicegerent and heir, while the Holy Ghost hovered above them as
the spirit of order and authority.

The most essential and at any rate practically most important dogma of
the early Christian Church, the doctrine of the imminent approach of the
day of judgment, faded away when the Church rose to power, but it
reappeared from time to time, sometimes not unlike an acute attack of a
frightful alienation of men's minds rendering them forgetful of the
duties of the living present for the sake of trying to escape the
imaginary evils of the

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

doom to come. The scenes of the last judgment, however, have always
remained a favorite subject of Christian artists and poets, the keynote
of which vibrates through the old Church hymn:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Dies irae, dies illa,  
Solvet sæclum in favila,  
Tests David cum Sibylla."</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[163:1](hod12.htm#fr_66.md) τὰ τέλη τῶν αἰώνων. See
also Hebr. ix. 26, where the appearance of Christ is said to have taken
place at the consummation of the time (ἐπὶ συντελείᾳ τῶν αἰώνων).

<span id="fn_66"></span>[166:1](hod12.htm#fr_67.md) Edited by Dr. Ed.
Bratke, Bonn, 1891.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[168:1](hod12.htm#fr_68.md) Rom. 14 and I Cor. 8.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[174:1](hod12.htm#fr_69.md) See Matth., xxvi. 38.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[179:1](hod12.htm#fr_70.md) See Harnack,
*Bruchstücke des Evangeliums und der Apokalypse des Petrus*, p. 5-6.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[179:2](hod12.htm#fr_71.md) Translated into English
from Harnack's edition.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[182:1](hod12.htm#fr_72.md) We prefer to omit
further details.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[183:1](hod12.htm#fr_73.md) See Harnack, *Texte und
Untersuchungen*, etc., p. 98.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[183:2](hod12.htm#fr_74.md) Ibid., pp. 94 et seq.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[183:3](hod12.htm#fr_75.md) "Qui acceperit
μυστήριον Ineffabilis, ille est ego."--"Ego sum isti, isti sum
ego."--"Ego sum mysterium illud."--"Vis quae est in vobis, e me est."
Harnack says (p. 30): "These brief significant sentences are not
invented by the author who <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> makes his
Christ express himself in quite different sermons: they point, in my
opinion, to an older gnostic book, or a gnostic gospel."

<span id="fn_75"></span>[184:1](hod12.htm#fr_76.md) This reminds us of the
myths of the Midgard-serpent and anticipates the innumerable mediaeval
representations of Hell as a big-mouthed dragon.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[186:1](hod12.htm#fr_77.md) The idea of "Ieou, the
first man, the overseer of the light, the ancient of the first statue,"
reminds us of the archetypal man of Simon Magus and other Gnostics and
also of the Adam of the Cabala.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[187:1](hod12.htm#fr_78.md) In mediæval
Hell-representations, which rarely are lacking in coarse humor, the
souls are thrown with pitchforks into the open jaws of the dragon. The
coarseness of the description of Hell in the *Pistis Sophia* is
apparently serious.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[188:1](hod12.htm#fr_79.md) An anticipation of
Dante's ice hell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Idea of Salvation in Greece and Italy.](hod13.md)
