[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34002)  [Next](cc34004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>TO THE READER

<span id="iv-p2"></span>Being instantly requested (gentle reader) by my
godly zealous friendes, to enterprise the translating of this most
learned Commentarie of M. Iohn Caluine, and being perswaded thervnto by
many godly reasons, whereof God’s glory and the profite of his Church
should be the cheife, I could not nor would not refuse to take that
charge vp on me, vnlesse I should haue forgotten my dutie towardes God,
his Church, and my friendes; and now, forasmuch (gentle reader) as the
principal recompence of my paines shal be that profit which thou shalt
reape by the reading of this my translation, I beseech thee refuse not
to take some paines in reading the same. I have not stuft it full of
strange words deriued of the Latine, which might no lesse molest thee
then if they continued Latine as they were. I haue not racked the
phrases to make them runn smoothly to please daintie eares, and so
digressed from the truth and meaning of the authour; but, so much as
possible I could, I haue translated worde for worde, which the learned
by conference shall wel perceiue. Long time haue the godly desired to
haue this worke published in the English tongue, and seeing they haue
their desire now, my request vnto them is to accept of my paines herein.
I dare not, good reader, presume so farre vpon mine owne skill as to
saye that there is no faultes committed heerein, but I am earnestly to
desire thee rather courteously to amend them then curiously to condemne
me for them. And thus, trusting to thy curtiesie, I committe thee to the
tuition og the Almightie, who so direct thee by his Spirite, that by
reading thou maiest profite.

<span id="iv-p3"></span>Thine in the Lorde,  
Christopher Fetherstone

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calvin's Epistle Dedicatory](cc34004)
