[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc34011)  [Next](cc34013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
7:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And after these things Jesus walked
in Galilee; for he did not wish to walk in Judea, because the Jews
sought to kill him. **2.** And the setting up of tabernacles, a feast of
the Jews, was at hand. **3.** His brethren therefore said to him, Depart
hence, and go away into Judea, that thy disciples also may see the works
which thou dost. **4.** For no man doth any thing in secret, and seeketh
to become known; if thou dost these things, show thyself to the world.
**5.** For even his brethren did not believe in him. **6.** Jesus
therefore said to them, My time is not yet come, but your time is always
ready. **7.** The world cannot hate you, but me it hateth, because I
testify of it that its works are evil. **8.** Go you up to this feast. I
go not up yet to this feast, because my time is not yet completed.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span><span id="xiii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Jesus walked in Galilee.* The
Evangelist appears not to pursue a continued narrative, but to select
out of what occurred at different times those events which were worthy
of being related. He says that Christ sojourned for a time in Galilee,
because he could not remain in safety anywhere among the Jews. If any
person think it strange that Christ sought a place of concealment, who,
by the mere act of his will, could break and render powerless all the
efforts of his enemies, it is easy to reply, that he remembered the
commission which he had received from the Father, and determined to
confine himself within the limits which belonged to him as man; for,

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>having taken upon him the form of a
servant,  
he emptied himself, till the Father exalted him,  
(<span id="xiii.i-p6.3"></span>[Php
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="xiii.i-p6.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>If it be objected that, as he knew the time
of his death, which had been foreordained and determined in the purpose
of God,  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) he had no reason for
avoiding it, the former solution applies here also; for he conducted
himself as a man who was liable to dangers, and, therefore, it was not
proper that he should throw himself at random into dangerous situations.
In encountering dangers, it is not our business to inquire what God has
determined respecting us in his decree, but what he commands and enjoins
on us, what our office requires and demands, and what is the proper
method of regulating our life. Besides, while Christ avoided dangers, he
did not turn aside a hairsbreadth from the course of duty; for to what
purpose would life be maintained and defended, but that we may serve the
Lord? We ought always to take care, therefore, that we do not, for the
sake of life, lose the reasons for living. When a small and despised
corner of Galilee grants a lodging to Christ, whom Judea cannot endure,
we learn from it that piety and the fear of God are not always to be
found in the chief places of the Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span><span id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**2.** *Now a feast of the Jews was at
hand.* Though I do not affirm it, yet it is probable that this happened
during the second year after Christ’s baptism. As to this feast, which
the Evangelist mentions, it is not necessary at present to say much. For
what purpose and use it was enjoined, Moses shows, (<span
id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>[Le
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034)<span id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>..md)
It was, that by this annual ceremony the Jews might call to remembrance,
that their fathers lived forty years in *tabernacles,* when they had no
houses, that they might thus celebrate the grace of God displayed in
their deliverance. We have formerly said that there were two reasons why
Christ came to Jerusalem during this *feast.* One was, that, being
subject to the Law, in order to redeem us all from its bondage, he
wished to omit no part of the observation of it; and the other was,
that, amidst a numerous and extraordinary assemblage of people, he had a
better opportunity of advancing the Gospel. But now the Evangelist
relates that Christ kept himself in retirement at Galilee, as if he did
not intend to come to Jerusalem.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span><span id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**3.** *His brethren therefore said to
him.* Under the word *brethren* the Hebrews include all cousins and
other relations, whatever may be the degree of affinity. He says that
they mocked at Christ, because he shunned to be seen or known, and
concealed himself in a mean and despised district of Judea. There is
reason to doubt, however, if they were excited by ambition to desire
that Christ should obtain celebrity. But granting this, still it is
evident that they ridicule him, because they do not think that his
conduct is rational and judicious; and they even upbraid him with folly,
because, while he wishes to be something, he wants confidence in
himself, and does not venture to appear openly before men. When they
say, *that thy disciples also may see,* they mean not only his
domestics, but all those whom he wished to procure out of the whole
nation; for they add, “Thou wishest to be known by all, and yet thou
concealest thyself.”

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span><span id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**4.** *If thou dost these things;* that
is, if thou aspirest to such greatness that all may applaud thee, direct
towards thee the eyes of all. And they add, *show thyself to the world,*
using the word *world,* as contrasted with the small number of persons
among whom he was spending his time without honor. We might also draw
from it another meaning. “*If thou dost these things*, that is, since
thou art endued with so great power as to procure reputation for thyself
by miracles, do not throw them away; for all that has been given to thee
by God thou spendest here to no purpose, because there are none to bear
thee testimony, or to hold thee in just estimation.” Hence we perceive
how great is the indolence of men in considering the works of God; for
the relations of Christ would never have spoken in this manner, if they
had not — as it were — trampled under foot the manifest proofs of his
Divine power, which they ought to have beheld with the greatest
admiration and reverence. What is here told us concerning Christ happens
in daily experience, that the children of God suffer greater annoyance
from their near relations than from strangers; for they are instruments
of Satan which tempt, sometimes to ambition, and sometimes to avarice,
those who desire to serve God purely and faithfully. But such Satans
receive a vigorous repulse from Christ, who thus instructs us by his
example, that we ought not to yield to the foolish wishes of *brethren*
or relations.  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span><span id="xiii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**5.** *For even his brethren did not
believe in him.* Hence we infer how small is the value of carnal
relationship; for the Holy Spirit stamps with a perpetual mark of infamy
the relations of Christ, because, though convinced by the testimonies of
so many works, they did not even then believe. *Therefore*, *whosoever
wishes to be thought to be in Christ*, as Paul says, *let him be a new
creature*, (<span id="xiii.i-p17.1"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017.md)<span id="xiii.i-p17.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p17.2"></span>[Ga
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)<span id="xiii.i-p17.2"></span>;.md)
for they who dedicate themselves wholly to God obtain the place of
father, and mother, and brethren to Christ, and all others he utterly
disavows, (<span id="xiii.i-p17.3"></span>[Mt
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#050)<span id="xiii.i-p17.3"></span>..md)
So much the more ridiculous is the superstition of Papists, who,
disregarding everything else in the Virgin Mary, extol her only on the
ground of relationship, bestowing on her the title of the Mother of
Christ,  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) as if Christ himself
had not reproved the woman who exclaimed from the midst of the crowd,

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the
breasts that suckled thee; for Christ replied, Nay, rather, blessed are
they who hear the word of God,  
(<span id="xiii.i-p19.2"></span>[Luke
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028)<span id="xiii.i-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span><span id="xiii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>**6.** *My time is not yet come.* There are
some who erroneously interpret this as referring to the *time* of his
death, for it denotes the *time* of his setting out on the journey to go
to the feast.  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) He assures them
that, in this respect, he differs from his relations. They may freely
and without danger appear, at all hours, before the world, because the
world is friendly and favorable to them; but he is in dread of his
person, and justly, because the world is his mortal enemy. By these
words he means that they do wrong in giving advice on a matter which
they do not understand.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span><span id="xiii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**7.** *The world cannot hate you.* When he
says that *the world cannot hate them*, he reproves them for being
altogether carnal; for peace with *the world* can only be purchased by a
wicked consent to vices and to every kind of wickedness.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>*But me it hateth, because I testify. The
world* here denotes men who are not born again, who retain their natural
disposition; and accordingly he declares that all who have not yet been
regenerated by the Spirit are Christ’s adversaries. And why? Because he
condemns *their works* And if we acquiesce in the decision of Christ, we
are under the necessity of acknowledging that the whole nature of man is
so sinful and wicked, that nothing right, or sincere, or good, can
proceed from it. This is the only reason why any of us is pleased with
himself, so long as he is in his natural state.

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>*Because I testify of it, that its works
are evil.* When Christ says that *the world hateth him* on this account,
he means that the Gospel cannot be faithfully preached without summoning
the whole world, as guilty, to the judgment-seat of God, that flesh and
blood may thus be crushed and reduced to nothing, according to that
saying,

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>When the Spirit shall come, he will reprove
the world of sin,  
(<span id="xiii.i-p27.2"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="xiii.i-p27.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>We learn from it also, that so great is the
pride natural to men, that they flatter and applaud themselves in their
vices; for they would not kindle into rage, when they are reproved, were
it not that they are blinded by excessive love of themselves, and on
that account flatter themselves in their sins. Even among the vices of
men, the chief and most dangerous is pride and arrogance. The Holy
Spirit alone softens us, so as to endure reproofs patiently, and thus to
offer ourselves willingly to be slain by the sword of the Church.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
7:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#009.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**9.** And having said these things, he
remained in Galilee. **10.** And when his brethren had gone up, then he
also went up to the feast, not openly, but, as it were, in secret.
**11.** The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, Where is
he? **12.** And there was much murmuring concerning him among the
crowds; for some said, He is a good man, and others said, No, but he
seduceth the multitude. **13.** Yet no man spoke openly about him for
fear of the Jews.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**9.** *He remained in Galilee.* The
Evangelist here places before our eyes the cousins of our Lord Jesus
Christ,  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) who, in compliance with
ordinary customs, pretend to worship God, but yet are on friendly terms
with unbelievers, and therefore walk without any alarm. On the other
hand, he places before our eyes Christ himself, who *hated by the
world*, comes *secretly* into the city, till the necessity arising out
of his office compels him to show himself openly. But if there be
nothing more wretched than to be separated from Christ, accursed be that
peace which costs so high a price as to leave and abandon the Son of
God.  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md)

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>**11.** *The Jews therefore sought him.*
Here we ought to consider what was the condition of the Church. For the
Jews, at that time, gaped for the promised redemption like hungry men;
yet, when Christ appears to them, they remain in suspense. Hence arose
that murmuring and that variety of opinions. That they whisper secretly
is an indication of the tyranny which the priests and scribes exercised
over them. It is a shocking exhibition, indeed, that this Church, which
was at that time the only Church on earth, is here represented to us as
a confused and shapeless chaos.  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md)
They who rule, instead of pastors, hold the people oppressed by fear and
terror, and throughout the whole body there is shameful desolation and
lamentable disorder. By *the Jews* he means the common people, who,
having been accustomed for two years to hear Christ, inquire about him,
because he does not appear according to his custom. For when they say,
*Where is he?* they describe a man whom they knew, and yet that word
shows that they had not yet been earnestly moved, and that they always
remained in doubt and suspense.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**12.** *And there was much murmuring.* He
means that, wherever men were collected in crowds, as usually happens in
large assemblies, they held secret conversations about Christ. The
diversity of opinion, which is here related, proves that it is not a new
evil, that men should differ in their opinions about Christ, even in the
very bosom of the Church. And as we do not hesitate to receive Christ,
who was formerly condemned by the greater part of his own nation, so we
ought to be armed with the same kind of shield, that the dissensions
which we see daily may not disturb us. Again, we may perceive how great
is the rashness of men in the things of God. In a matter of no
importance, they would not have taken so great liberty, but when the
question relates to the Son of God and to his most holy doctrine, they
immediately hasten to give judgment respecting it. So much the greater
moderation ought we to maintain, that we may not thoughtlessly condemn
our life with the eternal truth of God. And if the world holds us for
impostors, let us remember that these are the marks and brands of
Christ, provided that we show, at the same time, that we are faithful.
This passage shows likewise that in a great multitude, even when the
whole body is in a state of confusion, there are always some who think
aright; but those few persons, whose minds are well regulated, are
swallowed up by the multitude of those whose understandings are
bewildered.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>**13.** *Yet no man spoke openly of him
for fear of the Jews.* By *the Jews* he here means the rulers, who had
the government in their hands. They burned with such hatred against
Christ, that they did not permit a word to be uttered on either side.
Not that they were displeased at any reproaches which were heaped upon
him, but because they could discover no better expedient than that his
name should be buried in oblivion. Thus the enemies of the truth, after
having found that they gain nothing by their cruelty, desire nothing
more than to suppress the remembrance of him, and this object alone they
strive to attain. That all were silent, being subdued by *fear*, was a
proof of gross tyranny, as I have already said; for as unbridled
licentiousness has no place in a well-regulated Church, so when all
freedom is held oppressed by *fear*, it is a most wretched condition.
But the power of our Lord Jesus Christ shone forth with greater and more
wonderful brightness, when — causing himself to be heard amidst armed
foes, and amidst their furious resentment, and under so formidable a
government — he openly maintained and asserted the truth of God.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
7:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**14.** And about the middle of the feast,
Jesus went up into the temple, and taught. **15.** And the Jews
wondered, saying, How doth this man know letters, since he did not learn
them? **16.** Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine,
but that of him who sent me. **17.** If any man wish to do his will, he
shall know of the doctrine, if it be of God, or if I speak from myself.
**18.** He who speaketh from himself seeketh his own glory; but he who
seeketh the glory of him who sent him is true, and there is no
unrighteousness in him. **19.** Did not Moses give you the law, and not
one of you keepeth the law? Why do you seek to kill me?

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**14.** *Jesus went up into the temple.*
We now see that Christ was not so much afraid as to desist from the
execution of his office; for the cause of his delay was, that he might
preach to a very large assembly. We may sometimes, therefore, expose
ourselves to dangers, but we ought never to disregard or omit a single
opportunity of doing good. As to his *teaching in the temple*, he does
so according to the ancient ordinance and custom; for while God
commanded so many ceremonies, he did not choose that his people should
be occupied with cold and useless spectacles. That their usefulness
might be known, it was necessary that they should be accompanied by
doctrine; and in this manner, external rites are lively images of
spiritual things, when they take their shape from the word of God. But
almost all the priests being at that time dumb, and the pure doctrine
being corrupted by the leaven and false inventions of the scribes,
Christ undertook the office of a teacher; and justly, because he was the
great High Priest, as he affirms shortly afterwards, that he attempts
nothing but by the command of the Father.

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>**15.** *And the Jews wondered* Those who
think that Christ was received in such a manner as to be esteemed and
honored are mistaken; for the *wonder* or *astonishment* of the Jews is
of such a nature, that they seek occasion from it to despise him. For
such is the ingratitude of men that, in judging of the works of God,
they always seek deliberately an occasion of falling into error. If God
acts by the usual means and in the ordinary way, those means which are
visible to the eyes are — as it were — veils which hinder us from
perceiving the Divine hand; and therefore we discern nothing in them but
what is human. But if an unwonted power of God shines above the order of
nature and the means generally known, we are stunned; and what ought to
have deeply affected all our senses passes away as a dream. For such is
our pride, that we take no interest in any thing of which we do not know
the reason.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>*How doth this man know letters?* It was
an astonishing proof of the power and grace of God, that Christ, who had
not been taught by any master, was yet eminently distinguished by his
knowledge of the Scriptures; and that he, who had never been a scholar,
should be a most excellent teacher and instructor. But for this very
reason the Jews despise the grace of God, because it exceeds their
capacity. Admonished by their example, therefore, let us learn to
exercise deeper reverence for God than we are wont to do in the
consideration of his works.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>**16.** *My doctrine is not mine.* Christ
shows that this circumstance, which was an offense to the Jews, was
rather a ladder by which they ought to have risen higher to perceive the
glory of God; as if he had said, “When you see a teacher not trained in
the school of men, know that I have been taught by God.” For the reason
why the Heavenly Father determined that his Son should go out of a
mechanic’s workshop, rather than from the schools of the scribes, was,
that the origin of the Gospel might be more manifest, that none might
think that it had been fabricated on the earth, or imagine that any
human being was the author of it. Thus also Christ chose ignorant and
uneducated men to be his apostles, and permitted them to remain three
years in gross ignorance, that, having instructed them in a single
instant, he might bring them forward as new men, and even as angels who
had just come down from heaven.

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>*But that of him who sent me.* Meanwhile,
Christ shows whence we ought to derive the authority of spiritual
doctrine, from God alone. And when he asserts that the doctrine of his
Father is not his, he looks to the capacity of the hearers, who had no
higher opinion of him than that he was a man. By way of concession,
therefore, he allows himself to be reckoned different from his Father,
but so as to bring forward nothing but what the Father had enjoined. The
amount of what is stated is, that what he teaches in the name of his
Father is not a doctrine of men, and did not proceed from men, so as to
be capable of being despised with impunity. We see by what method he
procures authority for his doctrine. It is by referring it to God as its
Author. We see also on what ground, and for what reason, he demands that
he shall be heard. It is, because the Father sent him to teach. Both of
these things ought to be possessed by every man who takes upon himself
the office of a teacher, and wishes that he should be believed.

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>**17.** *If any man wish to do his will.*
He anticipates the objections that might be made. For since he had many
adversaries in that place, some one might readily have murmured against
him in this manner: “Why dost thou boast to us of the name of God? For
we do not know that thou hast proceeded from him. Why, then, dost thou
press upon us that maxim, which we do not admit to thee, that thou
teachest nothing but by the command of God?” Christ, therefore, replies
that sound judgment flows from fear and reverence for God; so that, if
their minds be well disposed to the fear of God, they will easily
perceive if what he preaches be true or not. He likewise administers to
them, by it, an indirect reproof; for how comes it that they cannot
distinguish between falsehood and truth,  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) but because they want the principal
requisite to sound understanding, namely, piety, and the earnest desire
to obey God?

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>This statement is highly worthy of
observation. Satan continually plots against us, and spreads his nets in
every direction, that he may take us unawares by his delusions. Here
Christ most excellently forewarns us to beware of exposing ourselves to
any of his impostures, assuring us that if we are prepared to obey God,
he will never fail to illuminate us by the light of his Spirit, so that
we shall be able to distinguish between truth and falsehood. Nothing
else, therefore, hinders us from judging aright, but that we are unruly
and headstrong; and every time that Satan deceives us, we are justly
punished for our hypocrisy. In like manner Moses gives warning that,
when false prophets arise, we are *tried* and *proved* by God; for they
whose hearts are right will never be deceived, (<span
id="xiii.iii-p15.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p15.1"></span>.) Hence it is evident how wickedly and
foolishly many persons in the present day, dreading the danger of
falling into error, by that very dread shut the door against all desire
to learn; as if our Savior had not good ground for saying,

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>Knock, and it shall be opened to you,
(<span id="xiii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Mt
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="xiii.iii-p16.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>On the contrary, if we be entirely
devoted to obedience to God, let us not doubt that He will give us the
spirit of discernment, to be our continual director and guide. If others
choose to waver, they will ultimately find how flimsy are the pretences
for their ignorance. And, indeed, we see that all who now hesitate, and
prefer to cherish their doubt rather than, by reading or hearing, to
inquire earnestly where the truth of God is, have the hardihood to set
God at defiance by general principles. One man will say that he prays
for the dead, because, distrusting his own judgment, he cannot venture
to condemn the false doctrines invented by wicked men about purgatory;
and yet he will freely allow himself to commit fornication. Another will
say that he has not so much acuteness as to be able to distinguish
between the pure doctrine of Christ and the spurious contrivances of
men, but yet he will have acuteness enough to steal or commit perjury.
In short, all those doubters, who cover themselves with a veil of doubt
in all those matters which are at present the subject of controversy,
display a manifest contempt of God on subjects that are not at all
obscure.

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>We need not wonder, therefore, that the
doctrine of the Gospel is received by very few persons in the present
day, since there is so little of the fear of God in the world. Besides,
these words of Christ contain a definition of true religion; that is,
when we are prepared heartily to follow the will of God, which no man
can do, unless he has renounced his own views.

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>*Or if I speak from myself.* We ought to
observe in what manner Christ wishes that a judgment should be formed
about any doctrine whatever. He wishes that what is from God should be
received without controversy, but freely allows us to reject whatever is
from man; for this is the only distinction that he lays down, by which
we ought to distinguish between doctrines.

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span>**18.** *He who speaketh from himself.*
Hitherto he has showed that there is no other reason why men are blind,
but because they are not governed by the fear of God. He now puts
another mark on the doctrine itself, by which it may be known whether it
is of God or of man. For every thing that displays the glory of God is
holy and divine; but every thing that contributes to the ambition of
men, and, by exalting them, obscures the glory of God, not only has no
claim to be believed, but ought to be vehemently rejected. He who shall
make the glory of God the object at which he aims will never go wrong;
he who shall try and prove by this touchstone what is brought forward in
the name of God will never be deceived by the semblance of right. We are
also reminded by it that no man can faithfully discharge the office of
teacher in the Church, unless he be void of ambition, and resolve to
make it his sole object to promote, to the utmost of his power, the
glory of God. When he says that *there is no unrighteousness in him,* he
means that there is nothing wicked or hypocritical, but that he does
what becomes an upright and sincere minister of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>**19.** *Did not Moses give you the Law?*
The Evangelist does not give a full and connected narrative of the
sermon delivered by Christ, but only a brief selection of the principal
topics, which contain the substance of what was spoken. The scribes
mortally hated him,  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) and the
priests had been kindled into rage against him, because he had cured a
paralytic; and they professed that this arose from their zeal for the
Law. To confute their hypocrisy, he reasons, not from the subject, but
from the person. All of them having freely indulged in their vices, as
if they had never known any law, he infers from it that they are not
moved by any love or zeal for the Law. True, this defense would not have
been sufficient to prove the point. Granting that — under a false
pretense — they concealed their wicked and unjust hatred, still it does
not follow that Christ did right, if he committed any thing contrary to
the injunction of the Law; for we must not attempt to extenuate our own
blame by the sins of others.

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>But Christ connects here two clauses. In
the former, he addresses the consciences of his enemies, and, since they
proudly boasted of being defenders of the Law, he tears from them this
mask; for he brings against them this reproach, that they allow
themselves to violate the Law as often as they please, and, therefore,
that they care nothing about the Law. Next, he comes to the question
itself, as we shall afterwards see; so that the defense is satisfactory
and complete in all its parts. Consequently, the amount of this clause
is, that no zeal for the Law exists in its despisers. Hence Christ
infers that something else has excited the Jews to so great rage, when
they seek to put him to death. In this manner we ought to drag the
wicked from their concealments, whenever they fight against God and
sound doctrine, and pretend to do so from pious motives.

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span>Those who, in the present day, are the
fiercest enemies of the Gospel and the most strenuous defenders of
Popery, have nothing more plausible to urge in their behalf than that
they are excited by ardor of zeal. But if their life be narrowly
examined, they are all filled with base crimes, and openly mock at God.
Who knows not that the Pope’s court is filled with Epicureans?  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) And as to Bishops and Abbots, have
they as much modesty as to conceal their baseness, that some appearance
of religion may be observed in them? Again, as to monks and other
brawlers, are they not abandoned to all wickedness, to uncleanness,
covetousness, and every kind of shocking crimes, so that their life
cries aloud that they have altogether forgotten God? And now that they
are not ashamed to boast of their zeal for God and the Church, ought we
not to repress them by this reply of Christ?

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
7:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020.md)<span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>**20.** The multitude answered, and said,
Thou hast a devil; who seeketh to kill thee? **21.** Jesus answered, and
said to them, I have done one work, and you all wonder. **22.**
Therefore Moses gave you circumcision, not because it is of Moses, but
of the fathers, and on the Sabbath you circumcise a man. **23.** If a
man receives circumcision on the Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not
be broken, are you offended at me, because I have completely cured a man
on the Sabbath? **24.** Judge not according to the appearance, but judge
right judgment.

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>**20.** *Thou hast a devil.* The meaning
is, “Thou art mad;” for it was a customary phrase among the Jews, who
had been trained to the doctrine that, when men are excited to rage, or
when they have lost sense and reason, they are tormented by the devil.
And, indeed, as gentle and moderate chastisements are God’s fatherly
rods, so when He treats us with greater harshness and severity, He
appears not to strike us with his own hand, but rather to employ the
devil as the executioner and minister of his wrath. Again, the multitude
reproach Christ with simplicity; for the common people were not
acquainted with the intentions of the priests. Those foolish men,
therefore, ascribe it to madness, when Christ complains that they are
endeavoring to put him to death. We learn from it that we ought to be
exceedingly cautious not to form an opinion about subjects which we do
not understand; but, if it ever happens that we are rashly condemned by
ignorant men, mildly to digest such an affront.

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span>**21.** *I have done one work.* Now,
leaving their persons, he begins to speak of the fact; for he proves
that the miracle which he performed is not inconsistent with the Law of
God. When he says that *he has done one work*, the meaning is, that it
is only of a single crime that he is held guilty, or that it is only for
a single work that he is blamed, which is, that he cured a man on the
day of Rest;  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md) but that they, on
every day of Rest, do many works of the same, or a similar description,
and do not reckon them criminal; for not a day of Rest passed on which
there were not many infants *circumcised* in Judea. By this example he
defends his action, although he does not merely argue from what is
similar, but draws a comparison between the greater and the less. There
was this similarity between *circumcision* and the cure of the
paralytic, that both were works of God; but Christ maintains that the
latter is more excellent, because the benefit of it extends to the whole
man. Now if he had merely cured the man of bodily disease, the
comparison would not have been applicable; for *circumcision* would have
greater excellence as to the cure of the soul. Christ, therefore,
connects the spiritual advantage of the miracle with the outward benefit
granted to the body; and on this account he justly prefers to
*circumcision* the entire cure of a man.

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>There might also be another reason for the
comparison, namely, that the sacraments are not always attended by power
and efficacy, while Christ wrought efficaciously in curing the
paralytic. But I prefer the former exposition, that the Jews maliciously
and slanderously blame *a work*, in which the grace of God shines more
illustriously than in *circumcision*, on which they bestow so much honor
that they think *the Sabbath* is not violated by it. *And you all
wonder* The *wonder,* of which he speaks, means that what Christ had
done caused this murmur, because they thought that he had ventured to do
more than was lawful.

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>**22.** *Therefore Moses gave you
circumcision* The particle *therefore* appears to be unsuitable; and,
accordingly, some take <span id="xiii.iv-p11.1"></span>διὰ τούτο (*on
this account*, or *therefore*) in the sense of <span
id="xiii.iv-p11.2"></span>διὰ τούτο, (*because*;) but the Greek syntax
is unfavourable to their opinion.  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) I explain it simply as meaning, that
*circumcision* was enjoined in such a manner that the practice of that
symbolical rite was necessary *even on the Sabbath-day* *Therefore*,
says he; that is, it has in this manner been sufficiently demonstrated
to them, that the worship of the Sabbath is not violated by the works of
God. And although Christ accommodates the instance of circumcision to
the present subject, yet he immediately makes use of a correction, when
he says, that Moses was not the first minister of circumcision. But it
was enough for his purpose, that Moses, who so rigidly demanded the
keeping of *the Sabbath*, commanded that infants should be circumcised
on the eighth day, even though it should fall on *the day of Rest*
 <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md)

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span>**24.** *Judge not according to the
appearance.* Having concluded his defense, he likewise administers a
reproof on this ground, that they are carried away by wicked
dispositions, and do not form *a judgment* according to the fact and the
matter in hand. *Circumcision* was properly held by them in reverence;
and when it was performed on the Sabbath-day, they knew that the Law was
not violated by it, because *the works of God* agree well with each
other. Why do they not arrive at the same conclusion as to the *work* of
Christ, but because their minds are preoccupied by a prejudice which
they have formed against his person? *Judgment,* therefore, will never
be *right,* unless it be regulated by the truth of the fact; for as soon
as persons appear in public, they turn their eyes and senses on them, so
that the truth immediately vanishes. While this admonition ought to be
observed in all causes and affairs, it is peculiarly necessary when the
question relates to the heavenly doctrine; for there is nothing to which
we are more prone than to dislike that doctrine on account of the hatred
or contempt of men.

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span><span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>[John
7:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025.md)<span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>**25.** Some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem
therefore said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill? **26.** And, lo,
he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing to him. Do the rulers actually
know that this is truly the Christ? **27**. But we know whence this man
is; but when Christ shall come, no man will know whence he is. **28.**
Jesus therefore exclaimed in the temple, teaching and saying, You both
know me, and you know whence I am; and I did not come of myself, but he
who sent me is true, whom you know not. **29.** But I know him, for I am
from him, and he hath sent me. **30.** Therefore they sought to seize
him; but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span><span id="xiii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span>**25.** *Some of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem;* that is, those to whom the rulers had communicated their
plots, and who knew how much Christ was hated; for the people at large —
as we saw lately — looked upon this as a dream, or as madness. Those
persons, therefore, who knew with what inveterate rage the rulers of
their nation burned against Christ, have some reason for wondering that,
while Christ *in the temple* not only converses openly but preaches
freely, the rulers *say nothing to him.* But they err in this respect,
that in a miracle altogether Divine they do not take into account the
providence of God. Thus carnal men, whenever they behold any unusual
work of God, do indeed wonder, but no consideration of the power of God
ever enters into their mind. But it is our duty to examine more wisely
the works of God; and especially when wicked men, with all their
contrivances, do not hinder the progress of the Gospel so much as they
would desire, we ought to be fully persuaded that their efforts have
been rendered fruitless, because God, by interposing his word, has
defeated them.

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span><span id="xiii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span>**27.** *But we know whence this man is.*
Here we see not only how great is the blindness of men, when they ought
to judge about the things of God, but this vice is almost natural to
them, to be ingenious in contriving what may hinder them from arriving
at the knowledge of the truth. It is frequently, indeed, from the craft
of Satan that offenses arise, which cause many to turn away from Christ;
but though the road were plain and smooth, every man would contrive an
offense for himself. So long as the rulers were opposed to Christ, their
unbelief would of itself have kept back this multitude; but when that
obstacle has been removed, they contrive a new reason for themselves,
that they may not come to the faith. And even though it were proper that
they should be influenced by the example of their rulers, they are so
far from following what is right, that they willingly stumble at the
first step. Thus it frequently happens, that men who had begun well fall
away quickly, unless the Lord conduct them to the very end of their
career.

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span>*But when Christ shall come.* The argument
by which they obstruct their own progress is this: “The Prophets have
testified that the origin of Christ will be unknown. Now *we know whence
this man is*, and therefore we cannot reckon him to be *the Christ*.”
Hence we are reminded how pernicious it is to mangle the Scriptures, and
even Christ himself, so as not to admit more than the half of him. God
promised that the Redeemer would be of the seed of David; but he
frequently claims this office as peculiar to himself; therefore, he must
have been God manifested in the flesh, that he might be the Redeemer of
his Church. Thus Micah points out the place where Christ would be born.
*Out of thee*, *Bethlehem*, he says, *a Prince shall come*, *to govern
my people* But, immediately afterwards, he speaks of another *going
forth* which is far loftier, and then he says that it is hidden and
secret, (<span id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>[Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>..md)
Yet those wretched men, when they perceived in Christ nothing but what
is liable to contempt, draw the absurd conclusion, that he is not the
person who had been promised. On the mean condition of Christ in the
flesh let us therefore learn to look in such a manner, that this state
of humiliation, which is despised by wicked men, may raise us to his
heavenly glory. Thus *Bethlehem*, where the man was to be born, will be
to us a door by which we may enter into the presence of the eternal God.

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span><span id="xiii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p10"></span>**28.** *Jesus therefore exclaimed in the
temple.* He bitterly reproaches them for their rashness, because they
arrogantly flattered themselves in a false opinion, and in this manner
excluded themselves from a knowledge of the truth; as if he had said,
“You know all things, and yet you know nothing.” And, indeed, there is
not a more destructive plague than when men are so intoxicated by the
scanty portion of knowledge which they possess, that they boldly reject
every thing that is contrary to their opinion.

<span id="xiii.v-p11"></span>*You both know me, and you know whence I
am.* This is ironical language. With the false opinion which they had
formed concerning him, he contrasts what is true; as if he had said,
“While you have your eyes fixed on the earth, you think that every part
of me is before your eyes; and therefore you despise me as mean and
unknown. But God will testify that I have come from heaven; and though I
may be rejected by you, God will acknowledge that I am truly his own
Son.”

<span id="xiii.v-p12"></span>*But he who hath sent me is true.* He calls
God *true* in the same sense that Paul calls him *faithful*

<span id="xiii.v-p13"></span>If we are unbelievers, says he, he
remaineth faithful, he cannot deny himself,  
(<span id="xiii.v-p13.2"></span>[2Ti
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="xiii.v-p13.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.v-p14"></span>For his object is to prove, that the credit
due to the Gospel is not in the smallest degree diminished by the utmost
exertions of the world to overthrow it; that though wicked men may
attempt to take from Christ what belonged to him, still he remains
unimpaired, because the truth of God is firm and is always like itself.
Christ sees that he is despised; but so far is he from yielding, that,
on the contrary, he boldly repels the furious arrogance of those who
hold him in no estimation. With such unshaken and heroic fortitude all
believers ought to be endued; nay, more, our faith will never be solid
or lasting, unless it treat with contempt the presumption of wicked men,
when they rise up against Christ. Above all, godly teachers, relying on
this support, ought to persevere in maintaining sound doctrine, even
though it should be opposed by the whole world. Thus Jeremiah appeals to
God as his defender and guardian, because he is condemned as an
impostor:

<span id="xiii.v-p15"></span>Thou hast deceived me, O Lord, says he, and
I was deceived,  
(<span id="xiii.v-p15.2"></span>[Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007)<span id="xiii.v-p15.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.v-p16"></span>Thus Isaiah, overwhelmed on all sides by
calumnies and reproaches, flies to this refuge, that God will approve
his cause, (<span id="xiii.v-p16.1"></span>[Isa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008)<span id="xiii.v-p16.1"></span>..md)
Thus Paul, oppressed by unjust judgments, appeals against all to *the
day of the Lord*, (<span id="xiii.v-p16.2"></span>[1Co
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="xiii.v-p16.2"></span>,.md)
reckoning it enough to have God alone to place against the whole world,
however it may rage and storm.

<span id="xiii.v-p17"></span>*Whom you knew not.* He means that it is
not wonderful that he is not *known* by the Jews, because they *do not
know God*; for the beginning of wisdom is, to behold God.

<span id="xiii.v-p18"></span><span id="xiii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p19"></span>**29.** *But I know him.* When he says that
*he knoweth God*, he means that it is not without good grounds that he
has risen to so great confidence; and by his example he warns us not to
assume lightly the name of God, so as to vaunt of Him as the patron and
defender of our cause. For many are too presumptuous in boasting of the
authority of God; and, indeed, it is impossible to imagine greater
readiness and boldness in rejecting the opinions of all men, than is to
be found among fanatics who give out their own inventions as the oracles
of God. But we are taught by these words of our Lord Jesus Christ that
we ought especially to beware of proud and foolish confidence; and that,
when we have fully ascertained the truth of God, we ought boldly to
resist men. And he who is fully aware that God is on his side has no
reason to dread the charge of being insolent, in trampling under foot
all the haughtiness of the world.

<span id="xiii.v-p20"></span>*Because I am from him, and he hath sent
me.* Some distinguish these two clauses in this manner. They refer the
former clause — *I am from him* — to the Divine essence of Christ; and
the latter clause — *he hath sent me* — to the office enjoined on him by
the Father, for the sake of executing which he took upon him the flesh
and human nature. Though I do not venture to reject this view, still I
do not know if Christ intended to speak so abstrusely. I readily
acknowledge that Christ’s heavenly descent may be inferred from it, but
it would not be a sufficiently strong proof of his eternal Divinity
against the Arians.

<span id="xiii.v-p21"></span><span id="xiii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p22"></span>**30.** *Therefore they sought to seize
him.* They had no want of will to do him mischief; they even made the
attempt, and they had strength to do it. Why, then, amidst so much
ardor, are they benumbed, as if they had their hands and feet bound? The
Evangelist replies, *because Christ*’*s hour was not yet come*; by which
he means that, against all their violence and furious attacks, Christ
was guarded by the protection of God. And at the same time he meets the
offense of the cross; for we have no reason to be alarmed when we learn
that Christ was dragged to death, not through the caprice of men, but
because he was destined for such a sacrifice by the decree of the
Father. And hence we ought to infer a general doctrine; for though we
live from day to day, still the time of every man’s death has been fixed
by God. It is difficult to believe that, while we are subject to so many
accidents, exposed to so many open and concealed attacks both from men
and beasts, and liable to so many diseases, we are safe from all risk
until God is pleased to call us away. But we ought to struggle against
our own distrust; and we ought to attend first to the doctrine itself
which is here taught, and next, to the object at which it aims, and the
exhortation which is drawn from it, namely, that each of us, *casting
all his cares on God*, (<span id="xiii.v-p22.1"></span>[Ps
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022.md)<span id="xiii.v-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.v-p22.2"></span>[1Pe
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)<span id="xiii.v-p22.2"></span>,.md)
should follow his own calling, and not be led away from the performance
of his duty by any fears. Yet let no man go beyond his own bounds; for
confidence in the providence of God must not go farther than God himself
commands.

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
7:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#031.md)<span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>**31.** And many of the multitude believed
in him, and said, When Christ shall come, will he do more miracles than
this man doth? **32.** The Pharisees heard the multitude muttering these
things concerning him; and the Pharisees and priests sent officers to
seize him. **33.** Jesus, therefore, said to them, Yet a little while am
I with you, and I go to him who hath sent me. **34.** You shall seek me,
and shall not find me; and where I am, you cannot come. **35.** The
Jews, therefore, said among themselves, Whither will he go, that we
shall not find him? Will he go to those who are scattered among the
Greeks,  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) and teach the Greeks?
**36.** What is this saying which he hath spoken, You shall seek me, and
shall not find me, and whither I go, you cannot come?

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span>**31.** *And many of the multitude believed
in him.* We might have thought that Christ preached to deaf and
altogether obstinate persons; and yet the Evangelist says that some
fruit followed. And, therefore, though some may murmur, and others
scorn, and others slander, and though many differences of opinion may
arise, still the preaching of the Gospel will not be without effect; so
that we must sow the seed, and wait with patience until, in process of
time, the fruit appear. The word *believe* is here used inaccurately,
for they depended more on miracles than they relied on doctrine, and
were not convinced that Jesus was the Christ; but as they were prepared
to listen to him, and showed themselves willing to receive instruction
from him as their Teacher, such a preparation for faith is called
*faith* When the Holy Spirit bestows so honorable a designation on a
small spark of good disposition, it ought to encourage us, so as not to
doubt that faith, however small it may be, is acceptable to God.

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p8"></span>**32.** *The Pharisees heard.* Hence it
appears that the Pharisees, like persons set on the watch, were anxious
on all occasions not to permit Christ to be known. In the first instance
the Evangelist calls them only *Pharisees,* and next he adds to them
*the priests* of whom *the Pharisees* were a part. There can be no doubt
that, as they wished to be reckoned the greatest zealots for the Law,
they opposed Christ more bitterly than all the other sects; but finding
that their unaided exertions were not sufficient to oppress Christ, they
committed the affair to the whole order of the priests. Thus they who,
in other respects, differed among themselves now conspire together,
under the guidance of Satan, against the Son of God. Meanwhile, since
*the Pharisees* had such ardent zeal and such incessant toil for
defending their tyranny and the corrupt state of the Church, how much
more zealous ought we to be in maintaining the kingdom of Christ! The
Papists in the present day are not less mad or less eager to extinguish
the Gospel; and yet it is monstrously wicked that their example does
not, at least, whet our desires, and cause us to labor with greater
boldness in the defense of true and sound doctrine.

<span id="xiii.vi-p9"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p10"></span>**33.** *Yet a little while am I with
you.* Some think that this sermon was addressed to the assembly of the
people who were present, and others, that it was addressed to *the
officers* who had been sent *to seize* Christ. But for my own part, I
have no doubt that Christ particularly addresses his enemies, who had
taken counsel to destroy him; for he ridicules their efforts, because
they will be utterly ineffectual, *until the time* decreed by the Father
*be come* And at the same time, he reproaches them for their obstinacy,
because they not only reject, but furiously oppose, the grace which is
offered to them; and threatens that ere long it will be taken from them.
When he says, *I am with you*, he rebukes their ingratitude, because,
though he had been given to them by the Father, though he had come down
to them from the heavenly glory, though, by calling them to be his
familiar associates, he desired nothing more than to assist them, still
there were few who received him. When he says, *Yet a little while,* he
warns them that God will not long endure that his grace should be
exposed to such shameful contempt. Yet he also means, that neither his
life nor his death is placed at their disposal, but that his Father has
fixed a time, which must be fulfilled.

<span id="xiii.vi-p11"></span>*I go to him who hath sent me.* By these
words he testifies that he will not be extinguished by his death, but,
on the contrary, when he shall have laid aside his mortal body, will be
declared to be the Son of God by the magnificent triumph of his
resurrection; as if he had said, “Labour as much as you please, yet you
will never hinder my Father from receiving me into his heavenly glory,
when I have discharged the embassy which he has committed to me. Thus
not only will my rank remain undiminished after my death, but a more
excellent condition is then provided for me.” Besides, we ought to draw
from it a general admonition; for as often as Christ calls us to the
hope of salvation by the preaching of the Gospel, he is present with us.
For not without reason is the preaching of the Gospel called Christ’s
descent to us, where it is said,

<span id="xiii.vi-p12"></span>he came and preached peace to those who
were far off, and to those who were near,  
(<span id="xiii.vi-p12.2"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="xiii.vi-p12.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.vi-p13"></span>If we accept the hand which he holds out,
he will lead us to the Father; and so long as we must sojourn in the
world, not only will he show himself to be near us, but will constantly
dwell in us. And if we disregard his presence, he will lose nothing,
but, departing from us, will leave us altogether strangers to God and to
life.

<span id="xiii.vi-p14"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p15"></span>**34.** *You shall seek me.* They *sought*
Christ, to put him to death. Here Christ alludes to the ambiguous
signification of the word *seek,* for soon *they shall seek him* in
another manner; as if he had said, “My presence, which is now irksome
and intolerable to you, will last for a short time; but ere long *you
shall seek me* in vain, for, far removed from you, not only by my body,
but also by my power, I shall behold from heaven your destruction.” But
here a question may be put, of what nature was this *seeking* of Christ?
For it is plain enough that Christ speaks of the reprobate, whose
obstinacy in rejecting Christ had reached the utmost point. Some refer
it to doctrine, because the Jews, by foolishly pursuing the
righteousness of works, *did not obtain what they desired*, (<span
id="xiii.vi-p15.1"></span>[Ro
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)<span id="xiii.vi-p15.1"></span>..md)
Many understand it as referring to the person of the Messiah, because
the Jews, reduced to extremities, in vain implored a Redeemer. But for
my own part, I explain it as merely denoting the groans of distress
uttered by the wicked, when, compelled by necessity, they look in some
manner towards God.

<span id="xiii.vi-p16"></span>*And shall not find me.* When they *seek*
him, they do not seek him; for unbelief and obstinacy — by shutting up
their hearts, as it were — hinders them from approaching to God. They
would desire, indeed, that God should aid them, and should be their
Redeemer, but, by impenitence and hardness of heart, they obstruct their
path. We have a very striking example  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) in Esau, who, on account of having
lost his birthright, not only is oppressed with grief, but groans and
gnashes his teeth, and breaks out into furious indignation, (<span
id="xiii.vi-p17.2"></span>[Ge
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#038.md)<span id="xiii.vi-p17.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.vi-p17.3"></span>[Heb
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiii.vi-p17.3"></span>.) But yet so far is he from the right way of
seeking the blessing, that, at the very time when he is seeking it,
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md) he renders himself more
unworthy of it. In this manner God usually punishes the contempt of his
grace in the reprobate, so that, either afflicted by severe punishments,
or oppressed by a conviction of their misery, or reduced to other
extremities, they complain, and cry, and howl, but without reaping any
advantage; for, being always like themselves, they nourish within their
hearts the same cruelty which they formerly displayed, and do not go to
God, but rather wish that he were changed, since they cannot destroy
him. Hence let us learn that we ought to receive Christ without delay,
while he is still present with us, that the opportunity of enjoying him
may not pass away from us; for if the door be once shut, it will be vain
for us to try to open it.

<span id="xiii.vi-p19"></span>Seek the Lord, says Isaiah, while he may
be found; call upon him, while he is near,  
(<span id="xiii.vi-p19.2"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)<span id="xiii.vi-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.vi-p20"></span>We ought therefore to go to God early,
*while the time of his good pleasure lasts*, as the prophet speaks,
(<span id="xiii.vi-p20.1"></span>[Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span id="xiii.vi-p20.1"></span>;.md)
for we know not how long God will bear with our negligence. In these
words, *where I am, you cannot come,* he employs the present tense
instead of the future, *where I shall be*, *you shall not be able to
come*

<span id="xiii.vi-p21"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p22"></span>**35.** *Whither will he go?* This was
added by the Evangelist, for the express purpose of showing how great
was the stupidity of the people. Thus not only are wicked men deaf to
hear God’s instruction, but even dreadful threatenings are allowed by
them to pass by in mockery, as if they were listening to a fable. Christ
spoke expressly of the Father, but they remain fixed on the earth, and
think of nothing else than a departure to distant countries.

<span id="xiii.vi-p23"></span>*Will he go to the dispersion of the
Greeks?* It is well known that the Jews gave the name of Greeks to all
nations beyond the sea; but they do not mean that Christ will go to the
uncircumcised nations, but to the Jews, who were dispersed through the
various countries of the world. For the word dispersion would not apply
to those who are natives of the place, and who inhabit their native
soil, but applies well to the Jews, who were fugitives and exiles. Thus
Peter inscribes his First Epistle <span
id="xiii.vi-p23.1"></span>παρεπιδήμοις διασπορᾶς, to the strangers of
the dispersion, that is, to the strangers who are scattered  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia, (<span id="xiii.vi-p24.2"></span>[1Pe
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)<span id="xiii.vi-p24.2"></span>;.md)
and James salutes the twelve tribes <span id="xiii.vi-p24.3"></span>ἐν
τὣ διασπορᾷ, in the dispersion, that is, scattered abroad, (<span
id="xiii.vi-p24.4"></span>[Jas
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)<span id="xiii.vi-p24.4"></span>..md)
The meaning of the words therefore is, “Will he cross the sea, to go to
Jews who dwell in a world unknown to us?” And it is possible that they
intended to teaze Christ by this mockery. “If this be the Messiah, will
he fix the seat of his reign in Greece, since God has assigned to him
the land of Canaan as his own habitation?” But however that may be, we
see that the severe threatening which Christ had uttered did not at all
affect them.

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
7:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>**37.** Now on the last day, which was the
greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood, and exclaimed, saying, If any
man thirst, let him come to me, and drink. **38.** He who believeth in
me, as the Scripture saith, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. **39** But this he spoke of the Spirit which they who believed in
him were to receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because
Jesus was not yet glorified.

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span>**37.** *On the last day.* The first thing
that ought to be observed here is, that no plots or intrigues of enemies
terrified Christ, so as to cause him to desist from his duty; but, on
the contrary, his courage rose with dangers, so that he persevered with
greater firmness. This is proved by the circumstance of the time, the
crowded assembly, and the freedom he used in *exclaiming*, while he knew
that hands were stretched out on all sides to seize him; for it is
probable that the officers were at that time ready to execute their
commission.

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span>We must next observe, that nothing else
than the protection of God, on which he relied, enabled him to stand
firm against such violent efforts of those men, who had every thing in
their power. For what other reason can be assigned why Christ preached
on the most public day of the festival, in the midst of the temple, over
which his enemies enjoyed a quiet reign, and after that they had
prepared a band of officers, but because God restrained their rage? Yet
it is highly useful to us, that the Evangelist introduces Christ
exclaiming aloud, *Let all who thirst come to me* For we infer from it
that the invitation was not addressed to one or two persons only, or in
a low and gentle whisper, but that this doctrine is proclaimed to all,
in such a manner that none may be ignorant of it, but those who, of
their own accord shutting their ears, will not receive this loud and
distinct cry.

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span>*If any man thirst.* By this clause he
exhorts all to partake of his blessings, provided that, from a
conviction of their own poverty, they desire to obtain assistance. For
it is true that we are all poor and destitute of every blessing, but it
is far from being true that all are roused by a conviction of their
poverty to seek relief. Hence it arises that many persons do not stir a
foot, but wretchedly wither and decay, and there are even very many who
are not affected by a perception of their emptiness, until the Spirit of
God, by his own fire, kindle *hunger and thirst* in their hearts. It
belongs to the Spirit, therefore, to cause us to desire his grace.

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span>As to the present passage, we ought to
observe, first, that none are called to obtain the riches of the Spirit
but those who burn with the desire of them. For we know that the pain of
*thirst* is most acute and tormenting, so that the very strongest men,
and those who can endure any amount of toil, are overpowered by
*thirst.* And yet he invites the *thirsty* rather than the hungry, in
order to pursue the metaphor which he afterwards employs in the word
*water* and the word *drink,* that all the parts of the discourse may
agree with each other. And I have no doubt that he alludes to that
passage in Isaiah, *All that thirst*, *come to the waters*, (<span
id="xiii.vii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)<span id="xiii.vii-p8.1"></span>..md)
For what the Prophet there ascribes to God must have been at length
fulfilled in Christ, as also that which the blessed Virgin sung, that

<span id="xiii.vii-p9"></span>those who are rich and full he sendeth
empty away,  
(<span id="xiii.vii-p9.2"></span>[Lu
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053)<span id="xiii.vii-p9.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.vii-p10"></span>He therefore enjoins us to come direct to
himself, as if he had said, that it is he alone who can fully satisfy
the *thirst* of all, and that all who seek even the smallest alleviation
of their thirst anywhere else are mistaken, and labor in vain.

<span id="xiii.vii-p11"></span>*And let him drink.* To the exhortation a
promise is added; for though the *word* — *let him drink* — conveys an
exhortation, still it contains within itself a promise; because Christ
testifies that he is not a dry and worn-out cistern, but an
inexhaustible fountain, which largely and abundantly supplies all who
will come *to drink* Hence it follows that, if we ask from him what we
want, our desire will not be disappointed.

<span id="xiii.vii-p12"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p13"></span>**38.** *He who believeth in me.* He now
points out the manner of coming, which is, that we must approach, not
with the feet, but by faith; or rather, *to come* is nothing else than
*to believe*, at least, if you define accurately the word *believe*; as
we have already said that we *believe in* Christ, when we embrace him as
he is held out to us in the Gospel, full of power, wisdom,
righteousness, purity, life, and all the gifts of the Holy Spirit.
Besides, he now confirms more plainly and fully the promise which we
lately mentioned; for he shows that he has a rich abundance to satisfy
us to the full.

<span id="xiii.vii-p14"></span>*Out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water.* The metaphor appears, no doubt, to be somewhat harsh,
when he says that *rivers of living water shall flow out of the belly of
believers*; but there can be no doubt as to the meaning, that they who
believe shall suffer no want of spiritual blessings. He calls it *living
water,* the fountain of which never grows dry, nor ceases to flow
continually. As to the word *rivers* being in the plural number, I
interpret it as denoting the diversified graces of the Spirit, which are
necessary for the spiritual life of the soul. In short, the perpetuity,
as well as the abundance, of the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit,
 <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) is here promised to us. Some
understand the saying — that *waters flow out of the belly* of believers
— to mean, that he to whom the Spirit has been given makes a part *to
flow* to his brethren, as there ought to be mutual communication between
us. But I consider it to be a simpler meaning, that whosoever shall
believe in Christ shall have a fountain of life springing up, as it
were, in himself, as Christ said formerly,

<span id="xiii.vii-p16"></span>He who shall drink of this water shall
never thirst,  
(<span id="xiii.vii-p16.2"></span>[Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md)<span
id="xiii.vii-p16.2"></span>;)

<span id="xiii.vii-p17"></span>for while ordinary drinking quenches
thirst only for a short time, Christ says that by faith we draw the
Spirit, that he may become *a fountain of water springing up into
everlasting life*

<span id="xiii.vii-p18"></span>Still he does not say that, on the first
day, believers are so fully satisfied with Christ, that ever afterwards
they neither hunger nor thirst; but, on the contrary, the enjoyment of
Christ kindles a new desire of him. But the meaning is, that the Holy
Spirit is like a living and continually flowing fountain in believers;
as Paul also declares that he is life in us, (<span
id="xiii.vii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiii.vii-p18.1"></span>,) though we still carry about, in the
remains of sin, the cause of death. And, indeed, as every one partakes
of the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, according to the measure of
his faith, we cannot possess a perfect fullness of them in the present
life. But believers, while they make progress in faith, continually
aspire to fresh additions of the Spirit, so that the first-fruits which
they have tasted carry them forward to perpetuity of life. But we are
also reminded by it, how small is the capacity of our faith, since the
graces of the Spirit scarcely come into us by drops, which would flow
like rivers, if we gave due admission to Christ; that is, if faith made
us capable of receiving him.

<span id="xiii.vii-p19"></span>As the Scripture saith. Some confine this
to the former clause, and others to the latter clause; for my own part,
I extend it to the entire scope of the discourse. Besides, Christ does
not here, in my opinion, point out any particular passage of Scripture,
but produces a testimony drawn from the ordinary doctrine of the
Prophets. For whenever the Lord, promising an abundance of his Spirit,
compares it to living waters, he looks principally to the kingdom of
Christ, to which he directs the minds of believers. All the predictions
of living waters, therefore, have their fulfillment in Christ, because
he alone hath opened and displayed the hidden treasures of God. The
reason why the graces of the Spirit are poured out on him is,

<span id="xiii.vii-p20"></span>that we may all draw out of his fullness,
(<span id="xiii.vii-p20.1"></span>[Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiii.vii-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.vii-p21"></span>Those persons, therefore, whom Christ so
kindly and graciously calls, and who wander in every direction, deserve
to perish miserably.

<span id="xiii.vii-p22"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p23"></span>**39.** *But this he spoke of the
Spirit.* The word *water* is sometimes applied to *the Spirit* on
account of its purity, because it is his office to cleanse our
pollutions; but in this and similar passages this term is employed in a
different acceptation, which is, that we are destitute of all the sap
and moisture of life, unless when the Spirit of God quickens us, and
when he waters us, as it were, by secret vigor. Under one part he
includes the whole;  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) for under
the one word *water* he includes all the parts of life. Hence we infer
also, that all who have not been regenerated by the Spirit of Christ
ought to be reckoned dead, whatever may be the pretended life of which
they boast.

<span id="xiii.vii-p25"></span>*For the Holy Spirit was not yet given.*
We know that the Spirit is eternal; but the Evangelist declares that, so
long as Christ dwelt in the world in the mean form of a servant, that
grace of the Spirit, which was poured out on men after the resurrection
of Christ, had not been openly manifested. And, indeed, he speaks
comparatively, in the same manner as when the New Testament is compared
to the Old. God promises his Spirit to his elect and believers,  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) as if he had never given him to the
Fathers. At that very time, the disciples had undoubtedly received the
first-fruits of the Spirit; for whence comes faith but from the Spirit?
The Evangelist, therefore, does not absolutely affirm that the grace of
the Spirit was not offered and given  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) to believers before the death of
Christ, but that it was not yet so bright and illustrious as it would
afterwards become. For it is the highest ornament of the kingdom of
Christ, that he governs his Church by his Spirit; but he entered into
the lawful and — what may be called — the solemn possession of his
kingdom, when he was exalted to the right hand of the Father; so that we
need not wonder if he delayed till that time the full manifestation of
the Spirit.

<span id="xiii.vii-p28"></span>But one question still remains to be
answered. Does he mean here the visible graces of the Spirit, or the
regeneration which is the fruit of adoption? I answer: The Spirit, who
had been promised at the coming of Christ, appeared in those visible
gifts, as in mirrors; but here the question relates strictly to the
power of the Spirit, by which we are born again in Christ, and become
new creatures. That we lie on earth poor, and famished, and almost
destitute of spiritual blessings, while Christ now sits in glory at the
right hand of the Father, and clothed with the highest majesty of
government, ought to be imputed to our slothfulness, and to the small
measure of our faith.

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>[John
7:40-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#040.md)<span
id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>**40.** Many of the multitude, therefore,
having heard this sermon, said, This is truly a Prophet.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) **41.** Others said, This is the
Christ. And others said, But will Christ come out of Galilee? **42.**
Doth not the Scripture say that Christ will come from the seed of David,
and from the town of Bethlehem, where David dwelt? **43.** There was
therefore a difference of opinion in the multitude on account of him.
**44.** And some of them wished to seize him, but no man laid hands on
him.

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span>**40.** *Many of the multitude.* The
Evangelist now relates what fruit followed from this last sermon of our
Lord Jesus Christ; namely, that some thought one thing and some another,
so that *a difference of opinion arose among the people* It ought to be
observed that John does not speak of the open enemies of Christ, or of
those who were already filled with deadly hatred  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) against sound doctrine, but of the
common people, among whom there ought to have been greater integrity. He
enumerates three classes of them.

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span>*He is truly a Prophet.* The first
acknowledged that Jesus *was truly a Prophet*, from which we infer that
they did not dislike his doctrine. But, on the other hand, how light and
trifling this confession was, is evident from the fact, that, while they
approve of the Teacher, they neither understand what he means, nor
relish what he says; for they could not truly receive him *as a
Prophet*, without, at the same time, acknowledging that he is the Son of
God and the Author of their salvation. Yet this is good in them, that
they perceive in Christ something Divine, which leads them to regard him
with reverence; for this willingness to learn might afterwards give an
easy opening to faith.

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span>**41.** *Others said, He is the Christ.*
The second have a more correct opinion than the first; for they plainly
acknowledge that he is the Christ; but the third  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) rise up against them, and hence
proceeds the debate. By this example we are warned that we ought not to
think it strange in the present day, if men are divided among themselves
by various controversies. We learn that Christ’s sermon produced a
schism, and that not among Gentiles who were strangers to the faith, but
in the midst of the Church of Christ, and even in the chief seat of the
Church. Shall the doctrine of Christ be blamed on that account, as if it
were the cause of disturbances? Nay rather, though the whole world were
in commotion, the word of God is so precious, that we ought to wish that
it were received, at least by a few. There is no reason, therefore, why
our consciences should be distressed, when we see those who wish to be
accounted the people of God fighting with each other by contrary
opinions.

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span>Yet it ought also to be observed that
divisions do not properly draw their origin from the Gospel; for there
can be no firm agreement among men except in undoubted truth. As to the
peace maintained among those who know not God, it arises more from
stupidity than from true agreement. In short, of all the differences
which spring up, when the Gospel is preached, the cause and seed
formerly lay concealed in men; but when they are awakened, as it were,
out of sleep, they begin to move, just as vapours are produced by
something else than the sun, although it is not till the sun arises that
they make their appearance.

<span id="xiii.viii-p13"></span>*But will Christ come out of Galilee?*
That they may not be thought to reject Christ on insufficient grounds,
they fortify themselves by the testimony of Scripture; and though they
do violence to this passage, by turning it improperly against Christ,
still they have some appearance of truth. In this point only they are in
the wrong, that they make Christ a Galilean. But whence arises this
ignorance but from contempt? For if they had taken the trouble to
inquire, they would have seen that Christ was adorned with both titles;
that he was *born in Bethlehem*, and that he was *the son of David* But
such is our natural disposition; in matters of little consequence we are
ashamed of being indolent, while, in the mysteries of the heavenly
kingdom, we slumber without any concern. It is likewise of importance to
observe, that those men are diligent and industrious in seeking an
excuse for turning aside from Christ, but, at the same time, are
astonishingly slow and dull in receiving sound doctrine. In this manner,
out of the Scriptures themselves, which lead us by the hand to Christ,
men frequently make obstacles for themselves, that they may not come to
Christ.

<span id="xiii.viii-p14"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p15"></span>**44.** *Some of them wished to seize
him.* By these words the Evangelist means, that they not only despised
Christ, but that their wicked rejection of him was accompanied by
cruelty and eagerness to do him injury; for superstition is always
cruel. That their efforts were unavailing, we ought to ascribe to the
providence of God; for since Christ’s *hour was not yet come*, as has
been formerly said, guarded by the protection of his Father, on which he
relied, he surmounted all dangers.

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>[John
7:45-53](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#045.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>**45.** So the officers came to the chief
priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, Why have you not brought
him? 46. The officers answered, Never man spoke like this man. **47.**
The Pharisees therefore answered them, And are you also seduced? **48.**
Hath any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed in him? **49.**
But this multitude, who know not the law, are accursed. **50.**
Nicodemus said to them, (he who came to him by night, for he was one of
them,) **51.** Doth our law judge a man before it hath heard him, and
knoweth what he doth? **52.** They answered and said to him, Art thou
also of Galilee? Search and see, that no Prophet hath arisen out of
Galilee. **53.** And every man went to his own house.

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span>**45.** *So the officers came.* Here we may
see how blind is the arrogance of men. To such an extent do they admire
and adore the greatness which renders them eminent, that they have no
hesitation in trampling under foot morality and religion. If any thing
happen contrary to their wish, they would willingly mingle heaven and
earth; for when these haughty and wicked priests  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) ask, *why Christ was not brought*,
they magnify their power so greatly as if nothing ought to oppose their
command.

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span>**46.** *Never man spoke like this man.*
Those officers acknowledge that they are subdued and vanquished by the
word of Christ, and yet they do not on that account repent or give due
honor to the word. If it be true, that *never man spoke like this man*,
why did not the Divine power, which they were compelled to feel, touch
their hearts in such a manner as to cause them to devote themselves
wholly to God? But it was necessary that the prediction of Isaiah should
thus be accomplished:

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span>he will prostrate the wicked by the breath
of his mouth,  
(<span id="xiii.ix-p9.2"></span>[Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span id="xiii.ix-p9.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.ix-p10"></span>Nay more, we shall afterwards see how
those who were attempting to put him to death, overwhelmed by the voice
of Christ alone, and as if they had been struck down with mallets, fell
backwards, (<span id="xiii.ix-p10.1"></span>[Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)<span id="xiii.ix-p10.1"></span>..md)
Let us, therefore, learn that the doctrine of Christ possesses such
power as even to terrify the wicked; but as this tends to their
destruction, let us take care that we be softened, instead of being
broken. Even in the present day, we see many persons who too much
resemble those officers, who are reluctantly drawn into admiration of
the doctrine of the Gospel, and yet are so far from yielding to Christ,
that they still remain in the enemy’s camp. There are others even worse,
who, for the sake of obtaining favor with the wicked, employ all the
opprobrious terms which they can find for basely slandering that
doctrine, which, notwithstanding, they acknowledge to be from God,
because they are convinced of it in their hearts.  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md)

<span id="xiii.ix-p12"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p13"></span>**47.** *And are you also seduced?* While
they reprove their officers, they endeavor, at the same time, to keep
them in subjection. For by these words they mean, that it would be
unreasonable and unbecoming that they should not remain steady, though
the whole people should revolt. But we must see on what argument they
rest, when they so haughtily insult Christ.

<span id="xiii.ix-p14"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p15"></span>**48.** *Has any of the rulers, or of the
Pharisees, believed in him?* “He has none on his side,” they say, “but
low and ignorant men; *the rulers,* and every person of distinction, are
opposed to him.” They expressly name *the Pharisees,* because they had a
reputation above others, both for knowledge and holiness, so that they
might be said to be the princes of the people. This objection appears to
have some plausibility; for if the rulers and governors of the Church do
not retain their authority, it is impossible that any thing shall ever
be properly done, or that the good order of the Church shall long
continue. We know what are the fierce passions of the common people; in
consequence of which the most frightful disorder must follow, when every
man is allowed to do what he pleases. The authority of those who rule is
therefore a necessary bridle for preserving the good order of the
Church; and, accordingly, it was provided by the Law of God that, if any
question or controversy should arise, it should be submitted to the
decision of the High Priest, (<span id="xiii.ix-p15.1"></span>[De
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008)<span id="xiii.ix-p15.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.ix-p16"></span>But they err in this respect, that, while
they claim for themselves the highest authority, they are unwilling to
submit to God. It is true that God conferred the power of judgment on
the high priest, but God did not intend that the high priest should
decide, except according to his Law. All the authority that is possessed
by pastors, therefore, is subject to the word of God, that all may be
kept in their own rank, from the greatest to the smallest, and that God
alone may be exalted. If pastors who honestly and sincerely discharge
their duty, claim authority for themselves, this glorying will be holy
and lawful; but when the mere authority of men is supported, without the
authority of God’s word, it is vain and useless boasting. But it often
happens that wicked men rule in the Church; and therefore we must beware
of giving any authority to men, as soon as they depart from the word of
God.

<span id="xiii.ix-p17"></span>We see that nearly all the prophets were
tormented by this kind of annoyance; for, in order to bury their
doctrine, men continually brought against them the magnificent titles of
Princes, of Priests, and of the Church. Provided with the same armor,
Papists in the present day rage not less fiercely than did the
adversaries of Christ and of the Prophets in former times. It is a
horrible blindness, indeed, when a mortal man is not ashamed to oppose
himself to God; but to such a pitch of madness does Satan carry those
who set a higher value on their own ambition than on the truth of God.
Meanwhile, it is our duty to cherish such a reverence for the word of
God as shall extinguish all the splendor of the world, and scatter its
vain pretensions; for miserable would be our condition, if our salvation
depended on the will of princes, and far too unsteady would our faith
be, if it were to stand or fall according to their pleasure.

<span id="xiii.ix-p18"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p19"></span>**49.** *But this multitude.* The first
part of their pride was, that, relying on the title of Priests, they
wished to subject all to them in a tyrannical manner. The next is, that
they despise others as men of no estimation, as those who excessively
flatter themselves are always disposed to abuse others, and an
immoderate love of ourselves is accompanied by contempt of the brethren.
They pronounce the whole populace to be *accursed;* and why? It is no
doubt alleged by them that *the people do not know the law*; but another
reason, which they concealed, was, that they thought that there was no
holiness but in their own rank. In like manner, the Popish priests in
our own day pretend that none but themselves deserve to be called the
Church; and all others, whom they call the laity, they despise as if
they were profane persons. But to throw down such madness of pride, God
prefers the mean and despised to those who hold the highest authority
and power. And it ought to be observed that they here boast of
*knowledge*, not that which instructs men in religion and the fear of
God, but such as they possessed while, with magisterial pride, they gave
forth their responses, as if they alone had been qualified to interpret
the law. It is undoubtedly true, that all who have not been instructed
in the law of God are *accursed*, because by the knowledge of it we are
truly sanctified. But this knowledge is not confined to a few who,
swelled with false confidence, wish to exclude themselves from the rank
of other men, but belongs in common to all the children of God, that
all, from the smallest even to the greatest, may be united in the same
obedience of faith.

<span id="xiii.ix-p20"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p21"></span>**50.** *Nicodemus said to them.* The
Evangelist describes *Nicodemus* as a neutral man, who does not venture
to undertake in good earnest the defense of sound doctrine, and yet
cannot endure to have the truth oppressed.

<span id="xiii.ix-p22"></span>*He who came to Jesus by night.* This
circumstance is mentioned by the Evangelist, partly to the praise, and
partly to the disgrace, of *Nicodemus.* If he had not loved the doctrine
of Christ, he would never have dared to meet the rage of wicked men; for
he knew that, if any of them but opened his mouth, he would be
immediately exposed to dislike and to danger. When, therefore, he
ventures to throw out one word, however feeble it may be, some small
spark of godliness shines from his heart; but in not defending Christ
openly, he manifests excessive timidity. Thus the Evangelist means that
he has still a hankering after the concealment of the night, and is not
a true disciple of Christ. He says that he once *came to Jesus by
night*, but remained openly among his enemies, and kept his place in
their camp.

<span id="xiii.ix-p23"></span>This ought to be the more carefully
observed, because there are many in the present day who plead that they
resemble Nicodemus, and hope that, by assuming this mask, they will mock
God with impunity. Granting what they ask, that there is no difference
between them and Nicodemus, what assistance, pray, do they derive from
such an example? Nicodemus says that Christ *ought not to be condemned
until he be heard*; and the same thing might be said of a robber or an
assassin; for it is a well-known and proverbial sentiment, that it is
better to acquit the innocent than to condemn the guilty. Besides, in
his attempts to release the person of Christ, he leaves and abandons the
doctrine. What shall we find here that is worthy of a believer or a
Christian?  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) Thus the seed of the
gospel, which afterwards bore fruit, was still concealed and choked in
him. We shall apply this example far more profitably to another purpose,
that the Lord frequently causes the doctrine, which seemed to have
perished, gradually to take a concealed root, and, after a long period,
to put forth some bud, first like an untimely plant, afterwards lively
and vigorous; just as the faith of Nicodemus acquired new and sudden
vigor from the death of Christ.

<span id="xiii.ix-p25"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p26"></span>**52.** *Art thou also from Galilee?* They
say that all who favor Christ are *from Galilee*, and this is spoken
reproachfully, as if he could not have any person among his followers
except from the small and unknown corner of *Galilee*  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) The extreme violence to which they are
excited against Nicodemus, shows with what furious hatred they burned
against Christ; for he had not avowedly undertaken to defend Christ, but
had only said that *he ought not to be condemned before he was heard*
Thus among the Papists in our own day, no man can show the slightest
token of candour that the Gospel may not be oppressed, but immediately
the enemies fly into a passion, and exclaim that he is a heretic.

<span id="xiii.ix-p28"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p29"></span>**53.** *And every man went to his own
house.* Now follows an astonishing close of the transaction. If any one
take into account what was the reign of the priests at that time, with
what rage they were excited, and how vast was their retinue, and, on the
other hand, if he consider that Christ was unarmed and defenceless, and
that there was no body of men to protect him, the conclusion must be,
that it was all over with him a hundred times. When so formidable a
conspiracy is dissolved of its own accord, and when all those men, like
waver of the sea, break themselves by their own violence, who will not
acknowledge that they were scattered by the hand of God? But God always
continues to be like himself; and therefore, whenever he pleases, he
will bring to nothing all the efforts of enemies, so that, while they
have everything in their power, and are ready and prepared to execute
their design, they will depart without having done their work. And we
have often found that, whatever contrivances our enemies have made to
extinguish the Gospel, yet by the amazing kindness of God, it
immediately fell powerless to the ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc34012.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span>Determine au
conseil de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc34012.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p15.1"></span>De nos
parens.”

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc34012.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p18.1"></span>Le titre
de Mere de Christ.”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc34012.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p22.1"></span>De se
mettre en chemin pour aller a la feste.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc34012.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>Les
cousins de nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ.”

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc34012.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>De quitter
et renoncer le Fils de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc34012.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>Comme un
abysme de confusion et disordre;” — “as a gulf of confusion and
disorder.”

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc34012.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p14.1"></span>Entre
la faussete et la verite.”

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc34012.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p24.1"></span>Les
scribes le haissoyent mortellement.”

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc34012.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p27.1"></span>Que la
cour du Pape est remplie d’Epicuriens.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc34012.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xiii.iv-p8.1"></span>An jour de
Repos.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc34012.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span> The difficulty is obviated by reading the
words <span id="xiii.iv-p12.1"></span>διὰ τούτο, (with Scholz,
Bloomfield, and others,) as the conclusion of the 21st, and not as the
commencement of the 22nd verse; <span id="xiii.iv-p12.2"></span>καὶ
πάντες Θαυμάζετε διὰ τούτο, *and you all wonder* at it, or, *on this
account* Our Author, with his usual sagacity, has, in this instance,
also anticipated the results of modern criticism; for his French
version, which contains his latest views, runs thus: “<span
id="xiii.iv-p12.3"></span>J’ay fait une oeuvre, et vous en estes tous
emerveillez, *ou*, *et vous estes esmerveillez de cela* *Moise vous a
donne la Circoncision*.” — “I have done one work, and you are all
astonished at it, *or*, *and you are all astonished at that* *Moses gave
you Circumcision*.” It is remarkable that, while a modern French version
copies Calvin’s rendering very closely, <span
id="xiii.iv-p12.4"></span>*et vous en etes tous etonnes*, (*and you are
all astonished at it*,) the translator has overlooked the force of <span
id="xiii.iv-p12.5"></span>διὰ τούτο, for *en* (*at it*) is marked by him
in Italics, as a supplement. — Ed.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc34012.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p12.6"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xiii.iv-p13.1"></span>An jour
de Repos.”

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc34012.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="xiii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xiii.vi-p3.1"></span>Vers ceux
qui sont espars entre les Grecs.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc34012.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xiii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.vi-p17.1"></span>Un fort
bel exemple.”

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc34012.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="xiii.vi-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="xiii.vi-p18.1"></span>Quand il
la cherche.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc34012.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="xiii.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.vi-p24.1"></span>Aux
estrangers qui estes espars.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc34012.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="xiii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiii.vii-p15.1"></span>Des
dons et graces du Sainct Esprit.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc34012.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="xiii.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.vii-p24.1"></span>Sous
une partie il comprend le tout.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc34012.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="xiii.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p26"></span> “<span id="xiii.vii-p26.1"></span>A ses
eleus et fideles.”

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc34012.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="xiii.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p27"></span> “<span
id="xiii.vii-p27.1"></span>Offerte et donnee.”

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc34012.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="xiii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span> “<span
id="xiii.viii-p3.1"></span>Cestuy-ci est veritablement Prophete, *ou*,
*le Prophete*.” — “This is truly a Prophet, *or*, *the Prophet*.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc34012.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="xiii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiii.viii-p7.1"></span>De
mortelle haine.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc34012.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="xiii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiii.viii-p11.1"></span>Les
troisiemes.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc34012.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span> “<span id="xiii.ix-p6.1"></span>Ces
orgueilleur et mechans sacrificateurs.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc34012.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p11"></span> “<span id="xiii.ix-p11.1"></span>Laquelle
toutesfois ils confessent estre de Dieu, d’autant qu’ils en sont
conveincus en leurs coeurs.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc34012.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.ix-p24.1"></span>D’un
homme fidele et Chrestien.”

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc34012.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p27"></span> “<span id="xiii.ix-p27.1"></span>De ce
petit coin incognee de Galilee.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc34013.md)
