[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc34007)  [Next](cc34009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[John
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now there was a man of the Pharisees,
called Nicodemus, a ruler among the Jews. **2.** He came to Jesus by
night, and said to him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from
God, for no man can do these signs which thou doest, unless God be with
him. **3.** Jesus answered and said to him, Verily, verily, I say to
thee, Unless a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
**4.** Nicodemus saith to him, How can a man be born when he is old? Can
he enter again into his mother’s womb and be born? **5.** Jesus
answered, Verily, verily, I say to thee, Unless a man be: born of water,
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. **6.** That
which is born of flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span><span id="ix.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Now there was a man of the Pharisees.*
In the person of Nicodemus the Evangelist now exhibits to our view how
vain and fleeting was the faith of those who, having been excited by
miracles, suddenly professed to be the disciples of Christ. For since
this man was of the order of the Pharisees, and held the rank of a ruler
in his nation, he must have been far more excellent than others. The
common people, for the most part, are light and unsteady; but who would
not have thought that he who had learning and experience was also a wise
and prudent man? Yet from Christ’s reply it is evident, that nothing was
farther from his design in coming than a desire to learn the first
principles of religion. If he who was *a ruler* among men is less than a
child, what ought we to think of the multitude at large? Now though the
design of the Evangelist was, to exhibit, as in a mirror, how few there
were in Jerusalem who were properly disposed to receive the Gospel, yet,
for other reasons, this narrative is highly useful to us; and especially
because it instructs us concerning the depraved nature of mankind, what
is the proper entrance into the school of Christ, and what must be the
commencement of our training to make progress in the heavenly doctrine.
For the sum of Christ’s discourse is, that, in order that we may be his
true disciples, we must become new men. But, before proceeding farther,
we must ascertain from the circumstances which are here detailed by the
Evangelist, what were the obstacles which prevented Nicodemus from
giving himself unreservedly to Christ.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>*Of the Pharisees*. This designation was, no
doubt, regarded by his countrymen as honorable to *Nicodemus;* but it is
not for the sake of honor that it is given to him by the Evangelist,
who, on the contrary, draws our attention to it as having prevented him
from coming freely and cheerfully to Christ. Hence we are reminded that
they who occupy a lofty station in the world are, for the most part,
entangled by very dangerous snares; nay, we see many of them held so
firmly bound, that not even the slightest wish or prayer arises from
them towards heaven throughout their whole life. Why they were called
*Pharisees* we have elsewhere explained;  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) for they boasted of being the only
expounders of the Law, as if they were in possession, of the marrow and
hidden meaning of Scripture; and for that reason they called themselves
<span id="ix.i-p7.3"></span>פרושים (*Perushim*.) Though the *Essenes*
led a more austere life, which gained them a high reputation for
holiness; yet because, like hermits, they forsook the ordinary life and
custom of men, the sect of the *Pharisees* was on that account held in
higher estimation. Besides, the Evangelist mentions not only that
*Nicodemus* was of the order of the *Pharisees,* but that he was one of
the *rulers* of his nation.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span><span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**2.** *He came to Jesus by night.* From the
circumstance of his *coming by night* we infer that his timidity was
excessive; for his eyes were dazzled, as it were, by the splendor of his
own greatness and reputation.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md)
Perhaps too he was hindered by shame, for ambitious men think that their
reputation is utterly ruined, if they have once descended from the
dignity of teachers to the rank of scholars; and he was unquestionably
puffed up with a foolish opinion of his knowledge. In short, as he had a
high opinion of himself, he was unwilling to lose any part of his
elevation. And yet there appears in him some seed of piety; for hearing
that a Prophet of God had appeared, he does not despise or spurn the
doctrine which has been brought from heaven, and is moved by some desire
to obtain it, — a desire which sprung from nothing else than fear and
reverence for God. Many are tickled by an idle curiosity to inquire
eagerly about any thing that is new, but there is no reason to doubt
that it was religious principle and conscientious feeling that excited
in Nicodemus the desire to gain a more intimate knowledge of the
doctrine of Christ. And although that seed remained long concealed and
apparently dead, yet after the death of Christ it yielded fruit, such as
no man would ever have expected, (<span id="ix.i-p10.2"></span>[Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039)<span id="ix.i-p10.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>*Rabbi, we know.* The meaning of these words
is, “*Master*, *we know that thou art come to be a teacher*.” But as
learned men, at that time, were generally called *Masters*, Nicodemus
first salutes Christ according to custom, and gives him the ordinary
designation, *Rabbi*, (which means Master,  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) .md) and afterwards declares that he was
sent *by God* to perform the office of a *Master*. And on this principle
depends all the authority of the teachers in the Church; for as it is
only from the word of God that we must learn wisdom, we ought not to
listen to any other persons than those by whose mouth God speaks. And it
ought to be observed, that though religion was greatly corrupted and
almost destroyed among the Jews, still they always held this principle,
that no man was a lawful *teacher*, unless he had been sent *by God*.
But as there are none who more haughtily and more daringly boast of
having been *sent by God* than the false prophets do, we need
discernment in this case for trying the spirits. Accordingly Nicodemus
adds:

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>*For no man can do the signs which thou
doest, unless God be with him.* It is evident, he says, that Christ has
been sent *by God*, because God displays his power in him so
illustriously, that it cannot be denied that *God is with him* He takes
for granted that God is not accustomed to work but by his ministers, so
as to seal the office which he has entrusted to them. And he had good
grounds for thinking so, because God always intended that miracles
should be seals of his doctrine. Justly therefore does he make God the
sole Author of miracles, when he says that *no man can do these signs,
unless God be with him;* for what he says amounts to a declaration that
miracles are not performed by the arm of man, but that the power of God
reigns, and is illustriously displayed in them. In a word, as miracles
have a twofold advantage, to prepare the mind for faith, and, when it
has been formed by the word, to confirm it still more, Nicodemus had
profited aright in the former part, because by miracles he recognizes
Christ as a true prophet of God.

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>Yet his argument appears not to be
conclusive; for since the false prophets deceive the ignorant by their
impostures as fully as if they had proved by true *signs* that they are
the ministers of God, what difference will there be between truth and
falsehood, if faith depends on miracles? Nay, Moses expressly says that
God employs this method *to try if we love him*, (<span
id="ix.i-p14.1"></span>[De 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003.md)<span
id="ix.i-p14.1"></span>.) We know also, the warning of Christ, (<span
id="ix.i-p14.2"></span>[Mt 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014.md)<span
id="ix.i-p14.2"></span>,) and of Paul, (<span
id="ix.i-p14.3"></span>[2Th 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009.md)<span
id="ix.i-p14.3"></span>,) that believers ought to beware of *lying
signs*, by which Anti-Christ dazzles the eyes of many. I answer, God may
justly permit this to be done, that those who deserve it may be deceived
by the enchantments of Satan. But I say that this does not hinder the
elect from perceiving in miracles the power of God, which is to them an
undoubted confirmation of true and sound doctrine. Thus, Paul boasts
that his apostleship was confirmed by *signs*, *and wonders*, *and
mighty deeds*, (<span id="ix.i-p14.4"></span>[2Co
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012)<span id="ix.i-p14.4"></span>..md)
To whatever extent Satan may, like an ape, counterfeit the works of God
in the dark, yet when the eyes are opened and the light of spiritual
wisdom shines, miracles are a sufficiently powerful attestation of the
presence of God, as Nicodemus here declares it to be.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span><span id="ix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**3.** *Verily, verily, I say to thee.* The
word Verily (<span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>ἀμὴν) is twice repeated, and
this is done for the purpose of arousing him to more earnest attention.
For when he was about to speak of the most important and weighty of all
subjects, he found it necessary to awaken the attention of Nicodemus,
who might otherwise have passed by this whole discourse in a light or
careless manner.  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) Such, then, is
the design of the double affirmation.

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>Though this discourse appears to be
far-fetched and almost inappropriate, yet it was with the utmost
propriety that Christ opened his discourse in this manner. For as it is
useless to sow seed in a field which has not been prepared by the labors
of the husbandman, so it is to no purpose to scatter the doctrine of the
Gospel, if the mind has not been previously subdued and duly prepared
for docility and obedience. Christ saw that the mind of Nicodemus was
filled with many thorns, choked by many noxious herbs, so that there was
scarcely any room for spiritual doctrine. This exhortation, therefore,
resembled a ploughing to purify him, that nothing might prevent him from
profiting by the doctrine. Let us, therefore, remember that this was
spoken to one individual, in such a manner that the Son of God addresses
all of us daily in the same language. For which of us will say that he
is so free from sinful affections that he does not need such a
purification? If, therefore, we wish to make good and useful progress in
the school of Christ, let us learn to begin at this point.

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>*Unless a man be born again.* That is, So
long as thou art destitute of that which is of the highest importance in
the kingdom of God, I care little about your calling me *Master*; for
the first entrance into the kingdom of God is, to become a new man. But
as this is a remarkable passage, it will be proper to survey every part
of it minutely.

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>*To* SEE *the kingdom of God* is of the same
meaning as *to* enter into *the kingdom of God*, as we shall immediately
perceive from the context. But they are mistaken who suppose that *the
kingdom of God* means *Heaven*; for it rather means the spiritual life,
which is begun by faith in this world, and gradually increases every day
according to the continued progress of faith. So the meaning is, that no
man can be truly united to the Church, so as to be reckoned among the
children of God, until he has been previously renewed. This expression
shows briefly what is the beginning of Christianity, and at the same
time teaches us, that we are born exiles and utterly alienated from *the
kingdom of God*, and that there is a perpetual state of variance between
God and us, until he makes us altogether different by our being *born
again*; for the statement is general, and comprehends the whole human
race. If Christ had said to one person, or to a few individuals, that
they could not *enter into heaven*, *unless they had been* previously
*born again*, we might have supposed that it was only certain characters
that were pointed out, but he speaks of all without exception; for the
language is unlimited, and is of the same import with such universal
terms as these: *Whosoever shall not be born again cannot enter into the
kingdom of God*

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span>By the phrase *born again* is expressed not
the correction of one part, but the renovation of the whole nature.
Hence it follows, that there is nothing in us that is not sinful; for if
reformation is necessary in the whole and in each part, corruption must
have been spread throughout. On this point we shall soon have occasion
to speak more largely. Erasmus, adopting the opinion of Cyril, has
improperly translated the adverb <span id="ix.i-p21.1"></span>ἄνωθεν,
from above, and renders the clause thus: *unless a man be born* from
above. The Greek word, I own, is ambiguous; but we know that Christ
conversed with Nicodemus in the Hebrew language. There would then have
been no room for the ambiguity which occasioned the mistake of Nicodemus
and led him into childish scruples about a second birth of the flesh. He
therefore understood Christ to have said nothing else than that *a man
must be born* again, before he is admitted into the kingdom of God.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span><span id="ix.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**4.** *How can a man be born when he is
old?* Though the form of expression which Christ employed was not
contained in the Law and the prophets, yet as renewal is frequently
mentioned in Scripture, and is one of the first principles of faith, it
is evident how imperfectly skilled the Scribes at that time were in the
reading of the Scriptures. It certainly was not one man only who was to
blame for not knowing what was meant by the grace of regeneration; but
as almost all devoted their attention to useless subtleties, what was of
chief importance in the doctrine of piety was disregarded. Popery
exhibits to us, at the present day, an instance of the same kind in her
Theologians. For while they weary out their whole life with profound
speculations, as to all that strictly relates to the worship of God, to
the confident hope of our salvation, or to the exercises of religion,
they know no more on these subjects than a cobbler or a cowherd knows
about the course of the stars; and, what is more, taking delight in
foreign mysteries, they openly despise the true doctrine of Scripture as
unworthy of the elevated rank which belongs to them as teachers. We need
not wonder, therefore, to find here that Nicodemus stumbles at a straw;
for it is a just vengeance of God, that they who think themselves the
highest and most excellent teachers, and in whose estimation the
ordinary simplicity of doctrine is vile and despicable, stand amazed at
small matters.

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span><span id="ix.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span>**5.** *Unless a man be born of water.* This
passage has been explained in various ways. Some have thought that the
two parts of regeneration are distinctly pointed out, and that by the
word *Water* is denoted the renunciation of the old man, while by *the
Spirit* they have understood the new life. Others think that there is an
implied contrast, as if Christ intended to contrast *Water and Spirit*,
which are pure and liquid elements, with the earthly and gross nature of
man. Thus they view the language as allegorical, and suppose Christ to
have taught that we ought to lay aside the heavy and ponderous mass of
the flesh, and to become like *water and air*, that we may move upwards,
or, at least, may not be so much weighed down to the earth. But both
opinions appear to me to be at variance with the meaning of Christ.

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span>*Chrysostom*, with whom the greater part of
expounders agree, makes the word *Water* refer to baptism. The meaning
would then be, that by baptism we enter into the kingdom of God, because
in baptism we are regenerated by the Spirit of God. Hence arose the
belief of the absolute necessity of baptism, in order to the hope of
eternal life. But though we were to admit that Christ here speaks of
baptism, yet we ought not to press his words so closely as to imagine
that he confines salvation to the outward sign; but, on the contrary, he
connects the *Water* with the *Spirit*, because under that visible
symbol he attests and seals that newness of life which God alone
produces in us by his Spirit. It is true that, by neglecting baptism, we
are excluded from salvation; and in this sense I acknowledge that it is
necessary; but it is absurd to speak of the hope of salvation as
confined to the sign. So far as relates to this passage, I cannot bring
myself to believe that Christ speaks of baptism; for it would have been
inappropriate.

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span>We must always keep in remembrance the design
of Christ, which we have already explained; namely, that he intended to
exhort Nicodemus to newness of life, because he was not capable of
receiving the Gospel, until he began to be a new man. It is, therefore,
a simple statement, that we must be born again, in order that we may be
the children of God, and that the Holy Spirit is the Author of this
second birth. For while Nicodemus was dreaming of the regeneration
(<span id="ix.i-p27.1"></span>παλιγγενεσία) or transmigration taught by
Pythagoras, who imagined that souls, after the death of their bodies,
passed into other bodies,  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) Christ,
in order to cure him of this error, added, by way of explanation, that
it is not in a natural way that men *are born a second time*, and that
it is not necessary for them to be clothed with a new body, but that
they are *born* when they are renewed in mind and heart by the grace of
the Spirit.

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>Accordingly, he employed the words *Spirit*
and *water* to mean the same thing, and this ought not to be regarded as
a harsh or forced interpretation; for it is a frequent and common way of
speaking in Scripture, when *the Spirit* is mentioned, to add the word
*Water* or *Fire*, expressing his power. We sometimes meet with the
statement, that it is Christ who *baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with
fire*, (<span id="ix.i-p29.1"></span>[Mt
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.i-p29.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p29.2"></span>[Lu
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span id="ix.i-p29.2"></span>,.md)
where *fire* means nothing different from the Spirit, but only shows
what is his efficacy in us. As to the word *water* being placed first,
it is of little consequence; or rather, this mode of speaking flows more
naturally than the other, because the metaphor is followed by a plain
and direct statement, as if Christ had said that no man is a son of God
until he has been renewed by *water*, and that this *water* is *the
Spirit* who cleanseth us anew and who, by spreading his energy over us,
imparts to us the rigor of the heavenly life, though by nature we are
utterly dry. And most properly does Christ, in order to reprove
Nicodemus for his ignorance, employ a form of expression which is common
in Scripture; for Nicodemus ought at length to have acknowledged, that
what Christ had said was taken from the ordinary doctrine of the
Prophets.

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span>By *water*, therefore, is meant nothing more
than the inward purification and invigoration which is produced by *the
Holy Spirit*. Besides, it is not unusual to employ the word *and*
instead of *that is*, when the latter clause is intended to explain the
former. And the view which I have taken is supported by what follows;
for when Christ immediately proceeds to assign the reason why we *must
be born again*, without mentioning the *water*, he shows that the
newness of life which he requires is produced by the *Spirit* alone;
whence it follows, that *water* must not be separated from *the Spirit*

<span id="ix.i-p31"></span><span id="ix.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p32"></span>**6.** *That which is born of the flesh.* By
reasoning from contraries, he argues that the kingdom of God is shut
against us, unless an entrance be opened to us by a *new birth*, (<span
id="ix.i-p32.1"></span>παλιγγενεσία ) For he takes for granted, that we
cannot enter into the kingdom of God unless we are spiritual. But we
bring nothing from the womb but a carnal nature. Therefore it follows,
that we are naturally banished from the kingdom of God, and, having been
deprived of the heavenly life, remain under the yoke of death. Besides,
when Christ argues here, that men must be *born again*, because they are
only *flesh*, he undoubtedly comprehends all mankind under the term
*flesh*. By the *flesh*, therefore, is meant in this place not the body,
but the soul also, and consequently every part of it. When the Popish
divines restrict the word to that part which they call sensual, they do
so in utter ignorance of its meaning;  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) for Christ must in that case have used an
inconclusive argument, that we need a second birth, because part of us
is corrupt. But if the *flesh* is contrasted with *the Spirit*, as a
corrupt thing is contrasted with what is uncorrupted, a crooked thing
with what is straight, a polluted thing with what is holy, a
contaminated thing with what is pure, we may readily conclude that the
whole nature of man is condemned by a single word. Christ therefore
declares that our understanding and reason is corrupted, because it is
carnal, and that all the affections of the heart are wicked and
reprobate, because they too are carnal.

<span id="ix.i-p34"></span>But here it may be objected, that since the
soul is not begotten by human generation, we are not *born of the
flesh*, as to the chief part of our nature. This led many persons to
imagine that not only our bodies, but our souls also, descend to us from
our parents; for they thought it absurd that original sin, which has its
peculiar habitation in the soul, should be conveyed from one man to all
his posterity, unless all our souls proceeded from his soul as their
source. And certainly, at first sight, the words of Christ appear to
convey the idea, that we are *flesh*, because we are *born of flesh*. I
answer, so far as relates to the words of Christ, they mean nothing else
than that we are all carnal when we are born; and that as we come into
this world mortal men, our nature relishes nothing but what is *flesh*.
He simply distinguishes here between nature and the supernatural gift;
for the corruption of all mankind in the person of Adam alone did not
proceed from generation, but from the appointment of God, who in one man
had adorned us all, and who has in him also deprived us of his gifts.
Instead of saying, therefore, that each of us draws vice and corruption
from his parents, it would be more correct to say that we are all alike
corrupted in Adam alone, because immediately after his revolt God took
away from human nature what He had bestowed upon it.

<span id="ix.i-p35"></span>Here another question arises; for it is
certain that in this degenerate and corrupted nature some remnant of the
gifts of God still lingers; and hence it follows that we are not in
every respect corrupted. The reply is easy. The gifts which God hath
left to us since the fall, if they are judged by themselves, are indeed
worthy of praise; but as the contagion of wickedness is spread through
every part, there will be found in us nothing that is pure and free from
every defilement. That we naturally possess some knowledge of God, that
some distinction between good and evil is engraven on our conscience,
that our faculties are sufficient for the maintenance of the present
life, that — in short — we are in so many ways superior to the brute
beasts, that is excellent in itself, so far as it proceeds from God; but
in us all these things are completely polluted, in the same manner as
the wine which has been wholly infected and corrupted by the offensive
taste of the vessel loses the pleasantness of its good flavor, and
acquires a bitter and pernicious taste. For such knowledge of God as now
remains in men is nothing else than a frightful source of idolatry and
of all superstitions; the judgment exercised in choosing and
distinguishing things is partly blind and foolish, partly imperfect and
confused; all the industry that we possess flows into vanity and
trifles; and the will itself, with furious impetuosity, rushes headlong
to what is evil. Thus in the whole of our nature there remains not a
drop of uprightness. Hence it is evident that we must be formed by the
second birth, that we may be fitted for the kingdom of God; and the
meaning of Christ’s words is, that as a man is born only *carnal* from
the womb of his mother; he must be formed anew by *the Spirit*, that he
may begin to be spiritual.

<span id="ix.i-p36"></span>The word *Spirit* is used here in two senses,
namely, for grace, and the effect of grace. For in the first place,
Christ informs us that *the Spirit* of God is the only Author of a pure
and upright nature, and afterwards he states, that we are *spiritual*,
because we have been renewed by his power.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
3:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Wonder not that I said to thee, You
must be born again. **8.** The wind bloweth where it pleaseth, and thou
hearest its voice; but knowest not whence it cometh, nor whither it
goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. **9.** Nicodemus
answered, and said to him, How can these things be? **10.** Jesus
answered, and said to him, Thou art a teacher of Israel, and knowest you
not these things? **11.** Verily, verily, I say to thee, We speak what
we know, and testify what we have seen; and you receive not our
testimony. **12.** If ‘I have told you earthly things, and you believe
not, how shall you believe if I tell you heavenly things?

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span><span id="ix.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**7.** *Wonder not.* This passage has been
tortured by commentators in various ways. Some think that Christ
reproves the gross ignorance of Nicodemus and other persons of the same
class, by saying that *it is not wonderful*, if they do not comprehend
that heavenly mystery of regeneration, since even in the order of nature
they do not perceive the reason of those things which fall under the
cognizance of the senses. Others contrive a meaning which, though
ingenious, is too much forced: that, “as *the wind blows* freely, so by
the regeneration of the Spirit we are set at liberty, and, having been
freed from the yoke of sin, run voluntarily to God. Equally removed from
Christ’s meaning is the exposition given by Augustine, that the Spirit
of God exerts his power according to his own pleasure. A better view is
given by Chrysostom and Cyril, who say that the comparison is taken from
the wind, and apply it thus to the present passage: though its power be
felt, *we know not* its source and cause.” While I do not differ greatly
from their opinion, I shall endeavor to explain the meaning of Christ
with greater clearness and certainty.

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>I hold by this principle, that Christ borrows
a comparison from the order of nature. Nicodemus reckoned that what he
had heard about regeneration and a new life was incredible, because the
manner of this regeneration exceeded his capacity. To prevent him from
entertaining any scruple of this sort, Christ shows that even in the
bodily life there is displayed an amazing power of God, the reason of
which is concealed. For all draw from the air their vital breath; we
perceive the agitation of the air, but *know not whence it comes to us
or whither it departs*. If in this frail and transitory life God acts so
powerfully that we are constrained to admire his power, what folly is it
to attempt to measure by the perception of our own mind his secret work
in the heavenly and supernatural life, so as to believe no more than
what we see? Thus Paul, when he breaks out into indignation against
those who reject the doctrine of the resurrection, on the ground of its
being impossible that the body which is now subject to putrefaction,
after having been reduced to dust and to nothing, should be clothed with
a blessed immortality, reproaches them for stupidity in not considering
that a similar display of the power of God may be seen in *a grain of
wheat*; for the seed does not spring until it; has been putrefied,
(<span id="ix.ii-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#037)<span id="ix.ii-p6.1"></span>..md)
This is the astonishing wisdom of which David exclaims,

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom
hast thou made them all,  
(<span id="ix.ii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)<span id="ix.ii-p7.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>They are therefore excessively stupid who,
having been warned by the common order of nature, do not rise higher, so
as to acknowledge that the hand of God is far more powerful in the
spiritual kingdom of Christ. When Christ says to Nicodemus that he ought
not to wonder, we must not understand it in such a manner as if he
intended that we should despise a work of God, which is so illustrious,
and which is worthy of the highest admiration; but he means that we
ought not to wonder with that kind of admiration which hinders our
faith. For many reject as fabulous what they think too lofty and
difficult. In a word, let us not doubt that by the Spirit of God we are
formed again and made new men, though his manner of doing this be
concealed from us.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span><span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**8.** *The wind bloweth where it pleaseth.*
Not that, strictly speaking, there is will in the *blowing*, but because
the agitation is free, and uncertain, and variable; for the air is
carried sometimes in one direction and sometimes in another. How this
applies to the case in hand; for if it flowed in a uniform motion like
water, it would be less miraculous.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>*So is every one that is born of the
Spirit.* Christ means that the movement and operation of the Spirit of
God is not less perceptible in the renewal of man than the motion of the
air in this earthly and outward life, but that the manner of it is
concealed; and that, therefore, we are ungrateful and malicious, if we
do not adore the inconceivable power of God in the heavenly life, of
which we behold so striking an exhibition in this world, and if we
ascribe to him less in restoring the salvation of our soul than in
upholding the bodily frame. The application will be somewhat more
evident, if you turn the sentence in this manner: *Such is the power and
efficacy of the Holy Spirit in the renewed man*

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span><span id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>**9.** *How can these things be?* We see
what is the chief obstacle in the way of Nicodemus. Every thing that he
hears appears monstrous, because he does not understand the manner of
it; so that there is no greater obstacle to us than our own pride; that
is, we always wish to be wise beyond what is proper, and therefore we
reject with diabolical pride every thing that is not explained to our
reason; as if it were proper to limit the infinite power of God to our
poor capacity. We are, indeed, permitted, to a certain extent, to
inquire into the manner and reason of the works of God, provided that we
do so with sobriety and reverence; but Nicodemus rejects it as a fable,
on this ground, that he does not believe it to be possible. On this
subject we shall treat more fully under the Sixth Chapter.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span><span id="ix.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>**10.** *Thou art a teacher of Israel.* As
Christ sees that he is spending his time and pains to no purpose in
teaching so proud a man, he begins to reprove him sharply. And certainly
such persons will never make any progress, until the wicked confidence,
with which they are puffed up, be removed. This is, very properly,
placed first in order; for in the very matter in which he chiefly plumes
himself on his acuteness and sagacity, Christ censures his ignorance. He
thought, that not to admit a thing to be possible would be considered a
proof of gravity and intelligence, because that man is accounted.
foolishly credulous who assents to what is told him by another, before
he has fully inquired into the reason. But still Nicodemus, with all his
magisterial haughtiness, exposes himself to ridicule by more than
childish hesitation about the first principles. Such hesitation,
certainly, is base and shameful. For what religion have we, what
knowledge of God, what rule of living well, what hope of eternal life,
if we do not believe that man is renewed by the Spirit of God? There is
an emphasis, therefore, in the word *these*; for since Scripture
frequently repeats this part of doctrine, it ought not to be unknown
even to the lowest class of beginners. It is utterly beyond endurance
that any man should be ignorant and unskilled in it, who professes to be
a *teacher* in the Church of God.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span><span id="ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>**11.** *We speak what we know.* Some refer
this to Christ and John the Baptist; others say that the plural number
is used instead of the singular. For my own part, I have no doubt that
Christ mentions himself in connection with all the prophets of God, and
speaks generally in the person of all. Philosophers and other
vain-glorious teachers frequently bring forward trifles which they have
themselves invented; but Christ claims it as peculiar to himself and all
the servants of God, that they deliver no doctrine but what is certain.
For God does not send ministers to prattle about things that are unknown
or doubtful, but trains them in his school, that what they have learned
from himself they may afterwards deliver to others. Again, as Christ, by
this testimony, recommends to us the certainty of his doctrine, so he
enjoins on all his ministers a law of modesty, not to put forward their
own dreams or conjectures — not to preach human inventions, which have
no solidity in theme but to render a faithful and pure testimony to God.
Let every man, therefore, see what the Lord has revealed to him, that no
man may go beyond the bounds of his faith; and, lastly, that no man may
allow himself to speak any thing but what he has heard from the Lord. It
ought to be observed, likewise, that Christ here confirms his doctrine
by an oath, that it may have full authority over us.

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>*You receive not our testimony.* This is
added, that the Gospel may lose nothing on account of the ingratitude of
men. For since few persons are to be found who exercise faith in the
truth of God, and since the truth is everywhere rejected by the world,
we ought to defend it against contempt, that its majesty may not be held
in less estimation, because the whole world despises it, and obscures it
by impiety. Now though the meaning of the words be simple and one, still
we must draw from this passage a twofold doctrine. The first is, that
our faith in the Gospel may not be weakened, if it have few disciples on
the earth; as if Christ had said, Though you do not receive my doctrine,
it remains nevertheless certain and durable; for the unbelief of men
will never prevent God from remaining always true. The other is, that
they who, in the present day, disbelieve the Gospel, will not escape
with impunity, since the truth of God is holy and sacred. We ought to be
fortified with this shield, that we may persevere in obedience to the
Gospel in opposition to the obstinacy of men. True indeed, we must hold
by this principle, that our faith be founded on God. But when we have
God as our security, we ought, like persons elevated above the heavens,
boldly to tread the whole world under our feet, or regard it with lofty
disdain, rather than allow the unbelief of any persons whatever to fill
us with alarm. As to the complaint which Christ makes, that his
testimony is not received, we learn from it, that the word of God has,
in all ages, been distinguished by this peculiar feature, that they who
believed it were few; for the expression — *you receive not* — belongs
to the greater number, and almost to the whole body of the people. There
is no reason, therefore, that we should now be discouraged, if the
number of those who believe be small.

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span><span id="ix.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span>**12.** *If I have told you earthly things.*
Christ concludes that it ought to be laid to the charge of Nicodemus and
others, if they do not make progress in the doctrine of the Gospel; for
he shows that the blame does not lie with him, that all are not properly
instructed, since he comes down even *to the earth*, that he may raise
us *to heaven*. It is too common a fault that men desire to be taught in
an ingenious and witty style. Hence, the greater part of men are so
delighted with lofty and abstruse speculations. Hence, too, many hold
the Gospel in less estimation, because they do not find in it
high-sounding words to fill their ears, and on this account do not deign
to bestow their attention on a doctrine so low and mean. But it shows an
extraordinary degree of wickedness, that we yield less reverence to God
speaking to us, because he condescends to our ignorance; and, therefore,
when God prattles to us in Scripture in a rough and popular style, let
us know that this is done on account of the love which he bears to us.
 <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) Whoever exclaims that he is
offended by such meanness of language, or pleads it as an excuse for not
subjecting himself to the word of God, speaks falsely; for he who cannot
endure to embrace God, when he approaches to him, will still less fly to
meet him above the clouds.

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span>*Earthly things.* Some explain this to mean
the elements of spiritual doctrine; for self-denial may be said to be
the commencement of piety. But I rather agree with those who refer it to
the form of instruction; for, though the whole of Christ’s discourse was
*heavenly*, yet he spoke in a manner so familiar, that the style itself
had some appearance of being *earthly*. Besides, these words must not be
viewed as referring exclusively to a single sermon; for Christ’s
ordinary method of teaching — that is, a popular simplicity of style —
is here contrasted with the pompous and high-sounding phrases to which
ambitious men are too strongly addicted.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**13.** And  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) no one hath ascended to heaven but he who
came down from heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven. **14.** And as
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lifted up; **15.** That whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but
have eternal life. **16.** For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only-begotten Son; that whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but
may have eternal life. **17.** For God hath not sent his Son into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world may be saved by him.
**18.** He who believeth in him is not condemned; but he who believeth
not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of
the only-begotten Son of God.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>**13.** *No one hath ascended to heaven.* He
again exhorts Nicodemus not to trust to himself and his own sagacity,
because no mortal man can, by his own unaided powers, enter into heaven,
but only he who goes thither under the guidance of the Son of God. For
*to ascend to heaven* means here, “to have a pure knowledge of the
mysteries of God, and the light of spiritual understanding.” For Christ
gives here the same instruction which is given by Paul, when he declares
that

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>the sensual man does not comprehend the
things which are of God,  
(<span id="ix.iii-p7.2"></span>[1Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii-p7.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>and, therefore, he excludes from divine
things all the acuteness of the human understanding, for it is far below
God.

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>But we must attend to the words, that Christ
alone, who is heavenly, *ascends to heaven*, but that the entrance is
closed against all others. For, in the former clause, he humbles us,
when he excludes the whole world from *heaven*. Paul enjoins

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span>those who are desirous to be wise with God
to be fools with themselves,  
(<span id="ix.iii-p10.2"></span>[1Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="ix.iii-p10.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span>There is nothing which we do with greater
reluctance. For this purpose we ought to remember, that all our senses
fail and give way when we come to God; but, after having shut us out
from heaven, Christ quickly proposes a remedy, when he adds, that what
was denied to all others is granted to the Son of God. And this too is
the reason why he calls himself the Son of man, that we may not doubt
that we have an entrance into heaven in common with him who clothed
himself with our flesh, that he might make us partakers of all
blessings. Since, therefore, he is the Father’s only Counselor, (<span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>[Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>,) he admits us into those secrets which
otherwise would have remained in concealment.

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>*Who is in heaven.* It may be thought
absurd to say that *he is in heaven*, while he still dwells on the
earth. If it be replied, that this is true in regard to his Divine
nature, the mode of expression means something else, namely, that while
he was man, he was *in heaven*. It might be said that no mention is here
made of any place, but that Christ is only distinguished from others, in
regard to his condition, because he is the heir of the kingdom of God,
from which the whole human race is banished; but, as it very frequently
happens, on account of the unity of the Person of Christ, that what
properly belongs to one nature is applied to another, we ought not to
seek any other solution. Christ, therefore, who *is in heaven*, hath
clothed himself with our flesh, that, by stretching out his brotherly
hand to us, he may raise us to heaven along with him.

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span><span id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span>**14.** *And as Moses lifted up the
serpent.* He explains more clearly why he said that it is he alone to
whom heaven is opened; namely, that he brings to heaven all who are only
willing to follow him as their guide; for he testifies that he will be
openly and publicly manifested to all, that he may diffuse his power
over men of every class.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) To be
*lifted up* means to be placed in a lofty and elevated situation, so as
to be exhibited to the view of all. This was done by the preaching of
the Gospel; for the explanation of it which some give, as referring to
the cross, neither agrees with the context nor is applicable to the
present subject. The simple meaning of the words therefore is, that, by
the preaching of the Gospel, Christ was to be raised on high, like a
standard to which the eyes of all would be directed, as Isaiah had
foretold, (<span id="ix.iii-p15.2"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii-p15.2"></span>..md)
As a type of this *lifting up*, he refers to *the brazen serpent*, which
was erected by Moses, the sight of which was a salutary remedy to those
who had been wounded by the deadly bite of serpents. The history of that
transaction is well known, and is detailed in <span
id="ix.iii-p15.3"></span>[Nu 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009.md)<span
id="ix.iii-p15.3"></span>. Christ introduces it in this passage, in
order to show that he must be placed before the eyes of all by the
doctrine of the Gospel, that all who look at him by faith may obtain
salvation. Hence it ought to be inferred that Christ is clearly
exhibited to us in the Gospel, in order that no man may complain of
obscurity; and that this manifestation is common to all, and that faith
has its own look, by which it perceives him as present; as Paul tells us
that a lively portrait of Christ with his cross is exhibited, when he is
truly preached, (<span id="ix.iii-p15.4"></span>[Ga
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii-p15.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>The metaphor is not inappropriate or
far-fetched. As it was only the outward appearance of a serpent, but
contained nothing within that was pestilential or venomous, so Christ
clothed himself with the form of sinful flesh, which yet was pure and
free from all sin, that he might cure in us the deadly wound of sin. It
was not in vain that, when the Jews were wounded by serpents, the Lord
formerly prepared this kind of antidote; and it tended to confirm the
discourse which Christ delivered. For when he saw that he was despised
as a mean and unknown person, he could produce nothing more appropriate
than *the lifting up of the serpent*, to tell them, that they ought not
to think it strange, if, contrary to the expectation of men, he were
*lifted up* on high from the very lowest condition, because this had
already been shadowed out under the Law by the type of the serpent.

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span>A question now arises: Does Christ compare
himself to the *serpent*, because there is some resemblance; or, does he
pronounce it to have been a sacrament, as the Manna was? For though the
Manna was bodily food, intended for present use, yet Paul testifies that
it was a *spiritual* mystery, (<span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>[1Co
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>..md)
I am led to think that this was also the case with the brazen serpent,
both by this passage, and the fact of its being preserved for the
future, until the superstition of the people had converted it into an
idol, (<span id="ix.iii-p17.2"></span>[2Ki
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii-p17.2"></span>..md)
If any one form a different opinion, I do not debate the point with him.

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span><span id="ix.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span>**16.** *For God so loved the world.*
Christ opens up the first cause, and, as it were, the source of our
salvation, and he does so, that no doubt may remain; for our minds
cannot find calm repose, until we arrive at the unmerited love of God.
As the whole matter of our salvation must not be sought any where else
than in Christ, so we must see whence Christ came to us, and why he was
offered to be our Savior. Both points are distinctly stated to us:
namely, that faith in Christ brings life to all, and that Christ brought
life, because the Heavenly Father loves the human race, and wishes that
they should not perish. And this order ought to be carefully observed;
for such is the wicked ambition which belongs to our nature, that when
the question relates to the origin of our salvation, we quickly form
diabolical imaginations about our own merits. Accordingly, we imagine
that God is reconciled to us, because he has reckoned us worthy that he
should look upon us. But Scripture everywhere extols his pure and
unmingled mercy, which sets aside all merits.

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span>And the words of Christ mean nothing else,
when he declares the cause to be in the love of God. For if we wish to
ascend higher, the Spirit shuts the door by the mouth of Paul, when he
informs us that this love was founded on *the purpose of his will*,
(<span id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>[Eph
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>..md)
And, indeed, it is very evident that Christ spoke in this manner, in
order to draw away men from the contemplation of themselves to look at
the mercy of God alone. Nor does he say that God was moved to deliver
us, because he perceived in us something that was worthy of so excellent
a blessing, but ascribes the glory of our deliverance entirely to his
love. And this is still more clear from what follows; for he adds, that
*God gave his Son to men, that they may not perish.* Hence it follows
that, until Christ bestow his aid in rescuing the lost, all are destined
to eternal destruction. This is also demonstrated by Paul from a
consideration of the time;

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span>for he loved us while we were still enemies
by sin,  
(<span id="ix.iii-p21.2"></span>[Rom.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii-p21.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span>And, indeed, where sin reigns, we shall
find nothing but the wrath of God, which draws death along with it. It
is mercy, therefore, that reconciles us to God, that he may likewise
restore us to life.

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span>This mode of expression, however, may
appear to be at variance with many passages of Scripture, which lay in
Christ the first foundation of the love of God to us, and show that out
of him we are hated by God. But we ought to remember — what I have
already stated — that the secret love with which the Heavenly Father
loved us in himself is higher than all other causes; but that the grace
which he wishes to be made known to us, and by which we are excited to
the hope of salvation, commences with the reconciliation which was
procured through Christ. For since he necessarily hates sin, how shall
we believe that we are loved by him, until atonement has been made for
those sins on account of which he is justly offended at us? Thus, the
love of Christ must intervene for the purpose of reconciling God to us,
before we have any experience of his fatherly kindness. But as we are
first informed that God, because he loved us, gave his Son to die for
us, so it is immediately added, that it is Christ alone on whom,
strictly speaking, faith ought to look.

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span>*He gave his only-begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth on him may not perish.* This, he says, is the proper
look of faith, to be fixed on Christ, in whom it beholds the breast of
God filled with love: this is a firm and enduring support, to rely on
the death of Christ as the only pledge of that love. The word
*only-begotten* is emphatic, (<span id="ix.iii-p24.1"></span>ἐμφατικὸν)
to magnify the fervor of the love of God towards us. For as men are not
easily convinced that God loves them, in order to remove all doubt, he
has expressly stated that we are so very dear to God that, on our
account, he did not even spare his *only-begotten* Son. Since,
therefore, God has most abundantly testified his love towards us,
whoever is not satisfied with this testimony, and still remains in
doubt, offers a high insult to Christ, as if he had been an ordinary man
given up at random to death. But we ought rather to consider that, in
proportion to the estimation in which God holds his *only-begotten Son*,
so much the more precious did our salvation appear to him, for the
ransom of which he chose that his *only-begotten Son* should die. To
this name Christ has a right, because he is by nature *the only Son of
God*; and he communicates this honor to us by adoption, when we are
engrafted into his body.

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span>*That whosoever believeth on him may not
perish.* It is a remarkable commendation of faith, that it frees us from
everlasting destruction. For he intended expressly to state that, though
we appear to have been born to death, undoubted deliverance is offered
to us by the faith of Christ; and, therefore, that we ought not to fear
death, which otherwise hangs over us. And he has employed the universal
term *whosoever,* both to invite all indiscriminately to partake of
life, and to cut off every excuse from unbelievers. Such is also the
import of the term *World*, which he formerly used; for though nothing
will be found in *the world* that is worthy of the favor of God, yet he
shows himself to be reconciled to the whole world, when he invites all
men without exception to the faith of Christ, which is nothing else than
an entrance into life.

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span>Let us remember, on the other hand, that
while *life* is promised universally to *all who believe* in Christ,
still faith is not common to all. For Christ is made known and held out
to the view of all, but the elect alone are they whose eyes God opens,
that they may seek him by faith. Here, too, is displayed a wonderful
effect of faith; for by it we receive Christ such as he is given to us
by the Father — that is, as having freed us from the condemnation of
eternal death, and made us heirs of eternal life, because, by the
sacrifice of his death, he has atoned for our sins, that nothing may
prevent God from acknowledging us as his sons. Since, therefore, faith
embraces Christ, with the efficacy of his death and the fruit of his
resurrection, we need not wonder if by it we obtain likewise the life of
Christ.

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span>Still it is not yet very evident why and
how faith bestows life upon us. Is it because Christ renews us by his
Spirit, that the righteousness of God may live and be vigorous in us; or
is it because, having been cleansed by his blood, we are accounted
righteous before God by a free pardon? It is indeed certain, that these
two things are always joined together; but as the certainty of salvation
is the subject now in hand, we ought chiefly to hold by this reason,
that we live, because God loves us freely by not imputing to us our
sins. For this reason sacrifice is expressly mentioned, by which,
together with sins, the curse and death are destroyed. I have already
explained the object of these two clauses,

<span id="ix.iii-p28"></span>which is, to inform us that in Christ we
regain the possession of life, of which we are destitute in ourselves;
for in this wretched condition of mankind, redemption, in the order of
time, goes before salvation.

<span id="ix.iii-p29"></span><span id="ix.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p30"></span>**17.** *For God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn the world.* It is a confirmation of the preceding
statement; for it was not in vain that God sent his own Son to us. He
came not to destroy; and therefore it follows, that it is the peculiar
office of the Son of God, that *all who believe* may obtain salvation by
him. There is now no reason why any man should be in a state of
hesitation, or of distressing anxiety, as to the manner in which he may
escape death, when we believe that it was the purpose of God that Christ
should deliver us from it. The word *world* is again repeated, that no
man may think himself wholly excluded, if he only keep the road of
faith.

<span id="ix.iii-p31"></span>The word *judge* (<span
id="ix.iii-p31.1"></span>πρίνω) is here put for condemn, as in many
other passages. When he declares that *he did not come to condemn the
world*, he thus points out the actual design of his coming; for what
need was there that Christ should come to destroy us who were utterly
ruined? We ought not, therefore, to look at any thing else in Christ,
than that God, out of his boundless goodness chose to extend his aid for
saving us who were lost; and whenever our sins press us — whenever Satan
would drive us to despair — we ought to hold out this shield, that God
is unwilling that we should be overwhelmed with everlasting destruction,
because he has appointed his Son to be the salvation of the *world*

<span id="ix.iii-p32"></span>When Christ says, in other passages, that
*he is come to judgment*, (<span id="ix.iii-p32.1"></span>[Joh
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)<span id="ix.iii-p32.1"></span>;.md)
when he is called *a stone of offense*, (<span
id="ix.iii-p32.2"></span>[1Pe 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007.md)<span
id="ix.iii-p32.2"></span>;) when he is said to be *set for the
destruction of many*, (<span id="ix.iii-p32.3"></span>[Lu
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)<span id="ix.iii-p32.3"></span>:.md)
this may be regarded as accidental, or as arising from a different
cause; for they who reject the grace offered in him deserve to find him
the Judge and Avenger of contempt so unworthy and base. A striking
instance of this may be seen in the Gospel; for though it is strictly

<span id="ix.iii-p33"></span>the power of God for salvation to every one
who believeth,  
(<span id="ix.iii-p33.2"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii-p33.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="ix.iii-p34"></span>the ingratitude of many causes it to become
to them death. Both have been well expressed by Paul, when he boasts of

<span id="ix.iii-p35"></span>having vengeance at hand, by which he will
punish all the adversaries of his doctrine after that the obedience of
the godly shall have been fulfilled,  
(<span id="ix.iii-p35.2"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii-p35.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.iii-p36"></span>The meaning amounts to this, that the
Gospel is especially, and in the first instance, appointed for
believers, that it may be salvation to them; but that afterwards
believers will not escape unpunished who, despising the grace of Christ,
chose to have him as the Author of death rather than of life.

<span id="ix.iii-p37"></span><span id="ix.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p38"></span>**18.** *He who believeth in him is not
condemned.* When he so frequently and so earnestly repeats, that all
believers are beyond danger of death, we may infer from it the great
necessity of firm and assured confidence, that the conscience may not be
kept perpetually in a state of trembling and alarm. He again declares
that, when we have *believed*, there is no remaining *condemnation*,
which he will afterwards explain more fully in the Fifth Chapter. The
present tense — *is not condemned* — *is* here used instead of the
future tense — *shall not be condemned* — *according* to the custom of
the Hebrew language; for he means that believers are safe from the fear
of condemnation.

<span id="ix.iii-p39"></span>*But he who believeth not is condemned
already* This means that there is no other remedy by which any human
being can escape death; or, in other words, that for all who reject the
life given to them in Christ, there remains nothing but death, since
life consists in nothing else than in faith. The past tense of the verb,
*is condemned already*, (<span id="ix.iii-p39.1"></span>ἤδη κέκριται,)
was used by him emphatically, (<span
id="ix.iii-p39.2"></span>ἐμφατικῶς,) to express more strongly that all
unbelievers are utterly ruined. But it ought to be observed that Christ
speaks especially of those whose wickedness shall be displayed in open
contempt of the Gospel. For though it is true that there never was any
other remedy for escaping death than that men should betake themselves
to Christ, yet as Christ here speaks of the preaching of the Gospel,
which was to be spread throughout the whole world, he directs his
discourse against those who deliberately and maliciously extinguish the
light which God had kindled.

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
3:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019.md)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**19.** And this is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world; and men loved darkness rather than light;
for their works were evil. **20.** For whosoever doeth what is evil
hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, that his works may not be
discovered. **21.** But he who doeth truth cometh to the light, that his
works may be made manifest, that they are done in God.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md)

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span><span id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>**19.** *And this is the condemnation* He
meets the murmurs and complaints, by which wicked men are wont to
censure — what they imagine to be the excessive rigour of God, when he
acts towards them with greater severity than they expected. All think it
harsh that they who do not believe in Christ should be devoted to
destruction. That no man may ascribe his *condemnation* to Christ, he
shows that every man ought to impute the blame to himself. The reason
is, that unbelief is a testimony of a bad conscience; and hence it is
evident that it is their own wickedness which hinders unbelievers from
approaching to Christ. Some think that he points out here nothing more
than the mark of *condemnation*; but, the design of Christ is, to
restrain the wickedness of men, that they may not, according to their
custom, dispute or argue with God, as if he treated them unjustly, when
he punishes unbelief with eternal death. He shows that such a
*condemnation* is just, and is not liable to any reproaches, not only
because those men act wickedly, who prefer *darkness* to *light*, and
refuse the *light* which is freely offered to them, but because that
*hatred of the light* arises only from a mind that is wicked and
conscious of its guilt. A beautiful appearance and lustre of holiness
may indeed be found in many, who, after all, oppose the Gospel; but,
though they appear to be holier than the angels, there is no room to
doubt that they are hypocrites, who reject the doctrine of Christ for no
other reason than because they love their lurking-places by which their
baseness may be concealed. Since, therefore, hypocrisy alone renders men
hateful to God, all are held convicted, because were it not that,
blinded by pride, they delight in their crimes, they would readily and
willingly receive the doctrine of the Gospel.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span><span id="ix.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>**20.** *For whosoever doeth what is evil.*
The meaning is, that *the light* is hateful to them for no other reason
than because they are wicked and desire to conceal their sins, as far as
lies in their power. Hence it follows that, by rejecting the remedy,
they may be said purposely to cherish the ground of their condemnation.
We are greatly mistaken, therefore, if we suppose that they who are
enraged against the Gospel are actuated by godly zeal, when, on the
contrary, they abhor and shun the light, that they may more freely
flatter themselves in *darkness*

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span><span id="ix.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>**21.** *But he who doeth truth* This
appears to be an improper and absurd statement, unless you choose to
admit that some are upright and true, before they have been renewed by
the Spirit of God, which does not at all agree with the uniform doctrine
of Scripture; for we know that faith is the root from which the fruits
of good works spring. To solve this difficulty, *Augustine* says, that
*to do truth* means “to acknowledge that we are miserable and destitute
of all power of doing good;” and, certainly, it is a true preparation
for faith, when a conviction of our poverty compels us to flee to the
grace of God. But all this is widely removed from Christ’s meaning, for
he intended simply to say that those who act sincerely desire nothing
more earnestly than *light*, *that their works may be tried*; because,
when such a trial has been made, it becomes more evident that, in the
sight of God, they speak the *truth* and are free from all deceit. Now
it would be inconclusive reasoning, were we to infer from this, that men
have a good conscience before they have faith; for Christ does not say
that the elect believe, so as to deserve the praise of good works, but
only what unbelievers would do, if they had not a bad conscience.

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span>Christ employed the word *truth*, because,
when we are deceived by the outward lustre of works, we do not consider
what is concealed within. Accordingly, he says, that men who are upright
and free from hypocrisy willingly go into the presence of God, who alone
is the competent Judge of our works. For those *works* are said to be
done *in God* or *according to God*, which are approved by Him, and
which are good according to His rule. Hence let us learn that we must
not judge of *works* in any other way than by bringing them to the
*light* of the Gospel, because our reason is wholly blind.

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span><span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>[John
3:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>**22.** After these things came Jesus, and his
disciples, into the land of Judea, and there he remained with them and
baptized. **23.** And John also was baptizing in Enon, near Salim;
because there were many waters there. They came therefore and were
baptized. **24.** For John was not yet cast into prison. **25.** A
question then arose between the disciples of John and the Jews about
purifying. **26.** And they came to John, and said to him, Rabbi, he who
was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou gavest testimony, lo, he
baptizeth, and all men come to him. **27.** John answered and said, A
man cannot receive any thing, unless it be given to him from heaven.
**28.** Yourselves are witnesses to me, that I said, I am not Christ,
but was sent before him.

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span><span id="ix.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>**22.** *After these things came Jesus.* It is
probable that Christ, when the feast was past, came into that part of
Judea which was in the vicinity of the town *Enon*, which was situated
in the tribe of Manasseh. The Evangelist says that *there were many
waters there*, and these were not so abundant in Judea. Now geographers
tell us, that these two towns, *Enon* and *Salim*, were not far from the
confluence of the river Jordan and the brook Jabbok; and they add that
Scythopolis was near them. From these words, we may infer that John and
Christ administered baptism by plunging the whole body beneath the
water; though we ought not to give ourselves any great uneasiness about
the outward rite, provided that it agree with the spiritual truth, and
with the Lord’s appointment and rule. So far as we are able to
conjecture, the; vicinity of those places caused various reports to be
circulated, and many discussions to arise, about the Law, about the
worship of God, and about the condition of the Church, in consequence of
two persons who administered baptism having arisen at the same time. For
when the Evangelist says that *Christ baptized*, I refer this to the
commencement of his ministry; namely, that he then began to exercise
publicly the office which was appointed to him by the Father. And though
Christ did this by his disciples, yet he is here named as the Author of
the baptism, without mentioning his ministers, who did nothing but in
his name and by his command. On this subject, we shall have something
more to say in the beginning of the next Chapter.

<span id="ix.v-p6"></span><span id="ix.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p7"></span>**25.** *A question then arose.* Not without a
good reason does the Evangelist relate that *a question arose from the
disciples of John*; for just in proportion as they were ill-informed
about doctrine, they are so much the more eager to enter into debate, as
ignorance is always bold and presumptuous. If others had attacked them,
they might have been excused; but when they themselves, though unfit to
maintain the contest, voluntarily provoke the Jews, it is a rash and
foolish proceeding. Now the words mean, that “the *question* was raised
by them;” and not only were they to blame for taking up a matter which
they did not understand, and speaking about it rashly and beyond the
measure of their knowledge; but another fault — not less than the former
— was, that they did not so much intend to maintain the lawfulness of
Baptism as to defend the cause of their master, that his authority might
remain unimpaired. In both respects, they deserved reproof, because, not
understanding what was the real nature of Baptism, they expose the holy
ordinance of God to ridicule, and because, by sinful ambition, they
undertake to defend the cause of their master against Christ.

<span id="ix.v-p8"></span>It is evident, therefore, that they were
astonished and confounded by a single word, when it was represented to
them that *Christ also was baptizing*; for while their attention was
directed to the person of a man, and to outward appearance,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) they gave themselves less concern about
the doctrine. We are taught, by their example, into what mistakes those
men fall who are actuated by a sinful desire to please men rather than
by a zeal for God; and we are likewise reminded that the single object
which we ought to have in view and to promote by all means is, that
Christ alone may have the pre-eminence.

<span id="ix.v-p10"></span>*About purifying* The *question* was *about
purifying*; for the Jews had various baptisms and washings  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) enjoined by the Law; and not satisfied
with those which God had appointed,  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) they carefully observed many others which
had been handed down from their ancestors. When they find that, in
addition to so great a number and variety of *purifyings*, a new method
of *purifying* is introduced by Christ and by John, they look upon it as
absurd.

<span id="ix.v-p13"></span><span id="ix.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p14"></span>**26.** *To whom thou gavest testimony.* By
this argument they endeavor either to make Christ inferior to John, or
to show that John, by doing him honor, had laid him under obligations;
for they reckon that John conferred a favor on Christ by adorning him
with such honorable titles. As if it had not been the duty of John to
make such a proclamation, or rather, as if it had not been John’s
highest dignity to be the herald of the Son of God. Nothing could have
been more unreasonable than to make Christ inferior to John, because his
testimony was highly favorable; for we know what John’s testimony was.
The expression which they use — *all men come to Christ* — is the
language of envious persons,  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) and
proceeds from sinful ambition; for they are afraid that the crowd will
immediately forsake their master.

<span id="ix.v-p16"></span><span id="ix.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p17"></span>**27.** *A man cannot receive any thing.*
Some refer these words to Christ, as if John accused the disciples of
wicked presumption in opposition to God, by endeavoring to deprive
Christ of what the Father had given to him. They suppose the meaning to
be this: “That within so short a time he has risen to so great honor, is
the work of God; and therefore it is in vain for you to attempt to
degrade him whom God with his own hand has raised on high.” Others think
that it is an exclamation into which he indignantly breaks forth,
because his disciples had hitherto made so little progress. And
certainly it was excessively absurd that they should still endeavor to
reduce to the rank of ordinary men him who, they had so often heard, was
the Christ, that he might not rise above his own servants; and,
therefore, John might justly have said that it is useless to spend time
in instructing men, because they are dull and stupid, until they are
renewed in mind.

<span id="ix.v-p18"></span>But I rather agree with the opinion of those
who explain it as applying to John, as asserting that it is not in his
power, or in theirs, to make him great, because the measure of us all is
to be what God intended us to be. For if even the Son of God *took not
that honour to himself*, (<span id="ix.v-p18.1"></span>[Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span id="ix.v-p18.1"></span>,.md)
what man of the ordinary rank would venture to desire more than what the
Lord has given him? This single thought, if it were duly impressed on
the minds of us all, would be abundantly sufficient for restraining
ambition; and were ambition corrected and destroyed, the plague of
contentions would likewise be removed. How comes it then, that every man
exalts himself more than is proper, but because we do not depend on the
Lord, so as to be satisfied with the rank which he assigns to us?

<span id="ix.v-p19"></span><span id="ix.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p20"></span>**28.** *You are witnesses to me.* John
expostulates with his disciples that they did not give credit to his
statements. He had often warned them that he was not the Christ; and,
therefore, it only remained that he should be a servant and subject to
the Son of God along with others. And this passage is worthy of notice;
for, by affirming *that he is not the Christ*, he reserves nothing for
himself but to be subject to the head, and to serve in the Church as one
of the rest, and not to be so highly exalted as to obscure the honor of
the Head. He says that *he was sent before,* to prepare the way for
Christ, as kings are wont to have heralds or forerunners.

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span><span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
3:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>**29.** He who hath the bride is the
bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who standeth, and heareth
him, rejoiceth exceedingly on account of the bridegroom’s voice. This my
joy, therefore, is fulfilled. **30.** He must increase, but I must
decrease. **31.** He who cometh from above is above all; he who is from
the earth is of the earth, and speaketh  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) of the earth: he who cometh from heaven
is above all. **32.** And what he hath seen and heard, this he
testifieth, and no man receiveth his testimony. **33.** But he who
receiveth his testimony hath sealed that God is true. **34.** For he
whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God, for God giveth not the
Spirit by measure.

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span><span id="ix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p6"></span>**29.** *He who hath the bride.* By this
comparison, he confirms more fully the statement, that it is Christ
alone who is excluded from the ordinary rank of men. For as he who
marries a wife does not call and invite his friends to the marriage, in
order to prostitute the bride to them, or, by giving up his own rights,
to allow them to partake with him of the nuptial bed, but rather that
the marriage, being honored by them, may be rendered more sacred; so
Christ does not call his ministers to the office of teaching, in order
that, by conquering the Church, they may claim dominion over it, but
that he may make use of their faithful labors for associating them with
himself. It is a great and lofty distinction, that men are appointed
over the Church, to represent the person of the Son of God. They are,
therefore, like *the friends* whom *the bridegroom* brings with him,
that they may accompany him in celebrating the marriage; but we must
attend to the distinction, that ministers, being mindful of their rank,
may not appropriate to themselves what belongs exclusively to *the
bridegroom* The whole amounts to this, that all the eminence which
teachers may possess among themselves ought not to hinder Christ from
ruling alone in his Church, or from governing it alone by his word.

<span id="ix.vi-p7"></span>This comparison frequently occurs in
Scripture, when the Lord intends to express the sacred bond of adoption,
by which he binds us to himself. For as he offers himself to be truly
enjoyed by us, that he may be ours, so he justly claims from us that
mutual fidelity and love which the wife owes to her husband. This
marriage is entirely fulfilled in Christ, *whose flesh and bones* we
are, as Paul informs us, (<span id="ix.vi-p7.1"></span>[Eph
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030)<span id="ix.vi-p7.1"></span>..md)
The chastity demanded by him consists chiefly in the obedience of the
Gospel, that we may not suffer ourselves to be led aside from its pure
simplicity, as the same Apostle teaches us, (<span
id="ix.vi-p7.2"></span>[2 Cor. 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi-p7.2"></span>..md) We
must, therefore, be subject to Christ alone, he must be our only Head,
we must not turn aside a hair’s-breadth from the simple doctrine of the
Gospel, he alone must have the highest glory, that he may retain the
right and authority of being a bridegroom to us.

<span id="ix.vi-p8"></span>But what are ministers to do? Certainly, the
Son of God calls them, that they may perform their duty to him in
conducting the sacred marriage; and, therefore, their duty is, to take
care, in every way, that the *spouse* — who is committed to their charge
— may be presented by them *as a chaste virgin* to her husband; which
Paul, in the passage already quoted, boasts of having done. But they who
draw the Church to themselves rather than to Christ are guilty of basely
violating the marriage which they ought to have honored. And the greater
the honor which Christ confers on us, by making us the guardians of his
spouse, so much the more heinous is our want of fidelity, if we do not
endeavor to maintain and defend his right.

<span id="ix.vi-p9"></span>*This my joy therefore is fulfilled.* He
means that he has obtained the fulfillment of all his desires, and that
he has nothing further to wish, when he sees Christ reigning, and men
listening to him as he deserves. Whoever shall have such affections
that, laying aside all regard to himself, he shall extol Christ and be
satisfied with seeing Christ honored, will be faithful and successful in
ruling the Church; but, whoever shall swerve from that end in the
slightest degree will be a base adulterer, and will do nothing else than
corrupt the spouse of Christ.

<span id="ix.vi-p10"></span><span id="ix.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p11"></span>**30.** *He must increase.* John the Baptist
proceeds farther; for, having formerly been raised by the Lord to the
highest dignity, he shows that this was only for a time, but now that
*the Sun of Righteousness*, (<span id="ix.vi-p11.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi-p11.1"></span>.md) has
arisen, he must give way; and, therefore, he not only scatters and
drives away the empty fumes of honor which had been rashly and
ignorantly heaped upon him by men, but also is exceedingly careful that
the true and lawful honor which the Lord had bestowed on him may not
obscure the glory of Christ. Accordingly, he tells us that the reason
why he had been hitherto accounted a great Prophet was, that for a time
only he was placed in so lofty a station, until Christ came, to whom he
must surrender his office. In the meantime, he declares that he will
most willingly endure to be reduced to nothing, provided that Christ
occupy and fill the whole world with his rays; and this zeal of John all
pastors of the Church ought to imitate by stooping with the head and
shoulders to elevate Christ.

<span id="ix.vi-p12"></span><span id="ix.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p13"></span>**31.** *He who cometh from above.* By
another comparison he shows how widely Christ differs from all the rest,
and how far he is above them; for he compares him to a king or
distinguished general, who, speaking from his lofty seat, ought to be
heard with reverence for his authority, but shows that it is enough for
himself to speak from the lowest footstool of Christ.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) In the second clause the old Latin
translation has only once the words, *is of the earth;* but the Greek
manuscripts agree in repeating the words twice. I suspect that ignorant
men considered the repetition to be superfluous, and therefore erased
it; but the meaning is: *he who is of earth* gives evidence of his
descent, and remains in an earthly rank according to the condition of
his nature. He maintains that it is peculiar to Christ alone to speak
*from above*, because *he came from heaven*

<span id="ix.vi-p15"></span>But it may be asked, Did not John also *come
from heaven*, as to his calling and office, and was it not therefore the
duty of men to hear the Lord speaking by his mouth? For he appears to do
injustice to the heavenly doctrine which he delivers. I reply, this was
not said absolutely, but by comparison. If ministers be separately
considered, they speak as *from heaven*, with the highest authority,
what God commanded them; but, as soon as they begin to be contrasted
with Christ, they must no longer be anything. Thus the Apostle,
comparing the Law with the Gospel, says,

<span id="ix.vi-p16"></span>Since they escaped not who despised him that
spoke on earth, beware lest you despise him who is from heaven,  
(<span id="ix.vi-p16.2"></span>[Heb
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025)<span id="ix.vi-p16.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.vi-p17"></span>Christ, therefore, wishes to be acknowledged
in his ministers, but in such a manner that he may remain the only Lord,
and that they may be satisfied with the rank of servants; but especially
when a comparison is made, he wishes to be so distinguished that he
alone may be exalted.

<span id="ix.vi-p18"></span><span id="ix.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p19"></span>**32.** *And what he hath seen and heard.*
John proceeds in the discharge of his office; for, in order to procure
disciples for Christ, he commends Christ’s doctrine as certain, because
he utters nothing but what he has received from the Father. *Seeing* and
*hearing* are contrasted with doubtful opinions, unfounded rumors, and
every kind of falsehoods; for he means that Christ teaches nothing but
what has been fully ascertained. But some one will say that little
credit is due to him who has nothing but *what he has heard.* I reply,
this word denotes that Christ has been taught by the Father, so that he
brings forward nothing but what is divine, or, in other words, what has
been revealed to him by God.

<span id="ix.vi-p20"></span>Now this belongs to the whole person of
Christ, so far as the Father sent him into the world as His ambassador
and interpreter. He afterwards charges the world with ingratitude, in
basely and wickedly rejecting such an undoubted and faithful interpreter
of God. In this way he meets the offense which might cause many to turn
aside from the faith, and might hinder or retard the progress of many;
for, as we are accustomed to depend too much on the judgment of the
world, a considerable number of persons judge of the Gospel by the
contempt of the world, or at least, where they see it everywhere
rejected, they are prejudiced by that event, and are rendered more
unwilling and more slow to believe. And, therefore, whenever we see such
obstinacy in the world, let this admonition hold us in constant
obedience to the Gospel, that it is truth which came from God. When he
says that NO-MAN*, receiveth his testimony,* he means that there are
very few and almost no believers, when compared with the vast crowd of
unbelievers.

<span id="ix.vi-p21"></span><span id="ix.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p22"></span>**33.** *But he who receiveth his
testimony.* Here he exhorts and encourages the godly to embrace boldly
the doctrine of the Gospel, as if he had said that there was no reason
why they should be ashamed or uneasy on account of their small number,
since they have God as the Author of their faith, who alone abundantly
supplies to us the place of all the rest. And, therefore, though the
whole world should refuse or withhold faith in the Gospel, this ought
not to prevent good men from giving their assent to God. They have
something on which they may safely rest, when they know that to believe
the Gospel is nothing else than to assent to the truths which God has
revealed. Meanwhile, we learn that it is peculiar to faith to rely on
God, and to be confirmed by his words; for there can be no assent,
unless God have, first of all, come forward and spoken. By this doctrine
faith is not only distinguished from all human inventions, but likewise
from doubtful and wavering opinions; for it must correspond to the truth
of God, which is free from all doubt, and therefore, as God cannot lie,
it would be absurd that faith should waver. Fortified by this defense,
whatever contrivances Satan may employ in his attempts to disturb and
shake us, we shall always remain victorious.

<span id="ix.vi-p23"></span>Hence, too, we are reminded how acceptable
and precious a sacrifice in the sight of God faith is. As nothing is
more dear to him than his truth, so we cannot render to him more
acceptable worship than when we acknowledge by our faith that He is
true, for then we ascribe that honor which truly belongs to him. On the
other hand, we cannot offer to him a greater insult than not to believe
the Gospel; for he cannot be deprived of his truth without taking away
all his glory and majesty. His truth is in some sort closely linked with
the Gospel, and it is his will that there it should be recognized.
Unbelievers, therefore, as far as lies in their power, leave to God
nothing whatever; not that their wickedness overthrows the faithfulness
of God, but because they do not hesitate to charge God with falsehood.
If we are not harder than stones, this lofty title by which faith is
adorned ought to kindle in our minds the most ardent love of it; for how
great is the honor which God confers on poor worthless men, when they,
who by nature are nothing else than falsehood and vanity, are thought
worthy of attesting by their signature the sacred truth of God?

<span id="ix.vi-p24"></span><span id="ix.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p25"></span>**34.** *For he whom God hath sent speaketh
the words of God.* He confirms the preceding statement, for he shows
that we have actually to do with God, when we receive the doctrine of
Christ; because Christ proceeded from none else than from the Heavenly
Father. It is, therefore, God alone who speaks to us by him; and,
indeed, we do not assign to the doctrine of Christ all that it deserves,
unless we acknowledge it to be divine.

<span id="ix.vi-p26"></span>*For God giveth not the Spirit by measure.*
This passage is explained in two ways. Some extend it to the ordinary
dispensation in this manner: that God, who is the inexhaustible fountain
of all benefits, does not in the least degree diminish his resources,
when he largely and plentifully bestows his gifts on men. They who draw
from any vessel what they give to others come at last to the bottom; but
there is no danger that any thing of this sort can happen with God, nor
will the abundance of his gifts ever be so large that he cannot go
beyond it, whenever he shall be pleased to make a new exercise of
liberality. This exposition appears to have some plausibility, for the
sentence is indefinite; that is, it does not expressly point out any
person.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md)

<span id="ix.vi-p28"></span>But I am more disposed to follow Augustine,
who explains that it was said concerning Christ. Nor is there any force
in the objection, that no express mention is made of Christ in this
clause, since all ambiguity is removed by the next clause, in which that
which might seem to have been said indiscriminately about many is
limited to Christ. For these words were unquestionably added for the
sake of explanation, that *the Father hath given all things into the
hand of his Son*, *because he loveth him*, and ought therefore to be
read as placed in immediate connection. The verb in the present tense —
*giveth* — denotes, as it were, a continued act; for though Christ was
all at once endued with the Spirit in the highest perfection, yet, as he
continually flows, as it were, from a source, and is widely diffused,
there is no impropriety in saying that Christ now receives him from the
Father. But if any one choose to interpret it more simply, it is no
unusual thing that there should be a change of tenses in such verbs, and
that g*iveth* should be put for *hath given*  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md)

<span id="ix.vi-p30"></span>The meaning is now plain, that *the Spirit
was not given* to Christ *by measure,* as if the power of grace which he
possesses were in any way limited; as Paul teaches that

<span id="ix.vi-p31"></span>to every one is given according to the
measure of the gift,  
(<span id="ix.vi-p31.2"></span>[Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi-p31.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="ix.vi-p32"></span>so that there is no one who alone has full
abundance. For while this is the mutual bond of brotherly intercourse
between us, that no man separately considered has every thing that he
needs, but all require the aid of each other, Christ differs from us in
this respect, that the Father has poured out upon him an unlimited
abundance of his Spirit. And, certainly, it is proper that the Spirit
should dwell without measure in him, *that we may all draw out of his
fullness*, as we have seen in the first chapter. And to this relates
what immediately follows, that *the Father hath given all things into
his hand;* for by these words John the Baptist not only declares the
excellence of Christ, but, at the same time, points out the end and use
of the riches with which he is endued; namely, that Christ, having been
appointed by the Father to be the administrator, he distributes to every
one as he chooses, and as he finds to be necessary; as Paul explains
more fully in the fourth chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, which
I lately quoted. Although God enriches his own people in a variety of
ways, this is peculiar to Christ alone, that he has *all things in his
hand*

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
3:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035.md)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**35.** The Father loveth the Son, and hath
given all things into his hand. **36.** He who believeth in the Son hath
eternal life; but he who believeth not in the Son  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abideth on him.

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span><span id="ix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span>**35.** *The Father loveth the Son.* But
what is the meaning of this reason? Does he regard all others with
hatred? The answer is easy, that he does not speak of the common love
with which God regards men whom he has created, or his other works, but
of that peculiar love which, beginning with the Son, flows from him to
all the creatures. For that love with which, embracing the Son, he
embraces us also in him, leads him to communicate all his benefits to us
by his hand.

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span><span id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span>**36.** *He who believeth in the Son.* This
was added, not only to inform us that we ought to ask all good things
from Christ, but likewise to make us, acquainted with the manner in
which they are enjoyed. He shows that enjoyment consists in faith; and
not without reason, since by means of it we possess Christ, who brings
along with him both righteousness and *life,* which is the fruit of
righteousness. When faith in Christ is declared to be the cause of
*life,* we learn from it that *life* is to be found in Christ alone, and
that in no other way do we become partakers of it than by the grace of
Christ himself. But all are not agreed as to the way in which the *life*
of Christ comes to us. Some understand it thus: “as by believing we
receive the Spirit, who regenerates us in order to justification, by
that very regeneration we obtain salvation.” For my own part, though I
acknowledge it to be true, that we are renewed by faith, so that the
Spirit of Christ governs us, yet I say that we ought first to take into
consideration the free forgiveness of sins, through which we are
accepted by God. Again, I say that on this all our confidence of
salvation is founded, and in this it consists; because justification
before God cannot be reckoned to us in any other way than when he does
not impute to us our sins.

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span>*But he who believeth not in the Son.* As he
held out life in Christ, by the sweetness of which he might allure us,
so now he adjudges to eternal death all who do not believe in Christ.
And, in this way, he magnifies the kindness of God, when he warns us,
that there is no other way of escaping death, unless Christ deliver us;
for this sentence depends on the fact, that we are all accursed in Adam.
Now if it be the office of Christ to save what was lost, they who reject
the salvation offered in him are justly suffered to remain in death. We
have just now said that this belongs peculiarly to those who reject the
gospel which has been revealed to them; for though all mankind are
involved in the same destruction, yet a heavier and double vengeance
awaits those who refuse to have the Son of God as their deliverer. And,
indeed, it cannot be doubted that the Baptist, when he denounced death
against unbelievers, intended to excite us, by the dread of it, to the
exercise of faith in Christ. It is also manifest; that all the
righteousness which the world thinks that it has out of Christ is
condemned and reduced to nothing. Nor is any one enabled to object that
it is unjust that those who are otherwise devout and holy should perish,
because they do not believe; for it is folly to imagine that there is
any holiness in men, unless it have been given to them by Christ.

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span>*To see life* is here put for “enjoying
life.” But to express more clearly that no hope remains for us, unless
we are delivered by Christ, he says that *the wrath of God abideth* on
unbelievers. Though I am not dissatisfied with the view given by
Augustine, that John the Baptist used the word *abideth*, in order to
inform us that, from the womb we were appointed to death, because we are
all born *the children of wrath*, (<span id="ix.vii-p10.1"></span>[Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span id="ix.vii-p10.1"></span>..md)
At least, I willingly admit an allusion of this sort, provided we hold
the true and simple meaning to be what I have stated, that death hangs
over all unbelievers, and keeps them oppressed and overwhelmed in such a
manner that they can never escape. And, indeed, though already the
reprobate are naturally condemned, yet by their unbelief they draw down
on themselves a new death. And it is for this purpose that the power of
binding was given to the ministers of the gospel; for it is a just
vengeance on the obstinacy of men, that they who shake off the salutary
yoke of God should bind themselves with the chains of death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc34008.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span> Our Author’s views of the etymology of the
term are fully stated and examined, *Harmony*, volume 1 page 281; but it
cannot be supposed that this *Commentary on the Gospel by John*, which
appeared in the year 1553, makes reference to the *Harmony*, which did
not appear till 1555. The priority of the date (1548) of the *Commentary
on the Epistle to the Philippians* more naturally sends us to consult
that passage, in which Paul says that he was a *Pharisee*, (3:5.) —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc34008.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="ix.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>De sa grandeur
et reputation.”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc34008.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p12.1"></span>Qui signific
Maistre.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc34008.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="ix.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p17.1"></span>L’oyant
seulement comme en pensant ailleurs, et sans en tenir grand conte:” —
“merely listening to it as if he were thinking of something else, and
without caring much about it.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc34008.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="ix.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p28.1"></span>Qui imaginoit
que los ames apres la mort de leurs corps cntroyent dedans des autres
corps.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc34008.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="ix.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p33"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p33.1"></span>Monstrent bien
qu’ils n’en entendent rien.”

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc34008.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>Pour l’amour
de nous.”

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc34008.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p3.1"></span>Car personne
n’est monte;” — “For no one hath ascended.”

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc34008.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p15.1"></span>Sur toutes
manieres de gens.”

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc34008.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p3.1"></span>Faites selon
Dieu;” — “done according to God.”

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc34008.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="ix.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p9.1"></span>Et apparence
exterieure.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc34008.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="ix.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p11.1"></span>De baptesmes
et lavemens.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc34008.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="ix.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p12.1"></span>Que Dieu avoit
instituez.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc34008.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="ix.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p15.1"></span>C’est une
parole de gens envieux.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc34008.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="ix.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.vi-p3.1"></span>Et parle de la
terre, *ou*, *comme issu de terre*;” — “and speaketh of the earthy *or*,
*as having proceeded from the earth*.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc34008.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="ix.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.vi-p14.1"></span>Au
marchepied de Christ.”

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc34008.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="ix.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.vi-p27.1"></span>C’est a
dire, ne determine point certaine personne.”

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc34008.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="ix.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="ix.vi-p29.1"></span>Et que
*Donne* soit mis pour *et donne*.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc34008.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="ix.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.vii-p3.1"></span>Qui ne croit
point au Fils, *ou*, *qui desobeit au Fils;*” — “who believeth not in
the Son, *or*, *who disobeyeth the Son*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc34009.md)
