[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34013)  [Next](cc34015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[John
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Jesus, passing by, saw a man blind
from his birth. **2.** And his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, who
hath sinned, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? **3.**
Jesus answered, Neither did this man sin, nor his parents; but that the
works of God may be displayed in him. **4.** I must work the works of
him who sent me, while it is day; the night cometh, when no man can
work. **5.** While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span><span id="xv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Jesus saw a man blind.* In this
chapter, the Evangelist describes the restoration of sight to the blind
man, at the same time mingling doctrine, to point out the fruit of the
miracle. *From his birth.* This circumstance gives an additional display
of the power of Christ; for *blindness*, which he had brought from his
mother’s womb, and which he had endured till he arrived at the age of a
man, could not be cured by human remedies. This gave occasion to the
disciples to propose a question, Of whose sin was this the punishment?

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span><span id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**2.** *Rabbi, who hath sinned, this man, or
his parents?* In the first place, as Scripture testifies that all the
sufferings to which the human race is liable proceed from sin, whenever
we see any person wretched, we cannot prevent the thought from
immediately presenting itself to our minds, that the distresses which
fall heavily upon him are punishments inflicted by the hand of God. But
here we commonly err in three ways.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>First, while every man is ready to censure
others with extreme bitterness, there are few who apply to themselves,
as they ought to do, the same severity. If my brother meets with
adversity, I instantly acknowledge the judgment of God; but if God
chastises me with a heavier stroke, I wink at my sins. But in
considering punishments, every man ought to begin with himself, and to
spare himself as little as any other person. Wherefore, if we wish to be
candid judges in this matter, let us learn to be quick in discerning our
own evils rather than those of others.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>The second error lies in excessive severity;
for no sooner is any man touched by the hand of God, than we conclude
that this shows deadly hatred, and we turn small offenses into crimes,
and almost despair of his salvation. On the contrary, by extenuating our
sins, we scarcely think that we have committed very small offenses, when
we have committed a very aggravated crime.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>Thirdly, we do wrong in this respect, that we
pronounce condemnation on all, without exception, whom God visits with
the cross or with tribulation.  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)
What we have lately said is undoubtedly true, that all our distresses
arise from sin; but God afflicts his own people for various reasons. For
as there are some men whose crimes he does not punish in this world, but
whose punishment he delays till the future life, that he may inflict on
them more dreadful torments; so he often treats his believing people
with greater severity, not because they have sinned more grievously, but
that he may mortify the sins of the flesh for the future. Sometimes,
too, he does not look at their sins, but only tries their obedience, or
trains them to patience; as we see that holy Job — a righteous man, and
one that feareth God,  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) is
miserable beyond all other men; and yet it is not on account of his sins
that he is sore distressed, but the design of God was different, which
was, that his piety might be more fully ascertained even in adversity.
They are false interpreters, therefore, who say that all afflictions,
without any distinction, are sent on account of sins; as if the measure
of punishments were equal, or as if God looked to nothing else in
punishing men than to what every man deserves.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>Wherefore, there are two things here that
ought to be observed: that

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>judgment begins, for the most part, at the
house of God,  
(<span id="xv.i-p14.2"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="xv.i-p14.2"></span>;)

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>and, consequently, that while he passes by
the wicked, he punishes his own people with severity when they have
offended, and that, in correcting the sinful actions of the Church, his
stripes are far more severe. Next, we ought to observe that there are
various reasons why he afflicts men; for he gave Peter and Paul, not
less than the most wicked robbers, into the hands of the executioner.
Hence we infer, that we cannot always put our finger on the causes of
the punishments which men endure.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>When the disciples, following the common
opinion, put the question, what kind of sin it was that the God of
heaven punished, as soon as this man was born, they do not speak so
absurdly as when they ask *if* *he sinned* before he was born. And yet
this question, absurd as it is, was drawn from a common opinion which at
that time prevailed; for it is very evident from other passages of
Scripture, that they believed the *transmigration* (<span
id="xv.i-p16.1"></span>μετεμψύχωσις) of which Pythagoras dreamed, or
that souls passed from one body into another.  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) Hence we see that the curiosity of men
is an exceedingly deep labyrinth, especially when presumption is added
to it. They saw that some were born lame, some squint-eyed, some
entirely blind, and some with a deformed body; but instead of adoring,
as they ought to have done, the hidden judgments of God, they wished to
have a manifest reason in his works. Thus through their rashness they
fell into those childish fooleries, so as to think that a soul, when it
has completed one life, passes into a new body, and there endures the
punishment due on account of the life which is already past. Nor are the
Jews in the present day ashamed to proclaim this foolish dream in their
synagogues, as if it were a revelation from heaven.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>We are taught by this example, that we ought
to be exceedingly careful not to push our inquiries into the judgments
of God beyond the measure of sobriety, but the wanderings and errors of
our understanding hurry and plunge us into dreadful gulfs. It was truly
monstrous, that so gross an error should have found a place among the
elect people of God, in the midst of which the light of heavenly wisdom
had been kindled by the Law and the Prophets. But if God punished so
severely their presumption, there is nothing better for us, in
considering the works of God, than such modesty that, when the reason of
them is concealed, our minds shall break out into admiration, and our
tongues shall immediately exclaim, “Thou art righteous, O Lord, and thy
judgments are right though they cannot be comprehended.”

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>It is not without reason that the disciples
put the question, *Did his parents sin*? For though the innocent son is
not punished for his father’s fault, but

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>the soul which hath sinned shall itself
die,  
(<span id="xv.i-p20.2"></span>[Eze
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="xv.i-p20.2"></span>,)

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>yet it is not an empty threatening, that the
Lord throws the crimes of the parents into the bosom of the children,
and

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>revenges them to the third and fourth
generation,  
(<span id="xv.i-p22.2"></span>[Ex
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>Thus it frequently happens that the anger of
God rests on one house for many generations; and, as he blesses the
children of believers for the sake of their fathers, so he also rejects
a wicked offspring, destining the children, by a just punishment, to the
same ruin with their fathers. Nor can any man complain, on this account,
that he is unjustly punished on account of the sin of another man; for,
where the grace of the Spirit is wanting, from bad crows — as the
proverb says  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) — there must be
produced bad eggs. This gave reason to the apostles to doubt if the Lord
punished, in the son, some crime of *his parents*.

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span><span id="xv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span>**3.** Neither did this man sin, nor his
parents. Christ does not absolutely say that the blind man, and his
parents, were free from all blame; but he declares that we ought not to
seek the cause of the blindness in sin. And this is what I have already
said, that God has sometimes another object in view than to punish the
sins of men, when he sends afflictions to them. Consequently, when the
causes of afflictions are concealed, we ought to restrain curiosity,
that we may neither dishonor God nor be malicious towards our brethren.
Wherefore, Christ assigns another reason. This man, he says, was born
blind, —

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>*That the works of God might be manifested in
him.* He does not, say a single work, but uses the plural number,
*works*; for, so long as he was blind, there was exhibited in him a
proof of the severity of God, from which others might learn to fear and
to humble themselves. It was afterwards followed by the benefit of his
cure and deliverance,  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) in which
the astonishing goodness of God was strikingly displayed. So then Christ
intended, by these words, to excite in his disciples the expectation of
a miracle; but at the same time reminds them in a general manner, that
this must be abundantly exhibited on the theater of the world, as the
true and lawful cause, when God glorifies his name. Nor have men any
right to complain of God, when he makes them the instruments of his
glory in both ways, whether he shows himself to be merciful or severe.

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span><span id="xv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span>**4.** *I must work the works of him who hath
sent me.* He now testifies that he has been sent for the purpose of
manifesting the kindness of God in giving sight to the blind man. He
borrows also a comparison from the ordinary custom of life; for, when
the sun is risen, man rises to labor, but the night is allotted to
repose, as it is said,

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>The sun riseth; man goeth forth to his work,
and to his labor, till the evening  
(<span id="xv.i-p31.2"></span>[Ps.
104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)<span id="xv.i-p31.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>He therefore employs the word *Day* to denote
the time which the Father had fixed, during which he must finish *the
work* assigned him; in the same manner as every man who has been called
to some public office ought to be employed in what may be called his
*daily* task, to perform what the nature of his office demands. Hence
too we ought to deduce a universal rule, that to every man the course of
his life may be called his *day* Wherefore, as the short duration of the
light ought to excite laborers to industry and toil, that the darkness
of the night may not come on them by surprise, ere their exertions are
well begun, so, when we see that a short period of life is allotted to
us, we ought to be ashamed of languishing in idleness. In short, as soon
as God enlightens us by calling us, we ought to make no delay, that the
opportunity may not be lost.

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span><span id="xv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span>**5.** *While I am in the world, I am the
light of the world.* I consider this to have been added, by way of
anticipation; for it might have been thought strange that Christ should
speak of his time of working as limited, as if there were danger that
the night should come upon him by surprise, as it does on other men.
Thus, while he makes a distinction between himself and others, still he
says that his time of working is limited. For he compares himself to the
sun which, though it illuminates the whole earth by its brightness, yet,
when it sets, takes away the day along with it. In this manner he states
that his death will resemble the setting of the sun; not that his death
extinguishes or obscures his light, but that it withdraws the view of it
from the world. At the same time, he shows that, when he was manifested
in flesh, that was truly the time of the day-light of the world. For
though God gave light in all ages, yet Christ, by his coming, diffused a
new and unwonted splendor. Hence he infers that this was an exceedingly
fit and proper time, and that it might be said to be a very bright day,
for illustrating the glory of God, when God intended to make a more
striking exhibition of himself in his wonderful works.

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>But here arises another question. After the
death of Christ, the power of God shone more illustriously, both in the
fruit of the doctrine and in miracles; and Paul applies this strictly to
the time of his own preaching, that

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>God, who from the beginning of the world
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, at that time shone in the
face of Christ by the Gospel,  
(<span id="xv.i-p36.2"></span>[2Co
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="xv.i-p36.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span>And does Christ now give less light to the
world than when he was in the presence of men, and conversed with them?
I reply, when Christ had finished the course of his office, he labored
not less powerfully by his ministers than he had labored by himself,
while he lived in the world. This I acknowledge to be true; but, first,
it is not inconsistent with what he had said, that he was bound to
perform, in his own person, what had been enjoined on him by the Father,
and at the time when he was manifested in the flesh for that purpose.
Secondly, it is not inconsistent with what he said, that his bodily
presence was the true and remarkable *day of the world*, the lustre of
which was diffused over all ages. For whence did the holy fathers in
ancient times, or whence do we now, desire *light and day*, but because
the manifestation of Christ always darted its rays to a great distance,
so as to form one continued day? Whence it follows, that all who have
not Christ for their guide grope in the dark like the blind, and wander
about in confusion and disorder. Yet we must hold by this meaning of the
words, that, as the sun discovers to our view the lovely spectacle of
earth and heaven, and the whole arrangement of nature, so God has
visibly displayed the chief glory of his works in his Son.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
9:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Having said this, he spat on the
ground, and made clay of the spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind
man with the day, **7.** And said to him, Go, wash in the pool of
Siloam, which, being interpreted, means Sent. He went, therefore, and
washed, and came seeing. **8.** Then the neighbors, and they who had
formerly seen him, and that he was a beggar, said, Is not this he who
sat and begged? **9.** Some said, This is he. And others, He is like
him. But he said, I am he. **10.** They said, therefore, to him, How
were thine eyes opened? **11.** He answered and said, A man, who is
called Jesus, made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go into
the pool of Siloam, and wash; and after I had gone and washed, I saw.
**12.** They said, therefore, to him, Where is he? He said, I know not.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *He spat on the ground.* The intention
of Christ was, to restore sight to *the blind man*, but he commences the
operation in a way which appears to be highly absurd; for, by *anointing
his eyes with clay*, he in some respects doubles the *blindness* Who
would not have thought either that he was mocking the wretched man, or
that he was practising senseless and absurd fooleries? But in this way
he intended to try the faith and obedience of *the blind man,* that he
might be an example to all. It certainly was no ordinary proof of faith,
that *the blind man,* relying on a bare word, is fully convinced that
his sight will be restored to him, and with this conviction hastens to
go to the place where he was commanded. It is an illustrious
commendation of his obedience, that he simply obeys Christ, though there
are many inducements to an opposite course. And this is the trial of
true faith, when the devout mind, satisfied with the simple word of God,
promises what otherwise appears incredible. Faith is instantly followed
by a readiness to obey, so that he who is convinced that God will be his
faithful guide calmly yields himself to the direction of God. There can
be no doubt that some suspicion and fear that he was mocked came into
the mind of *the blind man;* but he found it easy to break through every
obstruction, when he arrived at the conclusion that it was safe to
follow Christ. It may be objected that *the blind man* did not know
Christ; and, therefore, could not render the honor which was due to him
as the Son of God. I acknowledge this to be true; but as he believed
that Christ had been sent by God, he submits to him, and not doubting
that he speaks the truth, he beholds in him nothing but what is Divine;
and, in addition to all this, his faith is entitled to the greater
commendation, because, while his knowledge was so small, he devoted
himself wholly to Christ.

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span><span id="xv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>**7.** *Go, wash in the pool of Siloam.*
Unquestionably, there was not, either in *the clay*, or in *the water of
Siloam*, any power or fitness for curing the eyes; but Christ freely
made use of those outward symbols, on various occasions, for adorning
his miracles, either to accustom believers to the use of signs, or to
show that all things were at his disposal, or to testify that every one
of the creatures has as much power as he chooses to give them. But some
inquire what is meant by *the clay* composed of *dust* and *spittle*,
and they explain it to have been a figure of Christ, because *the dust*
denotes the earthly nature of the flesh, and *the spittle,* which came
from his mouth, denotes the Divine essence of the Word. For my part, I
lay aside this allegory as being more ingenious than solid, and am
satisfied with this simple view, that as man was at first made of
*clay*, so in restoring the eyes Christ made use of *clay*, showing that
he had the same power over a part of the body which the Father had
displayed in forming the whole man. Or, perhaps, he intended to declare,
by this sign, that it was not more difficult for him to remove the
obstruction, and to open the eyes of *the blind man*, than to wash away
*clay* from any man whatever; and, on the other hand, that it was as
much in his power to restore sight to the man as it was to *anoint his
eyes with clay* I prefer the latter interpretation.

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>As to *the pool of Siloam,* he perhaps
ordered *the blind man* to *wash in it,* in order to reprove the Jews
for not being able to discern the power of God when present; as Isaiah
reproaches the men of his time, that they

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>despise the waters of Siloam, which flow
softly,  
(<span id="xv.ii-p9.2"></span>[Isa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)<span id="xv.ii-p9.2"></span>,)

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>and prefer rapid and impetuous streams. This
was also the reason, I think, why Elisha ordered Naaman the Syrian to
*go* *and wash in Jordan*, (<span id="xv.ii-p10.1"></span>[2Ki
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p10.1"></span>.)
This *pool*, if we may believe Jerome, was formed by waters which flowed
at certain hours from Mount Zion.

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>*Which, if you interpret it, means Sent.*
The Evangelist purposely adds the interpretation of the word *Siloam;*
because that fountain, which was near the temple, daily reminded the
Jews of Christ who was to come, but whom they despised when he was
exhibited before them. The Evangelist, therefore, magnifies the grace of
Christ, because he alone enlightens our darkness, and restores sight to
the blind. For the condition of our nature is delineated in the person
of one man, that we are all destitute of light and understanding from
the womb, and that we ought to seek the cure of this evil from Christ
alone.

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span>Let it be observed that, though Christ was
present then, yet he did not wish to neglect signs; and that for the
sake of reproving the stupidity of the nation, which laid aside the
substance, and retained only an empty shadow of signs. Besides, the
astonishing goodness of God is displayed in this respect, that he comes
of his own accord to cure the blind man, and does not wait for his
prayers to bestow help. And, indeed, since we are by nature averse to
him, if he do not meet us before we call on him, and anticipate by his
mercy us who are plunged in the forgetfulness of light and life, we are
ruined.

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span><span id="xv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p14"></span>**8.** *Then the neighbors, and those who
had formerly seen him. The blind man* was known not only to *the
neighbors*, but to all the inhabitants of the town, having been wont to
sit and beg at the gate of the temple; and the common people look more
readily at such persons than at others. This circumstance — of the man
being *known* — contributed to make many people acquainted with the fame
of the miracle. But, as impiety is ingenious in obscuring the works of
God, many thought that it was not the same man, because a new power of
God openly appeared in him. Thus we find that the more brightly the
majesty of God is displayed in his works, the less credit do they obtain
among men. But the doubts of those men aided in proving the miracle,
for, in consequence of those doubts, the blind man celebrated more
highly the grace of Christ by his testimony. It is not without good
reason, therefore, that the Evangelist brings together all those
circumstances which seemed to exhibit more clearly the truth of the
miracle.

<span id="xv.ii-p15"></span><span id="xv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p16"></span>**11.** *And after I had gone and washed.*
So happy a result of obedience warns us to surmount every obstacle, and
to proceed courageously wherever the Lord calls us, and not even to
entertain a doubt that every thing which we undertake by his authority,
and under his guidance, will have a prosperous issue.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
9:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#013)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**13.** They bring to the Pharisees him who
formerly had been blind. **14.** Now it was the Sabbath when Jesus had
made the clay, and opened his eyes. **15.** The Pharisees also,
therefore, asked him again, how he had received his sight. And he said
to them, He put clay on mine eyes, and I washed, and I see. **16.**
Wherefore some of the Pharisees said, This man is not of God, because he
keepeth not the Sabbath. Others said, How can a man who is a sinner do
these signs? And there was a division among them. **17.** They say to
him who had been formerly blind,  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) What sayest thou of him, for having
opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a Prophet.

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>**13.** *They bring to the Pharisees.* The
following narrative shows that wicked men are so far from profiting by
the works of God, that, the more they are urged by their power, so much
the more are they constrained to pour out the venom which dwells within
their breasts. The restoration of sight to the blind man ought
undoubtedly to have softened even hearts of stone; or, at least, the
Pharisees ought to have been struck with the novelty and greatness of
the miracle, so as to remain in doubt for a short time, until they
inquired if it were a divine work; but their hatred of Christ drives
them to such stupidity, that they instantly condemn what they are told
that he has done.

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span>The Evangelist mentions *the Pharisees;* not
that other sects were favorable to Christ, but because this sect was
more zealous than the rest in maintaining the present condition.
Hypocrisy is always proud and cruel. Being swelled with a false opinion
of their holiness, they were chiefly wounded by the doctrine of the
Gospel, which condemned all their counterfeit righteousnesses; and above
all, they fought for their power and kingdom, under the pretense of
endeavoring to maintain the Law.

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span>When the Evangelist says that the multitude
*brought the blind man to the Pharisees*, it is difficult to determine
with what disposition or with what intention they did so. Scarcely an
individual among them could then be ignorant of the inveterate hostility
of *the Pharisees* to Christ; and therefore it is possible that many
flatterers, in order to obtain their favor, purposely attempted to
conceal the glory of the miracle. Yet I think it is probable that the
greater part of the people, suspending their judgment, as usually
happens, determined to refer to the arbitration and decision of those
who held the government. But wilfully shutting their eyes, while the sun
is shining, they bring darkness on themselves to obscure its light. It
is a foolish superstition of the common people that, under the pretense
of honoring God, they adore the wicked tyrants of the Church, and
despise God himself, both in his word and in his works, or, at least, do
not deign to look at him.

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span><span id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>**14.** *Now it was the Sabbath.* Christ
purposely selected *the Sabbath-day*, which must have given ground of
offense to the Jews. He had already found, in the case of the paralytic,
that this work was liable to slander. Why then does he not avoid the
offense — which he could easily have done — but because the defense
malignantly undertaken by men would tend to magnify the power of God?
*The Sabbath-day* serves as a whetstone to sharpen them, to inquire more
eagerly into the whole matter. And yet what advantage do they reap from
a careful and earnest examination of the question but this, that the
truth of the Gospel shines more brightly? We are taught by this example
that, if we would follow Christ, we must excite the wrath of the enemies
of the Gospel; and that they who endeavor to effect a compromise between
the world and Christ, so as to condemn every kind of offenses, are
altogether mad, since Christ, on the contrary, knowingly and
deliberately provoked wicked men. We ought to attend, therefore, to the
rule which he lays down, that they who are *blind*, *and leaders of the
blind*, (<span id="xv.iii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="xv.iii-p10.1"></span>,)
ought to be disregarded.

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span>**15.** *The Pharisees also asked him.* The
people had already heard this confession from the mouth of the blind
man; and now the Pharisees also are made witnesses of it, who might have
objected that a report had been groundlessly circulated by the common
people, and had been as groundlessly believed. And, first, leaving out
of view the question as to the fact, they dispute only about the law of
the case; for they do not deny that Christ restored sight to the blind
man, but they find a crime in the circumstance of the time when it was
done, and assert that it is not a work of God, because it violated *the
Sabbath.* But we ought first to inquire if a work of God was a violation
of the Sabbath. And what hinders them from seeing this, but that, in
consequence of having been blinded by sinful motives and by malice, they
see nothing? Besides, they had already been abundantly instructed by
Christ, that the benefits which God bestows on men are not more
inconsistent with the Sabbath than circumcision; and the words of the
Law enjoin men to abstain from their own works only, and not from the
works of God, (<span id="xv.iii-p12.1"></span>[Exod.
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008), [Exod.
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#012)<span id="xv.iii-p12.1"></span>.)
When they take for granted an error which has been so frequently
refuted, it must be imputed to obstinate malice; or at least there is no
other reason why they go wrong but because they choose to go wrong.

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span>Thus the Palmists do not cease to bring
forward, with hardened effrontery, their idle and foolish slanders,
which have been answered a hundred times. What, then, must we do with
them? When an opportunity occurs, we must endeavor, as far as lies in
our power, to oppose the wicked attempts of those who, actuated by false
zeal, reproach and slander the gospel. If no defense, however just, shut
their mouth, we have no reason to be discouraged, but ought to trample
under foot, with boldness and magnanimity, that eagerness to slander by
which they wish to oppress us. They take up maxims which we readily
grant to them, that we ought not to listen to those who revolt from the
Church, and break up the unity of the faith. But they pass by, and
pretend not to have observed — that which ought to form the principal
subject of inquiry, and which we have explained clearly in many passages
— that nothing can be farther removed from the Church than the Pope with
all his band; that a medley composed of lies and impositions, and
stained by so many superstitious inventions, is widely distant from the
purity of faith. But with all their furious arrogance, they will never
hinder the truth, which has been so frequently and so firmly maintained
by us, from being at length successful. In like manner, *the Pharisees*
brought against Christ a plausible maxim, *That he who does not keep the
Sabbath is not from God*; but they unjustly and falsely asserted that
the work of God is a violation of the Sabbath.

<span id="xv.iii-p14"></span><span id="xv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p15"></span>**16.** *How can a man who is a sinner do
these things?* The word *sinner* is employed here, as in many other
passages, to denote a person of immoral conduct and a despiser of God.

<span id="xv.iii-p16"></span>Why doth your Master eat with publicans and
sinners?  
(<span id="xv.iii-p16.2"></span>[Mr
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#016)<span id="xv.iii-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.iii-p17"></span>That is, “Why doth your Master eat with men
of ungodly and wicked lives, whose baseness is stamped with universal
infamy?” For from the violation of the Sabbath the enemies of Christ
inferred that he was a profane person, and destitute of all religion.
Those who stand neutral and judge more candidly, on the other hand,
conclude that he is a good and religious man, because God has endued him
with remarkable power to work miracles. And yet the argument does not
appear to be quite conclusive; for God sometimes permits false prophets
to perform some miracles, and we know that Satan, like an ape,
counterfeits the works of God so as to deceive the incautious.

<span id="xv.iii-p18"></span>Suetonius relates that, when Vespasian was
in Alexandria, and was seated on his tribunal to dispense justice in the
open court, a blind man requested him to anoint his eyes with spittle,
and said that one Serapis  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) had
pointed out to him that cure in a dream; that Vespasian, being unwilling
to expose himself to contempt without any good reason, was slow and
reluctant to comply; but that, when his friends urged him on all sides,
he granted to the blind man what he asked, and that in this way his eyes
were instantly opened. Who would reckon Vespasian among the servants of
God on that account, or adorn him with the applause of piety? I reply,
among good men and those who fear God, miracles are undoubted pledges of
the power of the Holy Spirit; but it happens by a just judgment of God,
that Satan deceives unbelievers by false miracles, as by enchantments.
What I have just now quoted from Suetonius I do not reckon to be
fabulous; but I rather ascribe it to the righteous vengeance of God,
that the Jews, having despised so many and so illustrious miracles of
Christ, were at length — as they deserved to be — sent away to Satan.
For they ought to have profited in the pure worship of God by the
miracles of Christ; they ought to have been confirmed by them in the
doctrine of the Law, and to have risen to the Messiah himself, who was
the end of the Law. And undoubtedly Christ, by giving sight to the blind
man, had clearly proved that he was the Messiah.

<span id="xv.iii-p20"></span>They who refuse to acknowledge God in his
works make this refusal, not only through indifference, but through
malicious contempt; and do they not deserve that God should give them up
to the delusions of Satan? Let us then remember that we ought to seek
God with a sincere disposition of heart, that he may reveal himself to
us by the power of his Spirit; and that we ought to lend our ears
submissively to his word, that he may clearly point out true prophets by
miracles that are not delusive. Thus shall we profit, as we ought to do,
by miracles, and not be exposed to the frauds of Satan.

<span id="xv.iii-p21"></span>As to the men themselves, though they act
commendably in this respect, that they speak with reverence about the
miracles in which the power of God is displayed, still they do not bring
forward a sufficiently strong argument, to prove that Christ ought to be
reckoned a Prophet of God. And even the Evangelist did not intend that
their answer should be regarded as an oracle. He only exhibits the
wicked obstinacy of the enemies of Christ, who maliciously pick a
quarrel with what they cannot but acknowledge to be the works of God,
and, when warned, do not even attend to them for a short time.

<span id="xv.iii-p22"></span>*And there was a division among them.* A
schism is a highly pernicious and destructive evil in the Church of God;
and how comes it then that Christ sows the occasion of discord among the
very teachers of the Church? The answer is easy. Christ had no other
object in view than to bring all men to God the Father, by stretching
out his hand to them. The *division* arose from the obstinate malice
 <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) of those who had no disposition
to go to God. All who do not yield obedience to the truth of God,
therefore, rend the Church by schism. Yet it is better that men should
differ among themselves, than that they should all, with one consent,
revolt from the true religion.  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)
Wherefore, whenever *differences* arise, we ought always to consider
their source.

<span id="xv.iii-p25"></span><span id="xv.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p26"></span>**17.** *They say to him who had been
blind.* The more diligently they inquire, the more impressively does the
truth of God appear; for they act as if one were endeavoring to
extinguish a strong flame  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) by
his breath. Thus, when we see wicked men contrive all that they can to
crush the truth of God, we have no reason to be afraid, or to be
excessively anxious about the result, for all that they can gain in this
way will be to cause its light to burn with greater brightness.

<span id="xv.iii-p28"></span>*What sayest thou of him?* When they ask
the blind man what is his opinion, they do so, not because they wish to
abide by his judgment, or set any value on it, but because they hope
that the man, struck with fear, will reply according to their wish. In
this respect the Lord disappoints them; for when a poor man disregards
their threatenings, and boldly maintains that Christ is a Prophet, we
ought justly to ascribe it to the grace of God; so that this boldness is
another miracle. And if he so boldly and freely acknowledged Christ to
be a Prophet, though he did not as yet know that the Lord Jesus  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) was the Son of God, how shameful is
the treachery of those who, subdued by fear, either deny him, or are
silent respecting him, though they know that he sitteth at the right
hand of the Father, and that he will come thence to be the Judge of the
whole world! Since this blind man did not quench a small spark of
knowledge, we ought to endeavor that an open and full confession may
blaze forth from the full brightness which has shone into our hearts.

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
9:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#018)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**18.** But the Jews did not believe
respecting him, that he had been blind and had received his sight, until
they called the parents of him who had received his sight. **19.** And
they asked them, saying, Is this your son who, you say, was born blind?
How then doth he now see? **20.** His parents answered and said, We know
that this is our son, and that he was born blind. **21.** But how he now
seeth, we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not; he is of
age, ask him, he will speak of himself. **22.** These things said his
parents, because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already
determined that, if any man confessed that he was the Christ, he should
be thrown out of the synagogue. **23.** On this account his parents
said, He is of age, ask him.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span>**18.** *But the Jews did not believe.* There
are two things here which ought to be observed; that *they do not
believe* that a miracle has been performed, and that, being wilfully
blinded through a perverse hatred of Christ, they do not perceive what
is manifest. The Evangelist tells us that *they did not believe.* If the
reason be asked, there can be no doubt that their blindness was
voluntary. For what prevents them from seeing an obvious work of God
placed before their eyes; or, after having been fully convinced, what
prevents them from believing what they already know, except that the
inward malice of their heart keeps their eyes shut? Paul informs us that
the same thing takes place in the doctrine of the Gospel; for he says
that it is not *hidden* or obscure, except to the reprobate,

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span>whose understandings the god of this world
hath blinded,  
(<span id="xv.iv-p6.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="xv.iv-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span>Warned by such examples, let us learn not to
bring upon ourselves those obstacles which drive us away from the faith.
By *the Jews,* the Evangelist means that part of them which held the
government of the people.

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span><span id="xv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span>**19.** *Is this your son?* Not having
succeeded in the former way, they now attempt another; but the Lord not
only defeats their attempts in a wonderful manner, but turns them even
to an opposite purpose. They do not merely put a single question, but
cunningly put a multitude of questions involved in each other, with the
view of preventing a reply. But out of a variety of entangled and
captious questions, *the parents of the blind man* select only the half,
to which they reply:

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span><span id="xv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span>**20.** *We hnow that this is our son, and
that he was born blind.* Hence it follows that he does not see
naturally, but that his eyes have been miraculously opened; but this
latter point — that his sight had been miraculously restored — they pass
by, because it would give offense. By their silence they show their
ingratitude; for, having received so distinguished a gift of God, they
ought to have burned with desire to celebrate his name. But, struck with
terror, they bury the grace of God, as far as lies in their power, with
this exception, that they substitute in their room, as a witness, their
son, who will explain the whole matter as it happened, and who will be
heard with less prejudice, and will be more readily believed. But though
they prudently avoid danger, and continue this middle path, of
testifying indirectly about Christ by the mouth of their son, yet this
does not prevent the Holy Spirit from condemning their cowardice by the
mouth of the Evangelist, because they fail to discharge their own duty.
How much less excuse then will they have, who, by treacherous denial,
utterly bury Christ, with his doctrine, with his miracles, with his
power and grace!

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span><span id="xv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span>**22.** *The Jews had determined.* This
passage shows that the custom of excommunication is ancient, and has
been observed in all ages; for excommunication was not then for the
first time invented, but it was a custom which had been anciently used
against apostates and despisers of the Law, and was turned against the
disciples of Christ. We learn, therefore, that the practice of
excommunication arose out of the most ancient discipline of the Church.
We learn also that it is a crime which has not been of recent origin,
and has not been peculiar to a single age, that wicked and unbelieving
 <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) men should corrupt the holy
ordinances of God by their deeds of sacrilege. God determined, from the
beginning of the world,  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) that
there should be some form of correction, by which rebels should be
restrained. The priests and scribes not only abused this power in a
tyrannical manner to oppress innocent men; but at length they basely
attacked God himself and his doctrine. The truth of Christ being so
powerful that they were not able to put it down by law, or by a regular
course of proceedings, they launched the thunders of excommunications to
crush it.

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span>The same thing has also been done with the
Christian people; for it is impossible to express the barbarous tyranny
which the pretended bishops have exercised in enslaving the people, so
that no man dared to whisper; and now we see with what cruelty they
throw this dart of excommunication against all who worship God. But we
ought to believe that excommunication, when it is violently applied to a
different purpose by the passions of men, may safely be treated with
contempt. For when God committed to his Church the power of
excommunicating, he did not arm tyrants or executioners to strangle
souls, but laid down a rule for governing his people; and that on the
condition that he should hold the supreme government, and that he should
have men for his ministers. Let the pretended bishops then thunder as
they think fit, by their empty noises they will not terrify any but
those who wander about in doubt and uncertainty, not having yet been
instructed, by the voice of the Chief Shepherd, what is the true fold.

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span>In short, nothing can be more certain than
that those who, we see, are not subject to Christ are deprived of the
lawful power of excommunicating. Nor ought we to dread being excluded by
them from their assembly, since Christ, who is our life and salvation,
is banished from it. So far are we from having any reason to dread being
thrown out, that, on the contrary, if we desire to be united to Christ,
we must, of our own accord, withdraw from the synagogues of Satan. Yet
though the ordinance of excommunication was so basely corrupted in the
ancient Church, still Christ did not intend that it should be abolished
by his coming, but restored it to its purity, that it might be in full
vigor amongst us. Thus, though at the present day there prevails in
Popery a base profanation of this holy discipline, yet, instead of
abolishing it, we ought rather to give the utmost diligence to restore
it to its former completeness. There never will be so good order the
world, that even the holiest Laws of God shall not degenerate into
corruption, through the fault of men. Assuredly, it would give too much
power to Satan, if he could reduce to nothing every thing that he
corrupts. We would then have no Baptism, no Lord’s Supper, and, in
short, no religion; for there is no part of it which he has left
uncontaminated by its pollutions.

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[John
9:24-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**24.** A second time, therefore, they called
the man who had been blind, and said to him, Give glory to God; we know
that this man is a sinner. **25.** Therefore he answered and said,
Whether he be a sinner, I know not; one thing I know, that though I was
blind, I now see. **26.** Again, therefore, they said to him, What did
he to thee? How did he open thine eyes? **27.** He answered them, I told
you already, and you did not hear; why do you wish to hear it again? Do
you wish also to become his disciples? **28.** Then they upbraided him,
and said, Be thou his disciple; as for us,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) we are the disciples of Moses. **29.**
We know that God spoke to Moses; but as for this man, we do not know
whence he is. **30.** The man answered, and said to them, Certainly this
is wonderful, that you do not know whence he is, and yet  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) he hath opened mine eyes. **31.** Now
we know that God heareth not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of
God, and do his will, him he heareth. **32.** Never before was it heard
 <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) that any man opened the eyes of
him who had been born blind. **33.** If this man were not from God, he
could do nothing.

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span><span id="xv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span>**24.** *A second time, therefore, they called
the man who had been blind.* There can be no doubt that they were
constrained by shame to call the blind man, whom they had previously
found to be too firm and steady. In this way, the more fiercely they
struggle against God, the more numerous are the cords which they put
about their neck,  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) and the more
strongly do they bind themselves. Besides, they put the questions in
such a manner as to endeavor to make the man say what they wish. It is a
plausible preface, indeed, when they exhort him to *give glory to God;*
but immediately afterwards they strictly forbid him to answer according
to the conviction of his mind; and therefore, under the pretense of the
name of God, they demand from him servile obedience.

<span id="xv.v-p10"></span>*Give glory to God.* Though this adjuration
may be referred to what is connected with the present cause, that the
blind man should not obscure *the glory of God* by ascribing to man the
benefit which he had received, yet I rather agree with those who think
that it was a solemn form, which was wont to be employed when an oath
was administered to any person. For in those very words does Joshua
adjure Achan, when he wishes to draw from him a true confession of
having taken away *the accursed thing*, (<span
id="xv.v-p10.1"></span>[Jos 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)<span
id="xv.v-p10.1"></span>.) By these words they reminded him that no
slight insult is offered to God, when any person, in His name, commits
falsehood. And, indeed, whenever we are called to swear, we ought to
remember this preface, so that truth may not be less highly valued by us
than *the glory of God.* If this were done, the sacredness of an oath
would be viewed in a very different light. Now, since the greater part
of men — not considering that they deny God, when they invoke His name
for upholding a falsehood — rashly and daringly rush forward to swear,
the consequence is, that every place is full of perjuries. Meanwhile, we
see how hypocrites, though they pretend to have the greatest reverence
for God, are guilty not only of hypocrisy, but of insolent mockery; for
they at the same time express a wish that the blind man should wickedly
swear according to their direction, with open contempt of God. Thus God
drags to light their wicked designs, whatever attempts they may make to
give them a plausible appearance, or to conceal them by hypocritical
pretences.

<span id="xv.v-p11"></span><span id="xv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p12"></span>**25.** *Whether he be a sinner, I know not.*
The blind man appears not to have been at all prevented by fear from
giving a sincere testimony. For there is no reason to believe that he
had any doubts about Christ, as his words seem to imply; but I rather
think that he spoke ironically, in order to wound them more deeply. He
had already confessed that Christ was *a Prophet*, (verse 17.)
Perceiving that he gains nothing by doing so, he suspends his judgment
about the person, and brings forward the fact itself, so that, while he
makes this admission in their favor, he is not free from ridiculing
them.

<span id="xv.v-p13"></span><span id="xv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p14"></span>**26.** *Again, therefore, they said to him.*
When we see wicked men so delighted in performing their own base
actions, we ought to be ashamed of our slothfulness, in acting with such
coolness about the affairs of Christ. Though they search on all sides to
obtain grounds of slander, the Lord defeats their attempts, in a
remarkable manner, by the unshaken firmness of the blind man; for not
only does he persist in his opinion, but he freely and severely
reproaches them, that after having abundantly ascertained and known the
truth, they endeavor to bury it by their continual inquiries. He charges
them also with wicked hatred of Christ, when he says,

<span id="xv.v-p15"></span>*Do you also wish to become his disciples?*
For he means that, though they were a hundred times convinced, they are
so strongly prejudiced by wicked and hostile dispositions, that they
will never yield. It is an astonishing display of freedom, when a man of
mean and low condition, and especially liable to be reproached on
account of his poverty, fearlessly provokes the rage of all the priests
against himself. If that which was nothing more than a small preparation
for faith gave him so much boldness, when he came to the struggle, what
excuse can be pleaded by great preachers of the Gospel, who, though they
are beyond the reach of darts, are silent as soon as danger is
threatened? This question is likewise ironical; for he means that they
are prompted by malice, and not by a sincere desire of the truth, to
press him so earnestly to reply as to this fact.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)

<span id="xv.v-p17"></span><span id="xv.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p18"></span>**28.** *Then they upbraided him.* It is
probable that all the reproaches which were prompted by the violence of
their rage and indignation were eagerly cast upon him; but there was
this one reproach among men, that they called him an apostate from the
Law. For, in their opinion, he could not be a disciple of Christ without
revolting from the Law of Moses; and they expressly represent these two
things as inconsistent with each other. It is a very plausible pretence,
that they are afraid of revolting from the doctrine of Moses. For this
is the true rule of piety, that we ought to listen to the prophets, by
whom we certainly know that God has spoken; that our faith may not be
carried about by any doctrines of men. From this principle they deduce
their certainty as to the Law of Moses; but they lie when they say that
they are *the disciples of Moses,* for they have turned aside from the
end of the Law. Thus hypocrites are wont to tear God in pieces,  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) when they wish to shelter themselves
under his name. If Christ be the soul of the Law, as Paul tells us,
(<span id="xv.v-p19.2"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="xv.v-p19.2"></span>,)
what will the Law be when separated from him, but a dead body? We are
taught by this example, that no man truly hears God, unless he be an
attentive hearer of his word, so as to understand what God means and
says.

<span id="xv.v-p20"></span><span id="xv.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p21"></span>**29.** *As for this man, we know not whence
he is.* When they say so, they refer not to his country or the place of
his birth, but to the prophetical office. For they allege that they have
no knowledge of his calling, so as to receive him as having proceeded
from God.

<span id="xv.v-p22"></span><span id="xv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p23"></span>**30.** *Certainly this is wonderful.* He
indirectly reproves them for remaining unmoved by a miracle so
illustrious, and for pretending that they did not know Christ’s calling;
as if he had said, that it was highly improper that such a testimony of
Divine power should be held in no estimation, and that the calling of
Christ, so proved and attested, should obtain no credit among them. And,
in order to show more clearly their stupidity or malice, he magnifies
the excellence of the miracle from this consideration, that, as far as
the memory of men reaches, none was ever heard to say that such a thing
was done by a man. Hence it follows that they are malicious and
ungrateful, because they voluntarily shut their eyes on a manifest work
of God. He infers from this, that Christ was sent by God, because he is
endued with so great power of the Spirit of God, to procure credit for
himself and for his doctrine.

<span id="xv.v-p24"></span><span id="xv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p25"></span>**31.** *Now we know that God heareth not
sinners.* Those who think that the man spoke this, in accordance with
the opinion of the people, are mistaken; for the word *sinner*, in this
passage, as in another which lately occurred, means an ungodly and
immoral person. It is the uniform doctrine of Scripture, that God does
not listen to any but those who call upon him with truth and sincerity.
For while faith alone opens the door to us to go to God, it is certain
that all wicked men are excluded from approaching to him; and he even
declares that *he detests their prayers*, (<span
id="xv.v-p25.1"></span>[Pr 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#009)<span
id="xv.v-p25.1"></span>,) as *he abhors their sacrifices*, (<span
id="xv.v-p25.2"></span>[Pr 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008)<span
id="xv.v-p25.2"></span>.) It is by a special privilege that he invites
his children to himself; and it is *the Spirit of adoption* alone *that
crieth out in our hearts*, *Abba*, *Father*, (<span
id="xv.v-p25.3"></span>[Ro 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="xv.v-p25.3"></span>; <span id="xv.v-p25.4"></span>[Ga
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="xv.v-p25.4"></span>.) In
short, no man is properly disposed to pray to God, unless his heart be
purified by faith. But wicked men profane the sacred name of God by
their prayers, and therefore they deserve rather to be punished for this
sacrilege, than to obtain any thing for salvation. Accordingly, the
blind man does not reason inconclusively, that Christ has come from God,
because God lends a favorable ear to his prayers.

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
9:34-41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**34.** They answered, and said to him, Thou
wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him
out. **35.** Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found
him, he said to him, Dost thou believe in the Son of God? **36.** He
answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I should believe in him?
**37.** And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he who
talketh with thee. **38.** And he said, Lord, I believe; and he
worshipped him. **39.** Then Jesus said, For judgment am I come into
this world, that they who see not may see, and that they who see may
become blind. **40.** Some of the Pharisees, who were with him, heard
these things, and said to him, And are we blind also? **41.** Jesus said
to them, If you were blind, you would not have sin;  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) but now you say, We see: therefore
your sin remaineth.

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span><span id="xv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span>**34.** *Thou wast altogether born in sins*
They alluded, I doubt not, to his blindness; as proud men are wont to
teaze those who have any distress or calamity; and, therefore, they
continually insult him, as if he had come out of his mother’s womb,
bearing the mark of his *sins* For all the scribes were convinced in
their hearts, that souls, after having finished one life, entered into
new bodies, and there suffered the punishment of their former crimes.
Hence they conclude that he who was born blind was, at that very time,
covered and polluted by his sins.

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span>This undeserved censure ought to instruct us
to be exceedingly cautious, not always to estimate the sins of any
person by the chastisements of God; for, as we have already seen, God
has various ends to accomplish, by inflicting calamities on men. But not
only do those hypocrites insult the wretched man; they likewise reject
disdainfully his warnings, though they are holy and good; as indeed it
very frequently happens that one cannot endure to be taught by him whom
he despises. Now, since we ought always to hear God, by whomsoever he
may talk to us, let us learn not to despise any man, that God may find
us always mild and submissive, even though he employ a person altogether
mean and despicable to instruct us. For there is not a more dangerous
plague than when pride stops our ears, so that we do not deign to hear
those who warn us for our profit; and it frequently happens that God
purposely selects vile and worthless persons to instruct and warn us, in
order to subdue our pride.

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span>*And they cast him out.* Though it is
possible that those haughty Rabbis  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) *cast him*, with violence, out of the
temple, yet I think that the Evangelist has a different meaning, that
*they excommunicated him*; and thus the *casting of him out* would have
the semblance of law. This agrees better also with what follows; for if
they had only *cast him out* in a disdainful and furious manner, it
would not have been of so great importance as to make it probable that
the report of it would reach Christ.

<span id="xv.vi-p10"></span><span id="xv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p11"></span>**35.** *Jesus heard that they had cast him
out.* From this circumstance I conjecture that they proceeded to it in a
solemn manner, as an affair of great importance, By this example, we are
taught how trivial and how little to be dreaded are the excommunications
of the enemies of Christ. If we are *cast out* from that assembly in
which Christ reigns, it is a dreadful judgment which is executed against
us, that we are *delivered to Satan*, (<span
id="xv.vi-p11.1"></span>[1Co 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span
id="xv.vi-p11.1"></span>,) because we are banished from the kingdom of
the Son of God. But so far are we from having any reason to dread that
tyrannical judgment by which wicked men insult the servants of Christ,
that, even though no man should drive us out, we ought of our own accord
to flee from that place in which Christ does not preside by his word and
Spirit.

<span id="xv.vi-p12"></span>*And having found him.* If he had been
allowed to remain in the synagogue, he would have been in danger of
becoming gradually alienated from Christ, and plunged in the same
destruction with wicked men. Christ now meets him, when he is no longer
in the temple, but wandering hither and hither; receives and embraces
him, when he is *cast out* by the priests; raises him up from the
ground, and offers to him life, when he has received the sentence of
death. We have known the same thing by experience in our own time; for
when Dr Martin Luther,  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) and
other persons of the same class, were beginning to reprove the grosser
abuses of the Pope, they scarcely had the slightest relish for pure
Christianity; but after that the Pope had thundered against them, and
*cast them out* of the Roman synagogue by terrific bulls, Christ
stretched out his hand, and made himself fully known to them. So there
is nothing better for us than to be at a very great distance from the
enemies of the Gospel, that Christ may approach nearer to us.

<span id="xv.vi-p14"></span>*Dost thou believe on the Son of God?* He
speaks to a Jew, who had been from his infancy instructed in the
doctrine of the Law, and had learned that God had promised the Messiah.
This question, therefore, has the same meaning as if Christ had exhorted
him to follow the Messiah and to devote himself to him; though he
employs a more honorable name than they were wont at that time to
employ, for the Messiah was reckoned to be only *the son of David*,
(<span id="xv.vi-p14.1"></span>[Mt
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span id="xv.vi-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.vi-p15"></span><span id="xv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p16"></span>**36.** *Who is he, Lord, that I may believe
in him?* From this reply of the blind man it is evident that, though he
had not yet attained any clear or certain knowledge of Christ, still he
was obedient and ready to receive instruction; for these words mean, “As
soon as he is pointed out to me, I am ready to embrace him.” But it
ought to be observed that the blind man desires to be instructed by
Christ as a Prophet; for he was already convinced that Christ had been
sent by God, and therefore he does not at random place reliance on his
doctrine.

<span id="xv.vi-p17"></span><span id="xv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p18"></span>**37.** *Thou hast both seen him.* By these
words of Christ the blind man could not be carried higher than to a very
small and cold portion of faith. For Christ does not mention his power,
or the reason why he was sent by the Father, or what he has brought to
men. But what principally belongs to faith is, to know that, by the
sacrifice of his death, atonement has been made for our sins, and we are
reconciled to God; that his resurrection was a triumph over vanquished
death; that we are renewed by his Spirit, in order that, being dead to
the flesh and to sin, we may live to righteousness; that he is the only
Mediator; that the Spirit is the earnest of our adoption; in short, that
in him is found every thing that belongs to eternal life. But the
Evangelist either does not relate the whole of the conversation which
Christ held with him, or he only means that the blind man professed his
attachment to Christ, so that henceforth he began to be one of his
disciples. For my own part, I have no doubt that Jesus intended to be
acknowledged by him as the Christ, that from this beginning of faith he
might afterwards lead him forward to a more intimate knowledge of
himself.

<span id="xv.vi-p19"></span><span id="xv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p20"></span>**38.** *And he worshipped him.* It may be
asked, Did the blind man honor or worship Christ as God?  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) The word which the Evangelist employs
(<span id="xv.vi-p21.2"></span>προσέκυνησει) means nothing more than to
express respect and homage by bending the knee, or by other signs. For
my own part, certainly, I think that it denotes something rare and
uncommon; namely, that the blind man gave far more honor to Christ than
to an ordinary man, or even to a prophet. And yet I do not think that at
that time he had made such progress as to know that Christ was God
manifested in the flesh. What then is meant by *worship*? The blind man,
convinced that Jesus was *the Son of God*, nearly lost the command of
himself, and, in rapturous admiration, bowed down before him.

<span id="xv.vi-p22"></span><span id="xv.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p23"></span>**39.** *For judgment am I come into this
world.* The word *judgment* cannot be understood, in this passage, to
denote simply the punishment which is inflicted on unbelievers,  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) and on those who despise God; for it
is made to include the grace of illumination. Christ, therefore, calls
it *judgment*, because he restores to proper order what was disordered
and confused; but he means that this is done by a wonderful purpose of
God, and contrary to the ordinary opinion of men. And, indeed, human
reason considers nothing to be more unreasonable than to say, that *they
who see are made blind* by the light of the world. This then is one of
the secret judgments of God, by which he casts down the pride of men. It
ought to be observed, that the *blindness* which is here mentioned, does
not proceed so much from Christ as from the fault of men. For by its own
nature, it does not strictly *blind* any man, but as there is nothing
which the reprobate desire more earnestly than to extinguish its light,
the eyes of their mind, which are diseased through malice and depravity,
must be dazzled by the light which is exhibited to them. In short, since
Christ is, by his own nature, *the light of the world*, (<span
id="xv.vi-p24.2"></span>[Joh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span
id="xv.vi-p24.2"></span>,) it is an accidental result, that some *are
made blind* by his coming.

<span id="xv.vi-p25"></span>But again it may be asked, Since all are
universally accused of *blindness*, who are *they that see*? I reply,
this is spoken ironically by way of concession, because unbelievers,
though they are blind, think that their sight is uncommonly acute and
powerful; and elated by this confidence, they do not deign to listen to
God. Besides, out of Christ the wisdom of the flesh has a very fair
appearance, because the world does not understand what it is to be truly
wise. So then, they *see*, says our Lord Jesus Christ,  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) who, deceiving themselves and others
under a foolish confidence in their wisdom, are guided by their own
opinion, and reckon their vain imaginations to be great wisdom.  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) Such persons, as soon as Christ
appears in the brightness of his Gospel, *are made blind;* not only
because their folly, which was formerly concealed amidst the darkness of
unbelief, is now discovered, but because, being plunged in deeper
darkness by the righteous vengeance of God, they lose that small remnant
of I know not what light which they formerly possessed.

<span id="xv.vi-p28"></span>It is true that we are all born *blind*, but
still, amidst the darkness of corrupted and depraved nature, some sparks
continue to shine, so that men differ from brute beasts. Now, if any
man, elated by proud confidence in his own opinion, refuses to submit to
God, he will seem — apart from Christ — to be wise, but the brightness
of Christ will strike him with dismay; for never does the vanity of the
human mind begin to be discovered, until heavenly wisdom is brought into
view. But Christ intended, as I have already suggested, to express
something more by these words. For hypocrites do not so obstinately
resist God before Christ shines; but as soon as the light is brought
near them, then do they, in open war, and — as it were, with unfurled
banner,  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) — rise up against God.
It is in consequence of this depravity and ingratitude, therefore, that
they become doubly *blind*, and that God, in righteous vengeance,
entirely puts out their eyes, which were formerly destitute of the true
light.

<span id="xv.vi-p30"></span>We now perceive the amount of what is stated
in this passage, that Christ came into the world to give sight to the
*blind*, and to drive to madness those who think that they are wise. In
the first part of it, he mentions illumination, *that they who see not
may see;* because this is strictly the cause of his coming, for he did
not come to *judge* the world, but rather *to save that which was lost*,
(<span id="xv.vi-p30.1"></span>[Mt
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011)<span id="xv.vi-p30.1"></span>.)
In like manner Paul, when he declares that he has *vengeance prepared
against all rebels*, at the same time adds, that this punishment will
take place

<span id="xv.vi-p31"></span>after that believers shall have fulfilled
their obedience,  
(<span id="xv.vi-p31.2"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="xv.vi-p31.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.vi-p32"></span>And this vengeance ought not to be limited
to the person of Christ, as if he did not perform the same thing daily
by the ministers of his Gospel.

<span id="xv.vi-p33"></span>We ought to be the more careful that none of
us, through a foolish and extravagant opinion of his wisdom, draw down
upon himself this dreadful punishment. But experience shows us the truth
of this statement which Christ uttered; for we see many persons struck
with giddiness and rage, for no other reason but because they cannot
endure the rising of the Sun of righteousness. Adam lived, and was
endued with the true light of understanding, while he lost that divine
blessing by desiring to see more than was allowed him. Now if, while we
are plunged in *blindness* and thus humbled by the Lord, we still
flatter ourselves in our darkness, and oppose our mad views to heavenly
wisdom, we need not wonder if the vengeance of God fall heavily upon us,
so that we are rendered doubly *blind* This very punishment was formerly
inflicted on the wicked and unbelievers  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) under the Law; for Isaiah is sent to
blind the ancient people, that

<span id="xv.vi-p35"></span>seeing they may not see: blind the heart of
this people, and shut their ears,  
(<span id="xv.vi-p35.2"></span>[Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span id="xv.vi-p35.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.vi-p36"></span>But in proportion as the brightness of the
divine light is more fully displayed in Christ than in the Prophets, so
much the more remarkably must this example of *blindness* have been
manifested and perceived; as even now the noon-day light of the Gospel
drives hypocrites to extreme rage.

<span id="xv.vi-p37"></span><span id="xv.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p38"></span>**40.** *Some of the Pharisees heard.* They
instantly perceived that they were smitten by this saying of Christ, and
yet they appear not to have belonged to the worst class; for the open
enemies had so strong an abhorrence of Christ that they did not at all
associate with him. But those men submitted to listen to Christ, yet
without any advantage, for no man is qualified to be a disciple of
Christ, until he has been divested of self, and they were very far from
being so.

<span id="xv.vi-p39"></span>*Are we also blind?* This question arose
from indignation, because they thought that they were insulted by being
classed with *blind* men; and, at the same time, it shows a haughty
contempt of the grace of Christ accompanied by mockery, as if they had
said, “Thou canst not rise to reputation without involving us in
disgrace; and is it to be endured that thou shouldst obtain honor for
thyself by upbraiding us? As to the promise thou makest of giving new
light to *the blind*, go hence and leave us with thy benefit; for we do
not choose to receive sight from thee on the condition of admitting that
we have been hitherto *blind*.” Hence we perceive that hypocrisy has
always been full of pride and of venom. The *pride* is manifested by
their being satisfied with themselves, and refusing to have any thing
taken from them; and the *venom*, by their being enraged at Christ and
arguing with him, because he has pointed out their wound, as if he had
inflicted on them a grievous wound. Hence arises contempt of Christ and
of the grace which he offers to them.

<span id="xv.vi-p40"></span>The word *also* is emphatic; for it means
that, though all the rest be *blind,* still it is improper that they
should be reckoned as belonging to the ordinary rank. It is too common a
fault among those who are distinguished above others, that they are
intoxicated with pride, and almost forget that they are men.

<span id="xv.vi-p41"></span><span id="xv.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p42"></span>**41.** *If you were blind.* These words may
be explained in two ways; either, that ignorance would, in some degree,
alleviate their guilt, if they were not fully convinced, and did not
deliberately fight against the truth; or, that there was reason to hope
that their disease of ignorance might be cured, if they would only
acknowledge it. The former view is supported by the words of Christ,

<span id="xv.vi-p43"></span>If I had not come and spoken to them, they
would have no sin,  
(<span id="xv.vi-p43.2"></span>[Joh
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span id="xv.vi-p43.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.vi-p44"></span>But as it is added in this passage, *but now
you say you see,* in order that the points of contrast may correspond to
each other, it appears to be more consistent to explain them to mean,
that he is *blind* who, aware of his own blindness, seeks a remedy to
cure his disease.  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) In this way
the meaning will be, “If you would acknowledge your disease, it would
not be altogether incurable; but now because you think that you are in
perfect health, you continue in a desperate state.” When he says that
*they who are blind have no sin*, this does not excuse ignorance, as if
it were harmless, and were placed beyond the reach of condemnation. He
only means that the disease may easily be cured, when it is truly felt;
because, when a *blind* man is desirous to obtain deliverance, God is
ready to assist him; but they who, insensible to their diseases, despise
the grace of God, are incurable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc34014.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p11.1"></span>Par croix ou
tribulation.”

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc34014.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xv.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p12.1"></span>Homme juste,
et craignaut Dieu.”

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc34014.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xv.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p17.1"></span>Que les ames
passoyent d’un corps eu l’autre.”

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc34014.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>Comme dit le
proverbe.”

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc34014.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p28.1"></span>De sa
guairison et delivrance.”

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc34014.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p3.1"></span>Ils disent
derechef a l’aveugle;” — “they say again to the blind man.”

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc34014.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p19.1"></span>Un certain
Serapis.”

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc34014.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p23.1"></span>De la
malice obstinee.”

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc34014.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xv.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p24.1"></span>De la
vraye religion.”

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc34014.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p27.1"></span>Une grande
flamme.”

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc34014.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xv.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p29.1"></span>Le
Seigneur Jesus.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc34014.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p14.1"></span>Les
infideles.”

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc34014.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xv.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>Des le
commencement du monde.”

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc34014.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p3.1"></span>Quant a nous.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc34014.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xv.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p4.1"></span>Et toutesfois.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc34014.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p5.1"></span>Il ne fut jamais
ouy.”

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc34014.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p9.1"></span>Tant plus de
lags se mettent-ils au Col.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc34014.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p16"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p16.1"></span>Quand ils le
pressent si instamment a respondre sur ce faict.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc34014.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xv.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p19"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p19.1"></span>De deschirer
Dieu par pieces.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc34014.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p3.1"></span>Vous n’auriez
point de peche;” — “you would have no sin.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc34014.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xv.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p9.1"></span>Ces Rabbins
orgueilleux.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc34014.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p13.1"></span>Le Docteur
Martin Luther.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc34014.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xv.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>Si l’aveugle
a honore ou adore Christ comme Dieu.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc34014.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p24.1"></span>Aux
infideles.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc34014.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xv.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p26"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p26.1"></span>Ceux voyent,
dit nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ.”

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc34014.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xv.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p27"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p27.1"></span>Pour une
grande sagesse.”

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc34014.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p29.1"></span>Et comme a
enseigne desployee.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc34014.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xv.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p34"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p34.1"></span>Les mechans
et infideles.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc34014.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xv.vi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p45"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p45.1"></span>Pour guairir
son mal.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc34015)
