[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc34005)  [Next](cc34007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>COMMENTARY

<span id="vii-p2"></span>ON THE

<span id="vii-p3"></span>HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

<span id="vii-p4"></span>ACCORDING TO

<span id="vii-p5"></span>jOHN

<span id="vii-p6"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1**. In the beginning was the Speech, and
the Speech was with God, and the Speech was God. **2**. He was in the
beginning with God. **3**. All things were made by him, and without him
was not any thing made that was made. **4**. In him was life, and the
life was the light of men. **5**. And the light shineth in darkness, and
the darkness did not comprehend it.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span><span id="vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *In the beginning was the Speech*. In
this introduction he asserts the eternal Divinity of Christ, in order to
inform us that he is the eternal God, who *was manifested in the flesh*,
(<span id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>[1Ti
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016)<span id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>..md)
The design is, to show it to have been necessary that the restoration of
mankind should be accomplished by the Son of God, since by his power all
things were created, since he alone breathes into all the creatures life
and energy, so that they remain in their condition; and since in man
himself he has given a remarkable display both of his power and of his
grace, and even subsequently to the fall of man has not ceased to show
liberality and kindness towards his posterity. And this doctrine is
highly necessary to be known; for since apart from God we ought not at
all to seek life and salvation, how could our faith rest on Christ, if
we did not know with certainty what is here taught? By these words,
therefore, the Evangelist assures us that we do not withdraw from the
only and eternal God, when we believe in Christ, and likewise that life
is now restored to the dead through the kindness of him who was the
source and cause of life, when the nature of man was still uncorrupted.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>As to the Evangelist calling the Son of God
*the Speech*, the simple reason appears to me to be, first, because he
is the eternal Wisdom and Will of God; and, secondly, because he is the
lively image of His purpose; for, as *Speech* is said to be among men
the image of the mind, so it is not inappropriate to apply this to God,
and to say that He reveals himself to us by his *Speech*. The other
significations of the Greek word <span id="vii.i-p6.1"></span>λόγος
(Logos) do not apply so well. It means, no doubt, *definition*, and
*reasoning*, and *calculation*; but I am unwilling to carry the
abstruseness of philosophy beyond the measure of my faith. And we
perceive that the Spirit of God is so far from approving of such
subtleties that, in prattling with us, by his very silence he cries
aloud with what sobriety we ought to handle such lofty mysteries.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>Now as God, in creating the world, revealed
himself by that *Speech*, so he formerly had him concealed with himself,
so that there is a twofold relation; the former to God, and the latter
to men. Servetus, a haughty scoundrel belonging to the Spanish nation,
invents the statement, that this eternal *Speech* began to exist at that
time when he was displayed in the creation of the world, as if he did
not exist before his power was made known by external operation. Very
differently does the Evangelist teach in this passage; for he does not
ascribe to *the Speech* a *beginning* of time, but says that he was
*from the beginning*, and thus rises beyond all ages. I am fully aware
how this dog barks against us, and what cavils were formerly raised by
the Arians, namely, that

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>in the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth,  
(<span id="vii.i-p8.2"></span>[Ge
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p8.2"></span>.md)

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>which nevertheless are not eternal, because
the word *beginning* refers to order, instead of denoting eternity. But
the Evangelist meets this calumny when he says,

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>*And the Speech was with God.* If *the
Speech* began to be at some time, they must find out some succession of
time in God; and undoubtedly by this clause John intended to distinguish
him from all created things. For many questions might arise, Where was
this *Speech*? How did he exert his power? What was his nature? How
might he be known? The Evangelist, therefore, declares that we must not
confine our views to the world and to created things; for he was always
united to God, before the world existed. Now when men date *the
beginning* from the origin of heaven and earth, do they not reduce
Christ to the common order of the world, from which he is excluded in
express terms by this passage? By this proceeding they offer an
egregious insult not only to the Son of God, but to his eternal Father,
whom they deprive of his wisdom. If we are not at liberty to conceive of
God without his *wisdom*, it must be acknowledged that we ought not to
seek the origin of *the Speech* any where else than in the Eternal
Wisdom of God.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>Servetus objects that *the Speech* cannot be
admitted to have existed any earlier than when Moses introduces God as
speaking. As if he did not subsist in God, because he was not publicly
made known: that is, as if he did not exist *within*, until he began to
appear *without*. But every pretense for outrageously absurd fancies of
this description is cut off by the Evangelist, when he affirms without
reservation, that *the Speech was with God*; for he expressly withdraws
us from every moment of time.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>Those who infer from the imperfect tense of
the verb  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) which is here used, that it
denotes continued existence, have little strength of argument to support
them. *Was*, they say, is a word more fitted to express the idea of
uninterrupted succession, than if John had said, *Has been*. But on
matters so weighty we ought to employ more solid arguments; and, indeed,
the argument which I have brought forward ought to be reckoned by us
sufficient; namely, that the Evangelist sends us to the eternal secrets
of God, that we may there learn that *the Speech* was, as it were
hidden, before he revealed himself in the external structure of the
world. Justly, therefore, does Augustine remark, that this *beginning*,
which is now mentioned, has no *beginning*; for though, in the order of
nature, the Father came before his *Wisdom*, yet those who conceive of
any point of time when he went before his *Wisdom*, deprive Him of his
glory. And this is the eternal generation, which, during a period of
infinite extent before the foundation of the world, lay hid in God, so
to speak — which, for a long succession of years, was obscurely shadowed
out to the Fathers under the Law, and at length was more fully
manifested in flesh.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>I wonder what induced the Latins to render
<span id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>ὁ λόγος by *Verbum*, (the Word;) for that
would rather have been the translation of <span
id="vii.i-p14.2"></span>τὸ ῥη̑μα. But granting that they had some
plausible reason, still it cannot be denied that *Sermo* (*the Speech*)
would have been far more appropriate. Hence it is evident, what
barbarous tyranny was exercised by the theologians of the Sorbonne,
 <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) who teased and stormed at Erasmus in
such a manner, because he had changed a single word for the better.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>*And the Speech was with God*. We have
already said that *the Son of God* is thus placed above the world and
above all the creatures, and is declared to have existed before all
ages. But at the same time this mode of expression attributes to him a
distinct personality from the Father; for it would have been absurd in
the Evangelist to say that *the Speech* *was* always *with God*, if he
had not some kind of subsistence peculiar to himself in God. This
passage serves, therefore, to refute the error of Sabellius; for it
shows that the Son is distinct from the Father. I have already remarked
that we ought to be sober in thinking, and modest in speaking, about
such high mysteries. And yet the ancient writers of the Church were
excusable, when, finding that they could not in any other way maintain
sound and pure doctrine in opposition to the perplexed and ambiguous
phraseology of the heretics, they were compelled to invent some words,
which after all had no other meaning than what is taught in the
Scriptures. They said that there are three Hypostases, or Subsistences,
or Persons, in the one and simple essence of God. The word; <span
id="vii.i-p16.1"></span>ὑπόστασις (Hypostasis) occurs in this sense in
<span id="vii.i-p16.2"></span>[Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.i-p16.2"></span>, to
which corresponds the Latin word *Substaatia*, (*substance*) as it is
employed by Hilary. The Persons (<span id="vii.i-p16.3"></span>τὰ
πρόσωπα) were called by them distinct properties in God, which present
themselves to the view of our minds; as Gregory Nazianzen says, “I
cannot think of the One (God) without having the Three (Persons) shining
around me.  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md)

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>*And the Speech was God*. That there may be
no remaining doubt as to Christ’s divine essence, the Evangelist
distinctly asserts that *he is God*. Now since there is but one God, it
follows that Christ is of the same essence with the Father, and yet
that, in some respect, he is distinct from the Father. But of the second
clause we have already spoken. As to the unity of the divine essence,
Arius showed prodigious wickedness, when, to avoid being compelled to
acknowledge the eternal Divinity of Christ, he prattled about I know not
what imaginary Deity;  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) but for our
part, when we are informed that *the Speech was God*, what right have we
any longer to call in question his eternal essence?

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span><span id="vii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>**2.** *He was in the beginning*. In order
to impress more deeply on our minds what had been already said, the
Evangelist condenses the two preceding clauses into a brief summary,
that *the Speech* always *was*, and that *he was with God*; so that it
may be understood that *the beginning* was before all time.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span><span id="vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>**3.** *All things were made by him*. Having
affirmed that the Speech is God, and having asserted his eternal
essence, he now proves his Divinity from his works. And this is the
practical knowledge, to which we ought to be chiefly accustomed; for the
mere name of God attributed to Christ will affect us little, if our
faith do not feel it to be such by experience. In reference to the Son
of God, he makes an assertion which strictly and properly applies to his
person. Sometimes, indeed, Paul simply declares that *all things are by
God*, (<span id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>[Ro
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>.md)
but whenever the Son is compared with the Father, he is usually
distinguished by this mark. Accordingly, the ordinary mode of expression
is here employed, that the Father *made all things by* the Son, and that
all things are by God through the Son. Now the design of the Evangelist
is, as I have already said, to show that no sooner was the world created
than *the Speech* of God came forth into external operation; for having
formerly been incomprehensible in his essence, he then became publicly
known by the effect of his power. There are some, indeed, even among
philosophers, who make God to be the Master-builder of the world in such
a manner as to ascribe to him intelligence in framing this work. So far
they are in the right, for they agree with Scripture; but as they
immediately fly off into frivolous speculations, there is no reason why
we should eagerly desire to have their testimonies; but, on the
contrary, we ought to be satisfied with this inspired declaration, well
knowing that it conveys far more than our mind is able to comprehend.

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>*And without him was not any thing made that
was made*. Though there is a variety of readings in this passage, yet
for my own part, I have no hesitation in taking it continuously thus:
*not any thing was made that was made*; and in this almost all the Greek
manuscripts, or at least those of them which are most approved, are
found to agree; besides, the sense requires it. Those who separate the
words, *which was made*, from the preceding clause, so as to connect
them with the following one, bring out a forced sense: *what was made
was in him life*; that is, lived, or was sustained in life.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) But they will never show that this mode
of expression is, in any instance, applied to creatures. Augustine, who
is excessively addicted to the philosophy of Plato, is carried along,
according to custom, to the doctrine of ideas; that before God made the
world, he had the form of the whole building conceived in his mind; and
so the life of those things which did not yet exist was in Christ,
because the creation of the world was appointed in him. But how widely
different this is From the intention of the Evangelist we shall
immediately see.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>I now return to the former clause. This is
not a faulty redundancy, (<span id="vii.i-p26.1"></span>περιττολογία) as
it appears to be; for as Satan endeavors, by every possible method, to
take any thing from Christ, the Evangelist intended to declare
expressly, that *of those things which have been made* there is no
exception whatever.

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span><span id="vii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>**4.** *In him was life*. Hitherto he has
taught us, that by *the Speech* of God *all* *things were created*. He
now attributes to him, in the same manner, the preservation of those
things which had been created, as if he had said, that in the creation
of the world there was not merely displayed a sudden exercise of his
power, which soon passed away, but that it is manifested in the steady
and regular order of nature, as he is said to uphold all things *by the
word* or will *of his power*, (<span id="vii.i-p28.1"></span>[Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p28.1"></span>.md).
This *life* may be extended either to inanimate creatures, (which live
after their own manner, though they are devoid of feeling,) or may be
explained in reference to *living* creatures alone. It is of little
consequence which you choose; for the simple meaning is, that *the
Speech* of God was not only the source of *life* to all the creatures,
so that those which were not began to be, but that his *life*-giving
power causes them to remain in their condition; for were it not that his
continued inspiration gives vigor to the world, every thing that *lives*
would immediately decay, or be reduced to nothing. In a word, what Paul
ascribes to God, that *in him we are*, *and move*, *and live*, (<span
id="vii.i-p28.2"></span>[Ac 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.i-p28.2"></span>,) John declares to be accomplished by the
gracious agency of *the Speech*; so that it is God who gives us *life*,
but it is by the eternal *Speech*

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>*The life was the light of men*. The other
interpretations, which do not accord with the meaning of the Evangelist,
I intentionally pass by. He speaks here, in my opinion, of that part of
*life* in which men excel other animals; and informs us that *the life*
which was bestowed on *men* was not of an ordinary description, but was
united to *the light* of understanding. He separates man from the rank
of other creatures; because we perceive more readily the power of God by
feeling it in us than by beholding it at a distance. Thus Paul charges
us not *to seek God* at a distance, because he makes himself to be felt
within us, (<span id="vii.i-p29.1"></span>[Ac
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span id="vii.i-p29.1"></span>..md)
After having presented a general exhibition of the kindness of Christ,
in order to induce men to take a nearer view of it, he points out what
has been bestowed peculiarly on themselves; namely, that they were not
created like the beasts, but having been endued with reason, they had
obtained a higher rank. As it is not in vain that God imparts his light
to their minds, it follows that the purpose for which they were created
was, that they might acknowledge Him who is the Author of so excellent a
blessing. And since this light, of which *the Speech* was the source,
has been conveyed from him to us, it ought to serve as a mirror, in
which we may clearly behold the divine power of *the Speech*

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span><span id="vii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span>**5.** *And the light shineth in darkness*.
It might be objected, that the passages of Scripture in which men are
called blind are so numerous and that the blindness for which they are
condemned is but too well known. For in all their reasoning faculties
they miserably fail. How comes it that there are so many labyrinths of
errors in the world, but because men, by their own guidance, are led
only to vanity and lies? But if no *light* appears in men, that
testimony of the divinity of Christ, which the Evangelist lately
mentioned, is destroyed; for that is the third step, as I have said,
that in *the life of men* there is something more excellent than motion
and breathing. The Evangelist anticipates this question, and first of
all lays down this caution, that *the light* which was originally
bestowed on men must not be estimated by their present condition;
because in this corrupted and degenerate nature *light* has been turned
into *darkness*. And yet he affirms that the *light* of understanding is
not wholly extinguished; for, amidst the thick darkness of the human
mind, some remaining sparks of the brightness still shine.

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>My readers now understand that this sentence
contains two clauses; for he says that men are now widely distant from
that perfectly holy nature with which they were originally endued;
because their understanding, which ought to have shed *light* in every
direction, has been plunged in darkness, and is wretchedly blinded; and
that thus the glory of Christ may be said to be *darkened* amidst this
corruption of nature. But, on the other hand, the Evangelist maintains
that, in the midst of the *darkness*:, there are still some remains of
light, which show in some degree the divine power of Christ. The
Evangelist admits, therefore, that the mind of man is blinded; so that
it may justly be pronounced to be covered with *darkness*. For he might
have used a milder term, and might have said that the light is dark or
cloudy; but he chose to state more distinctly how wretched our condition
has become since the fall of the first man. The statement that *the
light shineth in darkness* is not at all intended for the commendation
of depraved nature, but rather for taking away every excuse for
ignorance.

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>*And the darkness did not comprehend it*.
Although by that small measure of *light* which still remains in us, the
Son of God has always invited men to himself, yet the Evangelist says
that this was attended by no advantage, because *seeing*, *they did not
see*, (<span id="vii.i-p33.1"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="vii.i-p33.1"></span>..md)
For since man lost the favor of God, his mind is so completely
overwhelmed by the thralldom of ignorance, that any portion of *light*
which remains in it is quenched and useless. This is daily proved by
experience; for all who are not regenerated by the Spirit of God possess
some reason, and this is an undeniable proof that man was made not only
to breathe, but to have understanding. But by that guidance of their
reason they do not come to God, and do not even approach to him; so that
all their understanding is nothing else than mere vanity. Hence it
follows that there is no hope of the salvation of men, unless God grant
new aid; for though the Son of God sheds his *light* upon them, they are
so dull that they *do not comprehend* whence that *light* proceeds, but
are carried away by foolish and wicked imaginations to absolute madness.

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>The *light* which still dwells in corrupt
nature consists chiefly of two parts; for, first, all men naturally
possess some seed of religion; and, secondly, the distinction between
good and evil is engraven on their consciences. But what are the fruits
that ultimately spring from it, except that religion degenerates into a
thousand monsters of superstition, and conscience perverts every
decision, so as to confound vice with virtue? In short, natural reason
never will direct men to Christ; and as to their being endued with
prudence for regulating their lives, or born to cultivate the liberal
arts and sciences, all this passes away without yielding any advantage.

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>It ought to be understood that the
Evangelist speaks of natural gifts only, and does not as yet say any
thing about the grace of regeneration. For there are two distinct powers
which belong to the Son of God: the first, which is manifested in the
structure of the world and the order of nature; and the second, by which
he renews and restores fallen nature. As he is the eternal *Speech* of
God, by him the world was made; by his power all things continue to
possess the life which they once received; man especially was endued
with an extraordinary gift of understanding; and though by his revolt he
lost the light of understanding, yet he still sees and understands, so
that what he naturally possesses from the grace of the Son of God is not
entirely destroyed. But since by his stupidity and perverseness he
darkens the light which still dwells in him, it remains that a new
office be undertaken by the Son of God, the office of Mediator, to
renew, by the Spirit of regeneration, man who had been ruined. Those
persons, therefore, reason absurdly and inconclusively, who refer this
*light*, which the Evangelist mentions, to the gospel and the doctrine
of salvation.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
1:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**6**. There was a man sent by God, whose
name was John. **7**. He came for a testimony  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) , that he might testify of the light;
that by him all might believe. **8**. He was not that light, but that he
might testify concerning the light. **9**. The true light was that which
enlighteneth every man who cometh into the world. **10**. He was in the
world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.
**11**. He came into his own, and his own received him not. **12**. But
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God; namely, to those who believe in his name; **13**. Who were born not
of bloods  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span><span id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span>**6.** *There was a man*. The Evangelist now
begins to discourse about the manner in which the Son of God was
manifested in flesh; and that none may doubt that Christ is the eternal
Son of God, he relates that Christ was announced by *John* the Baptist,
as his herald. For not only did Christ exhibit himself to be seen by
men, but he chose also to be made known by the testimony and doctrine of
*John*; or rather, God the Father sent this witness before his Christ,
that they might more willingly receive the salvation offered by him.

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>But it might at first sight appear
ridiculous that Christ should receive *testimony* from another, as if he
needed it; while, on the contrary, he declares that he *does not seek
testimony from man*, (<span id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Joh
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034)<span id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>..md)
The answer is easy and obvious, that this witness was appointed, not for
the sake of Christ, but for our sake. If it be objected that the
testimony of man is too weak to prove that Christ is the Son of God, it
is likewise easy to reply, that the Baptist is not adduced as a private
*witness*, but as one who, having received authority from God, sustained
the character rather of an angel than of a man. Accordingly, he receives
commendation not for his own virtues, but for this single circumstance,
that he was the ambassador of God. Nor is this at variance with the
fact, that the preaching of the gospel was committed to Christ, that he
might be a witness to himself; for the design contemplated by the
preaching of John was, that men might attend to the doctrine and
miracles of Christ.

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>*Sent by God*. He does not say so for the
purpose of confirming the baptism of John, but only mentions it in
passing. This circumstance is not sufficient to produce certainty, since
many run of their own accord, and boast that God has sent them; but the
Evangelist, intending afterwards to speak more fully about this
*witness*, reckoned it enough, for the present, to say in a single word,
that John did not come but by the command of God. We shall afterwards
see how he himself affirms that God is the Author of his ministry. We
must now recollect — what I formerly noticed — that what is asserted
about John is required in all the teachers of the Church, that they be
called by God; so that the authority of teaching may not be founded on
any other than on God alone.

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span>*Whose name was John*. He states the
*name*, not only for the purpose of pointing out the man, but because it
was given to him in accordance with what he really was. There is no room
to doubt that the Lord had reference to the office to which he appointed
*John*, when he commanded by the angel that he should be so called, that
by means of it all might acknowledge him to be the herald of divine
grace.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) For though the name <span
id="vii.ii-p11.2"></span>יהוחנן  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md)
(*Jehohannan*) may be taken in a passive signification, and may thus be
referred to the person, as denoting that *John* was *acceptable to God*;
yet for my own part, I willingly extend it to the benefit which others
ought to derive from him.  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span>7. *He came for a testimony*. The end of
his calling is briefly noticed; which was, that he might prepare a
Church for Christ, as, by inviting all to Christ, he shows plainly
enough that he did not come on his own account.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>8. *He was not that light*. So far was John
from needing commendation, that the Evangelist gives this warning, lest
his excessive brightness might obscure the glory of Christ. For there
were some who gazed so eagerly upon him that they neglected Christ; just
as if a person, enraptured with beholding the dawning of the day, would
not deign to turn his eyes towards the sun. In what sense the Evangelist
employs the word *light* we shall immediately see. All the godly,
indeed, are *light in the Lord*, (<span id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Eph
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>,.md)
because, in consequence of their being enlightened by his Spirit, they
not only see for themselves, but likewise direct others by their example
to the way of salvation. The apostles likewise are peculiarly called
*light*, (<span id="vii.ii-p15.2"></span>[Mt
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="vii.ii-p15.2"></span>,.md)
because they go before, holding out the torch of the Gospel, to dispel
the darkness of the world. But here the Evangelist speaks of him who is
the only and eternal source of illumination, as he immediately shows
more clearly.

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span><span id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span>**9.** *The true light was*. The Evangelist
did not intend to contrast *the true light* with *the false*, but to
distinguish Christ from all others, that none might imagine that what is
called *light* belongs to him in common with angels or men. The
distinction is, that whatever is luminous in heaven and in earth borrows
its splendor from some other object; but Christ is *the light*, shining
from itself and by itself, and enlightening the whole world by its
radiance; so that no other source or cause of splendor is anywhere to be
found. He gave the name of *the true light*, therefore, to that which
has by nature the power of giving *light*

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span>*Which enlighteneth every man*. The
Evangelist insists chiefly on this point, in order to show, from the
effect which every one of us perceives in him, that Christ is *the
light*. He might have reasoned more ingeniously, that Christ, as the
eternal light, has a splendor which is natural, and not brought from any
other quarter; but instead of doing so, he sends us back to the
experience which we all possess. For as Christ makes us all partakers of
his brightness, it must be acknowledged that to him alone belongs
strictly this honor of being called *light*

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span>This passage is commonly explained in two
ways. Some restrict the phrase, *every man*, to those who, having been
renewed by the Spirit of God, become partakers of the life-giving
*light*. Augustine employs the comparison of a schoolmaster who, if he
happen to be the only person who has a school in the town, will be
called the teacher *of all*, though there be many persons that do not go
to his school. They therefore understand the phrase in a comparative
sense, that all are enlightened by Christ, because no man can boast of
having obtained the *light* of life in any other way than by his grace.
But since the Evangelist employs the general phrase, *every man that
cometh into the world*, I am more inclined to adopt the other meaning,
which is, that from this *light* the rays are diffused over all mankind,
as I have already said. For we know that men have this peculiar
excellence which raises them above other animals, that they are endued
with reason and intelligence, and that they carry the distinction
between right and wrong engraven on their conscience. There is no man,
therefore, whom some perception of the eternal *light* does not reach.

<span id="vii.ii-p20"></span>But as there are fanatics who rashly strain
and torture this passage, so as to infer from it that the grace of
illumination is equally offered to all, let us remember that the only
subject here treated is the common light of nature, which is far
inferior to faith; for never will any man, by all the acuteness and
sagacity of his own mind, penetrate into the kingdom of God. It is the
Spirit of God alone who opens the gate of heaven to the elect. Next, let
us remember that the light of reason which God implanted in men has been
so obscured by sin, that amidst the thick darkness, and shocking
ignorance, and gulf of errors, there are hardly a few shining sparks
that are not utterly extinguished.

<span id="vii.ii-p21"></span><span id="vii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p22"></span>**10.** *He was in the world*. He accuses
men of ingratitude, because of their own accord, as it were, they were
so blinded, that the cause of the light which they enjoyed was unknown
to them. This extends to every age of the world; for before Christ was
manifested in the flesh, his power was everywhere displayed; and
therefore those daily effects ought to correct the stupidity of men.
What can be more unreasonable than to draw water from a running stream,
and never to think of the fountain from which that stream flows? It
follows that no proper excuse can be found for the ignorance of the
world in not knowing Christ, before he was manifested in the flesh; for
it arose from the indolence and wicked stupidity of those who had
opportunities of seeing Him always present by his power. The whole may
be summed up by saying, that never was Christ in such a manner absent
from the world, but that men, aroused by his rays, ought to have raised
their eyes towards him. Hence it follows, that the blame must be imputed
to themselves.

<span id="vii.ii-p23"></span><span id="vii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p24"></span>**11.** *He came into his own*. Here is
displayed the absolutely desperate wickedness and malice of men; here is
displayed their execrable impiety, that when the Son of God was
manifested in flesh to the Jews, whom God had separated to himself from
the other nations to be His own heritage, he was not *acknowledged* or
*received*. This passage also has received various explanations. For
some think that the Evangelist speaks of the whole world
indiscriminately; and certainly there is no part of the world which the
Son of God may not lawfully claim as his own property. According to
them, the meaning is: “When Christ came down into the world, he did not
enter into another person’s territories, for the whole human race was
his own inheritance.” But I approve more highly of the opinion of those
who refer it to the Jews alone; for there is an implied comparison, by
which the Evangelist represents the heinous ingratitude of men. The Son
of God had solicited an abode for himself in one nation; when he
appeared there, he was rejected; and this shows clearly the awfully
wicked blindness of men. In making this statement, the sole object of
the Evangelist must have been to remove the offense which many would be
apt to take in consequence of the unbelief of the Jews. For when he was
despised and rejected by that nation to which he had been especially
promised, who would reckon him to be the Redeemer of the whole world? We
see what extraordinary pains the Apostle Paul takes in handling this
subject.

<span id="vii.ii-p25"></span>Here both the Verb and the Noun are highly
emphatic. *He came*. The Evangelist says that the Son of God *came* to
that place where he formerly was; and by this expression he must mean a
new and extraordinary kind of presence, by which the Son of God was
manifested, so that men might have a nearer view of him. *Into his own*.
By this phrase the Evangelist compares the Jews with other nations;
because by an extraordinary privilege they had been adopted into the
family of God. Christ therefore was first offered to them as his own
household, and as belonging to his empire by a peculiar right. To the
same purpose is that complaint of God by Isaiah:

<span id="vii.ii-p26"></span>The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master’s crib, but Israel knoweth me not, (<span
id="vii.ii-p26.1"></span>[Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.ii-p26.1"></span>;)

<span id="vii.ii-p27"></span>for though he has dominion over the whole
world, yet he represents himself to be, in peculiar manner, the Lord of
Israel, whom he had collected, as it were, into a sacred fold.

<span id="vii.ii-p28"></span><span id="vii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p29"></span>**12.** *But to as many as received him*.
That none may be retarded by this stumbling-block, that the Jews
despised and rejected Christ, the Evangelist exalts above heaven the
godly who believe in him; for he says that by faith they obtain this
glory of being reckoned *the sons of God*. The universal term, *as
many*, contains an implied contrast; for the Jews were carried away by a
blind vaunting,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) as if they
exclusively had God bound to themselves. The Evangelist declares that
their condition is changed, because the Jews have been rejected, and
their place, which had been left empty, is occupied by the Jews; for it
is as if he transferred the right of adoption to strangers. This is what
Paul says, that the destruction of one nation was the life of the whole
world, (<span id="vii.ii-p30.2"></span>[Ro
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)<span id="vii.ii-p30.2"></span>;.md)
for the Gospel, which might be said to have been banished from them,
began to be spread far and wide throughout the whole world. They were
thus deprived of the privilege which they enjoyed above others. But
their impiety was no obstruction to Christ; for he erected elsewhere the
throne of his kingdom, and called indiscriminately to the hope of
salvation all nations which formerly appeared to have been rejected by
God.

<span id="vii.ii-p31"></span>*He gave them power*. The word <span
id="vii.ii-p31.1"></span>ἐξουσία here appears to me to mean a right, or
claim; and it would be better to translate it so, in order to refute the
false opinions of the Papists; for they wickedly pervert this passage by
understanding it to mean, that nothing more than a choice is allowed to
us, if we think fit to avail ourselves of this privilege. In this way
they extract free-will from this phrase; but as well might they extract
fire from water. There is some plausibility in this at first sight; for
the Evangelist does not say that Christ makes them *sons of God*, but
that *he gives them power* to become such. Hence they infer that it is
this grace only that is offered to us, and that the liberty to enjoy or
to reject it is placed at our disposal. But this frivolous attempt to
catch at a single word is set aside by what immediately follows; for the
Evangelist adds, that they *become the sons of God*, *not by the will
which belongs to the flesh*, but when they are born of God. But if faith
regenerates us, so that we are the sons of God, and if God breathes
faith into us from heaven, it plainly appears that not by possibility
only, but actually — as we say — is the grace of adoption offered to us
by Christ. And, indeed, the Greek word, <span
id="vii.ii-p31.2"></span>ἐξουσία is sometimes put for <span
id="vii.ii-p31.3"></span>ἀξίωσις, (a claim,) a meaning which falls in
admirably with this passage.

<span id="vii.ii-p32"></span>The circumlocution which the Evangelist has
employed tends more to magnify the excellence of grace, than if he had
said in a single word, that all who believe in Christ are made by him
*sons of God*. For he speaks here of the unclean and profane, who,
having been condemned to perpetual ignominy, lay in the darkness of
death. Christ exhibited an astonishing instance of his grace in
conferring this honor on such persons, so that they began, all at once,
to be *sons of God*; and the greatness of this privilege is justly
extolled by the Evangelist, as also by Paul, when he ascribes it to

<span id="vii.ii-p33"></span>God, who is rich in mercy, for his great
love  
with which he loved us, (<span id="vii.ii-p33.2"></span>[Eph
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span id="vii.ii-p33.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.ii-p34"></span>But if any person shall prefer to take the
word *power* in its ordinary acceptation, still the Evangelist does not
mean by it any intermediate faculty, or one which does not include the
full and complete effect; but, on the contrary, means that Christ gave
to the unclean and the uncircumcised what appeared to be impossible; for
an incredible change took place when *out of stones* Christ *raised up
children to God*, (<span id="vii.ii-p34.1"></span>[Mt
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="vii.ii-p34.1"></span>..md)
The *power*, therefore, is that *fitness* (<span
id="vii.ii-p34.2"></span>ἱκανότης) which Paul mentions, when he

<span id="vii.ii-p35"></span>gives thanks to God, who hath made us fit
(or meet) to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints, (<span
id="vii.ii-p35.1"></span>[Col
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012)<span id="vii.ii-p35.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.ii-p36"></span>*Who believe in his name*. He expresses
briefly the manner of *receiving* Christ, that is, *believing in him*.
Having been engrafted into Christ by faith, we obtain the right of
adoption, so as to be *the sons of God*. And, indeed, as he is the
only-begotten Son of God, it is only so far as we are members of him
that this honor at all belongs to us. Here again the notion of the
Papists about the word *power* is refuted.  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) The Evangelist declares that this *power*
is given to those who already *believe*. Now it is certain that such
persons are in reality *the sons of God*. They detract too much from the
value of faith who say that, by *believing*, a man obtains nothing more
than that he may become *a son of God*, if he chooses; for instead of
present effect they put a *power* which is held in uncertainty and
suspense.

<span id="vii.ii-p38"></span>The contradiction appears still more
glaring from what immediately follows. The Evangelist says that those
who *believe* are already *born of God* It is not therefore, a mere
liberty of choice that is offered, since they obtain the privilege
itself that is in question. Although the Hebrew word, <span
id="vii.ii-p38.2"></span>שם (*Name*) is sometimes used to denote
*power*, yet here it denotes a relation to the doctrine of the Gospel;
for when Christ is preached to us, then it is that we *believe* in him.
I speak of the ordinary method by which the Lord leads us to faith; and
this ought to be carefully observed, for there are many who foolishly
contrive for themselves a confused faith, without any understanding of
doctrine, as nothing is more common among the Papists than the word
*believe*, though there is not among them any knowledge of Christ from
hearing the Gospel. Christ, therefore, offers himself to us by the
Gospel, and we receive him by faith.

<span id="vii.ii-p39"></span>**13.** *Who were born not of blood*  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) Some think that an indirect reference is
here made to the preposterous confidence of the Jews, and I willingly
adopt that opinion. They had continually in their mouth the nobleness of
their lineage, as if, because they were descended from a holy stock,
they were naturally holy. And justly might they have gloried in their
descent from Abraham, if they had been lawful sons, and not bastards;
but the glowing of faith ascribes nothing whatever to carnal generation,
but acknowledges its obligation to the grace of God alone for all that
is good. John, therefore, says, that those among the formerly unclean
Gentiles who believe in Christ *are not born* the sons of God from the
womb, but are renewed by God, that they may begin to be his sons. The
reason why he uses the word *blood* in the plural number appears to have
been, that he might express more fully a long succession of lineage; for
this was a part of the boasting among the Jews, that they could trace
their descent, by an uninterrupted line, upwards to the patriarchs.

<span id="vii.ii-p41"></span>*The will of the flesh and the will of man*
appear to me to mean the same thing; for I see no reason why *flesh*
should be supposed to signify *woman*, as Augustine and many others
explain it. On the contrary, the Evangelist repeats the same thing in a
variety of words, in order to explain it more fully, and impress it more
deeply on the minds of men. Though he refers directly to the Jews, who
gloried in the flesh, yet from this passage a general doctrine may be
obtained: that our being reckoned the sons of God does not belong to our
nature, and does not proceed from us, but because God *begat us*
willingly, (<span id="vii.ii-p41.1"></span>[Jas
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018)<span id="vii.ii-p41.1"></span>,.md)
that is, from undeserved love. Hence it follows, first, that faith does
not proceed from ourselves, but is the fruit of spiritual regeneration;
for the Evangelist affirms that no man can believe, unless he be
begotten of God; and therefore faith is a heavenly gift. It follows,
secondly, that faith is not bare or cold knowledge, since no man can
believe who has not been renewed by the Spirit of God.

<span id="vii.ii-p42"></span>It may be thought that the Evangelist
reverses the natural order by making regeneration to precede faith,
whereas, on the contrary, it is an effect of faith, and therefore ought
to be placed later. I reply, that both statements perfectly agree;
because by faith we receive the *incorruptible seed*, (<span
id="vii.ii-p42.1"></span>[1Pe
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span id="vii.ii-p42.1"></span>,.md)
by which we are born again to a new and divine life. And yet faith
itself is a work of the Holy Spirit, who dwells in none but the children
of God. So then, in various respects, faith is a part of our
regeneration, and an entrance into the kingdom of God, that he may
reckon us among his children. The illumination of our minds by the Holy
Spirit belongs to our renewal, and thus faith flows from regeneration as
from its source; but since it is by the same faith that we receive
Christ, who sanctifies us by his Spirit, on that account it is said to
be the beginning of our adoption.

<span id="vii.ii-p43"></span>Another solution, still more plain and
easy, may be offered; for when the Lord breathes faith into us, he
regenerates us by some method that is hidden and unknown to us; but
after we have received faith, we perceive, by a lively feeling of
conscience, not only the grace of adoption, but also newness of life and
the other gifts of the Holy Spirit. For since faith, as we have said,
receives Christ, it puts us in possession, so to speak, of all his
blessings. Thus so far as respects our sense, it is only after having
believed — that we begin to be the sons of God. But if the inheritance
of eternal life is the fruit of adoption, we see how the Evangelist
ascribes the whole of our salvation to the grace of Christ alone; and,
indeed, how closely soever men examine themselves, they will find
nothing that is worthy of the children of God, except what Christ has
bestowed on them.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**14**. And the Speech was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only-begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span><span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**14.** *And the Speech was made flesh*.
The Evangelist shows what was that coming of Christ which he had
mentioned; namely, that having been clothed with our flesh, he showed
himself openly to the world. Although the Evangelist touches briefly the
unutterable mystery, that the Son of God was clothed with human nature,
yet this brevity is wonderfully perspicuous. Here some madmen amuse
themselves with foolish and trivial subtleties of this sort: that *the
Speech* is said *to have been made flesh*, because God sent his Son into
the world, according to the conception which he had formed in his mind;
as if *the Speech* were I know not what shadowy image. But we have
demonstrated that that word denotes a real hypostasis, or subsistence,
in the essence of God.

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>The word *Flesh* expresses the meaning of
the Evangelist more forcibly than if he had said that *he was made man*.
He intended to show to what a mean and despicable condition the Son of
God, on our account, descended from the height of his heavenly glory.
When Scripture speaks of man contemptuously, it calls him *flesh*. Now,
though there be so wide a distance between the spiritual glory of *the
Speech* of God and the abominable filth of our *flesh*, yet the Son of
God stooped so low as to take upon himself that *flesh*, subject to so
many miseries. The word *flesh* is not taken here for corrupt nature,
(as it is often used by Paul,) but for mortal man; though it marks
disdainfully his frail and perishing nature, as in these and similar
passages, *for he remembered that they were* flesh, (<span
id="vii.iii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span id="vii.iii-p6.1"></span>;.md)
*all* flesh *is grass*, (<span id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>[Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>..md)
We must at the same time observe, however, that this is a figure of
speech in which a part is taken for the whole; for the lower part
includes the whole man.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) It was
therefore highly foolish in Apollinaris to imagine that Christ was
merely clothed with a human body without a soul; for it may easily be
proved from innumerable passages, that he had a soul as well as a body;
and when Scripture calls men *flesh*, it does not therefore deprive them
of a soul.

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span>The plain meaning therefore is, that *the
Speech* begotten by God before all ages, and who always dwelt with the
Father, *was made man*. On this article there are two things chiefly to
be observed. The first is, that two natures were so united in one Person
in Christ, that one and the same Christ is true God and true man. The
second is, that the unity of person does not hinder the two natures from
remaining distinct, so that his Divinity retains all that is peculiar to
itself, and his humanity holds separately whatever belongs to it. And,
therefore, as Satan has made a variety of foolish attempts to overturn
sound doctrine by heretics, he has always brought forward one or another
of these two errors; either that he was the Son of God and the Son of
man in so confused a manner, that neither his Divinity remained entire,
nor did he wear the true nature of man; or that he was clothed with
*flesh*, so as to be as it were double, and to have two separate
persons. Thus Nestorius expressly acknowledged both natures, but
imagined two Christs, one who was God, and another who was man.
Eutyches, on the other hand, while he acknowledged that the one Christ
is the Son of God and the Son of man, left him neither of the two
natures, but imagined that they were mingled together. And in the
present day, Servetus and the Anabaptists invent a Christ who is
confusedly compounded of two natures, as if he were a Divine man. In
words, indeed, he acknowledges that Christ is God; but if you admit his
raving imaginations, the Divinity is at one time changed into human
nature, and at another time, the nature of man is swallowed up by the
Divinity.

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span>The Evangelist says what is well adapted to
refute both of these blasphemies. When he tells us that *the Speech was
made flesh*, we clearly infer from this the unity of his Person; for it
is impossible that he who is now a man could be any other than he who
was always the true God, since it is said that God *was made* man. On
the other hand, since he distinctly gives to the man Christ the name of
*the Speech*, it follows that Christ, when he became man, did not cease
to be what he formerly was, and that no change took place in that
eternal essence of God which was clothed with *flesh*. In short, the Son
of God began to be man in such a manner that he still continues to be
that eternal *Speech* who had no beginning of time.

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span>*And dwelt*. Those who explain that *the
flesh* served, as it were, for an abode to Christ, do not perceive the
meaning of the Evangelist; for he does not ascribe to Christ a permanent
residence amongst us, but says that he remained in it as a guest, for a
short time. For the word which he employs (<span
id="vii.iii-p10.1"></span>ἐσκήνωσεν) is taken from *tabernacles*  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) He means nothing else than that Christ
discharged on the earth the office which had been appointed to him; or,
that he did not merely appear for a single moment, but that he conversed
among men until he completed the course of his office.

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span>*Among us*. It is doubtful whether he
speaks of men in general, or only of himself and the rest of the
disciples who were eye-witnesses of what he says. For my own part, I
approve more highly of the second view for the Evangelist immediately
adds:

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span>*And we beheld his glory*. for though all
men might have beheld the *glory* of Christ, yet it was unknown to the
greater part on account of their blindness. It was only a few, whose
eyes the Holy Spirit opened, that saw this manifestation of *glory*. In
a word, Christ was known to be man in such a manner that he exhibited in
his Person something far more noble and excellent. Hence it follows that
the majesty of God was not annihilated, though it was surrounded by
*flesh*; it was indeed concealed under the low condition of the *flesh*,
but so as to cause its splendor to be seen.

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span>*As of the only-begotten of the Father*.
The word *as* does not, in this passage, denote an inappropriate
comparison, but rather expresses true and hearty approbation; as when
Paul says, *Walk* as *children of light*, he bids us actually
demonstrate by our works that we are *the children of light*. The
Evangelist therefore means, that in Christ was *beheld a glory* which
was worthy of the Son of God, and which was a sure proof of his
Divinity. He calls him *the Only-begotten*, because he is the only Son
of God by nature; as if he would place him above men and angels, and
would claim for him alone what belongs to no creature.

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span>*Full of grace*. There were, indeed, other
things in which the majesty of Christ appeared, but the Evangelist
selected this instance in preference to others, in order to train us to
the speculative rather than the practical knowledge of it; and this
ought to be carefully observed. Certainly when Christ walked with dry
feet upon the waters, (<span id="vii.iii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.iii-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.iii-p15.2"></span>[Mr
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#048.md)<span id="vii.iii-p15.2"></span>;
<span id="vii.iii-p15.3"></span>[Joh
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#019)<span id="vii.iii-p15.3"></span>,.md)
when he cast out devils, and when he displayed his power in other
miracles, he might be known to be *the only-begotten* Son of God; but
the Evangelist brings forward a part of the approbation, from which
faith obtains delightful advantage, because Christ demonstrated that he
actually is an inexhaustible fountain *of grace and truth*. Stephen,
too, is said to have been *full of grace*,  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) but in a different sense; for the
*fullness of grace* in Christ is the fountain from which all of us must
draw, as we shall have occasion shortly afterwards to explain more
fully.

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span>*Grace and truth*. This might be taken, by
a figure of speech, for *true grace*, or the latter term might be
explanatory, thus: that he was *full of grace*, which is *truth* or
perfection; but as we shall find that he immediately afterwards repeats
the same mode of expression, I think that the meaning is the same in
both passages. This *grace and truth* he afterwards contrasts with *the
Law*; and therefore I interpret it as simply meaning, that the apostles
acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, because he had in himself the
fulfillment of things which belong to the spiritual kingdom of God; and,
in short, that in all things he showed himself to be the Redeemer and
Messiah; which is the most striking mark by which he ought to be
distinguished from all others.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**15**. John testifieth  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) of himself, and cried, saying, This is he
of whom I spoke; who, coming after me, was preferred to me, for he was
more excellent than I.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) **16**. And
out of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. **17**.
For the law was given by Moses; grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
**18**. No man hath ever seen God: the only-begotten Son himself, who is
in the bosom of the Father, hath declared him.

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span><span id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span>**15.** *John testifieth*. He now relates
what was the preaching of John. By using the verb *testifieth* (<span
id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>μαρτυρεῖ) in the present tense,  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) he denotes a continued act, and certainly
this doctrine must be continually in force, as if the voice of John were
continually resounding in the ears of men. In the same manner he
afterwards uses the word *cry*, to intimate that the doctrine of John
was in no degree obscure or ambiguous, and that he did not mutter among
a few men,  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) but openly, and with a
loud voice, preached Christ. The first sentence is intended to convey
the statement, that he was sent for the sake of Christ, and therefore
that it would have been unreasonable that he should be exalted, while
Christ was lying low.

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span>*This is he of whom I spoke*. By these
words he means that his intention was, from the beginning, to make
Christ known, and that this was the design of his public discourses; as,
indeed, there was no other way in which he could discharge his office as
ambassador than by calling his disciples to Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>*Who, coming after me*. Though John the
Baptist was older than Christ by a few months, yet he does not now speak
of age; but as he had discharged the office of prophet for a short
period before Christ appeared in public, so he makes himself the
predecessor with respect to time. With respect, therefore, to public
manifestation, Christ *came after* John the Baptist. The words which
follow might be literally rendered, *he was made before me*, *for he was
before me*; but the meaning is, that Christ was justly *preferred to*
John, *because he was more excellent*. He therefore surrenders his
office to Christ and — as the proverb runs — “delivers to him the
torch,” or gives way to him as his successor. But as he arose later in
the order of time, John reminds his hearers that this is no reason why
he should not be *preferred to* himself, as his rank deserved. Thus, all
who are superior to others, either in the gifts of God or in any degree
of honor, must remain in their own rank, so as to be placed below
Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span><span id="vii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span>**16.** *And out of his fullness*. He
begins now to preach about the office of Christ, that it contains within
itself an abundance of all blessings, so that no part of salvation must
be sought anywhere else. True, indeed, the fountain of life,
righteousness, virtue, and wisdom, is with God, but to us it is a hidden
and inaccessible fountain. But an abundance of those things is exhibited
to us in Christ, that we may be permitted to have recourse to him; for
he is ready to flow to us, provided that we open up a channel by faith.
He declares in general, that out of Christ we ought not to seek any
thing good, though this sentence consists of several clauses. First, he
shows that we are all utterly destitute and empty of spiritual
blessings; for the abundance which exists in Christ is intended to
supply our deficiency, to relieve our poverty, to satisfy our hunger and
thirst. Secondly, he warns us that, as soon as we have departed from
Christ, it is ill vain for us to seek a single drop of happiness,
because God hath determined that whatever is good shall reside in him
alone. Accordingly, we shall find angels and men to be dry, heaven to be
empty, the earth to be unproductive, and, in short, all things to be of
no value, if we wish to be partakers of the gifts of God in any other
way than through Christ. Thirdly, he assures us that we shall have no
reason to fear the want of any thing, provided that we draw from the
*fullness* of Christ, which is in every respect; so complete, that we
shall experience it to be a truly inexhaustible fountain; and John
classes himself with the rest, not for the sake of modesty, but to make
it more evident that no man whatever is excepted.

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span>It is indeed uncertain whether he speaks
generally of the whole human race, or means only those who, subsequently
to the manifestation of Christ in the flesh, have been made more fully
partakers of his blessings. All the godly, no doubt, who lived under the
law, drew out of the same *fullness*; but as John immediately afterwards
distinguishes between different periods, it is more probable that here
he especially recommends that rich abundance of blessings which Christ
displayed at his coming. For we know that under the Law the gifts of God
were more sparingly tasted, but that when Christ was manifested in
flesh, they were poured out, as it were, with a full hand, even to
satiety. Not that any of us has obtained a greater abundance of the
grace of the Spirit than Abraham did, but I speak of God’s ordinary
dispensation, and of the way and manner of dispensing. John the Baptist,
that he may the more freely invite his disciples to come to Christ,
declares that in him is laid up for all an abundance of the blessings of
which they are destitute. And yet if any one choose to extend the
meaning farther, there will be no absurdity in doing so; or rather, it
will agree well with the strain of the discourse, that all the fathers,
from the beginning of the world, drew from Christ all the gifts which
they possessed; for though *the law was given by Moses*, yet they did
not obtain grace by it. But I have already stated what appears to me to
be the preferable view; namely, that John here compares us with the
fathers, so as to magnify, by means of that comparison, what has been
given to us.

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span>*And, grace for grace*. In what manner
Augustine explains this passage is well known - that all the blessings
which God bestows upon us from time to time, and at length life
everlasting, are not granted as the reward due to our merits, but that
it proceeds from pure liberality that God thus rewards former *grace*,
and crowns his own gifts in us. This is piously and judiciously said,
but has nothing to do with the present passage. The meaning would be
more simple if you were to take the word *for* (<span
id="vii.iv-p15.1"></span>ἀντὶ) comparatively, as meaning, that whatever
graces God bestows on us, proceed equally from the same source. It might
also be taken as pointing out the final cause, that we now receive
*grace*, that God may one day fulfill the work of our salvation, which
will be the fulfillment of *grace*. For my own part, I agree with the
opinion of those who say that we are watered with the *graces* which
were poured out on Christ; for what we receive from Christ he does not
bestow upon us as being God, but the Father communicated to him what
would flow to us as through a channel. This is the anointing with which
he was anointed, that he might anoint us all along with him. Hence, too,
he is called Christ, (*the Anointed*,) and we are called Christians.

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span><span id="vii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span>**17.** *For the Law was given by Moses*.
This is an anticipation, by which he meets an objection that was likely
to arise; for so highly was *Moses* esteemed by the Jews that they could
hardly receive anything that differed from him. The Evangelist therefore
shows how far inferior the ministry of *Moses* was to the power of
*Christ*. At the same time, this comparison sheds no small luster on the
power of Christ; for while the utmost possible deference was rendered to
*Moses* by the Jews, the Evangelist reminds them that what he brought
was exceedingly small, when compared with the grace of Christ. It would
otherwise have been a great hindrance, that they expected to receive
from *the Law* what we can only obtain through Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span>But we must attend to the antithesis, when
he contrasts *the law* with *grace and truth*; for his meaning is, that
*the law* wanted both of them.  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) The
word *Truth* denotes, in my opinion, a fixed and permanent state of
things. By the word *Grace* I understand the spiritual fulfillment of
those things, the bare letter of which was contained in *the Law*. And
those two words may be supposed to refer to the same thing, by a
well-known figure of speech, (hypallage;) as if he had said, that
*grace*, in which the *truth* of *the Law* consists, was at length
exhibited in *Christ*. But as the meaning will be in no degree affected,
it is of no importance whether you view them as united or as
distinguished. This at least is certain, that the Evangelist means, that
in *the Law* there was nothing more than a shadowy image of spiritual
blessings, but that they are actually found in *Christ*; whence it
follows, that if you separate *the Law* from *Christ*, there remains
nothing in it but empty figures. For this reason Paul says that

<span id="vii.iv-p20"></span>*the shadows* were in *the law*, but *the
body* is *in Christ*,  
(<span id="vii.iv-p20.2"></span>[Col
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)<span id="vii.iv-p20.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.iv-p21"></span>And yet it must not be supposed that
anything was exhibited by *the Law* in a manner fitted to deceive; for
*Christ* is the soul which gives life to that which would otherwise have
been dead under *the law*. But here a totally different question meets
us, namely, what *the law* could do by itself and without Christ; and
the Evangelist maintains that nothing permanently valuable is found in
it until we come to Christ. This *truth* consists in our obtaining
through Christ that *grace* which *the law* could not at all bestow; and
therefore I take the word *grace* in a general sense, as denoting both
the unconditional forgiveness of sins, and the renewal of the heart. For
while the Evangelist points out briefly the distinction between the Old
and New Testaments,  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) (which is more
fully described in <span id="vii.iv-p22.1"></span>[Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="vii.iv-p22.1"></span>,.md)
he includes in this word all that relates to spiritual righteousness.
Now this righteousness consists of two parts; first, that God is
reconciled to us by free *grace*, in not imputing to us our sins; and,
secondly, that he has engraven his *law* in our hearts, and, by his
Spirit, renews men within to obedience to it; from which it is evident
that *the Law* is incorrectly and falsely expounded, if there are any
whose attention it fixes on itself, or whom it hinders from coming to
*Christ*

<span id="vii.iv-p23"></span><span id="vii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p24"></span>**18.** *No man hath ever seen God*. Most
appropriately is this added to confirm the preceding statement; for the
knowledge of God is the door by which we enter into the enjoyment of all
blessings; and as it is by Christ alone that God makes himself known to
us, hence too it follows that we ought to seek all things from Christ.
This order of doctrine ought to be carefully observed. No remark appears
to be more common than this, that each of us receives, according to the
measure of his faith, what God offers to us; but there are few who think
that we must bring the vessel of faith and of the knowledge of God with
which we draw.

<span id="vii.iv-p25"></span>When he says that *no man hath seen God*,
we must not understand him to refer to the outward perception of the
bodily eye; for he means generally, that as God *dwells in*
*inaccessible light*, (<span id="vii.iv-p25.1"></span>[1Ti
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p25.1"></span>,.md)
he cannot be known but in Christ, who is his lively image. This passage
is usually explained thus that as the naked majesty of God is concealed
within himself, he never could be comprehended, except so far as he
revealed himself in Christ; and therefore that it was only in Christ
that God was formerly known to the fathers. But I rather think that the
Evangelist here abides by the comparison already stated, namely, how
much better our condition is than that of the fathers, because God, who
was formerly concealed in his secret glory, may now be said to have
rendered himself visible; for certainly when Christ is called *the
lively image of God*, (<span id="vii.iv-p25.2"></span>[Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="vii.iv-p25.2"></span>,.md)
this refers to the peculiar privilege of the New Testament. In like
manner, the Evangelist describes, in this passage, something new and
uncommon, when he says that *the only-begotten Son, who was in the bosom
of the Father*, hath made known to us what was formerly concealed. He
therefore magnifies the manifestation of God, which has been brought to
us by the gospel, in which he distinguishes us from the fathers, and
shows that we are superior to them; as also Paul explains more fully in
the Third and Fourth chapters of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians.
For he maintains that there is now no longer any *vail*, such as existed
under the Law, but that God is openly beheld in the face of Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p26"></span>If it be thought unreasonable that the
fathers are deprived of the knowledge of God, who have the prophets
daily going before them and holding out the torch, I reply, that what is
ascribed to us is not simply or absolutely denied to them, but that a
comparison is made between the less and the greater, as we say; because
they had nothing more than little sparks of the true light, the full
brightness of which daily shines around us. If it be objected, that at
that time also God was *seen face to face*, (<span
id="vii.iv-p26.1"></span>[Ge
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.iv-p26.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.iv-p26.2"></span>[De
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010)<span id="vii.iv-p26.2"></span>,.md)
I maintain that that sight is not at all to be compared with ours; but
as God was accustomed at that time to exhibit himself obscurely, and, as
it were, from a distance, those to whom he was more clearly revealed say
that they *saw him face to face*. They say so with reference to their
own time; but they did not see God in any other way than wrapped up in
many folds of figures and ceremonies.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) That vision which Moses obtained on the
mountain was remarkable and more excellent than almost all the rest; and
yet God expressly declares,

<span id="vii.iv-p28"></span>thou shalt not be able to see my face, only
thou shalt see my back, (<span id="vii.iv-p28.1"></span>[Ex
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#023)<span id="vii.iv-p28.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="vii.iv-p29"></span>by which metaphor he shows that the time
for a full and clear revelation had not yet come. It must also be
observed that, when the fathers wished to behold God, they always turned
their eyes towards Christ. I do not only mean that they beheld God in
his eternal *Speech*, but also that they attended, with their whole mind
and with their whole heart, to the promised manifestation of Christ. For
this reason we shall find that Christ afterwards said, *Abraham saw my
day*, (<span id="vii.iv-p29.1"></span>[Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="vii.iv-p29.1"></span>;.md)
and that which is subordinate is not contradictory. It is therefore a
fixed principle, that God, who was formerly invisible, hath now made
himself visible in Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p30"></span>When he says that the Son *was in the bosom
of the Father*, the metaphor is borrowed from men, who are said to
receive into their *bosom* those to whom they communicate all their
secrets. The breast is the seat of counsel. He therefore shows that the
Son was acquainted with the most hidden secrets of his Father, in order
to inform us that we have the breast of God, as it were, laid open to us
in the Gospel.

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[John
1:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**19**. And this is  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) the testimony of John, when the Jews sent
Priests and Levites to Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou? **20**. And
he confessed, and denied not; he confessed, I say, I am not the Christ.
**21**. They then asked him, What art thou then? Art thou Elijah? And he
said, I am not. Art thou a Prophet?  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) And he answered, No. **22**. They said
therefore to him, Who art thou, that we may give an answer to those who
sent us? What sayest thou of thyself? **23**. He saith, I am the voice
of him who crieth in the wilderness,  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) Prepare the way of the Lord, as said the
prophet Isaiah.

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span><span id="vii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span>**19.** *And this is the testimony*. Hitherto
the Evangelist has related the preaching of John about Christ; he now
comes down to a more illustrious testimony, which was delivered to the
ambassadors of *the Priests*, that they might convey it to Jerusalem. He
says, therefore, that John openly confessed for what purpose he was sent
by God. The first inquiry here is, for what purpose *the Priests* put
questions to him. It is generally believed that, out of hatred to
Christ, they gave to John an honor which did not belong to him; but this
could not be the reason, for Christ was not yet known to them. Others
say that they were better pleased with John, because he was of the
lineage and order of the priesthood; but neither do I think that this is
probable; for since they expected from *Christ* all prosperity, why did
they voluntarily contrive a false *Christ*? I think, therefore, that
there was another reason that induced them. It was now a long time since
they had the Prophets; John came suddenly and contrary to expectation;
and the minds of all were aroused to expect the Messiah. Besides, all
entertained the belief that the coining of the Messiah was at hand.

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>That they may not appear to be careless about
their duty, if they neglect or disguise a matter of so great importance,
they *ask John*, *Who art thou*? At first, therefore, they did not act
from malice, but, on the contrary, actuated by the desire of redemption,
they wish to know if John be the Christ, because he begins to change the
order which had been customary in the Church. And yet I do not deny that
ambition, and a wish to retain their authority, had some influence over
them; but nothing certainly was farther from their intention than to
transfer the honor of Christ to another. Nor is their conduct in this
matter inconsistent with the office which they sustain; for since they
held the government of the Church of God, it was their duty to take care
that no one rashly obtruded himself, that no founder of a new sect
should arise, that the unity of faith should not be broken in the
Church, and that none should introduce new and foreign ceremonies. It is
evident, therefore, that a report about John was widely spread and
aroused the minds of all; and this was arranged by the wonderful
Providence of God, that this *testimony* might be more strikingly
complete.

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span><span id="vii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span>**20.** *And he confessed, and denied not*.
That is, *he confessed* openly, and without any ambiguity or hypocrisy.
The word *confess*, in the first instance, means generally, that he
stated the fact as it really was. In the second instance, it is repeated
in order to express the form of the confession. He replied expressly,
*that he was not the Christ*

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span><span id="vii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p13"></span>**21.** *Art thou Elijah*? Why do they name
*Elijah* rather than Moses? It was because they learned from the
prediction of <span id="vii.v-p13.2"></span>[Mal.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.v-p13.2"></span>, that
when the Messiah, *the Sun of Righteousness*, should arise, *Elijah*
would be the morning star to announce his approach. But the question is
founded on a false opinion which they had long held; for, holding the
opinion that the soul of a man departs out of one body into another,
when the Prophet Malachi announced that *Elijah* would be sent, they
imagined that the same *Elijah*, who lived under the reign of king Ahab,
(<span id="vii.v-p13.3"></span>[1Ki
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)<span id="vii.v-p13.3"></span>,.md)
was to come. It is therefore a just and true reply which John makes,
that *he is not Elijah*; for he speaks according to the opinion which
they attached to the words; but Christ, giving the true interpretation
of the Prophet, affirms that *John is* Elijah, (<span
id="vii.v-p13.4"></span>[Mt 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.v-p13.4"></span>; <span id="vii.v-p13.5"></span>[Mr
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#013)<span id="vii.v-p13.5"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.v-p14"></span>*Art thou a Prophet*? Erasmus gives an
inaccurate explanation of these words by limiting them to Christ; for
the addition of the article (<span id="vii.v-p14.1"></span>ὁ προφήτης,
*the prophet*) carries no emphasis in this passage; and the messengers
afterwards declare plainly enough, that they meant a different *prophet*
from Christ; for they sum up the whole: by saying, (verse 25,) *if thou
art neither the Christ, nor Elijah, nor a Prophet*. Thus we see that
they intended to point out different persons. Others think that they
inquired if he was one of the ancient *prophets*; but neither do I
approve of that exposition. Rather do they by this term point out the
office of John, and ask if God had appointed him to be *a prophet*. When
he replies, *I am not*, he does not for the sake of modesty tell a lie,
but honestly and sincerely detaches himself from the company of the
*prophets*. And yet this reply is not inconsistent with the honorable
attestation which Christ gives him. Christ bestows on John the
designation of *prophet*, and even adds that he is *more than a
prophet*, (<span id="vii.v-p14.2"></span>[Mt
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009)<span id="vii.v-p14.2"></span>;.md)
but by these words he does nothing more than demand credit and authority
for his doctrine, and at the same time describes, in lofty terms, the
excellence of the office which had been conferred on him. But in this
passage John has a different object in view, which is, to show that he
has no special message, as was usually the case with the *prophets*, but
that he was merely appointed to be the herald of Christ.

<span id="vii.v-p15"></span>This will be made still more clear by a
comparison. All ambassadors — even those who are not sent on matters of
great importance — obtain the name and authority of ambassadors, because
they hold special commissions. Such were all the Prophets who, having
been enjoined to deliver certain predictions, discharged the prophetic
office. But if some weighty matter come to be transacted, and if two
ambassadors are sent, one of whom announces the speedy arrival of
another who possesses full power to transact the whole matter, and if
this latter has received injunctions to bring it to a conclusion, will
not the former embassy be reckoned a part and appendage of the latter,
which is the principal? Such was the case with John the Baptist, to whom
God had given no other injunction than to prepare the Jews for listening
to Christ, and becoming his disciples.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) That this is the meaning, will still more
fully appear from the context; for we must investigate the opposite
clause, which immediately follows. *I am not a prophet*, says he, but *a
voice crying in the wilderness*. The distinction lies in this, that *the
voice crying*, *that a way may be prepared for the Lord*, is not a
*prophet*, but merely a subordinate minister, so to speak; and his
doctrine is only a sort of preparation for listening to another Teacher.
In this way John, though he is more excellent than all the prophets,
still is *not a prophet*

<span id="vii.v-p17"></span><span id="vii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p18"></span>**23.** *The voice of him who crieth*. As he
would have been chargeable with rashness in undertaking the office of
teaching, if he had not received a commission, he shows what was the
duty which he had to perform, and proves it by a quotation from the
Prophet <span id="vii.v-p18.1"></span>[Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.v-p18.1"></span>.
Hence it follows that he does nothing but what God commanded him to do.
*Isaiah* does not, indeed, speak there of John alone, but, promising the
restoration of the Church, he predicts that there will yet be heard
joyful voices, commanding to *prepare the way for the Lord*. Though he
points out the coming of God, when he brought back the people from their
captivity in Babylon, yet the true accomplishment was the manifestation
of Christ in flesh. Among the heralds who announced that the Lord was at
hand, John held the chief place.

<span id="vii.v-p19"></span>To enter into ingenious inquiries, as some
have done, into the meaning of the word *Voice*, would be frivolous.
John is called *a Voice*, because he was enjoined to cry. It is in a
figurative sense, undoubtedly, that Isaiah gives the name wilderness to
the miserable desolation of the Church, which seemed to preclude the
return of the people; as if he had said, that a passage would indeed be
opened up for the captive people, but that the Lord would find a road
through regions in which there was no road. But that visible
*wilderness*, in which John preached, was a figure or image of the awful
desolation which took away all hope of deliverance. If this comparison
be considered, it will be easily seen that no torture has been given to
the words of the prophet in this application of them; for God arranged
everything in such a manner, as to place before the eyes of his people,
who were overwhelmed with their calamities, a mirror of this prediction.

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
1:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>**24**. Now those who were sent were of the
Pharisees. **25**. Therefore they asked him, and said to him, Why then
dost thou baptize, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor a
Prophet? **26**. John answered them, saying, I baptize with water; but
one standeth in the midst of you, whom you know not. **27**. It is he
who, coming after me, is preferred to me; whose shoe-latchet I am not
worthy to loose. **28**. These things were done in Bethabara beyond
Jordan, where John was baptizing.

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span><span id="vii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span>**24.** *Were of the Pharisees*. He says
that they were *Pharisees*, who at that time held the highest rank in
the Church; and he says so in order to inform us, that they were not
some contemptible persons of the order of the Levites, but men clothed
with authority. This is the reason why they raise a question about his
*baptism*. Ordinary ministers would have been satisfied with any kind of
answer; but those men, because they cannot draw from John what they
desired, accuse him of rashness for venturing to introduce a new
religious observance.

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span><span id="vii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span>**25.** *Why then dost thou baptize*? By
laying down those three degrees, they appear to form a very conclusive
argument*: if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor a prophet*; for
it does not belong to every man to institute the practice of *baptism*.
The *Messiah* was to be one who possessed all authority. Of *Elijah* who
was to come, they had formed this opinion, that he would commence the
restoration both of the royal authority and of the Church. The
*prophets* of God, they readily grant, have a right to discharge the
office committed to them. They conclude, therefore, that for John to
*baptize* is an unlawful novelty, since he has received from God no
public station. But they are wrong in not acknowledging him to be that
*Elijah* who is mentioned by <span id="vii.vi-p7.2"></span>[Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.vi-p7.2"></span>;
though he denies that he is that *Elijah* of whom they foolishly
dreamed.

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span><span id="vii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p9"></span>**26.** *I baptize with water*. This ought
to have been abundantly sufficient for the correction of their mistake,
but a reproof otherwise clear is of no advantage to the deaf; for, when
he sends them to Christ, and declares that Christ is present, this is a
clear proof not only that he was divinely appointed to be a minister of
Christ, but that he is the true *Elijah*, who is sent to testify that
the time is come  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) for the
renovation of the Church. There is a contrast here which is not fully
stated; for the spiritual *baptism* of Christ is not expressly
contrasted with the external *baptism* of John, but that latter clause
about the *baptism* of the Spirit might easily be supplied, and shortly
afterwards both are set down by the Evangelist.

<span id="vii.vi-p11"></span>This answer may be reduced to two heads:
first, that John claims nothing for himself but what he has a right to
claim, because he has Christ for the Author of his *baptism*, in which
consists the truth of the sign; and, secondly, that he has nothing but
the administration of the outward sign, while the whole power and
efficacy is in the hands of Christ alone. Thus he defends his *baptism*
so far as its truth depends on anything else; but, at the same time, by
declaring that he has not the power of the Spirit, he exalts the dignity
of Christ, that the eyes of men may be fixed on him alone. This is the
highest and best regulated moderation, when a minister borrows from
Christ whatever authority he claims for himself, in such a manner as to
trace it to him, ascribing to him alone all that he possesses.

<span id="vii.vi-p12"></span>It is a foolish mistake, however, into
which some people have been led, of supposing that John’s baptism was
different from ours; for John does not argue here about the advantage
and usefulness of his baptism, but merely compares his own person with
the person of Christ. In like manner, if we were inquiring, at the
present day, what part belongs to us, and what belongs to Christ, in
baptism, we must acknowledge that Christ alone performs what baptism
figuratively represents, and that we have nothing beyond the bare
administration of the sign. There is a twofold way of speaking in
Scripture about the sacraments; for sometimes it tells us that they are
*the laver of regeneration*, (<span id="vii.vi-p12.1"></span>Titus 3:5;)
that by them *our sins are washed away*, (<span
id="vii.vi-p12.2"></span>[1Pe
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span id="vii.vi-p12.2"></span>;.md)
that we

<span id="vii.vi-p13"></span>are in-grafted into the body of Christ,
that our old man is crucified, and that we rise again to newness of
life, (<span id="vii.vi-p13.1"></span>[Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="vii.vi-p13.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="vii.vi-p14"></span>and, in those cases, Scripture joins the
power of Christ with the ministry of man; as, indeed, man is nothing
else than the hand of Christ. Such modes of expression show, not what
man can of himself accomplish, but what Christ performs by man, and by
the sign, as his instruments. But as there is a strong tendency to fall
into superstition, and as men, through the pride which is natural to
them, take from God the honor due to him, and basely appropriate it to
themselves; so Scripture, in order to restrain this blasphemous
arrogance, sometimes distinguishes ministers from Christ, as in this
passage, that we may learn that ministers are nothing and can do
nothing.

<span id="vii.vi-p15"></span>*One standeth in the midst of you*. He
indirectly charges them with stupidity, in not knowing Christ, to whom
their minds ought to have been earnestly directed; and he always insists
earnestly on this point, that nothing can be known about his ministry,
until men have come to him who is the Author of it. When he says that
Christ standeth in the midst of, them, it is that he may excite their
desire and their exertion to know him. The amount of what he says is,
that he wishes to place himself as low as possible, lest any degree of
honor improperly bestowed on him might obscure the excellence of Christ.
It is probable that he had these sentences frequently in his mouth, when
he saw himself immoderately extolled by the perverse opinions of men.

<span id="vii.vi-p16"></span><span id="vii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p17"></span>**27.** *Who coming after me*. Here he says
two things; first, that Christ was behind him in the order of time; but,
secondly, that he was far before him in rank and dignity, because the
rather preferred him to all. Soon after he will add a third statement,
that Christ was preferred to all others, because he is in reality more
exalted than all others.

<span id="vii.vi-p18"></span><span id="vii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p19"></span>**28.** *These things were done in
Bethabara*. The place is mentioned, not only to authenticate the
narrative, but also to inform us that this answer was given amidst a
numerous assembly of people; for there were many who flocked to John’s
baptism, and this was his ordinary place for baptizing. It is likewise
supposed by some to be a passage across Jordan, and, from this
circumstance, they derive the name, for they interpret it *the house of
passage*; unless, perhaps, some may prefer the opinion of those who
refer to the memorable *passage* of the people, (<span
id="vii.vi-p19.2"></span>[Jos
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013)<span id="vii.vi-p19.2"></span>,.md)
when God opened up a way for them in the midst of the waters, under the
direction of Joshua. Others say that it ought rather to be read
*Betharaba*. Instead of *Bethabara*, some have inserted here the name
*Bethany*, but this is a mistake; for we shall afterwards see how near
*Bethany* was to Jerusalem. The situation of *Bethabara*, as laid down
by those who have described the country, agrees best with the words of
the Evangelist; though I have no wish to dispute about the pronunciation
of the word.

<span id="vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p1"></span><span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
1:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p2"></span>**29**. The next day, John seeth Jesus
coming to him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the
sin of the world! **30**. This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a
man who was preferred to me, because he was more excellent than I.
**31**. And I knew him not; but in order that he might be manifested to
Israel, therefore I came baptizing with water. **32**. And John
testified, saying, I saw the Spirit descending like a dove from heaven,
and it remained upon him. **33**. And I knew him not; but he who sent me
to baptize with water said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit
descending and remaining on him, it is he who baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost. **34**. I saw therefore, and testified, that he is the Son of
God.

<span id="vii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.vii-p4"></span><span id="vii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p5"></span>**29.** *The next day*. There can be no
doubt that John had already spoken about the manifestation of the
Messiah; but when Christ began to appear, he wished that his
announcement of him should quickly become known, and the time was now at
hand when Christ would put an end to John’s ministry, as, when the sun
is risen, the dawn suddenly disappears. After having testified to the
priests who were sent to him, that he from whom they ought to seek the
truth and power of baptism was already present, and was conversing in
the midst of the people, *the next day* he pointed him out to the view
of all. For these two acts, following each other in close succession,
must have powerfully affected their minds. This too is the reason why
Christ appeared in the presence of John.

<span id="vii.vii-p6"></span>*Behold the Lamb of God*. The principal
office of Christ is briefly but clearly stated; that he *takes away the
sins of the world* by the sacrifice of his death, and reconciles men to
God. There are other favors, indeed, which Christ bestows upon us, but
this is the chief favor, and the rest depend on it; that, by appeasing
the wrath of God, he makes us to be reckoned holy and righteous. For
from this source flow all the streams of blessings, that, by not
imputing our sins, he receives us into favor. Accordingly, John, in
order to conduct us to Christ, commences with the gratuitous forgiveness
of sins which we obtain through him.

<span id="vii.vii-p7"></span>By the word *Lamb* he alludes to the
ancient sacrifices of the Law. He had to do with Jews who, having been
accustomed to sacrifices, could not be instructed about atonement for
sins in any other way than by holding out to them a sacrifice. As there
were various kinds of them, he makes one, by a figure of speech, to
stand for the whole; and it is probable that John alluded to the paschal
*lamb*. It must be observed, in general, that John employed this mode of
expression, which was better adapted to instruct the Jews, and possessed
greater force; as in our own day, in consequence of baptism being
generally practiced, we understand better what is meant by obtaining
forgiveness of sins through the blood of Christ, when we are told that
we are washed and cleansed by it from our pollutions. At the same time,
as the Jews commonly held superstitious notions about sacrifices, he
corrects this fault in passing, by reminding them of the object to which
all the sacrifices were directed. It was a very wicked abuse of the
institution of sacrifice, that they had their confidence fixed on the
outward signs; and therefore John, holding out Christ, testifies that he
is *the Lamb of God*; by which he means that all the sacrifices, which
the Jews were accustomed to offer under the Law, had no power whatever
to atone for sins, but that they were only figures, the truth of which
was manifested in Christ himself.

<span id="vii.vii-p8"></span>*Who taketh away the sin of the world*. He
uses the word sin in the singular number, for any kind of iniquity; as
if he had said, that every kind of unrighteousness which alienates men
from God is *taken away* by Christ. And when he says, *the sin* Of The
World, he extends this favor indiscriminately to the whole human race;
that the Jews might not think that he had been sent to them alone. But
hence we infer that the whole *world* is involved in the same
condemnation; and that as all men without exception are guilty of
unrighteousness before God, they need to be reconciled to him. John the
Baptist, therefore, by speaking generally of *the sin of the world*,
intended to impress upon us the conviction of our own misery, and to
exhort us to seek the remedy. Now our duty is, to embrace the benefit
which is offered to all, that each of us may be convinced that there is
nothing to hinder him from obtaining reconciliation in Christ, provided
that he comes to him by the guidance of faith.

<span id="vii.vii-p9"></span>Besides, he lays down but one method of
*taking away sins* We know that from the beginning of the world, when
their own consciences held them convinced, men labored anxiously to
procure forgiveness. Hence the vast number of propitiatory offerings, by
which they falsely imagined that they appeased God. I own, indeed, that
all the spurious rites of a propitiatory nature drew their existence
from a holy origin, which was, that God had appointed the sacrifices
which directed men to Christ; but yet every man contrived for himself
his own method of appeasing God. But John leads us back to Christ alone,
and informs us that there is no other way in which God is reconciled to
us than through his agency, because he alone *takes away sin*. He
therefore leaves no other refuge for sinners than to flee to Christ; by
which he overturns all satisfactions, and purifications, and
redemptions, that are invented by men; as, indeed, they are nothing else
than base inventions framed by the subtlety of the devil.

<span id="vii.vii-p10"></span>The verb <span
id="vii.vii-p10.1"></span>αἴρειν (*to take away*) may be explained in
two ways; either that Christ took upon himself the load which weighed us
down, as it is said that he *carried our sins on the tree*, (<span
id="vii.vii-p10.2"></span>[1Pe
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span id="vii.vii-p10.2"></span>;.md)
and Isaiah says that

<span id="vii.vii-p11"></span>the chastisement of our peace was laid on
him, (<span id="vii.vii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span id="vii.vii-p11.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="vii.vii-p12"></span>or that he *blots out* sins. But as the
latter statement depends on the former, I gladly embrace both; namely,
that Christ, by bearing our sins, *takes them away*. Although,
therefore, sin continually dwells in us, yet there is none in the
judgment of God, because when it has been annulled by the grace of
Christ, it is not imputed to us. Nor do I dislike the remark of
Chrysostom, that the verb in the present tense — <span
id="vii.vii-p12.1"></span>ὁ αἴρων, *who taketh away*, denotes a
continued act; for the satisfaction which Christ once made is always in
full vigor. But he does not merely teach us that Christ *takes away
sin*, but points out also the method, namely, that he hath reconciled
the Father to us by means of his death; for this is what he means by the
word *Lamb*. Let us therefore learn that we become reconciled to God by
the grace of Christ, if we go straight to his death, and when we believe
that he who was nailed to the cross is the only propitiatory sacrifice,
by which all our guilt is removed.

<span id="vii.vii-p13"></span><span id="vii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p14"></span>**30.** *This is he of whom I said.* He
comprehends every thing in a few words, when he declares that Christ is
the person who, he said, was to be preferred to him; for hence it
follows that John is nothing more than a herald sent on his account; and
hence again it is evident that Christ is the Messiah. Three things are
here stated; for when he says that a man *cometh after him,* he means
that he himself was before him in the order of time, to prepare the way
for Christ, according to the testimony of Malachi,

<span id="vii.vii-p15"></span>Behold, I send my messenger before my
face, (<span id="vii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="vii.vii-p15.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.vii-p16"></span>Again, when he says that *he was preferred
to himself*, this relates to the glory with which God adorned his Son,
when he came into the world to fulfill the office of a Redeemer. At
last, the reason is added, which is, that Christ is far superior in
dignity to John the Baptist. That honor, therefore, which the Father
bestowed upon him was not accidental, but was due to his eternal
majesty. But of this expression, *he was preferred to me*, *because he
was before me*, I have already Spoken.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md)

<span id="vii.vii-p18"></span><span id="vii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p19"></span>**31.** *And I knew him not.* That his
testimony may not be suspected of having been given either from
friendship or favor, he anticipates such a doubt, by affirming that he
had no other knowledge of Christ than what he had obtained by divine
inspiration. The meaning, therefore, amounts to this, that John does not
speak at his own suggestion, nor for the favor of man, but by the
inspiration of the Spirit and the command of God.

<span id="vii.vii-p20"></span>*I came baptizing with water;* that is, I
was called and appointed to this office, *that I might manifest him to
Israel;* which the Evangelist afterwards explains more fully, and
confirms, when he introduces John the Baptist, testifying that he had no
knowledge of Christ but what he had obtained by oracle; that is, by
information or revelation from God.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) Instead of what we find here, I came to
baptize, he there states expressly (verse 33) that he was sent; for it
is only the calling of God that makes lawful ministers, because every
person who of his own accord, thrusts himself forward, whatever learning
or eloquence he may possess, is not entitled to any authority, and the
reason is, that he is not authorized by God. Now since it was necessary
that John, in order that he might lawfully baptize, should be sent by
God, let it be inferred from this, that it is not in the power of any
man whatever to institute sacraments, but that this right belongs to God
alone, as Christ, on another occasion, in order to prove the baptism of
John, asks *if it was from heaven*, *or from men*, (<span
id="vii.vii-p21.2"></span>[Mt
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#025.md)<span
id="vii.vii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.vii-p22"></span><span id="vii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p23"></span>**32.** *I saw the Spirit, descending like
a dove.* This is not a literal but a figurative mode of expression; for
with what eyes could he *see the Spirit*? But as the *dove* was a
certain and infallible sign of the presence of *the Spirit,* it is
called *the Spirit,* by a figure of speech in which one name is
substituted for another; not that he is in reality *the Spirit*, but
that he points him out, as far as human capacity can admit. And this
metaphorical language is frequently employed in the sacraments; for why
does Christ call the bread *his body*, but because the name of the thing
is properly transferred to the sign? especially when the sign is, at the
same time, a true and efficacious pledge, by which we are made certain
that the thing itself which is signified is bestowed on us. Yet it must
not be understood that the *dove* contained *the Spirit* who *fills
heaven and earth*, (<span id="vii.vii-p23.1"></span>[Jer
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024.md)<span
id="vii.vii-p23.1"></span>,) but that he was present by his power, so
that John knew that such an exhibition was not presented to his eyes in
vain. In like manner, we know that the body of Christ is not connected
with the bread, and yet we are partakers of his body.

<span id="vii.vii-p24"></span>A question now arises, why did *the
Spirit* at that time appear in the form of a *dove*? We must always hold
that there is a correspondence between the sign and the reality. When
*the Spirit* was given to the apostles, they *saw cloven tongues of
fire*, (<span id="vii.vii-p24.1"></span>[Ac
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="vii.vii-p24.1"></span>,.md)
because the preaching of the gospel was to be spread through all
tongues, and was to possess the power of fire. But in this passage God
intended to make a public representation of that mildness of Christ of
which Isaiah speaks in lofty terms,

<span id="vii.vii-p25"></span>The smoking flax he will not quench, and
the bruised reed he will not break, (<span
id="vii.vii-p25.1"></span>[Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)<span id="vii.vii-p25.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.vii-p26"></span>It was then, for the first time, that *the
Spirit was seen descending on him;* not that he had formerly been
destitute of him, but because he might be said to be then consecrated by
a solemn rite. For we know that he remained in concealment, during
thirty years, like a private individual, because the time for his
manifestation was not yet come; but when he intended to make himself
known to the world, he began with his baptism. At that time, therefore,
he received *the Spirit* not only for himself, but for his people; and
on that account his descent was visible, that we may know that there
dwells in him an abundance of all gifts of which we are empty and
destitute. This may easily be inferred from the words of the Baptist;
for when he says, *Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and
remaining on him, it is he who baptizeth with the Spirit*, his meaning
is, that the reason why *the Spirit* was beheld in a visible form, and
*remained on* Christ, was, that he might water all his people with his
fullness. What it is to *baptize with the Spirit* I have already noticed
in a few words; namely, that he imparts its efficacy to baptism, that it
may not be vain or useless, and this he accomplishes by the power of his
Spirit.

<span id="vii.vii-p27"></span><span id="vii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p28"></span>**33.** *Upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending.* Here a difficult question arises; for if John *did
not know Christ*, why does he refuse to admit him to baptism? To a
person whom he did not know he would not say, *I ought rather to be
baptized by thee*, (<span id="vii.vii-p28.1"></span>[Mt
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014)<span id="vii.vii-p28.1"></span>..md)
Some reply, that he knew him to such an extent as to regard him with the
reverence due to a distinguished Prophet, but was not aware that he was
*the Son of God*. But this is a poor solution of the difficulty, for
every man ought to obey the calling of God without any respect of
persons. No rank or excellence of man ought to prevent us from doing our
duty, and therefore John would have shown disrespect to God and to his
baptism, if he had spoken in this manner to any other person than the
Son of God. it follows that he must have previously known Christ.

<span id="vii.vii-p29"></span>In the first place, it ought to be
observed, that the *knowledge* here mentioned is that which arises from
personal and long acquaintance. Although he recognizes Christ whenever
he sees him, still it does not cease to be true that they were not known
to each other according to the ordinary custom of men, for the
commencement of his knowledge proceeded from God. But the question is
not yet fully answered; for he says that the sight of the Holy Spirit
was the mark by which he was pointed out to him. Now he had not yet
*seen the Spirit*, when he had addressed Christ as the Son of God. For
my own part, I willingly embrace the opinion of those who think that
this sign was added for confirmation, and that it was not so much for
the sake of John as for the sake of us all. John indeed saw it, but it
was rather for others than for himself. *Bucer* appropriately quotes
that saying of Moses,

<span id="vii.vii-p30"></span>This shall be a sign to you, that after
three days journey, you shall sacrifice to me on the mountain, (<span
id="vii.vii-p30.1"></span>[Ex
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012)<span id="vii.vii-p30.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.vii-p31"></span>Undoubtedly, when they were going out,
they already knew that God would conduct and watch over their
deliverance; but this was a confirmation *a posteriori*, as the phrase
is; that is, from the event, after it had taken place. In like manner,
this came as an addition to the former revelation which had been given
to John.

<span id="vii.vii-p32"></span><span id="vii.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p33"></span>**34.** *I saw and testified.* He means
that what he declares is not doubtful; because God was pleased to make
him fully and thoroughly acquainted with those things of which he was to
be the witness to the world; and it is worthy of notice, that he
*testified* that Christ was *the Son of God,* because he who gives the
Holy Spirit must be the Christ, for to no other belongs the honor and
the office of reconciling men to God.

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span><span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[John
1:35-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035.md)<span
id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span>**35.** The next day John was again
standing, and two of his disciples; **36.** And looking at Jesus
walking, he said, Behold the Lamb of God! **37.** And those two
disciples heard him speak, and followed Jesus. **38.** And Jesus
turning, and looking at them following him, saith to them, What do you
seek? And they said to him, Rabbi, (which, if you interpret it, is
explained Master,) where dwellest thou? **39.** He saith to them, Come
and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and remained with him that
day; for it was about the tenth hour.

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span><span id="vii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span>**36.** *Behold the Lamb of God!* Hence
appears more clearly what I have already stated, that when John
perceived that he was approaching the end of his course, he labored
incessantly to resign his office to Christ. His firmness too gives
greater credit to his testimony. But by insisting so earnestly, during
many successive days, in repeating the commendation of Christ, he shows
that his own course was nearly finished. Here we see also how small and
low the beginning of the Church was. John, indeed, prepared disciples
for Christ, but it is only now that Christ begins to collect a Church.
He has no more than two men who are mean and unknown, but this even
contributes to illustrate his glory, that within a short period, without
human aid, and without a strong hand, he spreads his kingdom in a
wonderful and incredible manner. We ought also to observe what is the
chief object to which John directs the attention of men; it is, to find
in Christ the forgiveness of sins. And as Christ had presented himself
to the disciples for the express purpose that they might come to him, so
no when they come, he gently encourages and exhorts them; for he does
not wait until they first address him, but asks, *What do you seek?*
This kind and gracious invitation, which was once made to two persons,
now belongs to all. We ought not therefore to fear that Christ will
withdraw from us or refuse to us easy access, provided that he sees us
desirous to come to him; but, on the contrary, he will stretch out his
hand to assist our endeavors. And how will not he meet those who come to
him, who seeks at a distance those who are wandering and astray, that he
may bring them back to the right road?

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span><span id="vii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span>**38.** *Rabbi.* This name was commonly
given to persons of high rank, or who possessed any kind of honor. But
the Evangelist here points out another use of it which was made in his
own age, which was, that they addressed by this name the teachers and
expounders of the word of God. Although, therefore, those two disciples
do not yet recognize Christ as the only Teacher of the Church, yet,
moved by the commendation bestowed on him by John the Baptist, they hold
him to be a Prophet and teacher, which is the first step towards
receiving instruction.

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>*Where dwellest thou?* By this example we
are taught that from the first, rudiments of the Church we ought to draw
such a relish for Christ as will excite our desire to profit; and next,
that we ought not to be satisfied with a mere passing look, but that we
ought to seek his dwelling, that he may receive us as guests. For there
are very many who smell the gospel at a distance only, and thus allow
Christ suddenly to disappear, and all that they have learned concerning
him to pass away. And though those two persons did not at that time
become his ordinary disciples, yet there can be no doubt that, during
that night, he instructed them more fully, so that they soon afterwards
became entirely devoted to him.

<span id="vii.viii-p9"></span><span id="vii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p10"></span>**39.** *It was about the tenth hour;*
that is, the evening was approaching, for it was not more than two hours
till sunset. The day was at that time divided by them into twelve hours,
which were longer in summer and shorter in winter. But from this
circumstance we infer that those disciples were so eagerly desirous to
hear Christ, and to gain a more intimate knowledge of him, that they
gave themselves no concern about a night’s lodging. On the contrary, we
are, for the most part, very unlike them, for we incessantly delay,
because it is not convenient for us to follow Christ.

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span><span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>[John
1:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040.md)<span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>**40.** Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, was
one of those who heard John speak and followed him. **41.** He first
findeth his own brother Simon, and saith to him, We have found the
Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. **42.** He brought him
therefore to Jesus; and Jesus, looking at him, said, Thou art Simon, the
son of Jonah; thou shalt be called Cephas, which is, being interpreted,
Peter.

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span><span id="vii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span>**40.** *Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother.* The
design of the Evangelist, down to the end of the chapter, is to inform
us how gradually the disciples were brought to Christ. Here he relates
about Peter, and afterwards he will mention Philip and Nathanael. The
circumstance of *Andrew* immediately bringing his brother expresses the
nature of faith, which does not conceal or quench the light, but rather
spreads it in every direction. *Andrew* has scarcely a spark, and yet,
by means of it, he enlightens his brother. Woe to our indolence,
therefore, if we do not, after having been fully enlightened, endeavor
to make others partakers of the same grace. We may observe in *Andrew*
two things which Isaiah requires from the children of God; namely, that
each should take his neighbor by the hand, and next, that he should say,

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span>Come, let us go up into the mountain of the
Lord,  
and he will teach us, (<span id="vii.ix-p6.2"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="vii.ix-p6.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span>For Andrew stretches out the hand to his
brother, but at the same time he has this object in view, that he may
become a fellow-disciple with him in the school of Christ. We ought also
to observe the purpose of God, which determined that *Peter,* who was to
be far more eminent, was brought to the knowledge of Christ by the
agency and ministry of Andrew; that none of us, however excellent, may
refuse to be taught by an inferior; for that man will be severely
punished for his peevishness, or rather for his pride, who, through his
contempt of a man, will not deign to come to Christ.

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span><span id="vii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span>**41.** *We have found the Messiah.* The
Evangelist has interpreted the Hebrew word *Messiah* (*Anointed*) by the
Greek word *Christ,* in order to publish to the whole world what was
secretly known to the Jews. It was the ordinary designation of kings,
 <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) as *anointing* was observed by
them as a solemn rite. But still they were aware that one King would be
anointed by God, under whom they might hope to obtain perfect and
eternal happiness; especially when they should learn that the earthly
kingdom of David would not be permanent. And as God raised their minds,
when subdued and weighed down by various calamities, to the expectation
of the Messiah, so he more clearly revealed to them that his coming was
at hand. The prediction of Daniel is more clear and forcible than all
the rest, so far as relates to the name of *Christ*; for he does not,
like the earlier Prophets, ascribe it to kings, but appropriates it
exclusively to the Redeemer, (<span id="vii.ix-p10.3"></span>[Dan.
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)<span id="vii.ix-p10.3"></span>..md)
Hence this mode of expression became prevalent, so that when the
*Messiah* or *Christ* was mentioned, it was understood that no other
than the Redeemer was meant. Thus we shall find the woman of Samaria
saying, *the Messiah will come*, (<span id="vii.ix-p10.4"></span>[Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)<span id="vii.ix-p10.4"></span>;.md)
which makes it the more wonderful that he who was so eagerly desired by
all, and whom they had constantly in their mouths, should be received by
so small a number of persons.

<span id="vii.ix-p11"></span><span id="vii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p12"></span>**42.** *Thou art Simon.* Christ gives a
name to *Simon,* not as men commonly do, from some past event, or from
what is now perceived in them, but because he was to make him Peter, (*a
stone*.) First, he says*, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonah.* He repeats
the name of his father in an abridged form; which is common enough when
names are translated into other languages; for it will plainly appear
from the last chapter that he was the son of *Johanna* or *John*. But
all this amounts to nothing more than that he will be a very different
person from what he now is. For it is not For the sake of honor that he
mentions his father; but as he was descended from a family which was
obscure, and which was held in no estimation among men, Christ declares
that this will not prevent him from making *Simon* a man of unshaken
courage. The Evangelist, therefore, mentions this as a prediction, that
*Simon* received a new name. I look upon it as a prediction, not only
because Christ foresaw the future steadfastness of faith in *Peter*, but
because he foretold what he would give to him. He now magnifies the
grace which he determined afterwards to bestow upon him; and therefore
he does not say that this is now his name, but delays it till a future
time.

<span id="vii.ix-p13"></span>*Thou shalt be called Cephas.* All the
godly, indeed, may justly be called *Peters* (*stones*,) which, having
been Sounded on Christ, are fitted for building the temple of God; but
he alone is so called on account of his singular excellence. Yet the
Papists act a ridiculous part, when they substitute him in the place of
Christ; so as to be the foundation of the Church, as if he too were not
founded on Christ along with the rest of the disciples; and they are
doubly ridiculous when out of a *stone* they make him a *head*. For
among the rhapsodies of Gratian there is a foolish canon under the name
of Anacletus, who, exchanging a Hebrew word for a Greek one, and not
distinguishing the Greek word <span id="vii.ix-p13.1"></span>κεφαλὴ
(kephale) from the Hebrew word *Cephas*, thinks that by this name Peter
was appointed to be Head of the Church. *Cephas* is rather a Chaldaic
than a Hebrew word; but that was the customary pronunciation of it after
the Babylonish captivity. There is, then, no ambiguity in the words of
Christ; for he promises what Peter had not at all expected, and thus
magnifies his own grace to all ages, that his former condition may not
lead us to think less highly of him, since this remarkable appellation
informs us that he was made a new man.

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span><span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>[John
1:43-46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#043.md)<span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p2"></span>**43.** The next day Jesus wished to go into
Galilee, and found Philip, and said to him, Follow me. **44.** Now
Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. **45.** Philip
findeth Nathanael, and saith to him, We have found Jesus of Nazareth,
the son of Joseph, of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets write.
**46.** Nathanael said to him, Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?
Philip said to him, Come and see.

<span id="vii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.x-p4"></span><span id="vii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p5"></span>**43.** *Follow me.* When *Philip* was
inflamed by this single word to follow Christ, we infer from it how
great is the efficacy of the word of God; but it does not appear
indiscriminately in all, for God addresses many without any advantage,
just as if he struck their ears with a sound which vanished into air. So
then the external preaching of the word is in itself unfruitful, except
that it inflicts a deadly wound on the reprobate, so as to render them
inexcusable before God. But when the secret grace of God quickens it,
all the senses must be affected in such a manner that men will be
prepared to *follow* wherever God calls them. We ought, therefore, to
pray to Christ that he may display in us the same power of the Gospel.
In the case of *Philip,* there was no doubt a peculiarity about his
*following* Christ; for he is commanded to follow, not like one of us,
but as a domestic, and as a familiar companion. But still the calling of
all of us is illustrated by this calling of *Philip.*

<span id="vii.x-p6"></span><span id="vii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p7"></span>**44.** *Was of Bethsaida.* The name of the
city appears to have been mentioned on purpose, that the goodness of God
to the three Apostles may be more illustriously displayed. We know how
severely, on other occasions, Christ threatens and curses that city,
(<span id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>[Mt
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.x-p7.2"></span>[Lu
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013)<span id="vii.x-p7.2"></span>..md)
Accordingly, when God brought into favor with him some out of a nation
so ungodly and wicked, we ought to view it in the same light as if they
had been brought out of the lowest hell. And when Christ, after having
drawn them out of that deep gulf, honors them so highly as to make them
Apostles, it is a distinguished favor and worthy of being recorded.

<span id="vii.x-p8"></span><span id="vii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p9"></span>**45.** *Philip findeth Nathanael.* Though
proud men despise these feeble beginnings of the Church, yet we ought to
perceive in them a brighter display of the divine glory, than if the
condition of the Kingdom of Christ had been in every respect, from the
outset, splendid and magnificent; for we know to how rich a harvest this
small seed afterwards grew. Again, we see in *Philip* the same desire of
building which formerly appeared in *Andrew.* His modesty, too, is
remarkable, in desiring and seeking nothing else than to have others to
learn along with him, from Him who is a Teacher common to all.

<span id="vii.x-p10"></span>*We have found Jesus.* How small was the
measure of Philip’s faith appears from this circumstance, that he cannot
utter a few words about Christ without mingling with them two gross
errors. He calls him *the son of Joseph,* and says, that *Nazareth* was
his native town, both of which statements were false; and yet, because
he is sincerely desirous to do good to his brother, and to make Christ
known, God approves of this instance of his diligence, and even crowns
it with good success. Each of us ought, no doubt, to endeavor to keep
soberly within his own limits; and, certainly, the Evangelist does not
mention it as worthy of commendation in Philip, that he twice disgraces
Christ, but relates that his doctrine, though faulty and involved in
error, was useful, because it nevertheless had this for its object, that
Christ might be truly known. He foolishly says that he was *the son of
Joseph,* and ignorantly calls him a native of *Nazareth,* but yet he
leads *Nathanael* to no other than the Son of God who was born in
Bethlehem, (<span id="vii.x-p10.1"></span>[Mt
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)<span id="vii.x-p10.1"></span>,.md)
and does not contrive a false Christ, but only wishes that they should
know him as he was exhibited by *Moses and the Prophets.* We see, then,
that the chief design of doctrine is, that those who hear us should come
to Christ in some way or other.

<span id="vii.x-p11"></span>There are many who engage in abstruse
inquiries about Christ, but who throw such darkness and intricacy around
him by their subtleties that they can never find him. The Papists, for
example, will not say that Christ is *the son of Joseph,* for they
distinctly know what is his name; but yet they annihilate his power, so
as to hold out a phantom in the room of Christ. Would it not be better
to stammer ridiculously, like *Philip,* and to hold by the true Christ,
than by eloquent and ingenious language to introduce a false Christ? On
the other hand, there are many poor dunces in the present day, who,
though ignorant and unskilled in the use of language, make known Christ
more faithfully than all the theologians of the Pope with their lofty
speculations. This passage, therefore, warns us that, if any unsuitable
language has been employed concerning Christ by ignorant and unlearned
men, we ought not to reject such persons with disdain, provided they
direct us to Christ; but that we may not be withdrawn from Christ by the
false imaginations of men, let us always have this remedy at hand, to
seek the pure knowledge of him from *the Law and the Prophets.*

<span id="vii.x-p12"></span><span id="vii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p13"></span>**46.** *Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth?* At first, *Nathanael* refuses, the place of Christ’s nativity
(as described by *Philip*) having given him offense. But, first of all,
he is deceived by the inconsiderate discourse of *Philip;* for what
*Philip* foolishly believed *Nathanael* receives as certain. Next, there
is added a foolish judgment arising from hatred or contempt of the
place. Both of these points ought to be carefully observed by us. This
holy man was not far from shutting out against himself all approach to
Christ. Why was this? Because he rashly believes what Philip spoke
incorrectly about Christ; and next, because his mind was under the
influence of a preconceived opinion that *no good thing could come out
of Nazareth*. If then we are not carefully on our guard, we shall be
liable to the same danger; and Satan labors every day, by similar
obstacles, to hinder us from coming to Christ; for he has the dexterity
to spread many falsehoods, the tendency of which is to excite our hatred
or suspicion against the Gospel, that we may not venture to taste it.
And next, he ceases not to try another method, namely, to make us look
on Christ with contempt; for we see how many there are who take offense
at the degradation of the cross, which appears both in Christ the head
and in his members. But as we can hardly be so cautious as not to be
tempted by those stratagems of Satan, let us at least remember
immediately this caution:

<span id="vii.x-p14"></span>*Come and see.* Nathanael allowed his
twofold error to be corrected by this expression which Philip uttered.
Following his example, let us first show ourselves to be submissive and
obedient; and next, let us not shrink from inquiry, when Christ himself
is ready to remove the doubts which harass us. Those who read these
words not as a question, but as an affirmation, *Some good thing may
come out of Nazareth*, are greatly mistaken. For, in the first place,
how trivial would such an observation be? And next, we know that the
city *Nazareth* was not at that time held in estimation; and Philip’s
reply shows plainly enough that it was expressive of hesitation and
distrust.

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[John
1:47-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047.md)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>**47.** When Jesus saw Nathanael coming to
him, he saith of him, Behold, one truly an Israelite, in whom there is
no deceit. **48.** Nathanael saith to him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus
answered and said to him, Before Philip called thee, when thou wast
under the fig-tree, I saw thee. **49.** Nathanael answered and said to
him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King: of Israel.
**50.** Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw
thee under the fig-tree, thou believest;  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) thou shalt see greater things than these.
**51.** Then he said to him, Verily, verily, I say to you, Hereafter you
shall see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending
on the Son of man.

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span><span id="vii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span>**47.** *Behold, one truly an Israelite.* It
is not on Nathanael’s own account that Christ bestows on him this
commendation, but under his person he holds out a general doctrine. For,
since many who boast of being believers are very far from being actually
believers, it is of great importance that some mark should be found for
distinguishing the true and genuine from the false. We know how
haughtily the Jews gloried in their father Abraham, and how
presumptuously they boasted of the holiness of their descent; and yet
there was scarcely one in a hundred among them who was not utterly
degenerate and alienated from the faith of the Fathers. For this reason,
Christ, in order to tear the mask from hypocrites, gives a short
definition of *a true Israelite*, and, at the same time, removes the
offense which would afterwards arise from the wicked obstinacy of the
nation. For those who wished to be accounted the children of Abraham,
and the holy people of God, were shortly afterwards to become the deadly
enemies of the Gospel. That none may be discouraged or alarmed by the
impiety which was generally found in almost all ranks, he gives a timely
warning, that of those by whom the name of Israelites is assumed there
are few who are true Israelites.

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span>Again, as this passage contains a definition
of Christianity, we must not pass by it slightly. To sum up the meaning
of Christ in a few words, it ought to be observed that *deceit* is
contrasted with uprightness and sincerity;  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) so that he calls those persons *sly*
 <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) and *deceitful* who are called in
other parts of Scripture *double in heart*, (<span
id="vii.xi-p9.2"></span>[Ps 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.xi-p9.2"></span>.) Nor is it only that gross hypocrisy by which
those who are conscious of their wickedness pretend to be good men, but
likewise another inward hypocrisy, when men are so blinded by their
vices that they not only deceive others but themselves. So then it is
integrity of heart before God, and uprightness before men, that makes a
Christian; but Christ points out chiefly that kind of *deceit* which is
mentioned in <span id="vii.xi-p9.3"></span>[Ps
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xi-p9.3"></span>. In
this passage <span id="vii.xi-p9.4"></span>ἀληθῶς (*truly*) means
something more than *certainly*. The Greek word, no doubt, is often used
as a simple affirmation; but as we must here supply a contrast between
the fact and the mere name, he is said to be *truly,* who is *in
reality* what he is supposed to be.

<span id="vii.xi-p10"></span><span id="vii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p11"></span>**48.** *Whence knowest thou?* Though
Christ did not intend to flatter him, yet he wished to be heard by him,
in order to draw forth a new question, by the reply to which he would
prove himself to be the Son of God. Nor is it without a good reason that
Nathanael asks *whence Christ knew him*; for to meet with a man of such
uprightness as to be free from all deceit is an uncommon case, and to
know such purity of heart belongs to God alone. The reply of Christ,
however, appears to be inappropriate; for though he *saw Nathanael under
the fig-tree,* it does not follow from this that he could penetrate into
the deep secrets of the heart. But there is another reason; for as it
belongs to God to know men when they are not seen, so also does it
belong to Him to see what is not visible to the eyes. As Nathanael knew
that Christ did not see him after the manner of men, but by a look truly
divine, this might lead him to conclude that Christ did not now speak as
a man. The proof, therefore, is taken from things which are of the same
class; for not less does it belong to God to see what lies beyond our
view than to judge concerning purity of heart. We ought also to gather
from this passage a useful doctrine, that when we are not thinking of
Christ, we are observed by him; and it is necessary that it should be
so, that he may bring us back, when we have wandered from the right
path.

<span id="vii.xi-p12"></span><span id="vii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p13"></span>**49.** *Thou art the Son of God.* That he
acknowledges him to be *the Son of God* from his divine power is not
wonderful; but on what ground does he call him *King of Israel*? for the
two things do not appear to be necessarily connected. But Nathanael
takes a loftier view. He had already heard that he is the Messiah, and
to this doctrine he adds the confirmation which had been given him. He
holds also another principle, that *the Son of God* will not come
without exercising the office of *King* over the people of God. Justly,
therefore, does he acknowledge that he who is *the Son of God* is also
*King of Israel* And, indeed, faith ought not to be fixed on the essence
of Christ alone, (so to speak,) but ought to attend to his power and
office; for it would be of little advantage to know who Christ is, if
this second point were not added, what he wishes to be towards us, and
for what purpose the Father sent him. The reason why the Papists have
nothing more than a shadow of Christ is, that they have been careful to
look at his mere essence, but have disregarded his *kingdom*, which
consists in the power to save.

<span id="vii.xi-p14"></span>Again, when Nathanael calls him *King of
Israel*, though his *kingdom* extends to the remotest bounds of the
earth, the confession is limited to the measure of faith. For he had not
yet advanced so far as to know that Christ was appointed to be King over
the whole world, or rather, that from every quarter would be collected
the children of Abraham, so that the whole world would be the *Israel*
of God. We to whom the wide extent of Christ’s kingdom has been revealed
ought to go beyond those narrow limits. Yet following the example of
Nathanael, let us exercise our faith in hearing the word, and let us
strengthen it by all the means that are in our power; and let it not
remain buried, but break out into confession.

<span id="vii.xi-p15"></span><span id="vii.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p16"></span>**50.** *Jesus answered*. He does not
reprove Nathanael as if he had been too easy of belief, but rather
approving of his faith, promises to him and to others that he will
confirm it by stronger arguments. Besides, it was peculiar to one man
that *he was seen under a fig-tree* by Christ, when absent and at a
distance from him; but now Christ brings forward a proof which would be
common to all, and thus — as if he had broken off from what he
originally intended — instead of addressing one man, he turns to address
all.

<span id="vii.xi-p17"></span><span id="vii.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p18"></span>**51.** *You shall see heaven opened.* They
are greatly mistaken, in my opinion, who anxiously inquire into the
place where, and the time when, Nathanael and others *saw heaven
opened*; for he rather points out something perpetual which was always
to exist in his kingdom. I acknowledge indeed, that the disciples
sometimes *saw angels*, who are not seen in the present day; and I
acknowledge also that the manifestation of the heavenly glory, when
Christ ascended to heaven, was different from what we now behold. But if
we duly consider what took place at that time, it is of perpetual
duration; for the kingdom of God, which was formerly closed against us,
is actually opened in Christ. A visible instance of this was shown to
Stephen, (<span id="vii.xi-p18.1"></span>[Ac
7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)<span id="vii.xi-p18.1"></span>,.md)
to the three disciples on the mountain, (<span
id="vii.xi-p18.2"></span>[Mt 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.xi-p18.2"></span>,) and to the other disciples at Christ’s
ascension, (<span id="vii.xi-p18.3"></span>[Lu
24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051.md)<span id="vii.xi-p18.3"></span>;
<span id="vii.xi-p18.4"></span>[Ac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xi-p18.4"></span>..md)
But all the signs by which God shows himself present with us depend on
this *opening of heaven*, more especially when God communicates himself
to us to be our life.

<span id="vii.xi-p19"></span>*Ascending and descending on the Son of
man.* This second clause refers to *angels.* They are said to *ascend*
and *descend*, so as to be ministers of God’s kindness towards us; and
therefore this mode of expression points out the mutual intercourse
which exists between God and men. Now we must acknowledge that this
benefit was received through Christ, because without him the *angels*
have rather a deadly enmity against us than a friendly care to help us.
They are said to *ascend and descend* on the son of man, not because
they minister to him, but because — in reference to him, and for his
honor — they include the whole body of the Church in their kindly
regard. Nor have I any doubt that he alludes to the *ladder* which was
exhibited to the patriarch Jacob in a dream, (<span
id="vii.xi-p19.1"></span>[Ge
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span id="vii.xi-p19.1"></span>;.md)
for what was prefigured by that vision is actually fulfilled in Christ.
In short, this passage teaches us, that though the whole human race was
banished from the kingdom of God, the gate of *heaven is now opened* to
us, so that we are *fellow-citizens of the saints*, and companions of
the angels, (<span id="vii.xi-p19.2"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xi-p19.2"></span>;.md)
and that they, having been appointed to be guardians of our salvation,
descend from the blessed rest of the heavenly glory  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) to relieve our distresses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc34006.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>Pource qu’il
est dit Estoit, et non pas N’este;” — “Because it is said *Was*, and not
*Has been*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc34006.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="vii.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p15.1"></span>Les
Theologiens Sorbonistes.”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc34006.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="vii.i-p16.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span> The reader will find our Author’s views of
the Holy Trinity very fully illustrated in the *Institutes of the
Christian Religion*, Book I. Chap. 13., and will be at a loss whether to
admire most the marvelous acuteness, or the sobriety of judgment, by
which the whole discussion is pervaded. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc34006.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p19.1"></span>Que c’estoit
je ne scay quel Dieu qui avoit este cree, et eu commencement;”— “That
there was I know not what God who had been created, and had a
beginning.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc34006.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span> The difference of readings lies wholly in
the punctuation, and the dispute is, whether the words <span
id="vii.i-p25.1"></span>ὃ γέγονεν shall form the conclusion of the
Third, or the commencement of the Fourth verse. Calvin expresses his
concurrence with the majority of manuscripts, which connect the words in
question with the Third verse thus <span id="vii.i-p25.2"></span>Καὶ
χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἓν ὃ γέγονεν, *and without him was not any
thing made*, (or, more literally, as well as more emphatically,) *and
without him was* not one thing made which was made. Other manuscripts,
certainly of no great authority, connect them with the Fourth verse:
<span id="vii.i-p25.3"></span>Καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἓν Ο γέγονεν
ἐν αὐτῷ ζωὴ ᾖν *And without him was not one thing made* What was made
*was in him life*. The preference given by our Author rests on grounds
which can scarcely be questioned. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc34006.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>Pour
(porter) tesmoignage;” — “to bear testimony.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc34006.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>Nais de
sangs, *ou*, *de* *sang*;” — “born of bloods, *or*, *of blood*.”

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc34006.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p11.1"></span>Heraut et
ambassade de la grace de Dieu;” — “Herald and ambassador of the grace of
God.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc34006.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>Le nom de
*Jean*, qui signifie Grace;” — “The name John, which signifies Grace.”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc34006.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span> For the meaning of the name *John*,
derived from the Hebrew *Jehohannan*, the reader may consult our
Author’s *Commentary on the Harmony of the Three Evangelists*, vol. i.
page 15. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc34006.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p30.1"></span>D’une
vanterie aveuglee; c est a dire, n’entendans pas ce qu’ils disoyent;” —
“by a blind vaunting; that is, not understanding what they said.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc34006.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p37.1"></span>Et par
ceci derechef est refutee l’imagination des Papistes de laquelle j’ai
parle, a scavoir que Dieu donne aux hommes une possibilite, seulement
d’estre faits enfans siens;” — “and here again is refuted the notion of
the Papists which I spoke of, namely, that God gives to men bare
possibility of becoming His children”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc34006.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p40"></span> Here our Author, either from choice or
from inadvertency, has adopted the phrase *of blood*, instead of What he
followed in his version of the Text, (see page 35,) of bloods — the
literal, though not idiomatic, rendering of <span
id="vii.ii-p40.2"></span>ἐξ αἱμάτων, which is itself of rare occurrence,
but not without classical authority. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc34006.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p7.1"></span>Car sous
la chair et la partie inferieure tout l’homme est comprins;” — “for
under the *flesh*, and the lower part, the whole man is included.”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc34006.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>Est
deduit d’un mot qui signifie Tabernacles, c’est a dire, tentes et
avillons;” — “is derived from a word which signifies Tabernacles, that
is, tents and pavilions.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc34006.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span> This must have been a slip of memory on
the part of our Author; for the phrases applied to Stephen are
different, though parallel. He is called *a man* full of *faith and of
the Holy Ghost*, (<span id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Ac
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005)<span id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>;.md)
full of *faith and power*, (<span id="vii.iii-p16.2"></span>[Ac
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008)<span id="vii.iii-p16.2"></span>;.md)
*and* full of *the Holy Ghost*, (<span id="vii.iii-p16.3"></span>[Ac
7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)<span id="vii.iii-p16.3"></span>..md)
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc34006.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p3.1"></span>Jean rend
(*ou*, *a rendu*) tesmoignage de luy.” “John gives (*or*, *gave*)
testimony of him.”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc34006.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p4.1"></span>Plus
excellent que moy, *ou*, *premier que moy*;” — “more excellent than I,
*or*, *before me*.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc34006.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>En usant du
verbe du temps present, a scavoir, *Rend* tesmoignage, et on pas,
*Rendoit*;” — “by using the verb in the present tense, giveth
*testimony*, and not gave *testimony*.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc34006.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p9.1"></span>Qu’il n’a
point parle entre ses dents, et communique la chose comme en secret a
peu de gens;” — “that he did not speak between his teeth, and
communicate the matter, as it were secretly, to a few persons.”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc34006.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p19.1"></span>Que la Loy
n’a eu ne l’un ne l’autre;” — “that the Law had neither the one nor the
other.”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc34006.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p22"></span> The points of agreement and of difference
between the Old and New Testaments are copiously illustrated by our
Author in the *Institutes of the Christian Religion,* Book II. chap.
10.11 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc34006.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p27"></span> “<span
id="vii.iv-p27.1"></span>Enveloppemens de figures et ceremonies.”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc34006.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>C’est ici
aussi (*ou*, *c*’*est done ci*) le tesmoignage;” — “this is also (*or*,
*this is therefore*) the testimony.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc34006.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="vii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p4.1"></span>Es-tu
Prophete, ou, le Prophete?” — “Art thou a Prophet, or, the Prophet?”

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc34006.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="vii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p5.1"></span>De celuy qui
crie au desert.”

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc34006.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="vii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p16"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p16.1"></span>Sinon de
preparer les Juifs a donner audience a Christ, et estre ses disciples.”

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc34006.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p10.1"></span>Que le
temps estoit venu.”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc34006.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p17"></span> See page 49.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc34006.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="vii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="vii.vii-p21.1"></span>Par
oracle; c’est a dire, advertissement ou revelation de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc34006.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="vii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p10"></span> See *Harmony of the Three Evangelists*,
volume 1 page 92, n. 2; and page 142, n. 2.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc34006.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="vii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.xi-p3.1"></span>Tu crois,
*ou*, *crois-tu*?” — “Thou believest, *or*, *believest thou*?”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc34006.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span> “<span id="vii.xi-p8.1"></span>Rondeur et
syncerite.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc34006.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="vii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.xi-p9.1"></span>Canteleux et
frauduleux.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc34006.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="vii.xi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p20"></span> “<span id="vii.xi-p20.1"></span>De la
gloire celeste.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc34007.md)
