[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34009)  [Next](cc34011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[John
5:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** After these things there was a feast of
the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. **2.** And there was in
Jerusalem, at the sheep-market, a pool, which is called in Hebrew
Bethesda, having five porches. **3.** In these lay a great multitude of
diseased, blind, lame, withered,  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)
waiting for the motion of the water. **4.** For an angel went down, at
intervals,  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) into the pool, and
troubled the water. Whosoever went down first after the troubling of the
water was cured of whatever disease he formerly had. **5.** Now there
was a man there, who had passed thirty and eight years in infirmity.
**6.** When Jesus saw this man lying, and knew that he had now been a
long time diseased, he saith to him, Dost thou wish to be cured? **7.**
The diseased man answered him, Sir, I have no man to let me down into
the pool, when the water is troubled; but while I am coming, another
goeth down before me. **8.** Jesus saith to him, Arise, carry thy bed,
and walk. **9.** And immediately that man was cured, and carried his
bed, and walked. And the Sabbath was on that day.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span><span id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**1.** *There was a feast of the Jews.* Though
the Evangelist does not expressly state what *feast* this was, yet the
probable conjecture is that he means Pentecost, at least if what is here
related took place immediately after that Christ came into Galilee. For
immediately after the Passover he set out from Jerusalem, and, as he was
passing through Samaria, he reckoned *four months to the harvest*;
having entered Galilee he cured the courtier’s son. The Evangelist adds
that the *feast* came afterwards; and, therefore, the order of time
leads us to conclude that we ought to understand it to be Pentecost;
though I do not dispute about that matter. Now Christ *came to Jerusalem
to the feast*, partly because at that time, on account of the great
multitude of people who were assembled, he had the opportunity of
publishing his doctrine more extensively, and partly because it was
necessary that he should be subject to the Law, that he might redeem us
from the bondage of the Law, as we have already explained on former
occasions.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span><span id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**2.** *There was in Jerusalem, at the
sheep-market, a pool.* The circumstance of the place is added, from
which we learn that the miracle was not concealed or known to a few
persons only; for the *five porches* show that the place was celebrated
for the great number of persons who resorted to it, and this was also
implied in its vicinity to the temple. Besides, the Evangelist expressly
says that *many diseased persons lay there* With respect to the meaning
of the name, the learned justly reject the fanciful opinion of Jerome,
who, instead of *Bethesda,* makes it *Betheder*, and interprets it to
mean *the house of the flock*; for here mention is made *of a pool,*
which was *near the sheep-market* Those who read it *Bethesda,* as
meaning *a place of fishing*, have no reason on their side. There is
greater probability in the opinion of those who explain it to be *a
place of pouring out*; for the Hebrew word (<span
id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>אשך) (*Eshed*) signifies *flowing out*; but the
Evangelist, as was then the ordinary way of speaking, pronounced it
*Esda* For I think that the water was conveyed into it by conduits, that
the priests might draw out of it; unless perhaps the place received its
name from the circumstance that the water was poured into it by means of
tubes. It was called *the sheep-market,* in my opinion, because the
beasts which were to be offered in sacrifice were taken there.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span><span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**3.** *In these lay a great multitude.* It
is possible that diseased persons lay in the porches to ask alms when
the people were passing there who were going into the temple to worship;
and there, too, it was customary to purchase the beasts which were to be
offered in sacrifice. Yet at each feast God cured a certain number,
that, in this way, he might recommend the worship prescribed in the Law
and the holiness of the temple. But might it not appear foolish to
believe, while we read of nothing of this kind having been done at a
time when religion was in the most flourishing condition, and even since
in the age of the Prophets miracles were not performed but on
extraordinary occasions, that when the affairs of the nation were so
decayed and almost ruinous, the power and grace of God were displayed
with more than ordinary lustre? I reply, there were, in my opinion, two
reasons. As the Holy Spirit, dwelling in the Prophets, was a sufficient
witness of the divine presence, religion at that time needed no other
confirmation; for the Law had been sanctioned by abundantly sufficient
miracles, and God ceased not to express, by innumerable testimonies, his
approbation of the worship which he had enjoined. But about the time of
Christ’s coming, as they were deprived of the Prophets and their
condition was very wretched, and as various temptations pressed upon
them on every hand, they needed this extraordinary aid, that they might
not think that God had entirely left them, and thus might be discouraged
and fall away. For we know that Malachi was the last of the Prophets,
and, therefore, he closes his doctrine with this admonition, that the
Jews may

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>remember the Law delivered by Moses, (<span
id="xi.i-p12.1"></span>[Mal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)<span
id="xi.i-p12.1"></span>,)

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>until Christ appear. God saw it to be
advantageous to deprive them of the Prophets, and to keep them in
suspense for a time, that they might be inflamed with a stronger desire
for Christ, and might receive him with greater reverence, when he should
be manifested to them. Yet, that testimonies might not be wanting to the
temple and sacrifices, and to the whole of that worship by which
salvation should be made known to the world, the Lord retained among the
Jews this gift of healing, that they might know that there was a good
reason why God separated them from the other nations. For God, by curing
the diseased, showed plainly — as by an arm stretched out from heaven —
that he approved of this kind of worship which they derived from the
injunction of the Law. Secondly, I have no doubt that God intended to
remind them by these signs that the time of redemption was approaching,
and that Christ, the Author of salvation, was already at hand, that the
minds of all might be the better aroused. I think that signs, in that
age, served this twofold purpose; first, that the Jews might know that
God was present with them, and thus might remain steady in their
obedience to the Law; and, secondly, that they might earnestly hope for
a new and unwonted condition.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>*Of lame, blind, withered.* For the purpose
of informing us that the diseases cured by our Lord were not of an
ordinary kind, the Evangelist enumerates some classes of them; for human
remedies could be of no avail to *the lame, blind, and withered.* It was
indeed a mournful spectacle, to see in so large a body of men so many
kinds of deformities in the members; but yet the glory of God shone more
brightly there than in the sight of the most numerous and best
disciplined army. For nothing is more magnificent than when an unwonted
power of God corrects and restores the defects of nature; and nothing is
more beautiful or more delightful than when, through his boundless
goodness, he relieves the distresses of men. For this reason the Lord
intended that this should be a splendid theater, in which not only the
inhabitants of the country, but strangers also, might perceive and
contemplate His majesty; and, as I have already suggested, it was no
small ornament and glory of the temple, when God, by stretching out his
hand, clearly showed that He was present.

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span><span id="xi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**4.** *For an angel went down.* It was, no
doubt, a work peculiar to God to cure the sick; but, as He was
accustomed to employ the ministration and agency of *angels,* so He
commanded *an angel* to perform this duty. For this reason the *angels*
are called *principalities* or *powers*, (<span
id="xi.i-p16.1"></span>[Col 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="xi.i-p16.1"></span>;) not that God gives up his *power* to them, and
remains unemployed in heaven, but because, by acting powerfully in them,
he magnificently shows and displays his power. It is, therefore, wicked
and shameful to imagine any thing as belonging to the *angels*, or to
constitute them the medium of communication between us and God, so as to
obscure the glory of God, as if it were at a great distance from us,
while, on the contrary, he employs them as the manifestations of his
presence. We ought to guard against the foolish speculations of Plato,
for the distance between us and God is too great to allow us to go to
the angels, that they may obtain favor for us; but, on the contrary, we
ought to come direct to Christ, that, by his guidance, protection, and
command, we may have the angels as assistants and ministers of our
salvation.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>*At intervals.* God might have at once, in a
single moment, cured them all:, but, as his miracles have their design,
so they ought also to have their limit; as Christ also reminds them
that, though there were so many that died in the time of Elisha, not
more than one child was raised from the dead, (<span
id="xi.i-p17.1"></span>[2Ki 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032)<span
id="xi.i-p17.1"></span>;)  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) and
that, though so many widows were famished during the time of drought,
there was but one whose poverty was relieved by Elijah, (<span
id="xi.i-p18.4"></span>[1Ki 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span
id="xi.i-p18.4"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p18.5"></span>[Lu
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025)<span id="xi.i-p18.5"></span>.)
Thus the Lord reckoned it enough to give a demonstration of his presence
in the case of a few diseased persons. But the manner of curing, which
is here described, shows plainly enough that nothing is more
unreasonable than that men should subject the works of God to their own
judgment; for pray, what assistance or relief could be expected from
*troubled water*? But in this manner, by depriving us of our own senses,
the Lord accustoms us to the obedience of faith. We too eagerly follow
what pleases our reason, though contrary to the word of God; and,
therefore, in order to render us more obedient to him, he often presents
to us those things which contradict our reason. Then only do we show our
submissive obedience, when we shut our eyes, and follow the plain word,
though our own opinion be that what we are doing will be of no avail. We
have an instance of this kind in Naaman a Syrian, whom the prophet sends
to Jordan, that he may be cured of his leprosy, (<span
id="xi.i-p18.6"></span>[2Ki 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)<span
id="xi.i-p18.6"></span>.) At first, no doubt, he despises it as a piece
of mockery, but afterwards he comes actually to perceive that, while God
acts contrary to human reason, he never mocks or disappoints us.

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>*And troubled the water* Yet the *troubling
of the water* was a manifest proof that God freely uses the elements
according to his own pleasure, and that He claims for himself the result
of the work. For it is an exceedingly common fault to ascribe to
creatures what belongs to God alone; but it would be the height of folly
to seek, in the *troubled water*, the cause of the cure. He therefore
holds out the outward symbol in such a manner that, by looking at the
symbol, the diseased persons may be constrained to raise their eyes to
Him who alone is the Author of grace.

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span><span id="xi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>**5.** *And there was a man there.* The
Evangelist collects various circumstances, which prove that the miracle
may be relied on as certain. The long duration of the disease had taken
away all hope of its being cured. This man complains that he is deprived
of the remedy of the water. He had frequently attempted to throw himself
into the water, but without success; there was no man to assist him, and
this causes the power of Christ to be more strikingly displayed. Such,
too, was the import of the command *to carry his bed,* that all might
plainly see that he was cured in no other way than by the agency of
Christ; for when he suddenly rises up healthy and strong in all the
members in which he was formerly impotent, so sudden a change is the
more fitted to arouse and strike the minds of all who beheld it.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span><span id="xi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>**6.** *Wilt thou be made whole?* He does not
inquire about it, as if it were a doubtful matter, but partly in order
to kindle in the man a desire of the favor which was offered to him, and
partly to quicken the attention of the witnesses who were present, and
who, if they had been thinking of something else, might not have
perceived the miracle, as frequently happens in sudden occurrences. For
these two reasons, therefore, this preparation was necessary.

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span><span id="xi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span>**7.** *I have no man.* This diseased man
does what almost all of us are wont to do; for he limits the assistance
of God according to his own thought, and does not venture to promise to
himself any thing more than he conceives in his mind. Christ forgives
his weakness, and in this we have a mirror of that forbearance of which
every one of us has daily experience, when, on the one hand, we keep our
attention fixed on the means which are within our reach, and when, on
the other hand, contrary to expectation, he displays his hand from
hidden places, and thus shows how far his goodness goes beyond the
narrow limits of our faith. Besides, this example ought to teach us
patience. *Thirty-eight years* were a long period, during which God had
delayed to render to this poor man that favor which, from the beginning,
He had determined to confer upon him. However long, therefore, we may be
held in suspense, though we groan under our distresses, let us never be
discouraged by the tediousness of the lengthened period; for, when our
afflictions are long continued, though we discover no termination of
them, still we ought always to believe that God is a wonderful
deliverer, who, by His power, easily removes every obstacle out of the
way.

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span><span id="xi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>**9.** *And it was the Sabbath.* Christ was
well aware how great offense would immediately arise, when they saw a
man walk along laden with burdens; for the Law expressly forbids

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>to carry any burden whatever on the
Sabbath-day,  
(<span id="xi.i-p28.2"></span>[Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021)<span id="xi.i-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>But there were two reasons why Christ,
disregarding this danger, chose to make such an exhibition; first, that
the miracle might be more extensively known; and, secondly, that he
might give occasion, and, as it were, open up the way for the beautiful
discourse which he delivered immediately afterwards. Of so great
importance was the knowledge of that miracle, that he found it to be his
duty to despise boldly the offense taken by the people, particularly
because he had at hand a just defense, by which, though he did not
pacify the ungodly, he abundantly refuted their calumnies. We ought
therefore to observe this rule, that though the whole world kindle into
rage, we ought to proclaim the glory of God and celebrate His works, so
far as His glory requires that they should be made known. Nor ought we
to be uneasy or discouraged, though our labors should not be immediately
successful, provided that we keep in view the object which I have
stated, and do not go beyond the limits of our office.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
5:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**10.** The Jews therefore said to him who
had been cured, It is the Sabbath; it is not lawful for thee to carry
thy bed. **11.** He answered them, He who made me whole said to me,
Carry thy bed and walk. **12.** They therefore asked him, Who is that
man who said to thee, Carry thy bed and walk? **13**. And he who had
been cured knew not who he was; for Jesus had withdrawn himself, because
there was a crowd in that place.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)
**14.** After these things, Jesus found him in the temple, and said to
him, Lo, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest something worse befall
thee. **15.** The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who
had made him whole. **16.** And for that reason the Jews persecuted
Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he did these things on the
Sabbath-day.

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span><span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>**10.** *It is the Sabbath.* It was the duty
of all to maintain the sanctity of the Sabbath, and, therefore, they
justly and properly accuse the man. But, when the excuse offered by the
man does not satisfy them, they already begin to be in fault; for, when
the reason was known, he ought to have been acquitted. It was a
violation of the Sabbath, as we have said, to carry a burden; but
Christ, who laid the burden on his shoulders, discharges him by his own
authority. We are therefore taught by this example to avoid every rash
judgment, until the reason of each action be fully known. Whatever
contradicts the word of God deserves to be condemned without hesitation;
but, as it frequently happens that there are mistakes in this matter, we
ought first to inquire modestly and calmly, that our decision may be
sound and sober. For since the Jews, prejudiced by wicked dispositions,
have not patience to inquire, they shut the door against judgment and
moderation; but, if they had allowed themselves to be taught, not only
would the offense have been removed, but they would have been conducted
still farther, with great advantage, to the knowledge of the Gospel.

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>We now see how far the Jews were in the
wrong. It is, because they do not admit a reasonable defense. The
defense is, that he who had been cured replies that he does nothing but
by the command of him who had power and authority to command; for,
though he did not yet know who Christ was, yet he was convinced that he
had been sent by God, because he had received a proof of his divine
power, and learns from it that Christ is endued with authority, so that
it must be his duty to obey him. But this appears to be worthy of
reproof, that a miracle turns him aside from obedience to the Law. I
confess, indeed, that the argument which the man employs in contending
with them is not sufficiently strong, but the others are faulty on two
accounts, that they neither consider that this is an extraordinary work
of God, nor suspend their judgment until they have heard a Prophet of
God who is furnished with the word.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>**13.** *And he who had been cured knew not
who he was.* Christ certainly did not intend that the glory of so great
a work should pass away, but he intended that it should become generally
known before that he acknowledged himself to be the Author of it. He
therefore withdrew for a little, that the Jews might have it in their
power to judge of the fact itself, without reference to any person. And
hence we learn that the cure of this man cannot be ascribed to his
faith, since, even after having been cured, he does not acknowledge his
Physician; and yet, when he was ordered, he carried his bed, which
appears to have been done by the guidance of faith. For my own part, as
I do not deny that there was in him some secret movement of faith, so I
say that it is clear from what follows, that he had no solid doctrine or
clear light on which he could rely.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span><span id="xi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>**14.** *After these things Jesus found
him.* These words show still more clearly that, when Christ concealed
himself for a time, it was not in order that the remembrance of the
kindness which he had conferred might perish, for he now appears in
public of his own accord; only he intended that the work should first be
known, and that he should afterwards be declared to be the Author of it.
This passage contains a highly useful doctrine; for when Christ says,
*lo, thou art made whole,* his meaning is, that we make an improper use
of the gifts of God, if we are not excited to gratitude. Christ does not
reproach the man with what he had given him, but only reminds him that
he had been cured in order that, remembering the favor which he had
received, he might all his life serve God his Deliverer. Thus, as God by
stripes instructs and spurs us on to repentance, so he invites us to it
by his goodness and forbearance; and, indeed, it is the universal design
both of our redemption and of all the gifts of God, to keep us entirely
devoted to Him. Now this cannot be done, unless the remembrance of the
past punishment remain impressed on the mind, and unless he who has
obtained pardon be employed in this meditation throughout his whole
life.

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>This admonition teaches us also, that all
the evils which we endure ought to be imputed to our sins; for the
afflictions of men are not accidental, but are so many stripes for our
chastisement. First, then, we ought to acknowledge the hand of God which
strikes us, and not to imagine that our distresses arise from a blind
impetuosity of fortune; and next we ascribe this honor to God, that,
since He is a Father full of goodness, He does not take pleasure in our
sufferings, and therefore does not treat us more harshly than he has
been offended by our sins. When he charges him, *sin no more,* he does
not enjoin him to be free from all sin, but speaks comparatively as to
his former life; for Christ exhorts him henceforth to repent, and not to
do as he had done before.

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>*Lest something worse befall thee.* If God
does not succeed in doing us good by the stripes with which he gently
chastises us, as the kindest father would chastise his tender and
delicate children, He is constrained to assume a new character, and a
character which, so to speak, is not natural to Him. He therefore seizes
the whip to subdue our obstinacy, as He threatens in the Law, (<span
id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>[Le 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014)<span
id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>; <span id="xi.ii-p13.2"></span>[De
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)<span id="xi.ii-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p13.3"></span>[Ps
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="xi.ii-p13.3"></span>;)
and indeed throughout the Scriptures passages of the same kind are to be
found. Thus, when we are incessantly pressed down by new afflictions, we
ought to trace this to our obstinacy; for not only do we resemble
restive horses and mules, but we are like wild beasts that cannot be
tamed. There is no reason to wonder, therefore, if God make use of
severer punishment to bruise us, as it were, by mallets, when moderate
punishment is of no avail; for it is proper that they who will not
endure to be corrected should be bruised by strokes. In short, the use
of punishments is, to render us more cautious for the future. If, after
the first and second strokes, we maintain obstinate hardness of heart,
he will strike us seven times more severely. If, after having showed
signs of repentance for a time, we immediately return to our natural
disposition, he chastises more sharply this levity which proves us to be
forgetful, and which is full of sloth.

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span>Again, in the person of this man it is of
importance for us to observe with what gentleness and condescension the
Lord bears with us. Let us suppose that the man was approaching old age,
in which case he must have been visited by disease in the very prime of
life, and perhaps had been attacked by it from his earliest infancy; and
now let us consider how grievous to him must have been this punishment
continued through so many years. It is certain that we cannot reproach
God with excessive severity in causing this man to languish, and to be
half-dead, for so long a period; and, therefore, when we are punished
more lightly, let us learn that it is because the Lord, in his infinite
goodness, moderates the extreme rigour of the punishments which we would
have well deserved.  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) Let us also
learn that no punishments are so rigorous and severe, that the Lord
cannot make additions to them whenever he pleases. Nor can it be doubted
that wretched men by their wicked complaints, often draw down upon
themselves dreadful and shocking tortures, when they assert that it is
not possible to endure heavier distresses, and that God cannot send them
any thing more.  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) *Are not these
things hidden among my treasures*? saith the Lord, (<span
id="xi.ii-p16.2"></span>[De 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034)<span
id="xi.ii-p16.2"></span>.) We ought also to observe how slow we are in
deriving benefit from God’s chastisements; for if Christ’s exhortation
was not superfluous, we may learn from it that the soul of this man was
not yet fully purified from every vice. Indeed, the roots of vices are
too deep in us to be capable of being torn out in a single day, or in a
few days; and the cure of the diseases of the soul is too difficult to
be effected by remedies applied for a short time.

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span><span id="xi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p18"></span>**15.** *The man went away* Nothing was
farther from his intention than to make Christ an object of their
hatred, and nothing was farther from his expectation than that they
would rage so furiously against Christ. His intention, therefore, was
pious; for he wished to render to his Physician the honor which was
justly due to him. The Jews, on the other hand, show their venom, not
only in accusing Christ of having violated the Sabbath, but in breaking
out into extreme cruelty.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**17.** But Jesus answered them, My Father
worketh hitherto, and I work. **18.** For this reason, therefore, the
Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath,
but likewise called God his Father, making himself equal with God.
**19.** Jesus then answered, and said to them, Verily, verily, I say to
you, The Son cannot do any thing of himself but what he hath seen the
Father do; for whatsoever things he doeth, those also doeth the Son
likewise.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span><span id="xi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span>**17.** *My Father worketh hitherto.* We
must see what kind of defense Christ employs. He does not reply that the
Law about keeping the Sabbath was temporary, and that it ought now to be
abolished; but, on the contrary, maintains that he has not violated the
Law, because this is a divine work. It is true that the ceremony of the
Sabbath was a part of the shadows of the Law,  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) and that Christ put an end to it by his
coming, as Paul shows, (<span id="xi.iii-p6.2"></span>[Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)<span id="xi.iii-p6.2"></span>;)
but the present question does not turn on that point. For it is only
from their own works that men are commanded to abstain; and,
accordingly, circumcision — which is a work of God, and not of men — is
not at variance with the Sabbath.

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>What Christ insists upon is this, that the
holy rest which was enjoined by the Law of Moses is not disturbed when
we are employed in works of God.  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)
And for this reason he excuses not only his own action, but also the
action of the man who carried his bed; for it was an appendage, and — as
we might say — a part of the miracle, for it was nothing else than an
approbation of it. Besides, if thanksgiving and the publication of the
divine glory be reckoned among the works of God, it was not a
profanation of the Sabbath to testify the grace of God by feet and
hands. But it is chiefly concerning himself that Christ speaks, to whom
the Jews were more hostile. He declares that the soundness of body which
he has restored to the diseased man is a demonstration of his divine
power. He asserts that he is the Son of God, and that he acts in the
same manner as his Father.

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span>What is the use of the Sabbath, and for what
reasons it was enjoined, I do not now argue at greater length. It is
enough for the present passage, that the keeping of the Sabbath is so
far from interrupting or hindering the works of God, that, on the
contrary, it gives way to them alone. For why does the Law enjoin men to
abstain from their own works, but in order to keep all their senses free
and occupied for considering the works of God? Consequently, he who does
not, on the Sabbath, allow a free course and reign to the works of God,
is not only a false expounder of the Law, but wickedly overturns it.

<span id="xi.iii-p10"></span>If it be objected, that the example of God
is held out to men, that they may rest on the seventh day, the answer is
easy. Men are not conformed to God in this respect, that He ceased to
work, but by abstaining from the troublesome actions of this world and
aspiring to the heavenly rest. The *Sabbath* or *rest* of God,  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) therefore, is not idleness, but true
perfection, which brings along with it a calm state of peace. Nor is
this inconsistent with what Moses says, that *God put an end to his
works*, (<span id="xi.iii-p11.2"></span>[Ge
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002)<span id="xi.iii-p11.2"></span>;)
for he means that, after having completed the formation of the world,
God consecrated that day, that men might employ it in meditating on his
works. Yet He did not cease to sustain by this power the world which he
had made, to govern it by his wisdom, to support it by his goodness, and
to regulate all things according to his pleasure, both in heaven and on
earth. In six days, therefore, the creation of the world was completed,
but the administration of it is still continued, and God incessantly
*worketh* in maintaining and preserving the order of it; as Paul informs
us, that *in* *him we live*, *and move*, *and are*, (<span
id="xi.iii-p11.3"></span>[Ac
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="xi.iii-p11.3"></span>;)
and David informs us, that all things stand so long as the Spirit of God
upholds them, and that they fail as soon as he withdraws his support,
(<span id="xi.iii-p11.4"></span>[Ps
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)<span
id="xi.iii-p11.4"></span>.) Nor is it only by a general Providence that
the Lord maintains the world which He has created, but He arranges and
regulates every part of it, and more especially, by his protection, he
keeps and guards believers whom he has received under his care and
guardianship.

<span id="xi.iii-p12"></span>*And I work.* Leaving the defense of the
present cause, Christ now explains the end and use of the miracle,
namely, that by means of it he may be acknowledged to be the Son of God;
for the object which he had in view in all his words and actions was, to
show that he was the Author of salvation. What he now claims for himself
belongs to his Divinity, as the Apostle also says, that

<span id="xi.iii-p13"></span>he upholdeth all things by his powerful
will, (<span id="xi.iii-p13.1"></span>[Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="xi.iii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.iii-p14"></span>But when he testifies that he is God, it is
that, being manifested in the flesh, he may perform the office of
Christ; and when he affirms that he came from heaven, it is chiefly for
the purpose of informing us for what purpose he came down to earth.

<span id="xi.iii-p15"></span><span id="xi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p16"></span>**18.** *For this reason, therefore, the
Jews sought the more to slay him.* This defense was so far from allaying
their fury that it even enraged them the more. Nor was he unacquainted
with their malignity and wickedness and hardened obstinacy, but he
intended first to profit a few of his disciples who were then present,
and next to make a public display of their incurable malice. By his
example he has taught us that we ought never to yield to the fury of
wicked men, but should endeavor to maintain the truth of God, so far as
necessity demands it, though the whole world should oppose and murmur.
Nor is there any reason why the servants of Christ should take it ill
that they do not profit all men according to their wish, since Christ
himself did not always succeed; and we need not wonder if, in proportion
as the glory of God is more fully displayed, Satan rages the more
violently in his members and instruments.

<span id="xi.iii-p17"></span>*Because he not only had broken the
Sabbath.* When the Evangelist says that the Jews were hostile to Christ,
*because he had broken the Sabbath*, he speaks according to the opinion
which they had formed; for I have already showed that the state of the
case was quite the contrary. The principal cause of their wrath was,
that *he called God his Father.* And certainly Christ intended that it
should be understood *that God was his Father* in a peculiar sense, so
as to distinguish himself from the ordinary rank of other men. *He made
himself equal to God,* when he claimed for himself continuance in
*working*; and Christ is so far from denying this, that he confirms it
more distinctly. This refutes the madness of the Arians, who
acknowledged that Christ is God, but did not think *that he is equal* to
the Father, as if in the one and simple essence of God there could be
any inequality.

<span id="xi.iii-p18"></span><span id="xi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p19"></span>**19.** *Jesus therefore answered.* We see
what I have said, that Christ is so far from vindicating himself from
what the Jews asserted, though they intended it as a calumny, that he
maintains more openly that it is true. And first he insists on this
point, that the work which the Jews cavilled at was a divine work, to
make them understand that they must fight with God himself, if they
persist in condemning what must necessarily be ascribed to him. This
passage was anciently debated in various ways between the orthodox
Fathers and the Arians. Arius inferred from it that the Son is inferior
to the Father, because *he can do nothing of himself* The Fathers
replied that these words denote nothing more than the distinction of the
person, so that it might be known that Christ is from the Father, and
yet that he is not deprived of intrinsic power to act. But both parties
were in the wrong. For the discourse does not relate to the simple
Divinity of Christ, and those statements which we shall immediately see
do not simply and of themselves relate to the eternal Word of God, but
apply only to the Son of God, so far as he is manifested in the flesh.

<span id="xi.iii-p20"></span>Let us therefore keep Christ before our
eyes, as he was sent into the world by the Father to be a Redeemer. The
Jews beheld in him nothing higher than human nature, and, therefore, he
argues that, when he cured the diseased man, he did it not by human
power, but by a Divine power which was concealed under his visible
flesh. The state of the case is this. As they, confining their attention
to the appearance of the flesh, despised Christ, he bids them rise
higher and look at God. The whole discourse must be referred to this
contrast, that they err egregiously who think that they have to do with
a mortal man, when they accuse Christ of works which are truly divine.
This is his reason for affirming so strongly that in this work, there is
no difference between him and his Father.

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
5:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**20.** For the Father loveth the Son, and
showeth him all things which he doeth; and he will show him greater
works than these, that you may wonder. **21.** For as the Father raiseth
up the dead, and quickeneth them; so also the Son quickeneth whom he
will. **22.** For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all
judgment to the Son; **23.** That all men may honor the Son, as they
honor the Father: he who honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father
who sent him. **24.** Verily, verily, I say to you, That he who heareth
my word, and believeth in him who sent me, hath eternal life, and shall
not come into condemnation, but hath passed from death to life.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**20.** *For the Father loveth the Son.*
Every body sees how harsh and far-fetched is the exposition of this
passage which is given by the Fathers. “God,” they say, “loves himself
in the Son.” But this statement applies beautifully to Christ as clothed
with flesh, that he is beloved by the Father. What is more, we know that
it is by this excellent title that he is distinguished both from angels
and from men, *This is my beloved Son*, (<span
id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>[Mt 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>.) For we know that Christ was chosen, that the
whole love of God might dwell in him, and might flow from him to us as
from a full fountain. Christ is loved by the Father, as he is the Head
of the Church. He shows that this love is the cause why the Father does
all things by his hand. For when he says that the Father SHOWTH *to him*
this word must be understood to denote communication, as if he had said,
“As the Father hath given to me his heart, so he hath poured out his
power on me, that the Divine glory may shine in my works, and — what is
more — that men may seek nothing Divine but what they find in me.” And,
indeed, out of Christ it will be in vain to seek the power of God.

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span>*He will show him greater works than these.*
By these words he means that the miracle, which he had performed in
curing the man, was not the greatest of the works enjoined on him by the
Father; for he had only given in it a slight taste of that grace of
which he is properly both minister and Author; namely, to restore life
to the world.

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>*That you may wonder.* By adding these words,
he indirectly charges them with ingratitude in despising so illustrious
a demonstration of the power of God; as if he had said, “Though you are
dull and stupid, yet the works which God shall afterwards perform by me
will draw you, however reluctantly, into admiration.” Yet this appears
not to have been fulfilled, for we know that *seeing*, *they saw not*;
as Isaiah also says that the reprobate are blind amidst the light of
God. I reply, Christ did not now speak of their disposition, but only
threw out a suggestion as to the splendor of the demonstration which he
would soon afterwards give that he was the Son of God.

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span><span id="xi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span>**21.** *For as the Father raiseth up the
dead.* Here he gives a summary view of the nature of the office which
had been given to him by the Father; for though he appears to specify
one class, yet it is a general doctrine in which he declares himself to
be the Author of *life* Now *life* contains within itself not only
righteousness, but all the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and every part of
our salvation. And certainly this miracle must have been so remarkable a
proof of the power of Christ, as to yield this common fruit; that is, to
open a door to the Gospel. We ought also to observe in what manner
Christ bestows *life* upon us; for he found us all dead, and therefore
it was necessary to begin with a *resurrection* Yet, when he joins the
two words, *raiseth up* and *quickeneth,* he does not use superfluous
language; for it would not have been enough that we were rescued from
death, if Christ did not fully and perfectly restore *life* to us.
Again, he does not speak of this life as bestowed indiscriminately on
all; for he says that *he* *giveth life to whom he will*; by which he
means that he specially confers this grace on none but certain men, that
is, on the elect.

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span><span id="xi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span>**22.** *For the Father judgeth no man.* He
now states more clearly the general truth, that the Father governs the
world in the person of the Son, and exercises dominion by his hand; for
the Evangelist employs the word *judgment,* agreeably to the idiom of
the Hebrew language, as denoting *authority* and *power* We now perceive
the amount of what is stated here, that the Father hath given to the Son
a kingdom, that he may govern heaven and earth according to his
pleasure. But this might appear to be very absurd, that the Father,
surrendering his right to govern, should remain unemployed in heaven,
like a private person. The answer is easy. This is said both in regard
to God and to men; for no change took place in the Father, when he
appointed Christ to be supreme King and Lord of heaven and earth; for he
is in the Son, and works in him. But since, when we wish to rise to God,
all our senses immediately fail, Christ is placed before our eyes as a
lively image of the invisible God. There is no reason, therefore, why we
should toil to no purpose in exploring the secrets of heaven, since God
provides for our weakness by showing himself to be near in the person of
Christ; but, on the other hand, whenever the inquiry relates to the
government of the world, to our own condition, to the heavenly
guardianship of our salvation, let us learn to direct our eyes to Christ
alone, as all power is committed to him, (<span
id="xi.iv-p11.1"></span>[Mt 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span
id="xi.iv-p11.1"></span>,) and in his face God the Father, who would
otherwise have been hidden and at a distance, appears to us so that the
unveiled majesty of God does not swallow us up by its inconceivable
brightness.

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span><span id="xi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span>**23.** *That all men may honor the Son.*
This clause sufficiently confirms the suggestion which I threw out a
little ago, that when it is said that God reigns in the person of
Christ, this does not mean that he reposes in heaven, as indolent kings
are wont to do, but because in Christ he manifests his power and shows
himself to be present. For what else is the meaning of these words,
*that all men may honor the Son,* but that the Father wishes to be
acknowledged and worshipped in the Son? Our duty, therefore, is to seek
God the Father in Christ, to behold his power in Christ, and to worship
him in Christ. For, as immediately follows, *he who honoureth not the
Son* deprives God of the honor which is due to him. All admit that we
ought to worship God, and this sentiment, which is natural to us, is
deeply rooted in our hearts, so that no man dares absolutely to refuse
to God the honor which is due to him; yet the minds of men lose
themselves in going out of the way to seek God. Hence so many pretended
deities, hence so many perverse modes of worship. We shall never,
therefore, find the true God but in Christ, nor shall we ever worship
Him aright but by *kissing the Son*, as David tells us, (<span
id="xi.iv-p13.2"></span>[Ps 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span
id="xi.iv-p13.2"></span>;) for, as John elsewhere declares,

<span id="xi.iv-p14"></span>He who hath not the Son hath not the
Father,  
(<span id="xi.iv-p14.2"></span>[1Jo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023)<span id="xi.iv-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.iv-p15"></span>Mahometans and Jews do indeed adorn with
beautiful and magnificent titles the God whom they worship; but we ought
to remember that the name of God, when it is separated from Christ, is
nothing else than a vain imagination. Whoever then desires to have his
worship approved by the true God, let him not turn aside from Christ.
Nor was it otherwise with the Fathers under the Law; for though they
beheld Christ darkly under shadows, yet never did God reveal himself out
of Christ. But now, since Christ has been manifested in the flesh and
appointed to be King over us, the whole world must bend the knee to him,
in order to obey God; for the Father having made him sit at his right
hand, he who forms a conception of God without Christ takes away the
half of him.

<span id="xi.iv-p16"></span><span id="xi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p17"></span>**24.** *He that heareth my word.* Here is
described the way and manner of honoring God, that no one may think that
it consists solely in any outward performance, or in frivolous
ceremonies. For the doctrine of the Gospel seems as a scepter to Christ,
by which he governs believers whom the Father has made his subjects. And
this definition is eminently worthy of notice. Nothing is more common
than a false profession of Christianity; for even the Papists, who are
most inveterate enemies of Christ, do in the most presumptuous manner
boast of his name. But here Christ demands from us no other honor than
to obey his Gospel. Hence it follows, that all the honor which
hypocrites bestow on Christ is but the kiss of Judas, by which he
betrayed his Lord. Though they may a hundred times call him King, yet
they deprive him of his kingdom and of all power, when they do not
exercise faith in the Gospel.

<span id="xi.iv-p18"></span>*Hath eternal life.* By these words he
likewise commends the fruit of obedience, that we may be more willing to
render it. For who ought to be so hardened as not to submit willingly to
Christ, when the reward of eternal life is held out to him? And yet we
see how few there are whom Christ gains to himself by so great goodness.
So great is our depravity that we choose rather to perish of our own
accord than to surrender ourselves to obey the Son of God, that we may
be saved by his grace. Both, therefore, are here included by Christ —
the robe of devout and sincere worship which he requires from us, and
the method by which he restores us to life. For it would not be
sufficient to understand what he formerly taught, that he came *to raise
the dead*, unless we also knew the manner in which he restores us to
life. Now he affirms that life is obtained by *hearing* his word, and by
the word *hearing* he means *faith*, as he immediately afterwards
declares. But faith has its seat not in the ears, but in the heart.
Whence faith derives so great power, we have formerly explained. We
ought always to consider what it is that the Gospel offers to us; for we
need not wonder that he who receives Christ with all his merits is
reconciled to God, and acquitted of the condemnation of death; and that
he who has received the gift of the Holy Spirit is clothed with a
heavenly righteousness, that he may *walk in newness of life*, (<span
id="xi.iv-p18.1"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="xi.iv-p18.1"></span>.) The clause which is added, *believeth on him
who sent him,* serves to confirm the authority of the Gospel: when
Christ testifies that it came from God, and was not invented by men, as
he elsewhere says that what he speaks *is not from himself*, but was
delivered to him by the Father, (<span id="xi.iv-p18.2"></span>[John
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016), [John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="xi.iv-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.iv-p19"></span>*And shall not come into condemnation.*
There is here an implied contrast between the guilt to which we are all
naturally liable, and the unconditional acquittal which we obtain
through Christ; for if all were not liable to condemnation, what purpose
would it serve to free from it those who believe in Christ? The meaning
therefore is, that we are beyond the danger of death, because we are
acquitted through the grace of Christ; and, therefore, though Christ
sanctifies and regenerates us, by his Spirit, to newness of life, yet
here he specially mentions the unconditional forgiveness of sins, in
which alone the happiness of men consists. For then does a man begin to
live when he has God reconciled to him; and how would God love us, if he
did not pardon our sins?

<span id="xi.iv-p20"></span>*But hath passed.* Some Latin copies have
this verb in the future tense, will pass *from death to life*; but this
has arisen from the ignorance and rashness of some person who, not
understanding the meaning of the Evangelist, has taken more liberty than
he ought to have taken; for the Greek word <span
id="xi.iv-p20.1"></span>μεταβέβηκε (*hath passed*) has no ambiguity
whatever. There is no impropriety in saying that we have already *passed
from death to life*; for the *incorruptible seed* of life (<span
id="xi.iv-p20.2"></span>[1Pe 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span
id="xi.iv-p20.2"></span>) resides in the children of God, and they
already sit in the heavenly glory with Christ by hope, (<span
id="xi.iv-p20.3"></span>[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="xi.iv-p20.3"></span>,) and they have *the kingdom of God* already
established *within them*, (<span id="xi.iv-p20.4"></span>[Lu
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)<span id="xi.iv-p20.4"></span>.)
For though their *life be hidden*, they do not on that account cease to
possess it by faith; and though they are besieged on every side by
faith, they do not cease to be calm on this account, that they know that
they are in perfect safety through the protection of Christ. Yet let us
remember that believers are now in life in such a manner that they
always carry about with them the cause of death; but the Spirit, who
dwells in us, is *life*, which will at length destroy the remains of
*death*; for it is a true saying of Paul, that

<span id="xi.iv-p21"></span>death is the last enemy that shall be
destroyed,  
(<span id="xi.iv-p21.2"></span>[1Co
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)<span id="xi.iv-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.iv-p22"></span>And, indeed, this passage contains nothing
that relates to the complete destruction of death, or the entire
manifestation of life. But though life be only begun in us, Christ
declares that believers are so certain of obtaining it, that they ought
not to fear *death*; and we need not wonder at this, since they are
united to him who is the inexhaustible fountain of *life*.

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[John
5:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**25.** Verily, verily, I say to you, That the
hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live. **26.** For as the Father hath
life in himself, so also hath he given to the Son to have life in
himself. **27.** And he hath given him power to execute judgment also,
because he is the Son of man.  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)
**28.** Wonder not at this; for the hour cometh when all who are in the
graves shall hear his voice, **29.** And they who have done good shall
go forth to the resurrection of life; and they who have done evil, to
the resurrection of condemnation.

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span><span id="xi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span>**25.** *Verily, verily* When the Evangelist
represents the Son of God as swearing so frequently in reference to our
salvation, hence we perceive, first, how eagerly he desires our welfare,
and next, of how great importance it is that the faith of the Gospel
should be deeply fixed and thoroughly confirmed. The statement has
indeed some appearance of being incredible, when we are told that this
is the effect of the faith of which Christ speaks; and therefore he
confirms by an oath that the voice of his Gospel has such power of
giving life that it is powerful to *raise the dead* It is generally
agreed that he speaks of spiritual death; for those who refer it to
Lazarus, (<span id="xi.v-p6.1"></span>[Joh
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span id="xi.v-p6.1"></span>,)
and to the widow’s son at Nain, (<span id="xi.v-p6.2"></span>[Lu
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#015)<span id="xi.v-p6.2"></span>,) and
similar instances, are refuted by what follows. First, Christ shows that
we are all *dead* before he quickens us; and hence it is evident what
the whole nature of man can accomplish towards procuring salvation.

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span>When the Papists wish to set up their
free-will, they compare it to the Samaritan whom the robbers had left
half-dead on the road, (<span id="xi.v-p7.1"></span>[Lu
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span id="xi.v-p7.1"></span>;) as
if by the smoke of an allegory they could darken a clear statement, by
which Christ declares that we are fully condemned to death. And indeed
as we have been, since the revolt of the first man, alienated from God
through sin, all who do not acknowledge that they are overwhelmed with
everlasting destruction do nothing else than deceive themselves by empty
flatteries. I readily acknowledge that in the soul of man there remains
some remnant of life; for understanding, and judgment, and will, and all
our senses, are so many parts of life; but as there is no part which
rises to the desire of the heavenly life, we need not wonder if the
whole man, so far as relates to the kingdom of God, is accounted dead.
And this death Paul explains more fully when he says, that we are
alienated from the pure and sound reason of the understanding, that we
are enemies to God, and opposed to his righteousness, in every affection
of our heart; that we wander in darkness like blind persons, and are
given up to wicked lusts, (<span id="xi.v-p7.2"></span>[Eph.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001), [Eph.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)<span id="xi.v-p7.2"></span>.) If
a nature so corrupted has no power to desire righteousness, it follows
that the life of God is extinguished in us.

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span>Thus the grace of Christ is a true
resurrection from the dead. Now this grace is conferred on us by the
Gospel; not that so much energy is possessed by the external voice,
which in many cases strikes the ears to no purpose, but because Christ
speaks to our hearts within by his Spirit, that we may receive by faith
the life which is offered to us. For he does not speak indiscriminately
of all the *dead,* but means the elect only, whose ears God pierces and
opens, that they may receive the voice of his Son, which restores them
to life. This twofold grace, indeed, Christ expressly holds out to us by
his words, when he says, *The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they who hear shall live;* for it is not less contrary to
nature that *the dead should hear*, than that they should be brought
back to the life which they had lost; and therefore both proceed from
the secret power of God.

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span>*The hour cometh, and now is.* He thus speaks
of it as a thing which had never before happened; and, indeed, the
publication of the Gospel was a new and sudden resurrection of the
world. But did not the word of God always give life to men? This
question may be easily answered. The doctrine of the Law and the
Prophets was addressed to the people of God, and consequently must have
been rather intended to preserve in life those who were the children of
God than to bring them back from death. But it was otherwise with the
Gospel, by which nations formerly estranged from the kingdom of God,
separated from God, and deprived of all hope of salvation, were invited
to become partakers of life.

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span><span id="xi.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>**26.** *For as the Father hath life in
himself.* He shows whence his voice derives such efficacy; namely, that
he is the fountain of *life,* and by his voice pours it out on men; for
*life* would not flow to us from his mouth, if he had not in himself the
cause and source of it. God is said to *have life in himself,* not only
because he alone lives by his own inherent power, but because,
containing in himself the fullness of *life,* he communicates *life* to
all things. And this, indeed, belongs peculiarly to God, as it is said,
*With thee is the fountain of life*, (<span id="xi.v-p11.1"></span>[Ps
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="xi.v-p11.1"></span>.)
But because the majesty of God, being far removed from us, would
resemble an unknown and hidden source, for this reason it has been
openly manifested in Christ. We have thus an open fountain placed before
us, from which we may draw. The meaning of the words is this: “God did
not choose to have life hidden, and, as it were, buried within himself,
and therefore he poured it into his Son, that it might flow to us.”
Hence we conclude, that this title is strictly applied to Christ, so far
as he was manifested in the flesh.

<span id="xi.v-p12"></span><span id="xi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p13"></span>**27.** *And hath given him power.* He again
repeats that the Father hath given him dominion, that he may have full
power over all things in heaven and in the earth. The word (<span
id="xi.v-p13.1"></span>ἐξουσία) here denotes *authority* *Judgment* is
here put for rule and government, as if he had said, that the Father had
appointed him to be King, to govern the world, and exercise the power of
the Father himself.

<span id="xi.v-p14"></span>*Because he is the Son of man.* This reason,
which is immediately added, deserves particularly to be observed, for it
means that he comes forth to men, adorned with such magnificence of
power, that he may impart to them what he has received from the Father.
Some think that this passage contains nothing else than what is said by
Paul, that Christ,

<span id="xi.v-p15"></span>having been in the form of God emptied
himself by taking upon him the form of a servant, and humbled himself
even to the death of the cross; and therefore God hath exalted him, and
given him a name more illustrious than any name, that every knee may bow
before him  
(<span id="xi.v-p15.2"></span>[Php
2:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="xi.v-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.v-p16"></span>But for my own part, I regard the meaning as
more extensive: that Christ, so far as he is man, was appointed by the
Father to be the Author of life, that it may not be necessary for us to
go far to seek it; for Christ did not receive it for himself, as if he
needed it, but in order to enrich us by his wealth. It may be summed up
thus: “What had been hidden in God is revealed to us in Christ as man,
and *life*, which was formerly inaccessible, is now placed before our
eyes.” There are some who separate this argument from its immediate
connection, and join it to the following clause; but this is a forced
interpretation, and is at variance with Christ’s meaning.

<span id="xi.v-p17"></span><span id="xi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p18"></span>**28.** *Wonder not at this.* We may be apt
to think that he reasons inconclusively, in drawing from the last
resurrection a confirmation of what he had said; for it is not an
instance of greater power to raise up bodies than to raise up minds. I
reply, it is not from the fact itself that he makes a comparison between
the greater and the less, but from the opinion of men; for, being
carnal, they admire nothing but what is outward and visible. Hence it
arises that they pass by the resurrection of the soul with little
concern, while the resurrection of the body excites in them greater
admiration. Another effect produced by this gross stupidity of ours is,
that those things which are perceived by the eyes have a more powerful
influence in producing faith than those which can be received by faith
alone. As he mentions the last day, that limitation — -and *now is* — is
not again added, but he simply declares that the time will one day
arrive.

<span id="xi.v-p19"></span>But another objection springs up; for though
believers expect the resurrection of bodies, yet they cannot rely on
their knowledge of it, so as to conclude that souls are now rescued from
death, because bodies will one day rise out of the graves. And among
ungodly men,  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) what would be
reckoned more ridiculous than to prove a thing unknown (to use a common
phrase) by a thing less known? I reply, Christ here boasts of his power
over the reprobate, so as to testify that the Father has committed to
him the full restoration of all things; as if he had said, “What I now
tell you that I have commenced, I will one day finish before your eyes.”
And, indeed, when Christ now, by the voice of his Gospel, quickens souls
which had been sunk in perdition, it is a sort of preparation for the
last resurrection. Again, as he includes the whole human race, he
immediately makes a distinction between the elect and the reprobate.
This division shows that the reprobate, as they are now summoned by the
voice of Christ to come to judgment, will also, by the same voice, be
dragged and brought to appear at his tribunal.

<span id="xi.v-p21"></span>But why does he mention those only who are
shut up *in graves,* as if others would not be partakers of the
resurrection, whether they have been drowned, or devoured by wild
beasts, or reduced to ashes? The answer is, that as the dead are
commonly buried, by the figure of speech called *synecdoche*, he employs
a part to denote all who are already dead. And this is more emphatic
than if he had said simply, *the dead*; for those whom death already
deprived of life and light the grave withdraws, as it were, from the
world.

<span id="xi.v-p22"></span>*Shall hear his voice.* The *voice of the
Son* means *the sound of the trumpet*, which will sound at the command
by the power of Christ, (<span id="xi.v-p22.1"></span>[Mt
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)<span id="xi.v-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.v-p22.2"></span>[1Co
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="xi.v-p22.2"></span>.)
For though an *angel* will be a herald or forerunner, (<span
id="xi.v-p22.3"></span>[1Th 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)<span
id="xi.v-p22.3"></span>,) this does not hinder what is done by the
authority of the Judge, and as it were in his own person, from being
ascribed to himself.

<span id="xi.v-p23"></span><span id="xi.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p24"></span>**29.** *And they who have done good.* He
points out believers by good works, as he elsewhere teaches that *a tree
is known by its fruit*, (<span id="xi.v-p24.1"></span>[Mt
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span id="xi.v-p24.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.v-p24.2"></span>[Lu
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#044)<span id="xi.v-p24.2"></span>.) He
praises their *good* works, to which they have begun to devote
themselves since they were called. For the robber, to whom Christ on the
cross (<span id="xi.v-p24.3"></span>[Lu
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042)<span id="xi.v-p24.3"></span>)
promised life, and who had all his life been given up to crimes,
expresses a desire to do good with his latest breath; but as he is born
again a new man, and from being the slave of sin begins to be a servant
of righteousness, the whole course of his past life is not taken into
account before God. Besides, the sins themselves, on account of which
believers every day subject themselves to condemnation, are not imputed
to them. For without the pardon which God grants to those who believe in
Him,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) there never was a man in
the world of whom we can say that he has lived well; nor is there even a
single work that will be reckoned altogether good, unless God pardon the
sins which belong to it, for all are imperfect and corrupted. Those
persons, therefore, are here called *doers of good works* whom Paul
calls earnestly desirous or *zealous of them*, (<span
id="xi.v-p25.2"></span>Titus 2:14.) But this estimate depends on the
fatherly kindness of God, who by free grace approves what deserved to be
rejected.

<span id="xi.v-p26"></span>The inference which the Papists draw from
those passages — that eternal life is suspended on the merits of works —
may be refuted without any difficulty. For Christ does not now treat of
the cause of salvation, but merely distinguishes the elect from the
reprobate by their own mark; and he does so in order to invite and
exhort his own people to a holy and blameless life. And indeed we do not
deny that the faith which justifies us is accompanied by an earnest
desire to live well and righteously; but we only maintain that our
confidence cannot rest on any thing else than on the mercy of God alone.

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
5:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**30.** I can do nothing of myself; as I
hear, I judge, and my judgment is just; because I seek not my own will,
but the will of my Father who sent me. **31.** If I testify concerning
myself, my testimony is not true. **32.** There is another who
testifieth concerning me, and I know that the testimony which he
testifieth concerning me is true.

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span><span id="xi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span>**30.** *I can do nothing of myself.* It
would be superfluous here to enter into abstruse reasonings, whether the
Son of God *can do any thing of himself* or otherwise, so far as relates
to his eternal Divinity; for he did not intend to keep our minds
employed about such trifles. Consequently there was no reason why the
ancients should have given themselves so much anxiety and distress about
refuting the calumny of Arius. That scoundrel gave out that the Son is
not equal to the Father because *he can do nothing of himself* The holy
men reply, that the Son justly claims for himself all that can be
ascribed to the Father, from whom he takes his commencement, with
respect to his person. But, in the first place, Christ does not speak of
his Divinity simply, but warns us that, so far as he is clothed with our
flesh, we ought not to judge of him from the outward appearance, because
he has something higher than man. Again, we ought to consider with whom
he has to deal. His intention was, to refute the Jews who were
endeavoring to contrast him with God. He therefore affirms that he does
nothing by human power, because he has for his guide and director God
who dwells in him.

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span>We ought always to keep in remembrance that,
whenever Christ speaks concerning himself, he claims only that which
belongs to man; for he keeps his eye upon the Jews, who erroneously said
that he was merely one of the ordinary rank of men. For the same reason,
he ascribes to the Father whatever is higher than man. The word *judge*
belongs properly to doctrine, but is intended also to apply to the whole
of his administration, as if he had said, that he acts by the Father’s
direction in all things, that the Father’s will is his rule, and
therefore that He will defend him against all adversaries.  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span>*And my judgment is just.* He concludes that
his actions and sayings are beyond the risk of blame, because he does
not allow himself to attempt anything but by the command and direction
of the Father; for it ought to be regarded as beyond all controversy
that whatever proceeds from God must be right. This modesty ought to be
held by us as the first maxim of piety, to entertain such reverence for
the word and works of God, that the name of God would alone be
sufficient to prove their justice and rectitude; but how few are to be
found who are ready to acknowledge that God is just, unless they are
compelled to do so! I acknowledge, indeed, that God demonstrates his
righteousness by experience; but to limit it to the perception of our
flesh, so as to have no opinion respecting it but what our own mind
suggests, is wicked and daring impiety. Let us, therefore, set it down
as certain and undoubted, that whatever is from God is right and true,
and that it is impossible for God not to be true in all his words, just
and right in all his actions. We are likewise reminded that the only
rule for acting well is, to undertake nothing but by the direction and
commandment of God. And if after this the whole world should rise
against us, we shall still have this invincible defense, that he who
follows God cannot go astray.

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span>*Because I seek not my own will.* He does not
here make his own will and that of his Father to clash with each other,
as if they were contrary things, but only refutes the false opinion
which they entertained, that he was impelled by human presumption rather
than guided by the authority of God. He affirms, therefore, that he has
no disposition which is peculiar to himself and separate from the
command of the Father.

<span id="xi.vi-p10"></span><span id="xi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p11"></span>**31.** *If I testify concerning myself.* He
does not here take any thing away from the credit due to his testimony,
which he elsewhere asserts in strong terms, but he speaks by way of
concession; for Christ, having been in other respects most abundantly
supported, consents that they should not believe his word. “If my
testimony concerning myself,” says he, “is suspected by you according to
the ordinary custom of men, let it go for nothing.” Now we know that
what any man asserts about himself is not reckoned to be true and
authentic, although in other respects he speak truth, because no man is
a competent witness in his own cause. Though it would be unjust to
reduce the Son of God to this rank, yet he prefers to surrender his
right, that he may convince his enemies by the authority of God.

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
5:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033)<span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>**33.** You sent to John, and he gave
testimony to the truth. **34.** But I receive not testimony from man;
but these things I say that you may be saved. **35.** He was a burning
and shining lamp, and for a time you were willing to amuse yourselves in
his light. **36.** But I have greater testimony than that of John; for
the works which my Father gave me to perform, the very works which I do,
testify concerning me that the Father hath sent me.

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span><span id="xi.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span>**33.** *You sent to John.* Before producing
the testimony of God, he presses them with the answer of *John,* from
which they could not honorably withhold their belief. For of what use
was it to *send to him*, if they did not intend to abide by his words?
They *send to him* as a Prophet of God, and thus they pretend that his
word will be regarded by them as an oracle. Now, though this implies
another admission in their favor, still Christ openly brings against
them this charge, that nothing but their own malice  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) hinders them from believing. And,
therefore, we see that this circumstance is highly appropriate to the
matter in hand, namely, that they sent to John, and — as if their motive
had been a desire to learn — inquired at him who was the Messiah, and
yet paid no attention to his reply.

<span id="xi.vii-p7"></span><span id="xi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p8"></span>**34.** *I receive not testimony from men.*
Yet it was not in vain that God chose Christ to be a witness to him, and
Christ himself declares, on another occasion, that the disciples

<span id="xi.vii-p9"></span>will be his witnesses. You shall be
witnesses to me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria,
and unto the uttermost part of the earth,  
(<span id="xi.vii-p9.2"></span>[Ac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008)<span id="xi.vii-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.vii-p10"></span>I reply, Christ avails himself of the
*testimony* of John, not because he needs it, but so far as it is
advantageous to us to receive from it some confirmation. Men borrow
*testimony* from one another, because they cannot dispense with that
assistance. The case is different with God and Christ. For if
philosophers assert that virtue has no need of foreign aid, what has man
in himself to lend support to the truth of God? And Christ immediately
adds, that he produces the testimony of John on their account: *these
things I say that you may be saved.* By this statement he means that it
is not so much from a regard to himself as from a desire to promote the
advantage of men, that he raises up the heralds of his Gospel by whom he
testifies to us concerning his will. In this we see also a striking
proof of his wonderful goodness, by which he regulates all things for
our salvation. It is therefore our duty, on the other hand, to strive
that the great care which he bestows in *saving* us may not be
fruitless.

<span id="xi.vii-p11"></span><span id="xi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p12"></span>**35.** *He was a burning and shining
lamp.* When he calls John *a burning lamp,* this proves their
ingratitude; for it follows that they are only blind, because they
choose to be so, since God kindled a *lamp* before their eyes. The
meaning of the words therefore is, “God did not intend that you should
go astray; for he appointed John to be a *lamp,* that he might direct
you by his brightness; and, therefore, when you do not acknowledge me to
be the Son of God, this arises from voluntary error.” This is followed
by another reproach, that not only did they shut their eyes, and thus
obstruct the entrance of the *light* which was offered to them, but they
intentionally abused it for the purpose of crushing Christ. For when
they were ready to applaud John beyond what he justly deserved, this
arose from a wicked and treacherous design not to give way to the Son of
God.

<span id="xi.vii-p13"></span>*And you were willing to amuse yourselves
in his light.* This wicked abuse of the heavenly *light* Christ
elegantly compares to foolish mirth; as if the head of a family were to
light a *lamp* for his servants by night, that they might perform the
duties which he had enjoined on them, but they, instead of doing so,
employed it for debauchery and every kind of licentiousness. By these
words Christ accuses the Jews, and at the same time conveys to all of us
a warning that, when God sends faithful teachers to guide us in the
right way, we should take care not to abuse them by wandering in every
direction. How useful this warning is, the experience of all ages shows.
God undertakes to direct men, throughout the whole course of their life,
to the final goal, and sends his prophets to be their guides. Yet such
is the madness of the folly of men that, instead of walking, they prefer
to indulge in wanton dancing, without making any progress; so light and
unsteady are they that, despising and rejecting his continued guidance,
they are hurried away by the sudden impulses of their passions.

<span id="xi.vii-p14"></span>*For a time,* or, for an hour. By this term
he reproves them for their folly in thinking that wickedness of a
transitory nature and short duration can extinguish the light of God.
Thus in our own day all those faithful teachers whom God has given to
his Church as *burning lamps* are applied by the Papists to a contrary
purpose; as if their intention were, by looking at the light, to dazzle
their eyes. And not only do they abuse the *lamps* for extinguishing the
light of God, but they often indulge in foolish gaiety amidst the
darkness, as when they rise against the pure doctrine of the Gospel, and
glory in the foolish sayings of their noisy declaimers. But what Christ
here asserts concerning John, Paul declares to be common to all
believers, because, having the word of life, they ought to give light to
the world, like torches. But Christ shows that it belongs strictly to
the Apostles and ministers of the Gospel to go before others and hold
out the torch to guide them;  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)
for though we are all blind, and in the midst of darkness, God shines
upon us by the light of his word. But here he peculiarly adorns John the
Baptist with this honorable designation, because by his ministry God
shone on his Church with much greater brightness.

<span id="xi.vii-p16"></span><span id="xi.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p17"></span>**36.** *But I have greater testimony than
that of John.* After having showed that, in the person of John, the Jews
had wickedly corrupted the gift of God, he now repeats a second time
what he had said, that he has no need of the *testimony* of man, as if
he had not enough of himself; although, perceiving that they held his
person in contempt, he sent them to his Father, according to his custom.

<span id="xi.vii-p18"></span>*For the works which the Father hath given
me to do.* He holds out to view two things, by which he was proved to be
the Son of God. “*My Father*,” says he, “attests by miracles that I am
his Son; and before I came into the world, he gave abundant testimony to
me in the sacred writings.” Let us always remember what object he has in
view. He wishes to be recognized as the Messiah promised by God, that he
may be heard, and, therefore, he maintains that he is now manifested to
be such a person as Scripture describes him. It may be asked, Are
miracles sufficient to prove this; for similar miracles had been already
performed by the Prophets? I reply, those miracles which God performed
by the agency of the Prophets did not go beyond the purpose for which
they were intended, namely, to show that they were the ministers of God,
because they could in no other way obtain the authority due to their
office. But God intended to exalt his Son more highly, and this purpose
of God ought to be regarded by us as the design of miracles. Therefore,
if the Jews had not been prejudiced by malice and voluntarily shut their
eyes, Christ might easily have proved to them by his miracles who and
what he was.

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>[John
5:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037)<span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>**37.** And the Father who hath sent me,
himself hath testified concerning me; you have never heard his voice, or
seen his shape. **38.** And you have not his word abiding in you; for
whom he hath sent, him you believe not. **39.** Search the Scriptures;
for you think that you have eternal life in them: and they are they
which testify concerning me. **40.** And you will not come to me, that
you may have life.

<span id="xi.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.viii-p4"></span><span id="xi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p5"></span>**37.** *And the Father who hath sent me.*
To limit this statement, as some have done,  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) to the voice which was heard at his
baptism, (<span id="xi.viii-p6.2"></span>[Mt
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="xi.viii-p6.2"></span>,)
is a mistake; for he says in the past tense, that the Father (<span
id="xi.viii-p6.3"></span>μεμαρτύρηκε) *testified*, in order to show that
he did not come forward as an unknown person, because the Father had
long ago distinguished him by such peculiar marks that, bringing them
along with him, he might be recognized. I explain, therefore, that God
testified concerning his Son, whenever in past times he held out to the
ancient people the hope of salvation, or promised that the kingdom of
Israel would be fully restored. In this manner the Jews must have formed
an idea of Christ from the Prophets, before he was manifested in the
flesh. When having him before their eyes, they despise and therefore
reject him, they show plainly that they have no relish for the Law, with
which Christ also reproaches them; and yet they boasted of their
knowledge of the Law, as if they had been brought up in the bosom of
God.

<span id="xi.viii-p7"></span>*You have never heard his voice.* After
having complained that they do not receive him, Christ breaks out in
still more severe language against their blindness. When he says that
*they had never heard the voice of God, or seen his shape,* these are
metaphorical expressions, by which he intends to state generally that
they are utterly estranged from the knowledge of God. For as men are
made known by the countenance and speech, so God utters *his voice* to
us by the voice of the Prophets, and, in the sacraments, takes, as it
were, a visible form, from which he may be known by us according to our
feeble capacity. But he who does not recognize God in his lively image,
plainly shows by this very fact that he worships no Deity but what he
has himself contrived. For this reason Paul says, that the Jews had *a
vail placed before their eyes*, that they might not perceive the glory
of God in the face of Christ, (<span id="xi.viii-p7.1"></span>[2Co
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)<span id="xi.viii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.viii-p8"></span><span id="xi.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p9"></span>**38.** *And you have not his word abiding
in you.* This is the true way of profiting, when the word of God takes
root in us, so that, being impressed on our hearts, it has its fixed
abode there. Christ affirms that the heavenly doctrine has no place
among the Jews, because they do not receive the Son of God, on whom it
everywhere bestows commendation. And justly does he bring this reproach
against them; for it was not in vain that God spake by Moses and the
Prophets. Moses had no other intention than to invite all men to go
straight to Christ; and hence it is evident that they who reject Christ
are not the disciples of Moses. Besides, how can that man have *the word
of life abiding in him* who drives from him the life itself? How can
that man keep the doctrine of the Law who destroys the soul of the Law,
as far as lies in his power? For the Law without Christ is empty and has
no solidity. Just in proportion, therefore, as any man knows Christ, is
the proficiency which he has made in the word of God.

<span id="xi.viii-p10"></span><span id="xi.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p11"></span>**39.** *Search the Scriptures.* We have
said that the statement which Christ formerly made — that he has the
Father for a witness in heaven — refers to Moses and the Prophets. Now
follows a clearer explanation; for he says that that testimony is to be
found in *the Scriptures.* He again reproves them for their foolish
boasting, because, while they acknowledged *that they had life in the
Scriptures*, they perceived nothing in them but the dead letter. For he
does not absolutely blame them for seeking life in *the Scriptures,*
since they were given to us for that end and use, but because the Jews
thought that *the Scriptures* gave them *life,* while they were widely
opposed to its natural meaning, and — what is worse — while they
quenched the light of *life* which was contained in them; for how can
the Law bestow life without Christ, who alone gives life to it?

<span id="xi.viii-p12"></span>Again, we are taught by this passage, that
if we wish to obtain the knowledge of Christ,  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) we must seek it from *the Scriptures;*
for they who imagine whatever they choose concerning Christ will
ultimately have nothing instead of him but a shadowy phantom. First,
then, we ought to believe that Christ cannot be properly known in any
other way than from *the Scriptures;* and if it be so, it follows that
we ought to read *the Scriptures* with the express design of finding
Christ in them. Whoever shall turn aside from this object, though he may
weary himself throughout his whole life in learning, will never attain
the knowledge of the truth; for what wisdom can we have without the
wisdom of God? Next, as we are commanded to seek Christ *in the
Scriptures*, so he declares in this passage that our labors shall not be
fruitless; for the Father testifies in them concerning his Son in such a
manner that He will manifest him to us beyond all doubt. But what
hinders the greater part of men from profiting is, that they give to the
subject nothing more than a superficial and cursory glance. Yet it
requires the utmost attention, and, therefore, Christ enjoins us to
*search* diligently for this hidden treasure. Consequently, the deep
abhorrence of Christ which is entertained by the Jews, who have the Law
constantly in their hands, must be imputed to their indolence. For the
lustre of the glory of God shines brightly in Moses, but they choose to
have a vail to obscure that lustre. By *the Scriptures,* it is well
known, is here meant the Old Testament; for it was not in the Gospel
that Christ first began to be manifested, but, having received testimony
from the Law and the Prophets, he was openly exhibited in the Gospel.

<span id="xi.viii-p14"></span><span id="xi.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p15"></span>**40.** *And you will not come to me.* He
again reproaches them that it is nothing but their own malice that
hinders them from becoming partakers of the life offered in the
Scriptures; for when he says that they *will not*, he imputes the cause
of their ignorance and blindness to wickedness and obstinacy. And,
indeed, since he offered himself to them so graciously, they must have
been willfully blind; but when they intentionally fled from the light,
and even desired to extinguish the sun by the darkness of their
unbelief, Christ justly reproves them with greater severity.

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>[John
5:41-47](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#041)<span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>**41.** I receive not glory from men. **42.**
But I know you, that you have not the love of God in you. **43.** I come
in the name of my Father, and you do not receive me; if another come in
his own name, him you will receive. **44.** How can you believe, who
receive glory from each other, and seek not the glory which cometh from
God alone? **45.** Think not that I shall accuse you to the Father; it
is Moses in whom you trust, that accuseth you. **46.** For if you
believed Moses, you would also believe me; for he wrote concerning me.
**47.** But if you do not believe his writings, how shall you believe my
words?

<span id="xi.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.ix-p4"></span><span id="xi.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p5"></span>**41.** *I receive not glory from men.* He
proceeds in his reproof; but that he may not be suspected of pleading
his own cause, he begins by saying that he does not care for *the glory
of men*, and that it gives him no concern or uneasiness to see himself
despised; and, indeed, he is too great to depend on the opinions of men,
for the malignity of the whole world can take nothing from him, or make
the slightest infringement on his high rank. He is so eager to refute
their calumny that he exalts himself above men. Afterwards, he enters
freely into invectives against them, and charges them with contempt and
hatred of God. And though, in regard to honorable rank, there is an
immense distance between Christ and us, still we ought boldly to despise
the opinions of men. We ought, at least, to guard most zealously against
being excited to anger, when we are, despised; but, on the contrary, let
us learn never to kindle into indignation, except when men do not render
to God the honor due to Him. Let our souls be burned and tortured by
this holy jealousy, whenever we see that the world is so ungrateful as
to reject God.

<span id="xi.ix-p6"></span><span id="xi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p7"></span>**42.** *That you have not the love of God in
you. The love of God* is here put for all religious feelings; for no man
can *love God* without beholding him with admiration and submitting
entirely to his authority; as, on the other hand, when *the love of God*
does not prevail, there can be no desire to obey him. That is the reason
why Moses gives this as the summary or recapitulation (<span
id="xi.ix-p7.1"></span>ἀνακεφαλαίωσις) of the Law:

<span id="xi.ix-p8"></span>thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might,  
(<span id="xi.ix-p8.2"></span>[De
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="xi.ix-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.ix-p9"></span><span id="xi.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p10"></span>**43.** *I have come in my Father’s name*
The false prophets do indeed boast of this title, as the Pope, in the
present day, boasts with open mouth that he is Christ’s *Deputy* or
*Vicar*; and under this very disguise has Satan deceived wretched men
from the beginning. But Christ here means the reality, and not a
hypocritical pretense; for when he testifies that he has come *in his
Father*’*s name*, he means not only that the *Father* has sent him, but
that he faithfully executes the commission which he has received. By
this mark he distinguishes the lawful teachers of the Church from
spurious and pretended teachers. This passage, therefore, teaches that
we ought boldly to reject all who exalt themselves, and, in their own
name, claim authority over souls; for he who is desirous to be reckoned
a servant of God ought to have nothing separate from God. Now, if the
whole doctrine of the Pope be examined, even the blind will see that he
has come in his own name.  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109)

<span id="xi.ix-p12"></span>*If another come in his own name, him you
will receive.* That the Jews *do not love God*, and have no reverence
for him, Christ proves by this argument, that they will eagerly receive
the false prophets, while they refuse to obey God; for he takes for
granted, that it is a sign of a wicked and ungodly mind, when men
disregard truth and willingly assent to falsehoods. If it be objected
that this is generally done rather through ignorance than through
malice, the answer is easy. No man is exposed to the impostures of
Satan, except so far as, through some wicked disposition, he prefers
falsehood to truth. For how comes it that we are deaf when God speaks,
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) and that Satan finds us ready
and active, but because we are averse to righteousness, and of our own
accord desire iniquity? Though it ought to be observed that here Christ
speaks chiefly of those whom God peculiarly enlightened, as he bestowed
on the Jews this privilege, that, having been instructed in his Law,
they might keep the right way of salvation. It is certain that such
persons lend an ear to false teachers for no other reason than because
they wish to be deceived. Accordingly, Moses says that, when false
prophets arise, this is intended to prove and try the people *if they
love the Lord their God*, (<span id="xi.ix-p13.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="xi.ix-p13.2"></span>.)
In many persons, no doubt, there appears to be an innocent and guileless
simplicity,  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) but their eyes are
undoubtedly blinded by the hypocrisy which lurks within their minds. For
it is certain that God never shuts the door to those who knock, (<span
id="xi.ix-p14.2"></span>[Mt 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#008)<span
id="xi.ix-p14.2"></span>,) never disappoints those who sincerely pray to
him, (<span id="xi.ix-p14.3"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span id="xi.ix-p14.3"></span>.)
Justly, therefore, does Paul ascribe it to the vengeance of God, when
the power of deceiving is given to Satan,

<span id="xi.ix-p15"></span>that they who have rejected the truth, and
taken pleasure in unrighteousness, may believe a lie, and says that they
perish who did not receive the love of the truth, that they might be
saved,  
(<span id="xi.ix-p15.2"></span>[2 Thess.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012)<span id="xi.ix-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.ix-p16"></span>In this manner is discovered the hypocrisy
of many who, devoted to the impostures and wicked superstitions of the
Pope, burn with envenomed rage against the Gospel; for if they had
hearts disposed to the fear of God, that fear would likewise produce
obedience.

<span id="xi.ix-p17"></span><span id="xi.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p18"></span>**44.** *How can you believe?* As it might
be thought harsh to say that those who were from their childhood the
trained disciples of the Law and the Prophets, should be charged with
such gross ignorance and declared to be enemies of the truth, and as
this might even be thought to be incredible, Christ shows what it is
that hinders them from believing. It is because ambition has deprived
them of sound judgment; for he speaks, in a peculiar manner, to the
priests and scribes, who, swelled with pride, could not obey God. This
is a remarkable passage, which teaches that the gate of faith is shut
against all whose hearts are preoccupied by a vain desire of earthly
glory. For he who wishes to be somebody in the world must become
wandering and unsteady, so that he will have no inclination towards God.
Never is a man prepared to obey the heavenly doctrine, until he is
convinced that his principal object, throughout his whole life, ought to
be, that he may be approved by God.

<span id="xi.ix-p19"></span>But it may be thought that the wicked
confidence, by which hypocrites exalt themselves in the presence of God,
is a greater obstacle than worldly ambition; and we know that this was
also a disease with which the scribes were deeply infected. The answer
is easy; for Christ intended to tear from them the false mask of
sanctity, by which they deceived the ignorant multitude. He therefore
points, as with the finger, to the grosser vice, by which it may be made
manifest to all that nothing is farther from their true character than
what they wished to be reckoned. Besides, though hypocrisy exalts itself
against God, still, in the world and before men, it is always ambitious;
nay, more, it is this vanity alone that swells us with false
presumption, when we rely more on our own judgment, and that of others,
than on the judgment of God. He who in reality presents himself before
God as his Judge, must, of necessity, fall down humbled and dismayed,
and finding nothing in himself on which he can place reliance.  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) So, then, in order that any man may
seek glory from God alone, he must be overwhelmed with shame, and flee
to the undeserved mercy of God. And, indeed, they who look to God see
that they are condemned and ruined, and that nothing is left to them in
which they can glory but the grace of Christ. The desire of such glory
will always be attended by humility.

<span id="xi.ix-p21"></span>So far as relates to the present passage,
Christ’s meaning is, that there is no other way in which men can be
prepared for receiving the doctrine of the Gospel, than by withdrawing
all their senses from the world, and turning them to God alone, and
seriously considering that it is with God that they have to do, that,
forgetting the flatteries by which they are accustomed to deceive
themselves, they may descend into their own consciences. We need not
wonder, therefore, if the Gospel in the present day find so few persons
willing to be taught, since all are carried away by ambition. Nor need
we wonder if many apostatize from the profession of the Gospel, for they
are hurried away by their own vanity and fly off. So much the more
earnestly ought we to seek this one thing, that, while we are mean and
despised in the eyes of the world, and even overwhelmed within
ourselves, we may be reckoned among the children of God.

<span id="xi.ix-p22"></span><span id="xi.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p23"></span>**45.** *Think not that I shall accuse you
to the Father.* This is the way in which we ought to deal with obstinate
and hardened persons, when they learn nothing by instruction and
friendly warnings. They must be summoned to the judgment-seat of God.
There are few persons, indeed, who openly mock God, but there are very
many who, believing that God, whom they oppose as enemies, is gracious
to them, amuse themselves at their ease with empty flatteries. Thus, in
the present day, our *Giants*,  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113)
though they wickedly trample under foot the whole doctrine of Christ,
haughtily plume themselves on being the intimate friends of God. For who
will persuade the Papists that Christianity exists anywhere else than
among them? Such were the scribes, with whom Christ is here disputing.
Though they were the greatest despisers of the Law, yet they boasted of
Moses in lofty terms, so that they did not hesitate to make use of him
as a shield in opposing Christ. If he had threatened that he would be a
powerful and formidable adversary to them, he knew that this would have
been treated with the utmost contempt; and, therefore, he threatens that
an accusation, drawn up by Moses, will be preferred against them.

<span id="xi.ix-p25"></span>*Moses, in whom you trust.* There are some
who think, that Christ here points out the distinction between his own
office and that of Moses, because it belongs to the Law to convict men
of being unbelievers. But this is a mistake; for Christ did not intend
that, but only intended to shake off the confidence of hypocrites, who
falsely boasted of entertaining reverence for Moses; just as if a person
in the present day, in order to foil the Papists with their own weapon,
 <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) were to say, that they will
find no enemies more decidedly opposed to them than the holy doctors of
the Church, under whose authority they falsely and wickedly take
shelter.  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) Let us also learn from
it, that we ought not to glory in the Scriptures without a good reason;
for if we do not honor the Son of God by the true obedience of faith,
all whom God hath raised up to be his witnesses will rise up against us
as accusers at the last day. When he says, that they *trust in Moses,*
he does not accuse them of superstition, as if they ascribed to Moses
the cause of their salvation; but his meaning is, that they do wrong in
relying on the protection of Moses, as if they had him to defend their
wicked obstinacy.

<span id="xi.ix-p28"></span><span id="xi.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p29"></span>**46.** *For if you believed Moses, you
would also believe me.* He shows why Moses will be their accuser. It is
because they do not reject his doctrine. We know that it is impossible
to offer a greater insult to the servants of God than when their
doctrine is despised or reproached. Besides, those whom the Lord has
appointed to be ministers of his word, ought to be ready to defend it
against despisers;  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) and
therefore, he gave to all his prophets a twofold commission, that they
might teach and instruct for the salvation of believers, and that, one
day, they might confound the reprobate by their testimony.

<span id="xi.ix-p31"></span>*For he wrote concerning me.* When Christ
says, that *Moses wrote concerning him,* this needs no long proof with
those who acknowledge that Christ is the end and soul of the Law. But if
any person be not satisfied with this, and desire to have the passages
pointed out to him, I would advise him, first, to read carefully the
Epistle to the Hebrews, with which also agrees Stephen’s sermon, in the
seventh chapter of the Acts of the Apostles; and, next, to observe the
quotations which Paul applies to his purpose. I acknowledge, indeed,
that there are few in which Moses expressly mentions Christ; but what
was the use of the tabernacle, and sacrifices, and all the ceremonies,
but to be figures drawn in conformity to that first *pattern which was
showed to him in the mountain*? (<span id="xi.ix-p31.1"></span>[Ex
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040)<span id="xi.ix-p31.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.ix-p31.2"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)<span id="xi.ix-p31.2"></span>.)
Thus, without Christ, the whole ministry of Christ vanishes. Again, we
see how he continually reminds the people of the covenant of the Fathers
which had been ratified in Christ, and even how he makes Christ to be
the principal subject and foundation of the covenant. Nor was this
unknown to the holy Fathers, who had always their eyes fixed on the
Mediator. To treat the subject more largely, would be inconsistent with
the brevity at which I aim.

<span id="xi.ix-p32"></span><span id="xi.ix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p33"></span>**47.** *But if you do not believe his
writings.* Christ appears here to claim less authority for himself than
for Moses; and yet we know that *heaven and earth have been shaken by
the voice* of the Gospel, (<span id="xi.ix-p33.1"></span>[Heb
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026)<span id="xi.ix-p33.1"></span>.)
But Christ accommodates his discourse to those to whom he speaks; for
the authority of the Law was, beyond all controversy, held sacred among
the Jews; and thus it was impossible that Christ should be inferior to
Moses. To the same purpose is the contrast between *writings* and
*words*; for he shows their unbelief to be more aggravated, because the
truth of God, recorded in an authentic form, has no authority with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc34010.htm#fr_92) <span
id="xi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p3.1"></span>Et qui avoyent
les membres secs;” — “and who had the limbs withered.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc34010.htm#fr_93) <span
id="xi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p4.1"></span>Par intervalles,
*ou*, *en certain temps*;” — “at intervals, *or*, *at a certain time*.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc34010.htm#fr_94) <span
id="xi.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span> The French version runs thus: “<span
id="xi.i-p18.1"></span>combion que du temps d’Elisee il y eust plusieurs
de ladres, toutesfois nul d’eux ne fut nettoye sinon Naaman Syrien;” —
“*though in the time of Elisha there were many lepers*, *yet not one of
them was cleansed except Naaman a Syrian*,” (<span
id="xi.i-p18.2"></span>[2Ki 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014)<span
id="xi.i-p18.2"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p18.3"></span>[Lu
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)<span id="xi.i-p18.3"></span>.)

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc34010.htm#fr_95) <span
id="xi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p3.1"></span>Car Jesus
s’estoit escoule de la multitude qui estoit en ce lieu-la;” — “for Jesus
had withdrawn from the multitude which was in that place.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc34010.htm#fr_96) <span
id="xi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p15.1"></span>Que nous
aurions bien meritee.”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc34010.htm#fr_97) <span
id="xi.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>Quand ils
disent qu’il n’est pas possible d’endurer plus grand mal, et que Dieu ne
leur en scauroit envoyer davantage.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc34010.htm#fr_98) <span
id="xi.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>Il est bien
vray que la ceremonie du Sabbath estoit une partie des ombres de la
Loy.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc34010.htm#fr_99) <span
id="xi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>Quand on
s’employe a oeuvres de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc34010.htm#fr_100) <span
id="xi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p11.1"></span>Le Repos
de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc34010.htm#fr_101) <span
id="xi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p3.1"></span>Pource qu’il est
(ou, *entant qu*’*il est*) le Fils de l’homme;” — “because he is (*or*,
*in* *so far as he is*) the Son of man.”

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc34010.htm#fr_102) <span
id="xi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p20"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p20.1"></span>Des
contempteurs de Dieu et incredules;” “with despisers of God and
unbelievers.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc34010.htm#fr_103) <span
id="xi.v-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p25.1"></span>Sans le pardon
que Dieu fait a ses fideles.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc34010.htm#fr_104) <span
id="xi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span>Il sera son
protecteur et garent contre tous adversaires.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc34010.htm#fr_105) <span
id="xi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.vii-p6.1"></span>Rien que
leur propre malice.”

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc34010.htm#fr_106) <span
id="xi.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p15"></span> “<span id="xi.vii-p15.1"></span>Pource
qu’ils marchent les premiers, portans le flambe au devant les autres
pour les guider.”

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc34010.htm#fr_107) <span
id="xi.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.viii-p6.1"></span>Aucuns
s’abusent.”

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc34010.htm#fr_108) <span
id="xi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.viii-p13.1"></span>Si nous
voulons avoir cognoissance de Christ.”

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc34010.htm#fr_109) <span
id="xi.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p11"></span> In transposing the two portions of the
exposition of this verse, I have followed the French version of our
Author, who, having observed that his observations on the first clause
of this verse were placed last, restored the clauses to their natural
order. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc34010.htm#fr_110) <span
id="xi.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p13.1"></span>Que nous
sommes sourds quand Dieu parle.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc34010.htm#fr_111) <span
id="xi.ix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p14"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p14.1"></span>Une
simplicite innocente et sans malice.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc34010.htm#fr_112) <span
id="xi.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p20"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p20.1"></span>Et ne
sentant rien en soy-mesme sur quoy il se puisse appuyer.”

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc34010.htm#fr_113) <span
id="xi.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p24"></span> The wars of *the Giants* held a conspicuous
place in the ancient mythology, and in the popular belief. Not to
mention the poets, whose imaginations were kindled by such topics, they
are formally introduced by Cicero, in a philosophical treatise, though
only for the purpose of instructing his readers to “despise and reject
these fables.” “The gods,” says he, “as the fables relate, were not
without wars and battles; and that not only as in those described by
Homer, when some of the gods were ranged on the one side, and some on
the other side, of two opposing armies; but even, as in the case of the
*Titans* and *Giants*, they carried on their own battles. Such things
(he adds) are said, and are very foolishly believed, and are full of
absurdity and downright silliness.” — (De Nat. Deorum, lib. 2.) The
daring presumption and utter discomfiture of *the Giants*, in their
fabulous wars, are sometimes alluded to by Calvin, and other Christian
writers, in describing the wickedness and folly of man, who *stretcheth
out his hand against God*, *and strengtheneth himself against the
Almighty*, (<span id="xi.ix-p24.2"></span>[Job
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025)<span id="xi.ix-p24.2"></span>.)
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc34010.htm#fr_114) <span
id="xi.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p26"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p26.1"></span>Pour
rembarrer les Papistes de leur baston mesme.”

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc34010.htm#fr_115) <span
id="xi.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p27"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p27.1"></span>Du titre
desquels ils se couvrent faussement et meschamment.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc34010.htm#fr_116) <span
id="xi.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p30"></span> “<span id="xi.ix-p30.1"></span>Contre
contempteurs.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc34011)
