[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34006)  [Next](cc34008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Three days after,  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee;
and the mother of Jesus was there. **2.** And Jesus also was invited,
and his disciples, to the marriage **3.** And when the wine fell short,
the mother of Jesus saith to him, They have no wine. **4.** Jesus saith
to her, What have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet come. **5.** His
mother saith to the servants, Do whatever he shall bid you. **6.** And
there were there six water-pots of stone, placed according to the Jewish
custom of cleansing, containing each of them about two or three baths.
**7.** Jesus saith to them, Fill the water-pots with water. And they
filled them to the brim. **8.** And he saith to them, Draw out now, and
carry to the master of the feast; and they carried. **9.** And when the
master of the feast had tasted the water which was made wine, (and knew
not whence it was, but the servants who drew the water knew,) the master
of the feast calleth the bridegroom, **10.** And saith to him, Every man
at first sets down good wine; and when men have drunk freely, then that
which is worse; but thou hast kept the good wine till now. **11.** This
beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and displayed his
glory, and his disciples believed on him.

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span><span id="viii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *There was a marriage in Cana of
Galilee.* As this narrative contains the first miracle which Christ
performed, it would be proper for us, were it on this ground alone, to
consider the narrative attentively; though — as we shall afterwards see
— there are other reasons which recommend it to our notice. But while we
proceed, the various advantages arising from it will be more clearly
seen. The Evangelist first mentions *Cana of Galilee,* not that which
was situated towards Zare-phath (<span id="viii.i-p6.1"></span>[1Ki
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span id="viii.i-p6.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p6.2"></span>[Obadiah
20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)<span id="viii.i-p6.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p6.3"></span>[Lu
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026)<span id="viii.i-p6.3"></span>) or
Sarepta, between Tyre and Sidon, and was called the greater in
comparison of this latter *Cana,* which is placed by some in the tribe
of Zebulun, and by others in the tribe of Asher. For Jerome too assures
us that, even in his time, there existed a small town which bore that
name. There is reason to believe that it was near the city of Nazareth,
since the mother of Christ came there to attend the marriage. From the
fourth chapter of this book it will be seen that it was not more than
one day’s journey distant from Capernaum. That it lay not far from the
city of Bethsaida may also be inferred from the circumstance, that
*three days after* Christ had been in those territories, the marriage
was celebrated — the Evangelist tells us — in *Cana of Galilee.* There
may have been also a third Cana, not far from Jerusalem, and yet out of
Galilee; but I leave this undetermined, because I am unacquainted with
it.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>*And the mother of Jesus was there.* It was
probably one of Christ’s near relations who married a wife; for *Jesus*
is mentioned as having accompanied *his mother.* From the fact that the
disciples also are invited, we may infer how plain and frugal was his
way of living; for he lived in common with them. It may be thought
strange, however, that a man who has no great wealth or abundance (as
will be made evident from the scarcity of the wine) invites four or five
other persons, on Christ’s account. But the poor are readier and more
frank in their invitations; because they are not, like the rich, afraid
of being disgraced, if they do not treat their guests with great
costliness and splendor; for the poor adhere more zealously to the
ancient custom of having an extended acquaintance.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>Again, it may be supposed to show a want of
courtesy, that the bridegroom allows his guests, in the middle of the
entertainment, to be in want of wine; for it looks like a man of little
thoughtfulness not to have a sufficiency of wine for his guests. I
reply, nothing is here related which does not frequently happen,
especially when people are not accustomed to the daily use of wine.
Besides, the context shows, that it was towards the conclusion of the
banquet that *the wine fell short,* when, according to custom, it might
be supposed that they had already drunk enough; for the master of the
feast thus speaks, *Other men place worse wine before those who have
drunk enough*, *but thou hast kept the best till now*. Besides, I have
no doubt that all this was regulated by the Providence of God, that
there might be room for the miracle.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span><span id="viii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>**3.** *The mother of Jesus saith to him.*
It may be doubted if she expected or asked any thing from her Son, since
he had not yet performed any miracle; and it is possible that, without
expecting any remedy of this sort, she advised him to give some pious
exhortations which would have the effect of preventing the guests from
feeling uneasiness, and at the same time of relieving the shame of *the
bridegroom*. I consider her words to be expressive of (<span
id="viii.i-p10.1"></span>συμπαθεία) earnest compassion; for the holy
woman, perceiving that those who had been invited were likely to
consider themselves as having been treated with disrespect, and to
murmur against the bridegroom, and that the entertainment might in that
way be disturbed, wished that some means of soothing them could be
adopted. Chrysostom throws out a suspicion that she was moved by the
feelings of a woman to seek I know not what favor for herself and her
Son; but this conjecture is not supported by any argument.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span><span id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**4.** *Woman, what have I to do with
thee?* Why does Christ repel her so rashly? I reply, though she was not
moved by ambition, nor by any carnal affection, still she did wrong in
going beyond her proper bounds. Her anxiety about the inconvenience
endured by others, and her desire to have it in some way mitigated,
proceeded from humanity, and ought to be regarded as a virtue; but
still, by putting herself forward, she might obscure the glory of
Christ. Though it ought also to be observed, that what Christ spoke was
not so much for her sake as for the sake of others. Her modesty and
piety were too great, to need so severe a chastisement. Besides, she did
not knowingly and willingly offend; but Christ only meets the danger,
that no improper use may be made of what his mother had said, as if it
were in obedience to her command that he afterwards performed the
miracle.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>The Greek words (<span
id="viii.i-p13.1"></span>Τί ἐμοὶ καὶ σοὶ) literally mean, *What to me
and to thee*? But the Greek phraseology is of the same import with the
Latin — *Quid tibi mecum*? (*what hast thou to do with me*?) The old
translator led many people into a mistake, by supposing Christ to have
asserted, that it was no concern of his, or of his mother’s, if the wine
fell short. But from the second clause we may easily conclude how far
removed this is from Christ’s meaning; for he takes upon himself this
concern, and declares that it belongs to him to do so, when he adds, *my
hour is not yet come.* Both ought to be joined together — that Christ
understands what it is necessary for him to do, and yet that he will not
act in this matter at his mother’s suggestion.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>It is a remarkable passage certainly; for
why does he absolutely refuse to his mother what he freely granted
afterwards, on so many occasions, to all sorts of persons? Again, why is
he not satisfied with a bare refusal? and why does he reduce her to the
ordinary rank of *women*, and not even deign to call her *mother*? This
saying of Christ openly and manifestly warns men to beware lest, by too
superstitiously elevating the honor of the name of mother in the Virgin
Mary,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) they transfer to her what
belongs exclusively to God. Christ, therefore, addresses his mother in
this manner, in order to lay down a perpetual and general instruction to
all ages, that his divine glory must not be obscured by excessive honor
paid to his mother.

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span>How necessary this warning became, in
consequence of the gross and disgraceful superstitions which followed
afterwards, is too well known. For Mary has been constituted the Queen
of Heaven, the Hope, the Life, and the Salvation of the world; and, in
short, their fury and madness proceeded so far that they stripped Christ
of his spoils, and left him almost naked. And when we condemn those
horrid blasphemies against the Son of God, the Papists call us malignant
and envious; and — what is worse — they maliciously slander us as deadly
foes to the honor of the holy Virgin. As if she had not all the honor
that is due to her, unless she were made a Goddess; or as if it were
treating her with respect, to adorn her with blasphemous titles, and to
substitute her in the room of Christ. The Papists, therefore, offer a
grievous insult to Mary when, in order to disfigure her by false
praises, they take from God what belongs to Him.

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>*My hour is not yet come.* He means that he
has not hitherto delayed through carelessness or indolence, but at the
same time he states indirectly that he will attend to the matter, when
the proper time for it shall arrive. As he reproves his mother for
unseasonable haste, so, on the other hand, he gives reason to expect a
miracle. The holy Virgin acknowledges both, for she abstains from
addressing him any farther; and when she advises the servants to do
whatever he commands, she shows that she expects something now. But the
instruction conveyed here is still more extensive that whenever the Lord
holds us in suspense, and delays his aid, he is not therefore asleep,
but, on the contrary, regulates all His works in such a manner that he
does nothing but at the proper time. Those who have applied this passage
to prove that the time of events is appointed by Fate, are too
ridiculous to require a single word to be said for refuting them. *The
hour of Christ* sometimes denotes *the hour* which had been appointed to
him by the Father; and by *his time* he will afterwards designate what
he found to be convenient and suitable for executing the commands of his
Father; but in this place he claims the right to take and choose *the
time* for working and for displaying his Divine power.  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span><span id="viii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>**5.** *His mother saith to the servants.*
Here the holy Virgin gives an instance of true obedience which she owed
to her Son,  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) when the question
related, not to the relative duties of mankind, but to his divine power.
She modestly acquiesces, therefore, in Christ’s reply; and in like
manner exhorts others to comply with his injunctions. I acknowledge,
indeed, that what the Virgin now said related to the present occurrence,
and amounted to a declaration that, in this instance, she had no
authority, and that Christ would do, according to his own pleasure,
whatever he thought right. But if you attend closely to her design, the
statement which she made is still more extensive; for she first
disclaims and lays aside the power which she might seem to have
improperly usurped; and next, she ascribes the whole authority to
Christ, when she bids them *do whatever he shall command.* We are taught
generally by these words, that if we desire any thing from Christ, we
will not obtain our wishes, unless we depend on him alone, look to him,
and, in short, *do whatever he commands* On the other hand, he does not
send us to his mother, but rather invites us to himself.

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span><span id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span>**6.** *And there were there six water-pots
of stone.* According to the computation of Budaeus, we infer that these
*water-pots* were very large; for as the metreta  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) (<span id="viii.i-p24.4"></span>μετρητὴς)
contains twenty *congii*, each contained, at least, a *Sextier* of this
country.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) Christ supplied them,
therefore, with a great abundance of wine, as much as would be
sufficient for a banquet to a hundred and fifty men. Besides, both the
number and the size of the *water-pots* serve to prove the truth of the
miracle. If there had been only two or three jars, many might have
suspected that they had been brought from some other place. If in one
vessel only the water had been changed into wine, the certainty of the
miracle would not have been so obvious, or so well ascertained. It is
not, therefore, without a good reason that the Evangelist mentions the
number of the *water-pots,* and states how much they contained.

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span>It arose from superstition that vessels so
numerous and so large were placed there. They had the ceremony of
washing, indeed, prescribed to them by the Law of God; but as the world
is prone to excess in outward matters, the Jews, not satisfied with the
simplicity which God had enjoined, amused themselves with continual
washings; and as superstition is ambitious, they undoubtedly served the
purpose of display, as we see at the present day in Popery, that every
thing which is said to belong to the worship of God is arranged for pure
display. There was, then, a twofold error: that without the command of
God, they engaged in a superfluous ceremony of their own invention; and
next, that, under the pretense of religion, ambition reigned amidst that
display. Some Popish scoundrels have manifested an amazing degree of
wickedness, when they had the effrontery to say that they had among
their relics those *water-pots* with which Christ performed this miracle
in Cana, and exhibited some of them,  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) which, first, are of small size, and,
next, are unequal in size. And in the present day, when the light of the
Gospel shines so clearly around us, they are not ashamed to practice
those tricks, which certainly is not to deceive by enchantments, but
daringly to mock men as if they were blind; and the world, which does
not perceive such gross mockery, is evidently bewitched by Satan.

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span><span id="viii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span>**7.** *Fill the water-pots with water.*
The servants might be apt to look upon this injunction as absurd; for
they had already more than enough of water. But in this way the Lord
often acts towards us, that his power may be more illustriously
displayed by an unexpected result; though this circumstance is added to
magnify the miracle; for when the servants drew wine out of vessels
which had been filled with water, no suspicion can remain.

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span><span id="viii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>**8.** *And carry to the master of the
feast.* For the same reason as before, Christ wished that the flavor of
the wine should be tried by *the master of the feast,* before it had
been tasted by himself, or by any other of the guests; and the readiness
with which the servants obey him in all things shows us the great
reverence and respect in which he was held by them. The Evangelist gives
the name of *the master of the feast* to him who had the charge of
preparing the banquet and arranging the tables; not that the banquet was
costly and magnificent, but because the honorable appellations borrowed
from the luxury and splendor of the rich are applied even to the
marriages of the poor. But it is wonderful that a large quantity of
wine, and of the very best wine, is supplied by Christ, who is a teacher
of sobriety. I reply, when God daily gives us a large supply of wine, it
is our own fault if his kindness is an excitement to luxury; but, on the
other hand, it is an undoubted trial of our sobriety, if we are sparing
and moderate in the midst of abundance; as Paul boasts that *he had
learned to know both how to be full and to be hungry*, (<span
id="viii.i-p31.1"></span>[Php
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span><span id="viii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>**11.** *This beginning of miracles.* The
meaning is, that this was the first of Christ’s miracles; for when the
angels announced to the shepherds that he was born in Bethlehem, (<span
id="viii.i-p33.1"></span>[Lu 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i-p33.1"></span>,) when the *star* appeared to *the Magi*,
(<span id="viii.i-p33.2"></span>[Mt
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002)<span id="viii.i-p33.2"></span>,)
when *the Holy Spirit descended on him in the shape of a dove*, (<span
id="viii.i-p33.3"></span>[Mt 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i-p33.3"></span>; <span id="viii.i-p33.4"></span>[Mr
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p33.4"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p33.5"></span>[Joh
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="viii.i-p33.5"></span>,)
though these were *miracles*, yet, strictly speaking, they were not
performed by him; but the Evangelist now speaks of the *miracles* of
which he was himself the Author. For it is a frivolous and absurd
interpretation which some give, that this is reckoned the first among;
the miracles which Christ performed in Cana of Galilee; as if a place,
in which we do not read that he ever was more than twice, had been
selected by him for a display of his power. It was rather the design of
the Evangelist to mark the order of time which Christ followed in the
exercise of his power. For until he was thirty years of age, he kept
himself concealed at home, like one who held no public office. Having
been consecrated, at his baptism, to the discharge of his office, he
then began to appear in public, and to show by clear proofs for what
purpose he was sent by the Father. We need not wonder, therefore, if he
delayed till this time the first proof of his Divinity. It is a high
honor given to marriage, that Christ not only deigned to be present at a
nuptial banquet, but honored it with his first miracle. There are some
ancient Canons which forbid the clergy to attend a marriage. The reason
of the prohibition was, that by being the spectators of the wickedness
which was usually practiced on such occasions, they might in some
measure be regarded as approving of it. But it would have been far
better to carry to such places so much gravity as to restrain the
licentiousness in which unprincipled and abandoned men indulge, when
they are withdrawn from the eyes of others. Let us, on the contrary,
take Christ’s example for our rule; and let us not suppose that any
thing else than what we read that he did can be profitable to us.

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span>*And manifested his glory;* that is,
because he then gave a striking and illustrious proof, by which it was
ascertained that he was the Son of God; for all the miracles which he
exhibited to the world were so many demonstrations of his divine power.
The proper time for displaying his glory was now come, when he wished to
make himself known agreeably to the command of his Father. Hence, also,
we learn the end of *miracles*; for this expression amounts to a
declaration that Christ, in order to *manifest his glory*, performed
this miracle. What, then, ought we to think of those miracles which
obscure the glory of Christ?

<span id="viii.i-p35"></span>*And his disciples believed on him.* If
they were *disciples,* they must already have possessed some faith; but
as they had hitherto followed him with a faith which was not distinct
and firm, they began at that time to devote themselves to him, so as to
acknowledge him to be the Messiah, such as he had already been announced
to them. The forbearance of Christ is great in reckoning as disciples
those whose faith is so small. And indeed this doctrine extends
generally to us all; for the faith which is now full grown had at first
its infancy, nor is it so perfect in any as not to make it necessary
that all to a man should make progress in *believing*. Thus, they who
now *believed* may be said to begin to *believe*, so far as they daily
make progress towards the end of their faith. Let those who have
obtained the first-fruits of faith labor always to make progress. These
words point out likewise the advantage of miracles; namely, that they
ought to be viewed as intended for the confirmation and progress of
faith. Whoever twists them to any other purpose corrupts and debases the
whole use of them; as we see that Papists boast of their pretended
miracles for no other purpose than to bury faith, and to turn away the
minds of men from Christ to the creatures.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
2:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**12.** After this he went down to
Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples and
he remained there not many days. **13.** And the passover of the Jews
was at hand; therefore, Jesus went up to Jerusalem. **14.** And found in
the temple some who sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and money-changers
also sitting. **15.** And having made a whip of cords, he drove them all
out of the temple, with the sheep and oxen, and threw down the money of
the changers, and overturned the tables; **16.** And said to those who
sold doves, Take those things hence; do not make my Father’s house a
house of merchandise. **17.** And his disciples remembered that it was
written, The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span><span id="viii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>**12.** *He went down to Capernaum.* The
Evangelist passes to an additional narrative; for having resolved to
collect a few things worthy of remembrance which the other three had
left out, he states the time when the occurrence which he is about to
relate took place; for the other three also relate what we here read
that Christ did, but the diversity of the time shows that it was a
similar event, but not the same. On two occasions, then, did Christ
cleanse the temple from base and profane merchandise; once, when he was
beginning to discharge his commission, and another time, (<span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Mt
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012)<span id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p5.2"></span>[Mr
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015)<span id="viii.ii-p5.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p5.3"></span>[Lu
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045)<span id="viii.ii-p5.3"></span>,)
when he was about to *leave the world and go to the Father*, (<span
id="viii.ii-p5.4"></span>[Joh
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span id="viii.ii-p5.4"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>To obtain a general view of the passage, it
will be necessary briefly to examine the details in their order. That
*oxen, and sheep, and doves,* were exposed to sale *in the temple*, and
that *money-changers* were sitting there, was not without a plausible
excuse. For they might allege that the *merchandise* transacted there
was not irreligious, but, on the contrary, related to the sacred worship
of God, that every person might obtain, without difficulty, what he
might offer to the Lord; and, certainly, it was exceedingly convenient
for godly persons to find oblations of any sort laid ready to their
hand, and in this way to be freed from the trouble of running about in
various directions to obtain them. We are apt to wonder, therefore, why
Christ was so highly displeased with it. But there are two reasons which
deserve our attention. First, as the Priests abused this *merchandise*
for their own gain and avarice, such a mockery of God could not be
endured. Secondly, whatever excuse men may plead, as soon as they
depart, however slightly, from the command of God, they deserve reproof
and need correction. And this is the chief reason why Christ undertook
to purify *the temple*; for he distinctly states that *the temple of God
is not a place of merchandise*

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>But it may be asked, Why did he not rather
begin with doctrine? For it seems to be a disorderly and improper method
to apply the hand for correcting faults, before the remedy of doctrine
has been applied. But Christ had a different object in view: for the
time being now at hand when he would publicly discharge the office
assigned to him by the Father, he wished in some way to take possession
of the temple, and to give a proof of his divine authority. And that all
might be attentive to his doctrine, it was necessary that something new
and strange should be done to awaken their sluggish and drowsy minds.
Now, *the temple* was a sanctuary of heavenly doctrine and of true
religion. Since he wished to restore purity of doctrine, it was of great
importance that he should prove himself to be the Lord of the temple.
Besides, there was no other way in which he could bring back sacrifices
and the other exercises of religion to their spiritual design than by
removing the abuse of them. What he did at that time was, therefore, a
sort of preface to that reformation which the Father had sent him to
accomplish. In a word, it was proper that the Jews should be aroused by
this example to expect from Christ something that was unusual and out of
the ordinary course; and it was also necessary to remind them that the
worship of God had been corrupted and perverted, that they might not
object to the reformation of those abuses

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>*And his brethren.* Why the *brethren* of
Christ accompanied him, cannot be determined with certainty, unless,
perhaps, they intended to go along with him to Jerusalem. The word
*brethren*, it is well known, is employed, in the Hebrew language, to
denote cousins and other relatives.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>**13.** *And the passover of the Jews was
at hand; therefore Jesus went up to Jerusalem.* The Greek words <span
id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>καὶ ἀνέβη, may be literally rendered, and *he
went up*; but the Evangelist has used the copulative and instead of
*therefore*; for he means that Christ *went up* at that time, in order
to celebrate *the passover* at Jerusalem. There were two reasons why he
did so; for since the Son of God became subject to the Law on our
account, he intended, by observing with exactness all the precepts of
the Law, to present in his own person a pattern of entire subjection and
obedience. Again, as he could do more good, when there was a multitude
of people, he almost always availed himself of such an occasion.
Whenever, therefore, we shall afterwards find it said that Christ came
to Jerusalem at the feast, let the reader observe that he did so, first,
that along with others he might observe the exercises of religion which
God had appointed, and, next, that he might publish his doctrine amidst
a larger concourse of people.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span><span id="viii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span>**16.** *Make not my Father’s house a
house of merchandise.* At the second time that he drove the traders out
of the Temple, the Evangelists relate that he used sharper and more
severe language; for he said, that they *had made* the Temple of God *a
den of robbers*, (<span id="viii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Mt
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii-p12.1"></span>;) and this was proper to be done, when a
milder chastisement was of no avail. At present, he merely warns them
not to profane the Temple of God by applying it to improper uses. The
Temple was called *the house of God*; because it was the will of God
that there He should be peculiarly invoked; because there He displayed
his power; because, finally, he had set it apart to spiritual and holy
services.

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span>*My Father’s house.* Christ declares
himself to be *the Son of God*, in order to show that he has a right and
authority to cleanse the Temple. As Christ here assigns a reason for
what he did, if we wish to derive any advantage from it, we must attend
chiefly to this sentence. Why, then, does he drive the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple? It is that he may bring back to its original
purity the worship of God, which had been corrupted by the wickedness of
men, and in this way may restore and maintain the holiness of the
Temple. Now that temple, we know, was erected, that it might be a shadow
of those things the lively image of which is to be found in Christ.
Thai; it might continue to be devoted to God, it was necessary that it
should be applied exclusively to spiritual purposes. For this reason he
pronounces it to be unlawful that it should be converted into a
market-place; for he founds his statement on the command of God, which
we ought always to observe. Whatever deceptions Satan may employ, let us
know that any departure — however small — from the command of God is
wicked. It was a plausible and imposing disguise, that; the worship of
God was aided and promoted, when the sacrifices which were to be offered
by believers were laid ready to their hand; but as God had appropriated
his Temple to different purposes, Christ disregards the objections that
might be offered against the order which God had appointed.

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>The same arguments do not apply, in the
present day, to our buildings for public worship; but what is said about
the ancient Temple applies properly and strictly to the Church, for it
is the heavenly sanctuary of God on earth. We ought always, therefore,
to keep before our eyes the majesty of God, which dwells in the Church,
that it may not be defiled by any pollutions; and the only way in which
its holiness can remain unimpaired is, that nothing shall be admitted
into it that is at variance with the word of God.

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span><span id="viii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span>**17.** *And his disciples remembered.* It
is to no purpose that some people tease themselves with the inquiry how
*the disciples remembered* a passage of Scripture, with the meaning of
which they were hitherto unacquainted. For we must not understand that
this passage of Scripture came to their remembrance at that time; but
afterwards, when, having been taught by God, they considered with
themselves what was the meaning of this action of Christ, by the
direction of the Holy Spirit this passage of Scripture occurred to them.
And, indeed, it does not always happen that the reason of God’s works is
immediately perceived by us, but afterwards, in process of time, He
makes known to us his purpose. And this is a bridle exceedingly well
adapted to restrain our presumption, that we may not murmur against God,
if at any time our judgment does not entirely approve of what he does.
We are at the same time reminded, that when God holds us as it were in
suspense, it is our duty to wait for the time of more abundant
knowledge, and to restrain the excessive haste which is natural to us;
for the reason why God delays the full manifestation of his works is,
that he may keep us humble.

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span>*The zeal of thine house hath eaten me
up.* The meaning is, that the disciples at length came to know, that the
zeal for the house of God, with which Christ burned, excited him to
drive out of it those profanations. By a figure of speech, in which a
part is taken for the whole, David employs the name of the temple to
denote the whole worship of God; for the entire verse runs thus:

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span>the zeal of thy house hath eaten me up,
and the reproaches of them who reproached thee have fallen on me, (<span
id="viii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span>The second clause corresponds to the
first, or rather it is nothing else than a repetition explaining what
had been said. The amount of both clauses is, that David’s anxiety about
maintaining the worship of God was so intense, that he cheerfully laid
down his head to receive all *the* *reproaches* which wicked men threw
against God; and that he burned with such *zeal,* that this single
feeling swallowed up every other. He tells us that he himself had such
feelings; but there can be no doubt that he described in his own person
what strictly belonged to the Messiah.

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span>Accordingly, the Evangelist says, that
this was one of the marks by which *the disciples* knew that it was
Jesus who protected and restored the kingdom of God. Now observe that
they followed the guidance of Scripture, in order to form such an
opinion concerning Christ as they ought to entertain; and, indeed, no
man will ever learn what Christ is, or the object of what he did and
suffered, unless he has been taught and guided by Scripture. So far,
then, as each of us shall desire to make progress in the knowledge of
Christ, it will be necessary that Scripture shall be the subject of our
diligent and constant meditation. Igor is it without a good reason that
David mentions the house of God, when the divine glory is concerned; for
though God is sufficient for himself, and needs not the services of any,
yet he wishes that his glory should be displayed in the Church. In this
way he gives a remarkable proof of his love towards us, because he
unites his glory — as it were, by an indissoluble link — with our
salvation.

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span>Now as Paul informs us that, in the
example of the head, a general doctrine is presented to the whole body,
(<span id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>,)
let each of us apply to the invitation of Christ, that — so far as lies
in our power — we may not permit the temple of God to be in any way
polluted. But, at the same time, we must beware lest any man transgress
the bounds of his calling. All of us ought to have zeal in common with
the Son of God; but all are not at liberty to seize *a whip*, that we
may correct vices with our hands; for we have not received the same
power, nor have we been entrusted with the same commission.

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
2:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018)<span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**18.** The Jews then answered and said to
him, What sign  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) showest thou to us,
that thou doest these things? **19.** Jesus answered and said to them,
Destroy this temple, and I will raise it up in three days. **20.** The
Jews therefore said, Forty and six years was this temple in building;
and wilt thou raise it up in three days? **21.** But he spoke of the
temple of his body. **22.** When therefore he was risen from the dead,
his disciples remembered that he had said this to them; and they
believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had spoken.

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span><span id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>**18.** *What sign showest thou to us?*
When in so large an assembly no man laid hands on Christ, and none of
the dealers in cattle or of the money-changers repelled him by violence,
we may conclude that they were all stunned and struck with astonishment
by the hand of God. And, therefore, if they had not been utterly
blinded, this would have been a sufficiently evident miracle, that one
man against a great multitude, an unarmed man against strong men, all
unknown man against so great rulers, attempted so great an achievement.
For since they were far stronger, why did they not oppose him, but
because their hands were loosened and — as it were — broken?

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>Yet they have some ground for putting the
question; for it does not belong to every man to change suddenly, if any
thing is faulty or displeases him in the temple of God. All are, indeed,
at liberty to condemn corruptions; but if a private man put forth his
hand to remove them, he will be accused of rashness. As the custom of
selling in the temple had been generally received, Christ attempted what
was new and uncommon; and therefore they properly call on him to prove
that he was sent by God; for they found their argument on this
principle, that in public administration it is not lawful to make any
change without an undoubted calling and command of God. But they erred
on another point, by refusing to admit the calling of Christ, unless he
had performed a miracle; for it was not an invariable rule that the
Prophets and other ministers of God should perform miracles; and God did
not limit himself to this necessity. They do wrong, therefore, in laying
down a law to God by demanding a sign. When the Evangelist says that the
Jews *asked him*, he unquestionably means by that term the multitude who
were standing there, and, as it were, the whole body of the Church; as
if he had said, that it was not the speech of one or two persons, but of
the people.

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span><span id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>**19.** *Destroy this temple.* This is an
allegorical mode of expression; and Christ intentionally spoke with that
degree of obscurity, because he reckoned them unworthy of a direct
reply; as he elsewhere declares that *he speaks to them in parables*,
because they are unable to comprehend the mysteries of the heavenly
kingdom, (<span id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span
id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>.) But first he refuses to them the sign which
they demanded, either because it would have been of no advantage, or
because he knew that it was not the proper time. Some compliances he
occasionally made even with their unreasonable requests, and there must
have been a strong reason why he now refused. Yet that they may not
seize on this as a pretense for excusing themselves, he declares that
his power will be approved and confirmed by a *sign* of no ordinary
value; for no greater approbation of the divine power in Christ could be
desired than his resurrection from the dead. But he conveys this
information figuratively, because he does not reckon them worthy of an
explicit promise. In short, he treats unbelievers as they deserve, and
at the same time protects himself against all contempt. It was not yet
made evident, indeed, that they were obstinate, but Christ knew well
what was the state of their feelings.

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span>But it may be asked, since he performed
so many miracles, and of various kinds, why does he now mention but one?
I answer, he said nothing about all the other miracles, First, because
his resurrection alone was sufficient to shut their mouth: Secondly, he
was unwilling to expose the power of God to their ridicule; for even
respecting the glory of his resurrection he spoke allegorically:
Thirdly, I say that he produced what was appropriate to the case in
hand; for, by these words, he shows that all authority over *the Temple*
belongs to him, since his power is so great in building the true
*Temple* of God.

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span>*This temple*. Though he uses the word
*temple* in accommodation to the present occurrence, yet the body of
Christ is justly and appropriately called a *temple*. The body of each
of us is called a *tabernacle*, (<span id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>[2Co
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.iii-p11.2"></span>[2Pe
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#013)<span
id="viii.iii-p11.2"></span>,) because the soul dwells in it; but the
body of Christ was the abode of his Divinity. For we know that the Son
of God clothed himself with our nature in such a manner that the eternal
majesty of God dwelt in the flesh which he assumed, as in his sanctuary.

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span>The argument of Nestorius, who abused
this passage to prove that it is not one and the same Christ who is God
and man, may be easily refuted. He reasoned thus: the Son of God dwelt
in the flesh, as in a *temple*; therefore the natures are distinct, so
that the same person was not God and man. But this argument might be
applied to men; for it will follow that it is not one man whose soul
dwells in the body as in a tabernacle; and, therefore, it is folly to
torture this form of expression for the purpose of taking away the unity
of Person in Christ. It ought to be observed, that our bodies also are
called temples of God, (<span id="viii.iii-p12.1"></span>[1Co
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="viii.iii-p12.1"></span>,
and <span id="viii.iii-p12.2"></span>[1Co
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span id="viii.iii-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.iii-p12.3"></span>[2Co
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span id="viii.iii-p12.3"></span>)
but it is in a different sense, namely, because God dwells in us by the
power and grace of his Spirit; but in Christ the fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily, so that he is truly *God manifested in flesh*, (<span
id="viii.iii-p12.4"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="viii.iii-p12.4"></span>.)

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>*I will raise it up again.* Here Christ
claims for himself the glory of his resurrection, though, in many
passages of Scripture, it is declared to be the work of God the Father.
But these two statements perfectly agree with each other; for, in order
to give us exalted conceptions of the power of God, Scripture expressly
ascribes to the Father that he raised up his Son from the dead; but
here, Christ in a special manner asserts his own Divinity. And Paul
reconciles both.

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span>If the Spirit of Him, that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead
shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in
you,  
(<span id="viii.iii-p14.2"></span>[Ro
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span
id="viii.iii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span>While he makes *the Spirit* the Author of
the resurrection, he calls Him indiscriminately sometimes *the Spirit of
Christ*, and sometimes *the Spirit of the Father*.

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span><span id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span>**20.** *Forty and six years.* The
computation of Daniel agrees with this passage, (<span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>[Da
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)<span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>;) for he reckons *seven weeks*, which make
Forty-nine years; but, before the last of these weeks had ended, *the
temple* was finished. The time described in the history of Ezra is much
shorter; but, though it has some appearance of contradiction, it is not
at all at variance with the words of the Prophet. For, when the
sanctuary had been reared, before the building of the temple was
completed, they began to offer sacrifices. The work was afterwards
stopped for a long time through the indolence of the people, as plainly
appears from the complaints of the Prophet <span
id="viii.iii-p17.2"></span>[Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)<span id="viii.iii-p17.2"></span>;
for he severely reproves the Jews for being too earnestly engaged in
building their private dwellings, while they left the Temple of God in
an unfinished state.

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span>But why does he mention that *temple*
which had been destroyed by Herod about forty years before that time?
For the *temple* which they had at that time, though it had been built
with great magnificence and at a vast expense, had been completed by
Herod, contrary to the expectation of men, as is related by Josephus,
(Ant. Book 15. chapter 11.) I think it probable that this new building
of the temple was reckoned as if the ancient temple had always remained
in its original condition, that it might be regarded with greater
veneration; and that they spoke in the usual and ordinary manner, that
their fathers, with the greatest difficulty, had scarcely built the
temple in *Forty-six, years*

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>This reply shows plainly enough what was
their intention in asking a *sign*; for if they had been ready to obey,
with reverence, a Prophet sent by God, they would not have so
disdainfully rejected what he had said to them about the confirmation of
his office. They wish to have some testimony of divine power, and yet
they receive nothing which does not correspond to the feeble capacity of
man. Thus the Papists in the present day demand miracles, not that they
would give way to the power of God, (for it is a settled principle with
them to prefer men to God, and not to move a hair’s breadth from what
they have received by custom and usage;) but that they may not appear to
have no reason for rebelling against God, they hold out this excuse as a
cloak for their obstinacy. In such a manner do the minds of unbelievers
storm in them with blind impetuosity, that they desire to have the hand
of God exhibited to them and yet do not wish that it should be divine.

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span>*When therefore he was risen from the
dead.* This recollection was similar to the former, which the Evangelist
lately mentioned, (verse 17.) The Evangelist did not understand Christ
when he said this; but the doctrine, which appeared to have been
useless, and to have vanished into air, afterwards produced fruit in its
own time. Although, therefore, many of the actions and sayings of our
Lord are obscure for a time, we must not give them up in despair, or
despise that which we do not all at once understand.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) We ought to observe the connection of the
words, that *they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had
spoken;* for the Evangelist means that, by comparing *the Scripture*
with *the word of Christ*, they were aided in making progress in faith.

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
2:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023)<span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**23.** And when he was in Jerusalem at the
passover, many believed in his name, beholding the signs which he
performed. **24.** But Jesus himself did not confide in them, because he
knew them all.  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) **25.** And needed
not that any should testify of man; for he knew what was in man.

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span><span id="viii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span>**23.** *Many believed.* The Evangelist
appropriately connects this narrative with the former. Christ had not
given such a sign as the Jews demanded; and now, when he produced no
good effect on them by many miracles — except that they entertained a
cold faith, which was only the shadow of faith — this event sufficiently
proves that they did not deserve that he should comply with their
wishes. It was, indeed, some fruit of *the signs,* that *many believed
in* Christ, and in his name, so as to profess that they wished to follow
his doctrine; for *name* is here put for *authority*. This appearance of
faith, which hitherto was fruitless, might ultimately be changed into
true faith, and might be a useful preparation for celebrating the name
of Christ among others; and yet what we have said is true, that they
were far from having proper feelings, so as to profit by the works of
God, as they ought to have done.

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span>Yet this was not a pretended faith by which
they wished to gain reputation among men; for they were convinced that
Christ was some great Prophet, and perhaps they even ascribed to him the
honor of being the Messiah, of whom there was at that time a strong and
general expectation. But as they did not understand the peculiar office
of the Messiah, their faith was absurd, because it was exclusively
directed to the world and earthly things. It was also a cold belief, and
unaccompanied by the true feelings of the heart. For hypocrites assent
to the Gospel, not that they may devote themselves in obedience to
Christ, nor that with sincere piety they may follow Christ when he calls
them, but because they do not venture to reject entirely the truth which
they have known, and especially when they can find no reason for
opposing it. For as they do not voluntarily, or of their own accord,
make war with God, so when they perceive that his doctrine is opposed to
their flesh and to their perverse desires, they are immediately
offended, or at least withdraw from the faith which they had already
embraced.

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span>When the Evangelist says, therefore, that
those men *believed,* I do not understand that they counterfeited a
faith which did not exist, but that they were in some way constrained to
enroll themselves as the followers of Christ; and yet it appears that
their faith was not true and genuine, because Christ excludes them from
the number of those on whose sentiments reliance might be placed.
Besides, that faith depended solely on miracles, and had no root in the
Gospel, and therefore could not be steady or permanent. Miracles do
indeed assist the children of God in arriving at the truth; but it does
not amount to actual believing, when they admire the power of God so as
merely to believe that it is true, but not to subject themselves wholly
to it. And, therefore, when we speak generally about faith, let us know
that there is a kind of faith which is perceived by the understanding
only, and afterwards quickly disappears, because it is not fixed in the
heart; and that is the faith which James calls *dead*; but true faith
always depends on the Spirit of regeneration, (<span
id="viii.iv-p8.1"></span>[Jas. 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)<span id="viii.iv-p8.1"></span>.)
Observe, that all do not derive equal profit from the works of God; for
some are led by them to God, and others are only driven by a blind
impulse, so that, while they perceive indeed the power of God, still
they do not cease to wander in their own imaginations.

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span><span id="viii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span>**24.** *But Christ did not rely on them.*
Those who explain the meaning to be, that Christ was on his guard
against them, because he knew that they were not upright and faithful,
do not appear to me to express sufficiently well the meaning of the
Evangelist. Still less do I agree with what Augustine says about recent
converts. The Evangelist rather means, in my opinion, that Christ did
not reckon them to be genuine disciples, but despised them as volatile
and unsteady. It is a passage which ought to be carefully observed, that
not all who profess to be Christ’s followers are such in his estimation.
But we ought also to add the reason which immediately follows:

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span>*Because he knew them all.* Nothing is
more dangerous than hypocrisy, for this reason among others, that it is
an exceedingly common fault. There is scarcely any man who is not
pleased with himself; and while we deceive ourselves by empty
flatteries, we imagine that God is blind like ourselves. But here we are
reminded how widely his judgment differs from ours; for he sees clearly
those things which we cannot perceive, because they are concealed by
some disguise; and he estimates according to their hidden source, that
is, according to the most secret feeling of the heart, those things
which dazzle our eyes by false luster. This is what Solomon says, that

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span>God weighs in his balance the hearts of
men, while they flatter themselves in their ways, (<span
id="viii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Pr
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#002)<span id="viii.iv-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span>Let us remember, therefore, that none are
the true disciples of Christ but those whom He approves, because in such
a matter He alone is competent to decide and to judge.

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span>A question now arises: when the Evangelist
says that Christ *knew them all*, does he mean those only of whom he had
lately spoken, or does the expression refer to the whole human race?
Some extend it to the universal nature of man, and think that the whole
world is here condemned for wicked and perfidious hypocrisy. And,
certainly, it is a true statement, that Christ can find in men no reason
why he should deign to place them in the number of his followers; but I
do not see that this agrees with the context, and therefore I limit it
to those who had been formerly mentioned.

<span id="viii.iv-p15"></span><span id="viii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p16"></span>**25.** *For he knew what was in man.* As
it might be doubted whence Christ obtained this knowledge, the
Evangelist anticipates this question, and replies that Christ perceived
every thing in men that is concealed from our view, so that he could on
his own authority make a distinction among men. Christ, therefore, who
knows the hearts, *had no need* *of any one* to inform him what sort of
men they were. He knew them to have such a disposition and such
feelings, that he justly regarded them as persons who did not belong to
him.

<span id="viii.iv-p17"></span>The question put by some — whether we too
are authorized by the example of Christ to hold those persons as
suspected who have not given us proof of their sincerity — has nothing
to do with the present passage. There is a wide difference between him
and us; for Christ knew the very roots of the trees, but, except from
the fruits which appear outwardly, we cannot discover what is the nature
of any one tree. Besides, as Paul tells us, that *charity is not
suspicious*, (<span id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>[1Co
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>,)
we have no right to entertain unfavorable suspicions about men who are
unknown to us. But, that we may not always be deceived by hypocrites,
and that the Church may not be too much exposed to their wicked
impostures, it belongs to Christ to impart to us the Spirit of
discretion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc34007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="viii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p3.1"></span>Tertio die;”
— “<span id="viii.i-p3.2"></span>trois jours apres.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc34007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="viii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p15.1"></span>En la
vierge Marie.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc34007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="viii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p18.1"></span>De
bosongner et desployer sa virtue Divine.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc34007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="viii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p21.1"></span>a son
Fils.”

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc34007.htm#fr_47) <span
id="viii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span> The exact size of the *firkin* cannot be
easily ascertained. If <span id="viii.i-p24.1"></span>μετρητὴς be here
used by the Evangelist as a purely Greek word, we must conclude it to be
an Attic measure, which was nearly equal to nine English gallons. If,
again, it be placed here as a substitute for the Hebrew word <span
id="viii.i-p24.2"></span>בת, (*Bath*,) as the Septuagint has done in
<span id="viii.i-p24.3"></span>[2Ch
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p24.3"></span>, it
will probably be rated at seven gallons and a half. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc34007.htm#fr_48) <span
id="viii.i-p24.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p25.1"></span>De ce pays
de Savoye;” — “of this country, Savoy.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc34007.htm#fr_49) <span
id="viii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p27.1"></span>Qu’ils
avoyent entre leurs reliques de ces cruches, esquelles Christ avoit fait
ce miracle en Cana, et en monstroyent.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc34007.htm#fr_50) <span
id="viii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p3.1"></span>Quel
signe, ou, miracle?” — “What sign? or, What miracle?”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc34007.htm#fr_51) <span
id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>Il ne
faut pas pourtant quitter la tout par desespoir, ne mespriser ce que
nous n’entendons pas tout incontinent.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc34007.htm#fr_52) <span
id="viii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p3.1"></span>Il les
cognoissoient tous,”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc34008)
