[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34004)  [Next](cc34006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="vi-p2"></span>OF THE

<span id="vi-p3"></span>GOSPEL OF JOHN

<span id="vi-p4"></span>The meaning of the Greek word, <span
id="vi-p4.1"></span>εὐαγγέλιον (*Gospel*) is well known.  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) In Scripture it denotes, by way of eminence,
<span id="vi-p5.2"></span>(κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν,) the glad and delightful
message of the grace exhibited to us in Christ, in order to instruct us,
by despising the world and its fading riches and pleasures, to desire
with our whole heart, and to embrace when offered to us, this invaluable
blessing. The conduct which we perceive in irreligious men, who take an
extravagant delight in the empty enjoyments of the world, while they are
little if at all, affected by a relish for spiritual blessings, is
natural to us all. For the purpose of correcting this fault, God
expressly bestows the name *Gospel* on the message which he orders to be
proclaimed concerning Christ; for thus he reminds us that nowhere else
can true and solid happiness be obtained, and that in him we have all
that is necessary for the perfection of a happy life.

<span id="vi-p6"></span>Some consider the word *Gospel* as extending to
all the gracious promises of God which are found scattered even in the
Law and the Prophets. Nor can it be denied that, whenever God declares
that he will be reconciled to men, and forgives their sins, he at the
same time exhibits Christ, whose peculiar office it is, wherever he
shines, to spread abroad the rays of joy. I acknowledge, therefore, that
the Fathers were partakers of the same *Gospel* with ourselves, so far
as relates to the faith of a gratuitous salvation. But as it is the
ordinary declaration made by the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures, that the
*Gospel* was first proclaimed when Christ came, let us also adhere to
this mode of expression; and let us keep by that definition of the
*Gospel* which I have given, that it is a solemn publication of the
grace revealed in Christ. On this account the *Gospel* is called

<span id="vi-p7"></span>the power of God to salvation to every one who
believeth,  
(<span id="vi-p7.2"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="vi-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="vi-p8"></span>because in it God displays his righteousness. It
is called also an

<span id="vi-p9"></span>embassy, by which he reconciles men to
himself,  
(<span id="vi-p9.2"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="vi-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="vi-p10"></span>and as Christ is the pledge of the mercy of
God, and of his fatherly love towards us, so he is, in a peculiar
manner, the subject of the Gospel.

<span id="vi-p11"></span>Hence it came that the histories which relate
that Christ appeared in the flesh and died, and was raised from the
dead, and at length was taken up into heaven, have peculiarly obtained
the name *Gospel*. For although, for the reason already stated:, this
word means the New Testament, yet the name which denote, the whole has
come, by general practice, to stand for that part of it which declares
that Christ was manifested to us in the flesh, and died, and rose from
the dead. But as the bare history would not be enough, and, indeed,
would be of no advantage for salvation, the Evangelists do not merely
relate that Christ was born, and that he died and vanquished death, but
also explain for what purpose he was born, and died, and rose again, and
what benefit we derive from those events.

<span id="vi-p12"></span>Yet there is also this difference between them,
that the other three are more copious in their narrative of the life and
death of Christ, but John dwells more largely on the doctrine by which
the office of Christ, together with the power of his death and
resurrection, is unfolded. They do not, indeed, omit to mention that
Christ came to bring salvation to the world, to atone for the sins of
the world by the sacrifice of his death, and, in short, to perform every
thing that was required from the Mediator, (as John also devotes a
portion of his work to historical details;) but the doctrine, which
points out to us the power and benefit of the coming of Christ, is far
more clearly exhibited by him than by the rest. And as all of them had
the same object in view, to point out Christ, the three former exhibit
his body, if we may be permitted to use the expression, but John
exhibits his soul. On this account, I am accustomed to say that this
Gospel is a key to open the door for understanding the rest; for whoever
shall understand the power of Christ, as it is here strikingly
portrayed, will afterwards read with advantage what the others relate
about the Redeemer who was manifested.

<span id="vi-p13"></span>John is believed to have written chiefly with
the intention of maintaining the Divinity of Christ, in opposition to
the wicked blasphemies of Ebion and Cerinthus; and this is asserted by
Eusebius and Jerome, in accordance with the general opinion of the
ancients. But whatever might be his motive for writing at that time,
there can be no doubt whatever that God intended a far higher benefit
for his Church. He therefore dictated to the Four Evangelists what they
should write, in such a manner that, while each had his own part
assigned him, the whole might be collected into one body; and it is our
duty now to blend the Four by a mutual relation, so that we may permit
ourselves to be taught by all of them, as by one mouth. As to John being
placed the fourth in order, it was done on account of the time when he
wrote, but in reading them, a different order would be more
advantageous, which is, that when we wish to read in Matthew and the
others, that Christ was given to us by the Father, we should first learn
from John the purpose for which he was manifested.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc34005.htm#fr_7) <span id="vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p5"></span> “<span id="vi-p5.1"></span>On scait assez que
le mot, d’Evangile signifie entre les Grees toutes bonnes nouvelles;” —
“it is well known that the word *Gospel* in Greek denotes any kind of
good news.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc34006)
