[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jch14)  [Next](jch16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jesus Christ heals*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1939\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Be Thou Made Whole

Chapter I

1\. In what respect do the words Christ and Jesus differ in meaning?

2\. What is the supreme attainment of every man?

3\. Is it possible for the Christ to experience death, burial, and
resurrection?

4\. When and where does resurrection take place? How did Jesus resurrect
His body?

5\. Do the words we use have any bearing on the results we get?

6\. Why is it that man has not brought forth a greater degree of the
Christ perfection?

7\. Are infirmities permanent? How overcome?

8\. Why did Jesus never give His personality any credit for the
wonderful works He did?

9\. Do all men have access to the Christ within?

10\. Should man give more attention to the healing power of nature?

11\. Should the student give his undivided attention to one system of
development or should he study many? Explain fully.

12\. Are there any short cuts into the kingdom of heaven?

13\. Explain what is meant by the "end of the world," as brought out in
the lesson?

14\. Describe the means by which Jesus undertook to establish the
kingdom of heaven on earth.

God Presence

Chapter II

1\. How may we know more of God and of ourselves?

2\. Explain the meaning of "God is the health of His people."

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

3\. Does God ever will man to be sick? Does He ever use His power to
punish His creations?

4\. How may we say that the attributes of God are expressed?

5\. Should man ever think of God as being separate from him or outside
him?

6\. Explain how mind is the connecting link between God and man.

7\. What is the proper procedure in realizing God as health? Is it
looked on as practical by the world at large?

8\. Explain the "still small voice."

9\. Explain God as principle. Should the truth that God is principle
lead us to infer that He is cold and unfeeling?

10\. What part does man play in the forming of things?

11\. Is God ever absent from His creations?

12\. Since intelligence is the light of the world, how may we increase
our intelligence?

Realization Precedes Manifestation

Chapter III

1\. How are we able to know that mind is the source of all things?

2\. How should we regard miracles?

3\. Is it possible for us to do the works that Jesus did?

4\. Is it possible to explain the laws governing religion from a
scientific viewpoint?

5\. What part does concentration play in our demonstrations?

6\. Give the metaphysical meaning of the word realization.

7\. What does faith have to do with the realization of one's ideals?

8\. Are all prayers answered?

9\. The text mentions a realm where no effort is required to gain the
answer to questions. Explain.

10\. What is the supreme realization of man?

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

Producing Results

Chapter IV

1\. What states of mind are necessary if we are to realize perfect
health?

2\. To what phase of being should a person give his

attention in order to understand the Scriptures?

3\. How can healing be instantaneous?

4\. Explain the meaning of the word sin.

5\. What is it to forgive sin?

6\. Should one ever think of oneself as being born in sin? What should
be one's viewpoint?

7\. What is the foundation of the Jesus Christ kingdom?

8\. What part does love play in our unfoldment?

9\. Explain fully the meaning of the Trinity.

10\. What mental attitude should man have toward his body?

The Omnipotence Of Prayer

Chapter V

1\. Why is it necessary to affirm a thing one already knows to be true?

2\. Should everyone pray? Why?

3\. Explain why Jesus advised us to ask for what we want.

4\. Is asking always a part of prayer? What other forms of prayer are
there?

5\. Is it ever good for one to be self-righteous? 6. What is the key to
all mysteries?

7\. What part do faith and understanding play in a perfect
demonstration?

8\. What is the real foundation of effective prayer?

9\. Is it essential to have great faith in order to demonstrate?

10\. Is silent prayer more effective than audible prayer? Why?

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

11\. What state of mind is necessary if we are to receive clear
revelations?

12\. Why are some healings slow even though prayers are said?

God Said, And It Was So

Chapter VI

1\. Explain fully in your own words the power of healing words.

2\. Did Jesus ever write? Through what channel have we received His
words?

3\. From what standpoint did Jesus say that His words are spirit and are
life?

4\. Does the word of itself have power? What must we do to give full
force to our words?

5\. Is Truth ever the formulated doctrine of any church, creed, or sect?
Where may we find Truth?

6\. What must we do to keep successfully in mind the words of Jesus?

7\. Is moral goodness always an indication of spirituality?

8\. What determines the character and the results of our words?

9\. Is it necessary for us to feel our oneness with God in order to
believe in His omnipotence?

10\. What does the healing of the man at the Pool of Bethesda represent?

11\. Is it ever possible for anyone to do our spiritual work for us?

12\. Explain how Jesus made His teachings available to all.

Indispensable Assurance

Chapter VII

1\. Is man's desire for a fuller and more excellent life a natural and
orderly one? Explain fully.

2\. Give in your own words a definition of faith. Is it

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

natural for man to have faith?

3\. Is it a falsehood to deny sickness in the face of its appearance?

4\. How are we to get more life?

5\. Is it a fact that faith is blind?

6\. How are we to emulate Jesus? Is it necessary to do so in order to do
the works of God?

7\. Give three steps that are necessary in demonstration.

8\. Would you call Jesus a master scientist? What did He mean when He
said, "In my Father's house are many mansions"?

9\. Is it better to seek understanding through intellectual reasoning or
through divine inspiration?

10\. Just what do our thoughts and words have to do with our
demonstrations?

11\. Is it always necessary for us to be receptive in order to be
healed? Does God ever do things for us against our will?

12\. Give the difference between a genius and an ordinary man from the
metaphysical viewpoint.

13\. Is it sufficient to be inspired by an ideal, or is something else
needed?

14\. Should one ever take the attitude that things as they are cannot be
changed?

15\. Explain what is meant by giving up the personal and taking up the
universal.

The Fullness Of Time

Chapter VIII

1\. What part does order play in life?

2\. Explain fully the power of words.

3\. Is there any limit to the power of thought?

4\. What should be our attitude toward hurry?

5\. How may we become conscious of our I AM?

6\. How is soul growth related to bodily health?

7\. Explain the relation between law and order. What part does law and
order play in the divine scheme of things?

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

8\. What is the difference between natural law and divine law?

9\. Were the works that Jesus performed really miracles? Why?

10\. Is it good to deny the existence of the things of the world?

11\. Is it necessary to enter fully into the kingdom in order to realize
results?

12\. Give some of the signs that follow the giving of attention to
Spirit.

Healing Through Praise And Thanksgiving

Chapter IX

1\. Has praise any commercial value? Any spiritual value? Explain.

2\. How is the body restored to perfection?

3\. How should the various writers of the Bible be judged?

4\. Is it possible for us to be of service in establishing peace on
earth?

5\. In your own words tell how the new Christianity and physical science
are working together.

6\. Where is heaven, and how is it formed?

7\. Explain what Jesus meant when He said that the bread and wine was
His body and His blood.

8\. Does man have the power to form and reform the universal energy?

9\. Is there more than one God?

10\. Explain in your own words the meaning of the four horses mentioned
in the 6th chapter of Revelation.

"I Am The Way, And The Truth, And The Life"

Chapter X

1\. Explain why the word of Spirit is next to Spirit in power.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

2\. Compare Jehovah and Christ. How should one go about choosing healing
words?

3\. Why do we find it advantageous to use the name Jesus Christ?

4\. Did Jesus discover the principles He taught and demonstrated?

5\. Give the difference between the real spiritual I AM and the
personality. How did Jesus handle this proposition? Is it possible for
us to do likewise?

6\. What is the difference between Jehovah God and Elohim God?

7\. Does the individual I AM contain infinite creative capacity?

8\. Can the unseen forces be mechanically demonstrated? How?

9\. What did Jesus mean when He said that we should be judged by our
words? What is meant by the "day of judgment"?

10\. Explain fully the change from the natural life to the spiritual
life. What did Paul mean when he said, "I die daily?"

11\. What must be our viewpoint if we are to be saved?

12\. Should we expect healing today the same as in the time of Jesus'
ministry on earth?

Healing Power Of Joy

Chapter XI

1\. Explain how joy acts on fear.

2\. Explain the relation between happiness and health.

3\. Do you think that singing can be of benefit toward the realization
of perfect health?

4\. Explain how the whole universe is in vibration.

5\. What part does zeal play in our unfoldment? Explain fully.

6\. What is the cause of man's seeming lack of vital energy?

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

7\. Explain the importance of faith. How is faith quickened?

8\. Does man's thinking have much to do with his spiritual progress?

9\. Why is it necessary first to study mind in order to understand the
real character of God?

10\. What should we do to bring the Spirit into our consciousness?

Holy Spirit Fulfills The Law

Chapter XII

1\. Explain the Holy Spirit from the viewpoint of the Christian
metaphysician and the physical scientist.

2\. How should a good Christian healer regard the Holy Spirit?

3\. Should we ever hesitate to call on the Holy Spirit?

4\. Did God create man with a perfect body or perfect-body idea?

5\. Did Jesus die on the cross? Explain how He was able to resurrect His
body.

6\. Is it to our benefit to know that mind rules matter? Explain.

7\. Is it possible to escape life's experiences by a change of
environment or by death?

8\. Can "ascension" be gained through physical death?

9\. What did Jesus mean when He said, "He that hath seen me hath seen
the Father"?

10\. Is it necessary for man to become as a little child? Explain fully.

11\. Why is it that man must have a mediator in order to contact God?
Who is this mediator?

12\. Since man has seemingly lost contact with Spirit, what is his only
salvation?

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](jch16.md)
