[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jch13)  [Next](jch15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jesus Christ heals*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1939\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Chapter XII Holy Spirit Fulfills the Law 

THE SPIRIT of wholeness quickens and heals me. The Spirit of wholeness
is called the Holy Spirit in the New Testament. In classical mythology
it is called Hygeia. Modern medical men refer to it as the restorative
power of nature. It has been recognized by savage and civilized in every
land and age. It has many names, and they all identify it as a universal
urge toward perfection in man and the universe and toward keeping things
going regardless of any interfering force.

We may look on this restorative power as merely the tendency of the
cells in an organism to retain their homogeneity, and when we look at it
in this light our consciousness robs it of any of the divine qualities
it may possess. This is the way the scientific world regards what we
call the Holy Spirit. To such a view the Holy Spirit has no warm heart.
To persons holding such a view the Holy Spirit is not the Comforter
referred to by Jesus but merely an abstract principle that works just
the same way whether it is praised or blamed.

But to the Christian metaphysician the Holy Spirit is just what the name
implies, the whole Spirit of God in action. In the Hebrew Jehovah is
written Yahweh, Yah being masculine and weh feminine.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

In the New Testament Christ stands for Jehovah. Jesus talked a great
deal about the Holy Spirit: that it would bear witness of Him, come with
Him, and help Him to the end of the age.

Do not be misled by the personality of the Holy Spirit and the reference
to it as "he." This was the bias of the Oriental mind, making God and
all forms of the Deity masculine.

Holy Spirit is the love of Jehovah taking care of the human family, and
love is always feminine. Love is the great harmonizer and healer, and
whoever calls upon God as Holy Spirit for healing is calling upon the
divine love.

Just here, in connection with the Holy Spirit is an important point for
a good Christian healer to consider. Do not regard the Holy Spirit
altogether as a restorative principle without feeling, sympathy, or
love. This reduces your healing method to intellectual logic and the
slow process of mental science. Under this method the patient must
always be educated in Truth principles before he can be healed. No
instantaneous healing ever takes place under this method.

The Holy Spirit is sympathetic, comforting, loving, forgiving, and
instantly healing.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Who forgiveth all thine iniquities;  
Who healeth all thy diseases."  
</span>

</div>

Do not fear to call mightily upon the Holy Spirit, who has all
compassion and healing power at His command.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

Thy perfect plan of bodily perfection is now made manifest in me.

That Mind, which designed the universe, must have planned for man, its
leading citizen, a body in harmony with the universe is good logic. This
conclusion does not require inspiration but merely common sense.

The religions of every race have taught this perfection of the body but
have usually assumed that it was to be given to God's elect in some
heavenly place after death. They have not thought it possible that the
body of flesh with its many apparent defects could be transformed into
an ideal body. In consequence man has put the stamp of inferiority upon
his body, and through the creative power of thought he has built into
the race mind a consciousness of corruptible flesh instead of the
inherent incorruptible substance of God-Mind.

This race thought of man's body as impure and perishable in time became
so dense that no human thought could penetrate it. It was gradually
consuming the little life left in human bodies and would have ended with
their total destruction if it had not been for Jesus, who was incarnated
as demonstrator of the perfection and immortality of man's body.

That the body of flesh had within it life elements that could be
released and incorporated into a much finer body has always been beyond
the comprehension of the sense mind, and it required a physical
demonstration to convince men that it could be done.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

Jesus made that demonstration, and some of His followers were convinced
that the body with which He appeared to them after the Crucifixion was
the identical body that suffered on the cross. Thomas, for example, was
allowed critically to examine that body for the marks and wounds of the
cross, and he found them and was convinced.

But the majority still doubted and do so to this day. Not understanding
that the body that Jesus occupied for the thirty-three years of His
earthly incarnation could be transformed into an imperishable body, they
have assumed that Jesus really died on the cross and went to heaven
where God gave Him a glorious body. There is no foundation for this in
the facts given in the New Testament.

"God is Spirit," said Jesus. "Know ye not that your body is a temple of
the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God?" wrote Paul.
Here are two statements by accepted authorities on fundamental Christian
principles. If God is Spirit and He dwells in man's body, that body must
have within it certain spiritual principles. Here modern science comes
to the rescue of primitive Christianity, telling us that the atoms that
compose the cells of our body have within them electrical units that,
released, can change the whole character of the organism. Jesus had
attained an understanding of the law that releases these electrical
units, and He knew before the Crucifixion that He could thus make His
body unkillable; which He did.

When Elohim God created man in His likeness,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

He imprinted upon man's supermind two body pictures: first the picture
of a natural body, and secondly the picture of a spiritual body. In the
primal cell He then inclosed the elements necessary to the building of
the natural and the spiritual body; that is, electricity on the inside
and flesh on the outside. Then to man was given dominion and authority
over these living atoms and cells out of which he must build mind and
body into visibility. As God created man, His image and likeness, by the
power of His word so man, God's image and likeness, projects his body by
the same power.

Our physical bodies are carried in our minds as thought and they
obediently reflect every mental attitude. When in the course of our
evolution we discern that an allwise Creator must have designed
perfection for all His creation and we begin to affirm that perfection,
then the transformation from the natural to the spiritual body begins,
and it continues until our body is wholly regenerated and appears
objectively in its divine perfection.

Thou art the strength of my life, and I am made whole.

The mighty truth that everything in this universe is the product of
thought few persons let sink deeply into their minds. Mankind have
wandered in thought so far from the parent Mind that they do not reflect
or observe that everything they do originates in mind. A very little
observation and reflection will convince anyone that mind acts on matter
in every part of life. The story of creation begins in the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

first chapter of the Bible with God's command that the dry land appear.
Then in the second chapter Jehovah God formed man out of the dust of the
ground. Not only here in the beginning do we find mind molding matter;
all through the Bible runs the same story. Jesus said of His body that
He could raise it up.

When the truth dawns on man that mind rules matter in both the great and
the small, he has the explanation of myriad mysteries, strange episodes,
reputed miracles. This great truth that mind is the source and moving
factor in all creation would, if studied and practiced, prove of
tremendous worth to religion, science, and art. Jesus taught the
supremacy of mind in many illustrations, but His followers have not
understood the metaphysical significance because they have not analyzed
the mind or directly applied its spiritual powers. When Jesus said that
the Father was within Him and that the words He spoke were not His but
the Father's, He must have referred to God as an interpenetrating mind.

Everything in this universe has both its mental and its physical side.
Heaven and earth are parallel everywhere. Even the so-called elemental
forces of nature are dual. Our men of science are puzzled because light
sometimes appears as waves in space and again as particles. To a
metaphysician the waves express the mind and the particles the matter.
When Jesus walked on the water He blended His mind with the mind of the
water and it obeyed His concentrated

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

will.

Nature's mind is always the servant of man's mind when man lifts his
thoughts to Spirit. Nature will even obey a determined will on an
inferior plane of consciousness. Concentration of will as practiced by
metaphysicians of the Orient, African witch doctors, and a horde of
occult adepts bears testimony to the power of the mind to manipulate
matter visible and invisible.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I sow no seeds of care and strife;  
But those of love, and joy, and life."  
</span>

</div>

It is reported that a great philosopher, Herbert Spencer, once said
substantially that he would gladly turn his life over to any creative
force that would plan and carry it forward without his having to take
any responsibility.

Because of the many blunders that the natural man makes in his life,
such a shifting of responsibility would be popular on the part of many
who have ideals that they are unable to fulfill because they are bound
by material limitations. Also in the secret recesses of all of us there
lurks the conviction that there is a power somewhere that may be invoked
to show us a hidden way into the city of success. We think we should
willingly follow any path in life if we were sure that we were being led
by the hand of supreme wisdom.

In his famous soliloquy Hamlet heaps up the measure of the burdens of
life with the subtle argument that they could be shifted by death:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,  
</span>

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,  
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,  
The insolence of office and the spurns  
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,  
When he himself might his quietus make  
With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,  
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,  
But that the dread of something after death,  
The undiscovered country from whose bourn  
No traveler returns, puzzles the will  
And makes us rather bear those ills we have  
Than fly to others that we know not of?  

</div>

Spiritual insight reveals that Hamlet is right. We cannot escape life's
experiences, be they ever so rough, by fleeing to another environment.
All the conditions in this world have been constructed by the people who
inhabit the world, and each individual is a builder of it and personally
responsible for his immediate environment.

It is the mind that makes the man, and the mind and the thoughts of the
mind endure even though the body be dissolved. So let no man think that
he can escape the creations of his mind by breaking the physical chains
that bind him to the earth. Nor does death in any of its phases relieve
him of the states of mind that dominated him at the time of passing. The
law of God is not mocked at any time or under any circumstances.
"Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." What we have sown in
the flesh we shall reap in the flesh unless we repent, change our minds.
When we do repent, we shall break mortal thoughts and ascend into a
spiritual thought

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

realm, the kingdom of God. This ascension we do not attain by dying
physically but by dying to ill thoughts and living in true, good
thoughts while still in the flesh. "Yet in my flesh shall I see God."

"The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us," says John in the very first
chapter of his gospel.

Of all the great spiritual teachers of the ages Jesus has given us the
most vivid and vital evidence of God as Father and guide. We say as
Philip did, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." The disciples
were looking for a flesh-and-blood God. Do not the majority of
Christians today look forward to seeing sometime, somewhere, a
flesh-and-blood God sitting on a throne? Jesus replied, "He that hath
seen me hath seen the Father."

He then explained that He was in the Father and the Father in Him. Yet
His listeners did not understand, because they had not been trained to
think metaphysically. God is Spirit, omnipresent Spirit-mind; and in Him
"we live, and move, and have our being."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"God lives in me; no more I pine;  
For love, and health, and joy are mine."  
</span>

</div>

That God is the animating principle of all creation is not a new or
startling teaching. It has been the conclusion of thinking minds ever
since the birth of logic, and it will never be discarded so long as the
faculty of logic continues to be exercised. Where there is an effect
there must be a cause, and no amount of sophistry will erase the
straight line from premise to conclusion. Timid men will cry pantheism

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

and scare both themselves and others with a bugaboo they do not
understand. Nevertheless the fact remains that intelligence and design
and all the other evidences of an omnipresent planning Mind are so
palpable in us and the world about us that we cannot boast of our sanity
and at the same time deny them.

When logic presents these mighty truths to us and we begin to turn our
attention to the omnipresent principle eternally active and flashing its
presence into us and the whole universe, we awaken within ourselves a
consciousness of it, and it begins to think and plan through us. This is
the first movement of Omnipresence, creating man as a self-conscious
replica of itself, that is, of God. This replica is the Son of God or
Christ, the exact reproduction in miniature of the mighty cosmic Mind.
When this man of cosmic Mind arrives at full manifestation of Himself in
habitation and place, we have Jesus Christ, the Son of God or God
glorified in man. Jesus in ecstasy beholding this climax exclaimed
"Glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was."

So if we have not begun our glorification by realizing this quickening
life within, let us commence right now to recognize it in thought and
word. James Russell Lowell wrote, "It may be that the longing to be so
helps make the soul immortal." A great truth, spoken by a great man.
Desire from within shoots a ray of energy from the imprisoned I AM to
the all-infolding Spirit, and a thread of golden light unites

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

parent and child. Darwin taught that desire for light in the
protoplasmic cell shot a ray from its center to its surface and formed
the primary eye. If this be true, and it seems logical, it is possible
for us to animate the thirty-nine trillion cells estimated by Doctor
Crile to be present in the body and eventually make them all luminous,
as did Jesus. Thus science is revealing to us the movements of mind in
forming the primary or physical body, which by the quickening of the
Spirit is raised to the glorified immortal body.

We should not lose sight of the fact that the completion of this
glorified body that God has planned for us devolves on us. We must
become conscious of God-Mind and co-operate with it in making His plan
manifest in us. As Jesus said, "My Father worketh even until now, and I
work."

The childlike simplicity of this primary work seems so insignificant
that great men who have delved into philosophy and worked with weighty
intellectual problems deem it beneath them to become as a little child
and concentrate their thoughts on nursery rhymes. They do not realize
that instead of molding and animating the cells of their bodies they
have projected their thoughts outwardly in speculating about the
universe and its laws. So the cells left to themselves gradually starve
for want of mind stimulation and finally die.

If you, dear reader, have attained eminence in some earthly field of
action and yet have not demonstrated health, it may be that you need to
take sound

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

words in some simple form and go unto your Lord.

The Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus dwells in me, and I am made
whole.

Paul wrote, "But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwelleth in you, he that raised up Christ Jesus from the dead shall give
life also to your mortal bodies through his Spirit that dwelleth in
you."

Few Christians realize the vital truth in this statement by Paul,
although it is but one of many of like character to be found in his
writings. Paul taught that what Spirit did for Jesus it would do for all
who follow Him and adopt His methods of spiritual self-development.

Jesus claimed like results for His followers. In Matthew 19:28 it is
written, "Verily I say unto you, that ye who have followed me, in the
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory,
ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel."

The promises of the power of Spirit to transform man from a mortal to an
immortal state are producing a great company of spiritual-minded persons
in the world today who work in the silence and speak but little about
their heavenly experiences. In this way Spirit is forming a mighty
Christian army that, when the need arises, will come out of its
obscurity and save our civilization from extinction.

Although these spiritually quickened souls, often widely separated, may
be working alone, they are bound together by the Holy Spirit, and the
bond of

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

brotherhood that unifies them is far more enduring than any human
relationship. They are developing latent faculties of the soul that will
make them superpowered men and women.

In order to establish and perpetuate the new order of life that is being
poured into earth's mental atmosphere from on high it is absolutely
essential that a people be prepared who can make use of the finer forces
of the mind. The great initial outpouring of Spirit took place at the
Pentecostal baptism more than nineteen centuries ago. The few who
received this primal baptism are the seed from which has sprung a
multitude. The trillions of cells forming the body of Jesus swim in
omnipresence awaiting our appropriation. They are the living, quickening
seeds of new life.

I am strengthened and healed by the power of the Spirit in the inner
man.

We all need a better acquaintance with that phase of creative Mind that
reveals and forms a connecting link between the Most High and the mind
of the natural man. Most of us have not made conscious contact with the
Spirit within but are thinking and acting in the outer crust of our
being. Consequently we cannot hold communion with God in His omnipotence
but must have a mediator or equalizer of the light and power that
proceeds from the originating source of existence.

This is illustrated in high-powered electric systems: a transformer is
necessary to lower the voltage and adapt it to the capacity of small
industrial

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

motors. If the full current from one of the big electric cables were
turned directly into our small motors it would burn them up.

If the full current of God life were turned directly into the ordinary
man's nervous system, it would destroy it. An equalizer has been
provided--the Holy Spirit or Spirit of truth--through Jesus Christ.

Our human family has lost contact with the Spirit of truth, and our only
salvation is through a soul strong enough to re-establish the
connection. Jesus Christ released the electric atoms in His body and
formed a conduit in the ether through which divine life is again flowing
to the inhabitants of this planet. Without this purified life substance
we should be unable to receive life or any message direct from God.

In John 14:16 Jesus said, "And I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, even the Spirit
of truth: whom the world cannot receive." Again in John 16:14 He makes
His identity with the Spirit of truth stronger: "He shall glorify me:
for he shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you."

All who have faith enough to believe these things are comforted and
guided by the Spirit of truth. Read John 17:20: "Neither for these only
do I pray, but for them also that believe on me through their word."

It is the Spirit of truth that talks to us in dreams, visions, and inner
urges. The more we acknowledge

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

the Spirit as our indwelling inspiration and life the stronger its
consciousness will be to us.

Through the Spirit of truth God moves the whole creation; hence any man
may constantly increase his understanding of the source and relation of
all things by claiming his unity with the Spirit of truth.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question Helps](jch15.md)
