[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28003)  [Next](cc28005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1-p1"></span>Commentaries on the Prophet Jonah

<span id="iii.1-p2"></span>Chapter 1.

<span id="iii.1.i"></span>

<span id="iii.1.i-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-second.

<span id="iii.1.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)<span id="iii.1.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Now the word of the LORD came unto
Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,

<span id="iii.1.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Ionam,
filium Amittai, dicendo,

<span id="iii.1.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Arise, go to Nineveh, that great
city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Surge, vade Niniveh, ad urbem
magnam, et clama contra eam; quia ascendit malitia eorum coram facie
mea.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.ii-p7"></span><span id="iii.1.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p8"></span>As I have before observed, Jonah seems
here indirectly to intimate,  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) that he
had been previously called to the office of a teacher; for it is the
same as though he had said, that he framed this history as a part of his
ordinary function. The word of God then was not for the first time
communicated to Jonah, when he was sent to Nineveh; but it pleased God,
when he was already a Prophet, to employ him among other nations. It
might have been then, that he was sent to Nineveh, that the Lord, being
wearied with the obstinacy of his own people, might afford an example of
pious docility on the part of a heathen and uncircumcised nation, in
order to render the Israelites more inexcusable. They made a profession
of true religion, they boasted that they were a holy people;
circumcision was also to them a symbol and a pledge of God’s covenant;
yet they despised all the Prophets, so that their teaching among them
was wholly useless. It is then probable that this Prophet was taken away
from them, that the Ninevites by their example might increase the sin of
Israel, for in three days they turned to God, after Jonah had preached
to them: but among the Israelites and their kindred he had, during a
long time, effected nothing, when yet his authority had been
sufficiently ratified, and thus, as we have already said, in their
favor: for Jonah had predicted, that the kingdom of Israel would as yet
stand; and however much they deserved to perish, yet the Lord fulfilled
what he had promised by the mouth at his servant. They ought then to
have embraced his doctrine, not only because it was divine, but
especially because the Lord had been pleased to show his love to them.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p15"></span>I do not indeed doubt, but that the
ingratitude of the people was in this manner arraigned, since the
Ninevites repented at the preaching of Jonah, and that for a short time,
while the Israelites ever hardened themselves in their obstinacy. And
hence some have refinedly expounded that passage in <span
id="iii.1.ii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
12:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)<span
id="iii.1.ii-p15.1"></span>, ‘This perverse generation seeketh a sign,
and a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the
Prophet,’ as though this intimated, that the Gospel was to be preached
to the Gentiles, inasmuch as Jonah was taken away from his own nation,
and was given as a teacher to foreign and heathen nations. They
therefore suppose, that we are to understand this as a prophecy
respecting the future call of the Gentiles, as though Christ had said,
that he would hereafter go to the Gentiles, after having found the
wickedness of the chosen people past recovery. But as Christ expressly
applies this comparison, we ought not to draw his words here and there.
 <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) He indeed confines the similitude to
one particular thing, that is, “As Jonah had been three days in the
whale’s bowels, so also he would be three days in the bowels of the
earth;” as though he had said, that in this he would be like to Jonah,
for he would be a Prophet brought to life again. And this was said
designedly by Christ, because he saw that he was despised by the Jews,
and that his labors were in vain: “Since ye now hear me not, and regard
me as nothing, know that I shall be hereafter a new Prophet, even after
my resurrection; so at length I shall begin to speak more effectually
both to the Jews and to the Gentiles, as Jonah converted Nineveh, after
having returned again to life.” This then is the simple meaning of the
passage. Hence Jonah was not a type of Christ, because he was sent away
unto the Gentiles, but because he returned to life again, after having
for some time exercised his office as a Prophet among the people of
Israel. They then who say that his going forth was a token of the call
of the Gentiles, adduce indeed what is plausible, but it seems to be
supported by no solid reason; for it was in fact an extraordinary thing.
God, then, had not as yet openly showed what he would do at the coming
of Christ. When Naaman the Syrian was converted to the faith, (<span
id="iii.1.ii-p16.2"></span>[2Ki
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015)<span id="iii.1.ii-p16.2"></span>)
and a few others, God changed nothing in his ordinary proceedings: for
there ever existed the special call of the race of Abraham, and religion
was ever confined within the ancient limits; and it remained ever true,
that God had not done to other nations as he had to the Jews, for he had
revealed to them his judgments, (<span id="iii.1.ii-p16.3"></span>[Ps
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)<span
id="iii.1.ii-p16.3"></span>.) It was therefore God’s will that the
adoption of the race of Abraham should continue unaltered to the conning
of Christ, so that the Jews might excel all other nations, and differ
from them through a gratuitous privilege, as the holy and elect people
of God.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p17"></span>Those who adopt the contrary opinion say,
that the Ninevites were converted to the Lord without circumcision. This
is true; but I know not whether that was a true and legitimate
conversion, which is hereafter mentioned; and of this, the Lord being
willing, I shall again speak more fully: but it seems more probable,
that they were induced by the reproofs and threatening of the Prophet,
suppliantly to deprecate the impending wrath of God: hence God once
forgave them; what took place afterwards does not clearly appear. It is
certainly not probable that the whole city was converted to the Lord:
for soon after that city became exceedingly hostile both to the
Israelites and the Jews; and the Church of God was by the Ninevites
continually harassed with slaughters. Since it was so, there is
certainly no reason to think, that they had really and from the heart
repented. But I put off a full discussion of this subject until we come
to another passage. Let us go on now with our text.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p18"></span><span id="iii.1.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p19"></span>*Arise, go to Nineveh, to that great
city.* Nineveh is called a great city, and not without reason; for it
was in circumference, as heathen writers say, 400 stadia: and we shall
see that Jonah was three whole days in going through the squares and
streets of the city  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) . It hence
follows, that it was a very large city, and this all allow. Profane
writers call it Ninus, and say that it is a name derived from its
founder; for it was Ninus, the son of Betas, who built it. But more
correct is their opinion, who think that <span
id="iii.1.ii-p21.1"></span>נינוה *Ninue,* is a Hebrew word: and hence
what Herodotus and Diodorus, and others of the same class, say, is
certainly fabulous, both as to the origin of the city and as to the
whole progress of the kingdom, and their legends can easily be disproved
by testimonies from holy Scripture. It is at the same time admitted by
all, that Nineveh was a very large and a well fortified city. Babylon
was afterwards built by Semiramis, who had been the wife of Betas: after
her husband’s death she wished to show that she also excelled in mind
and industry, and that she had wisdom above her sex. But with regard to
the founder of Nineveh, it is certain that the city was first built by
Asshur: whether it was enlarged by Ninus, I know not: this, then, I
leave as uncertain; for I wish not to contend about what is doubtful.
But it is certain, from what Moses has said, that the founder of this
city was Asshur, (<span id="iii.1.ii-p21.2"></span>[Ge
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011)<span
id="iii.1.ii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.1.ii-p22"></span>As to the largeness of the city, even if
profane writers had not said a word, the testimony of Jonah ought to be
sufficient to us. Now, since he is bidden to go and proceed to Nineveh,
the Lord gives him some hope of success. He indeed wrought effectually
by the hand of his servant, Nahum; who, though he continued at home, yet
prophesied against the Ninevites; but with a different view, and for
another end. For as the people were then miserably distressed, and saw
the kingdom or monarchy of Assyria in a flourishing state, they must
have despaired, had not some solace been afforded them. Hence Nahum
showed that God would be a judge against the Ninevites; that though he
for a time favored and spared them, there was yet impending over them
the dreadful judgment of which he speaks. Nahum, then, was not given as
a teacher to the Ninevites, but was only a proclaimer, that the Jews
might strengthen their faith by this comfort — that they were not wholly
rejected by the Lord, as he would some time avenge their wrongs. The
case with Jonah was different: for he was sent to the city itself, to
exhort the Ninevites to repent. Now the Lord, by speaking expressly of
the largeness of the city, intended thus to prepare him with firmness,
lest he should be frightened by the splendor, wealth, and power of that
city: for we know how difficult it is to take in hand great and arduous
undertakings, especially when we feel ourselves destitute of strength.
When we have to do with many and powerful adversaries, we are not only
debilitated, but our courage wholly vanishes away. Lest, then, the
greatness of Nineveh should fill Jonah with terror, he is here prepared
and armed with firmness. “*Go* then *to Nineveh,* and let not the power
of that monarchy prevent thee to fulfill what I command thee; which is,
to show to the Ninevites their sins, and to denounce on them
destruction, if they repent not.”

<span id="iii.1.ii-p23"></span>We now then understand why Nineveh was
called *a great city:* for had it not been for the reason just stated,
it would not have been necessary that this should have been said to
Jonah. The Israelites, I doubt not, knew well that it was a large city,
and also possessed of strength and of a large number of men: but the
Lord intended to set before his servant what might have been a hindrance
to him in the discharge of his office; *Go* then *to this great city.*
In short, God designed in this way to try Jonah, whether he would prefer
his command to all the hindrances of this world. And it is a genuine
proof of obedience when we simply obey God, however numerous the
obstacles which may meet us and may be suggested to our minds, and
though no escape may appear to us; yea, when we follow God, as it were
with closed eyes, wherever he may lead us, and doubt not but that he
will add strength to us, and stretch forth also his hand, whenever need
may require, to remove all our difficulties. It was then the Lord’s
purpose to deal thus with Jonah; as though he had said to him, “remember
who I am, and be content with my authority; for I have ready at hand all
resources; when any thing stands in your way, rely on my power, and
execute what I command thee.” This is the import of the passage.
Whenever then God demands any service from us, and we at the same time
see that what the discharge of our duty demands is either difficult or
apparently impossible, let this come to our minds, — that there is not
anything in the whole world which ought not to give way to God’s
command: we shall then gather courage and confidence, nor will anything
be able to call us away from our duty and a right course, though the
whole world were fighting against God.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p24"></span>It now follows*, Cry against her; for
ascended has their wickedness before my presence.* Cry, he says, against
her: it was an unpleasant undertaking to cry out against her immediately
at the beginning. We indeed know that men take pride in their power: and
as there was then but one monarchy in the world, the seat of which was
at Nineveh, a teacher could hardly expect to obtain a patient hearing,
though he excelled in gracefulness of manner, and had acquired
reputation, and brought an agreeable message. But Jonah was a foreigner,
one unknown, and destitute of authority; and still more, he was
immediately to denounce destruction on the Ninevites, to cry aloud, to
reprove, to make a vehement proclamation, to threaten. How difficult was
all this? We hence see how hard a command it was when God charged his
Prophet to cry against Nineveh.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p25"></span>It is now added, *For their wickedness
has ascended to me.* By this clause God strengthens his servant Jonah;
as though he said, “Thou wilt not, as an individual, have to contend
with them, but I constitute thee as my herald, to summon them to my
tribunal.” And no doubt it must have served much to animate Jonah, that
he had not to deal with the Ninevites as an individual, but as the
messenger of God: and it might also have had an influence on their
minds, to know, that though no mortal inflicted punishment for their
crimes, they yet could not escape the vengeance of God. This then is the
reason why the Lord here declares that he would be the judge of Nineveh.
And at the same time he reminds us, that though the Ninevites
felicitated themselves, and also gained the plaudits of the whole world
on account of their power, yet all this was of no moment, because their
wickedness and iniquity had ascended into heaven. When therefore we are
reproved, there is no reason that we should turn our eyes here and there
towards men; we ought instantly to present ourselves to the scrutiny of
God; nay, we ought ourselves to take in hand that voluntary examination
which God requires. By so doing, we shall not feed our vices by
foolishly deceiving ourselves, as hypocrites do, who ever look around
them to the right hand and to the left, and never raise up their
thoughts to heaven. Let us go on —

<span id="iii.1.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003)<span id="iii.1.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.iii-p2"></span>**3.** But Jonah rose up to flee unto
Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and went down to Joppa; and he
found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went
down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the
Lord.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et surrexit Jonas ad fugendum (ut
fugeret) Tharsis a facie Jehovae, et descendit Japho, et invenit navem,
quae transibat Tharsis, et dedit mercedem (hoc est, naulum pretium
vecturae,) et descendit in eam, ut iret cum ipsis (nempe cum
mercatoribus vel nautis) in Tharsis a conspectu Jehovae.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.iii-p6"></span>Jonah now relates how he sought
hiding-places, that he might withdraw himself from the service of God;
not that he deceived himself with such a gross notion, as that he would
be no longer under the power of God, after having passed over the sea;
but he intended to shun, as it were, the light of the present life, by
proceeding to a foreign country. He was, no doubt, not only in a
disturbed state of mind, when he formed such a purpose, but was utterly
confused.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p7"></span>It may be asked, why Jonah thus avoided
the command of God. The Jews, indulging in frigid trifles in divine
things, say that he feared lest, when he came to Nineveh, he should be
deprived of the prophetic spirit, as though he were not in the same
danger by passing over the sea: this is very frivolous and puerile. And
further, they blend things of no weight, when reasons sufficiently
important present themselves to us.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p8"></span>It was first a new and unusual thing for
Prophets to be drawn away from the chosen people, and sent to heathen
nations. When Peter was sent to Cornelius, (<span
id="iii.1.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ac
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017)<span
id="iii.1.iii-p8.1"></span>,) though he had been instructed as to the
future call of the Gentiles, he yet doubted, he hesitated until he was
driven as it were forcibly by a vision. What then must have come to the
mind of Jonah? If only on account of one man the mind of Peter was
disquieted, so as to think it an illusion, when he was sent a teacher to
Cornelius, what must Jonah have thought, when he was sent to a city so
populous? Hence novelty, doubtless, must have violently shaken the
courage of the holy Prophet, and induced him to retake himself
elsewhere, as one destitute of understanding. Again, doubt might have
had an influence on him: for how could he have hoped that a people, who
were notorious for their licentiousness, would be converted? He had
indeed before an experience of the hardness of the chosen people. He had
been faithfully engaged in his office, he had omitted nothing to confirm
the worship of God and true religion among the people of Israel: but he
had effected but little; and yet the Jews had been called from the womb.
What then could he hope, when the Lord removed him to Nineveh? for
unbridled licentiousness ruled there; there was also there extreme
blindness, they had no knowledge of divine worship; in a word, they were
sunk in extreme darkness, and the devil in every way reigned there.
Doubt then must have broken down the spirit of Jonah, so that he
disobeyed the command of God. Still further, the weakness of the flesh
must have hindered him from following his legitimate call: “What then?
even this, — I must go to the chief city of that monarchy, which at this
day treads under its feet the whole earth; I must go there, a man
obscure and despised; and then I must proclaim a message that will
excite the greatest hatred, and instantly kindle the minds of men into
rage; and what must I say to the Ninevites? ‘Ye are wicked men, God can
no longer endure your impiety; there is, therefore, a dreadful vengeance
near at hand.’ How shall I be received?” Jonah then, being still
surrounded by the infirmities of the flesh, must have given way to fear,
which dislodged the love of obedience.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p9"></span>And I have no doubt, in my own mind, but
that Jonah discussed these things within himself, for he was not a log
of wood. And doubtless it was not to no purpose, as I have already said,
that he mentions that the city was great. God indeed sought to remove
what might prove an hindrance, but Jonah, on the other hand, reasoned
thus, — “I see that I am to have a fierce contest; nay, that such a
number of people will fall on me, enough to overwhelm me a hundred
times, as the Lord has not in vain foretold me that the city is great.”
And though he might have had some hope, if they had been chastised, that
they would give God his due honor; yet he confesses, that this hindrance
came to his mind, which prevented him to proceed in the course of his
calling. Hence doubt, as well as the fear of the flesh made Jonah to
stumble, and novelty also, as I have already said, must have perplexed
him; so that he preferred to go down, as it were, to the grave, than to
undertake an office which apparently had no reason in its favor. For why
were the Prophets sent, except to effect something by their labor, and
to bring forth some fruit? but of this Jonah had no hope. Some authority
was also allowed the Prophets, at least they were allowed the liberty of
teaching; but Jonah thought that all entrance was closed up against him:
and still more, Jonah thought that he was opposing the covenant of the
Lord, who had chosen one people only; and he also thought that he was,
as it were, fixed to his own land, when he was appointed a Teacher in
his own country; he therefore could not remove elsewhere without feeling
a great repugnance.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p10"></span>I hence think, that Jonah disobeyed the
command of God, partly because the weakness of the flesh was an
hindrance, partly because of the novelty of the message, and partly
because he despaired of fruit, or of success to his teaching.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p11"></span>But he doubtless grievously
transgressed: for the first rule, as to all our actions, is to follow
the call of God. Though one may excel in heroic virtues, yet all his
virtues are mere fumes, which shine before the eyes of men, except the
object be to obey God. The call of God then, as I have said, holds the
first place as to the conduct of men; and unless we lay this foundation,
we do like him who would build a house in the air. Disordered then will
be the whole course of our life, except God presides over and guides us,
and raises up over us, as it were, his own banners. As then Jonah
subverted the first and the only firm foundation of a right conduct,
what could have remained for him? There is then no reason for us to
extenuate his fault, for he could not have sinned more grievously than
by forsaking God, in having refused to obey his call: it was, as it were
to shake off the yoke; and this he confesses himself.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p12"></span>They therefore very childishly write who
wish to be his apologists, since he twice condemns himself — *Jonah rose
up to flee from the presence of Jehovah* — *to go unto Tarshish from the
presence of Jehovah.* Why does he the second time repeat, from the
presence of Jehovah? He meant, no doubt, to express here more distinctly
his fault: and the repetition is indeed very emphatical: and it also
proves clearly that it was not a slight offense, when Jonah retook
himself elsewhere when he was sent to Nineveh. He could not indeed have
departed from the Lord, for God fills heaven and earth; and, as I have
said already, he was not fascinated by so gross an error as to think,
that when he became a fugitive, he was beyond the reach of God’s hand.
What then is to flee from the face of Jehovah, except it be that which
he here confesses, that he fled from the presence of God, as though he
wished, like runaway servants, to reject the government of God? Since
then Jonah was carried away by this violent temptation, there is no
reason why we should now try, by some vain and frivolous pretenses, to
excuse his sin. This is one thing.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p13"></span>With regard to the word *Tharsis,* or
Tharsisa, I doubt not but that it means Cilicia. There are those who
think that it is the city Tarsus; but they are mistaken, for it is the
name of a country. They are also mistaken who translate it, Sea; for
Jonah intended not only to go to sea, but also to pass over into
Cilicia, which is opposite to the Syrian Sea. But the Jews called that
the Sea of Tarshish, as it appears from many passages, because there was
very frequent sailing to that place. As then that transmarine country
was more known to them than any other, and as they carried there their
merchandise, and in their turn purchased their goods, they called that
the Sea of Tarshish, as it is well known, as being near it.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p14"></span>Jonah then intended to flee into
Cilicia, when the Lord would have sent him to Nineveh. It is said that
he *rose up to flee,* and then, that he *went down to Joppa,* that he
*found there a ship,* which was passing over to Tarshish, that he *paid
the fare,* that he *went down* into the ship, *to go with* them into
Cilicia:  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) now by all those
expressions Jonah intimates that he was wholly fixed in his purpose, and
that it was necessary that he should have been brought back by a strong
hand; for he was touched by no repentance during his journey. Many
things may indeed come to our minds when the call of God appears to us
too burdensome. There is none of us, when service is to be performed to
God, who does not roll this and that in his mind: “What will be the
issue? how wilt thou reach the place where thou expectest to be? See
what dangers await thee.” For Satan always comes forth, whenever we
resolve to obey God; but we are to struggle in this case, and then repel
what we see to be contrary to our calling. But Jonah shows that he was
obstinately fixed in his purpose of fleeing: for he not only intended to
go into Tarshish, but he actually went down to the city Joppa, which was
nigh to Judea; and, therefore some think that Tarshish was Africa; but
this is strained. Others divine it to be Thunetus or Carthage, as though
indeed these cities were built at that time; but men are very bold in
dreaming. But what need of giving a new meaning to this word against the
most common usage of Scriptures when it is evident enough that Tarshish
is Cilicia?

<span id="iii.1.iii-p17"></span>Now, when Jonah went down to Joppa, it
was evident that he intended immediately to migrate from the land of
Judah, and to pass over the sea: but by saying that he *paid the fare,*
that he *went down* into the ship, that he might *go,* — by this gradual
progress, he sets before us, as I have said, more fully his own
perverseness; so that he admits that he not only resolutely purposed to
reject the call of God, but that he also confirmed himself in it: and
though there were many things to be done, which might have sometimes
forced him to stand still, he yet constantly followed where his perverse
and blind impulse led him. There is no doubt then, but that Jonah, in
these distinct words sets himself forth as a fugitive, not only by one
act, but by many acts.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p18"></span>Now, as to his flight, we must bear in
mind what I have before said — that all flee away from the presence of
God, who do not willingly obey his commandments; not that they can
depart farther from him, but they seek, as far as they can, to confine
God within narrow limits, and to exempt themselves from being subject to
his power. No one indeed openly confesses this; yet the fact itself
shows, that no one withdraws himself from obedience to God’s commands
without seeking to diminish and, as it were, to take from him his power,
so that he may no longer rule. Whosoever, then, do not willingly subject
themselves to God, it is the same as though they would turn their backs
on him and reject his authority that they may no more be under his power
and dominion.

<span id="iii.1.iii-p19"></span>It is deserving of notice, that as Jonah
represents himself as guilty before the whole world, so he intended by
his example to show how great and detestable a sin it is, not to submit
to the commands of God, and not to undertake whatever he enjoins, but to
evade his authority. That he might then enhance the atrocity of his sin,
he shows by his own example that we cannot rebel against God, without
seeking, under some pretense or another to thrust him from his throne,
and, at the same time, to confine him within certain limits that he may
not include heaven and earth within his empire.

<span id="iii.1.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.1.iv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.1.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast not
sent a Jonah to us, when alienated from every hope of salvation, but
hast given thy Son to be our Teacher, clearly to show to us the way of
salvation, and not only to call us to repentance by threatening and
terrors, but also kindly to allure us to the hope of eternal life, and
to be a pledge of thy paternal love, — O grant, that we may not reject
so remarkable a favor offered to us, but willingly and from the heart
obey thee; and though the condition which thou settest before us in thy
Gospel may seem hard, and though the bearing of the cross is bitter to
our flesh, yet may we never shun to obey thee, but present ourselves to
thee as a sacrifice; and having overcome all the hindrances of this
world, may we thus proceed in the course of our holy calling, until we
be at length gathered into thy celestial kingdom, under the guidance of
Christ thy Son, our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.1.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.v"></span>

<span id="iii.1.v-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-third

<span id="iii.1.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#004)<span id="iii.1.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vi-p2"></span>**4.**. But the Lord sent out a great wind
into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the
ship was like to be broken.

<span id="iii.1.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et Jehova emisit ventum magnum
super mare, et facta est tempestas magna in mari, et navis cogitabit
frangi.

<span id="iii.1.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vi-p6"></span>Jonah declares here how he had been, as it
were, by force brought back by the Lord, when he tried to flee away from
his presence. He then says that a *tempest arose* *in the sea;* but he
at the same time tells us, that this tempest did not arise by chance, as
ungodly men are wont to say, who ascribe everything that happens to
fortune. God, he says, *sent a strong wind on the sea.* Some give this
renderings God raised up, deriving the verb from <span
id="iii.1.vi-p6.1"></span>נטל, *nuthel;* but others derive it more
correctly from <span id="iii.1.vi-p6.2"></span>טול, *tul*  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) , and we shall presently meet with the
same word in the fifth verse. Now as to what took place, he says that
there was so great a tempest, that the ship was not far from being
broken. When he says, ‘The ship thought to be broken  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) the expression corresponds with the idiom
of our language, <span id="iii.1.vi-p8.2"></span>*la navire cuidoit
perir* But some take the ship for the passengers or the sailors; but
this is strained; and we know that our common language agrees in many of
its phrases with the Hebrew.

<span id="iii.1.vi-p9"></span>Jonah then meant, that a tempest arose,
not by chance, but by the certain purpose of God, so that being
overtaken on the sea, he acknowledged that he had been deceived when he
thought that he could flee away from God’s presence by passing over the
sea. Though indeed the Prophet speaks here only of one tempest, we may
yet hence generally gather, that no storms, nor any changes in the air,
which produce rain or stir up tempests on the sea, happen by chance, but
that heaven and earth are so regulated by a Divine power, that nothing
takes place without being foreseen and decreed. But if any one objects,
and says that it does not harmonize with reason, that, for the fault of
one man, so many suffered shipwreck, or were tossed here and there by
the storm: the ready answer to this is, — that though God had a regard
only, in a special manner, to the case of Jonah, yet there were hidden
reasons why he night justly involve others in the same danger. It is
probable that many were then sailing; it was not one ship only that was
on that sea, since there were so many harbors and so many islands. But
though the Lord may involve many men in the same punishment, when he
especially intends to pursue only one man, yet there is never wanting a
reason why he might not call before his tribunal any one of us, even
such as appear the most innocent. And the Lord works wonderfully, while
ruling over men. It would be therefore preposterous to measure his
operations by our wisdom; for God can so punish one man, as to humble
some at the same time, and to chastise others for their various sins,
and also to try their patience. Thus then is the mouth of ungodly men
stopped, that they may not clamor against God, when he so executes his
judgments as not to comport with the judgment of our flesh. But this
point I shall presently discuss more at large: there are indeed
everywhere in Scripture, instances in which God inflicted punishment on
a whole people, when yet one man only had sinned. But when some murmur
and plead that they are innocent, there is ever to be found a reason why
God cannot be viewed as dealing cruelly with them; nay, were he pleased,
he might justly treat them with much greater severity: in a word, though
God may appear to deal severely with men, he yet really spares them, and
treats them with indulgence. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.1.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#005)<span id="iii.1.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vii-p2"></span>**5.** Then the mariners were afraid, and
cried every man unto his god, and cast forth the wares that *were* in
the ship into the sea, to lighten *it* of them. But Jonah was gone down
into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et timuerunt nautae et vociferati
sunt quisque ad deum suum; et projecerunt vasa, quae erant in navi, in
mare, ut levaretur ab illis: Jonas autem descenderat in latera navis, et
jacebat et dormiebat.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vii-p6"></span>This narrative, in which Jonah relates in
order so many circumstances, is not without its use; for, as we shall
presently see, he intended to set forth his own insensibility, and to
lay it before us as painted before our eyes: and the comparison, which
is implied in the circumstances, greatly illustrates the supine and
almost brutal security of Jonah.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p7"></span>He says first that *the mariners*  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) *were afraid,* and then, that each
*cried,* that is, *to his god* and that they *cast out into the sea the
lading of the ship.* As then they were all so concerned, was it not
marvelous that Jonah, on whose account the sea was stormy, was asleep?
Others were busy, they ran here and there in the ship, and spoiled
themselves of their goods, that they might reach the shore in safety:
they indeed chose to strip themselves of all they had rather than to
perish; they also cried to their gods. Jonah cared for nothing, nay, he
lay asleep: but whence came such a carelessness as this, except that he
was not only become torpid, but that he seemed also to have been
deprived of all reason and common feeling? There is no doubt then but
that Jonah, in order to show this to have been the case, has here
enumerated so many circumstances.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p9"></span>He says that the *mariners were afraid.*
We indeed know that sailors are not usually frightened by small or
common storms; for they are a hardy race of men, and they are the less
afraid, because they daily see various commotions in the air. When,
therefore, he says that the sailors were afraid, we hence gather that it
was not a moderate tempest, for such does not thus terrify men
accustomed by long expert once to all sorts of storms: they, then, who
had been previously hardened, were disquieted with fear. He afterwards
adds, that *they cried, each of them to his god.* Jonah certainly ought
not to have slept so soundly, but that he might rouse himself at almost
any moment, for he carried in his heart his own executioner, as he knew
that he was a fugitive: for we have said before, that it was not a
slight offense for Jonah to withdraw himself from the presence of God;
he despised his call, and, as far as he could, cast off the yoke, so as
not to obey God. Seeing, then, that Jonah was ill at ease with himself,
ought he not to have trembled, even while asleep? But while others cried
to their false gods, he either despised, or at least neglected the true
God, to whom he knew he was disobedient, and against whom he rebelled.
This is the point of the comparison, or of the antithesis. But we at the
same time see, how in dangers men are constrained to call on God.
Though, indeed, there is a certain impression by nature on the hearts of
men as to God, so that every one, willing or unwilling, is conscious
that there is some Supreme Being; we yet by our wickedness smother this
light, which ought to shine within us. We indeed gladly cast away all
cares and anxieties; for we wish to live at ease, and tranquillity is
the chief good of men. Hence it comes, that all desire to live without
fear and without care; and hence we all naturally seek quietness. Yet
this quietness generates contempt. Hence then it is, that hardly any
religion appears in the world, when God leaves us in an undisturbed
condition. Fear constrains us, however unwilling, to come to God. False
indeed is what is said, that fear is the cause of religion, and that it
was the first reason why men thought that there were gods: this notion
is indeed wholly inconsistent with common sense and experience. But
religion, which has become nearly extinct, or at least covered over in
the hearts of men, is stirred up by dangers. Of this Jonah gives a
remarkable instance, when he says that the sailors *cried, each of them
to his god* We know how barbarous is this race of men; they are disposed
to shake off every sense of religion; they indeed drive away every fear,
and deride God himself as long as they may. Hence that they cried to
God, it was no doubt what necessity forced them to do. And here we may
learn, how useful it is for us to be disquieted by fear; for while we
are safe, torpidity, as it is well known, soon creeps over us. Since,
then, hardly any one of himself comes to God, we have need of goads; and
God sharply pricks us, when he brings any danger, so as to constrain us
to tremble. But in this way, as I have already said, he stimulates us;
for we see that all would go astray, and even perish in their
thoughtlessness, were he not to draw them back, even against their own
will.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p10"></span>But Jonah does not simply say, that each
cried to God, but he adds, *to his own god.* As, then, this passage
teaches, that men are constrained by necessity to seek God, we also, on
the other hand, it shows, that men go astray in seeking God, except they
are directed by celestial truth, and also by the Spirit of God. There is
then some right desire in men, but it goes astray; for none will keep
the right way except the Lord directs them, as it has been said, both by
his word and his Spirit. Both these particulars we learn from the words
of the Prophet: The sailors *feared;* men hardy and almost iron-hearted,
who, like the Cyclops, despised God, — these, he says, were *afraid;*
and they also cried to God; but they did not cry by the guidance of
faith; hence it was, that every one cried to his own god.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p11"></span>When we read this, let it first come to
our minds that there is no hope until God constrains us, as it were, by
force; but we ought to anticipate extreme necessity by seeking him
willingly. For what did it avail the sailors and other passengers, to
call once on God? It is indeed probable that, shortly after, they
relapsed into their former ungodly indifference; after having been freed
from their danger, they probably despised God, and all religion was
regarded by them with contempt. And so it commonly happens as to ungodly
men, who never obey God except when they are constrained. Let therefore
every one of us offer himself willingly to God, even now when we are in
no danger, and enjoy full quietness. For if we think, that any pretext
for thoughtlessness, or for error, or for ignorance, will serve as an
excuse, we are greatly deceived; for no excuse can be admitted, since
experience teaches us, that there is naturally implanted in all some
knowledge of God, and that these truths are engraven on our hearts, that
God governs our life, — that he alone can remove us by death, — that it
is his peculiar office to aid and help us. For how was it that these
sailors cried? Had they any new teacher who preached to them about
religion, and who regularly taught them that God was the deliverer of
mankind? By no means: but these truths, as I have said, had been by
nature impressed on their hearts. While the sea was tranquil, none of
them called on their god; but danger roused them from their drowsiness.
But it is hence sufficiently evident, that whatever excuses they may
pretend, who ascribe not to God his glory, they are all frivolous; for
there is no need of any law, there is no need of any Scripture, in
short, there is no need of any teaching, to enable men to know, that
this life is in the hand of God, that deliverance is to be sought from
him alone, and that nothing, as we have said, ought to be looked for
from any other quarter: for invocation proves that men have this
conviction respecting God; and invocation comes from nothing else but
from some hidden instinct, and indeed from the guidance and teaching of
nature, (<span id="iii.1.vii-p11.1"></span>*duce ac magistra natura*)
This is one thing.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p12"></span>But let us also learn from this passage,
that when God is sought by us, we ought not to trust to our own
understanding; for we shall in that case immediately go astray. God then
must be supplicated to guide us by his word, otherwise every one will
fall off into his own superstitions; as we here see, that each cried to
his own god. The Prophet also reminds us that multiplicity of gods is no
modern invention; for mankind, since the fall of Adam, have ever been
prone to falsehood and vanity. We know how much corruption must occupy
our minds, when every one invents for himself hideous and monstrous
things. Since it is so, there is no wonder that superstitions have ever
prevailed in the world; for the wit of man is the workshop of all
errors. (<span id="iii.1.vii-p12.1"></span>*quia ingenium hominis
officina est omnium errorum*) And hence also we may learn what I have
lately touched upon, — that nothing is worse for us than to follow the
impulses of our flesh; for every one of himself advances in the way of
error, even without being pushed on by another; and at the same time, as
is commonly the case, men draw on one another.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p13"></span>He now adds, that the *wares were cast
out,* that is, the lading of the ship; and we know that this is the last
resource in shipwrecks; for men, to save their lives, will deprive
themselves willingly of all their goods. We hence see how precious is
life to man; for he will not hesitate to strip himself of all he has,
that he may not lose his life. We indeed shun want, and many seek death
because extreme poverty is intolerable to them; but when they come to
some great danger, men ever prefer their life to all their possessions;
for what are the good things of this world, but certain additions to our
life? But Jonah tells us for another purpose that the ship was
lightened, even for this, — that we may know that the tempest was no
ordinary commotion, but that the sailors, apprehensive of approaching
death, adopted this as the last resource.

<span id="iii.1.vii-p14"></span>Another clause follows: *Jonah had gone
down into the sides*  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) *,* or the
side, *of the ship.* Jonah no doubt sought a retreat before the storm
arose. As soon then as they sailed from the harbor, Jonah withdrew to
some remote corner, that he might sleep there. But this was no excusable
insensibility on his part, as he knew that he was a fugitive from the
presence of God: he ought then to have been agitated by unceasing
terrors; nay, he ought to have been to himself the taxer (<span
id="iii.1.vii-p15.4"></span>*exactor*) of anxiety. But it often so
happens, that when any one has sought hiding-places, he brings on
himself a stupor almost brutal; he thinks of nothing, he cares for
nothing, he is anxious for nothing. Such then was the insensibility
which possessed the soul of Jonah, when he went down to some recess in
the ship, that he might there indulge himself in sleep. Since it thus
happened to the holy Prophet, who of us ought not to fear for himself?
Let us hence learn to remind ourselves often of God’s tribunal; and when
our minds are seized with torpor, let us learn to stimulate and examine
ourselves, lest God’s judgment overwhelm us while asleep. For what
prevented ruin from wholly swallowing up Jonah, except the mercy of God,
who pitied his servant, and watched for his safety even while he was
asleep? Had not the Lord then exercised such care over Jonah, he must
have perished.  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iii.1.vii-p17"></span>We hence see that the Lord often cares
for his people when they care not for themselves, and that he watches
while they are asleep: but this ought not to serve to nourish our
self-indulgence; for every one of us is already more indulgent to
himself than he ought to be: but, on the contrary, this example of
Jonah, whom we see to have been so near destruction, ought to excite and
urge us, that when any of us has gone astray from his calling he may not
lie secure in that state, but, on the contrary, run back immediately to
God. And if God be not able to draw us back to himself without some
violent means, let us at least follow in this respect the example of
Jonah, which we shall in its own place notice. It follows —

<span id="iii.1.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#006)<span id="iii.1.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p2"></span>**6.** So the shipmaster came to him,
and said unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy
God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.

<span id="iii.1.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et accessit ad eum magister
funis, et dixit ei, Quid tibi, sopite? Surge, clama ad Deum tuum, si
forte serenum se exhibeat Deus nobis (alii vertunt, cogitet de nobis,
vel gratificetur nobis,) et non pereamus.

<span id="iii.1.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p6"></span>Jonah relates here how he was reproved
by the pilot or master of the ship  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)
, inasmuch as he alone slept, while all the rest were in anxiety and
fear. “What meanest thou, fast sleeper?” The pilot no doubt upbraids
Jonah for his sleepiness, and reproves him for being almost void of all
thought and reflection. *What meanest thou, fast sleeper*  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) *,* he says; when thou sees all the rest
smitten with alarm, how canst thou sleep? Is not this unnatural? *Rise,*
then, and *call on thy God*

<span id="iii.1.viii-p9"></span>We see that where there is no rule of
faith a liberty is commonly taken, so that every one goes astray here
and there. Whence was it, that the pilot said to Jonah, *Call on thy
God,* and that he did not confine him to any certain rule? Because it
had been customary in all ages for men to be satisfied with some general
apprehension of God; and then every one according to his own fancy
formed a god for himself: nor could it have been otherwise, as I have
said, while men were not restrained by any sacred bond. All agree as to
this truth, that there is some God, and also that no dead idol can do
anything, but that the world is governed by the providence and power of
God, and further, that safety is to be sought from him. All this, has
been received by the common consent of all; but when we come to
particulars, then every one is in the dark; how God is to be sought they
know not. Hence every one takes his own liberty: “For the sake of
appeasing God I will then try this; this shall be my mode of securing
his favor; the Lord will regard this service acceptable; in this way
shall all my iniquity be expiated, that I may obtain favor with God.”
Thus each invents for themselves some tortuous way to come to God; and
then every one forms a god peculiar to himself. There can therefore be
no stability nor consistency in men, unless they are joined together by
some bond, even by some certain rule of religion, so that they may not
vacillate, and not be in doubt as to what is right to be done, but be
assured and certainly persuaded, that there is but one true God, and
know what sort of God he is, and then understand the way by which he is
to be sought.

<span id="iii.1.viii-p10"></span>We then learn from this passage, that
there is an awful license taken in fictitious religions, and that all
who are carried away by their fancy are involved in a labyrinth, so that
men do nothing but weary and torment themselves in vain, when they seek
God without understanding the right way. They indeed run with all their
might, but they go farther and farther from God. But that they, at the
same time, form in their minds an idea of some God, and that they agree
on this great principle, is sufficiently evident from the second clause
of this verse, *If so be that God will be Propitious to us.* Here the
pilot confines not his discourse to the God of Jonah, but speaks simply
of a God; for though the world by their differences divide God, and
Jonah worshipped a God different from the rest, and, in short, there was
almost an endless number of gods among the passengers, yet the pilot
says, *If so be that God,* etc.: now then he acknowledges some Supreme
God, though each of them had his own god. We hence see that what I have
said is most true, — that this general truth has ever been received with
the consent of all, — that the world is preserved by the providence of
God, and hence that the life and safety of men are in his hand. But as
they are very far removed from God, and not only creep slowly, but are
also more inclined to turn to the earth than to look up to heaven, and
are uncertain and ever change, so they seek gods which are nigh to them,
and when they find none, they hesitate not to invent them.

<span id="iii.1.viii-p11"></span>We have elsewhere seen that the Holy
Spirit uses this form of speaking, *If so be,* when no doubt, but
difficulty alone is intended. It is however probable, that the pilot in
this case was perplexed and doubtful, as it is usual with ungodly men,
and that he could determine nothing certain as to any help from God; and
as his mind was thus doubtful, he says, that every means of relief were
to be tried. And here, as in a mirror, we may see how miserable is the
condition of all those who call not on God in pure faith: they indeed
cry to God, for the impulse of nature thus leads them; but they know not
whether they will obtain any thing by their cries: they repeat their
prayers; but they know not whether they pass off into air or really come
to God. The pilot owns, that his mind was thus doubtful, *If so be* that
God will be *propitious to us, call thou also on thy God.* Had he been
so surely convinced, as to call on the true God, he would have certainly
found it to have been no doubtful relief. However, that nothing might be
left untried, he exhorted Jonah, that if he had a God, to call upon him.
We hence see, that there are strange windings, when we do not understand
the right way. Men would rather run here and there, a hundred times,
through earth and heaven, than come to God, except where his word
shines. How so? because when they make the attempt, an insane impulse
drives them in different ways; and thus they are led here and there: “It
may be, that this may be useful to me; as that way has not succeeded, I
will try another.” God then thus punishes all the unbelieving, who obey
not his word; for to the right way they do not keep: He indeed shows how
great a madness it is, when men give loose reins to their imaginations,
and do not submit to celestial truth.

<span id="iii.1.viii-p12"></span>As to the words, interpreters translate
them in different ways. Some say, “If so be that God will think of us;”
others “If so be that God will favor us. <span
id="iii.1.viii-p12.1"></span>עשת, *oshit,* is properly to shine; but
when put as here in the conjugation Hithpael, it means to render one’s
self clear or bright: and it is a metaphor very common in Scriptures
that the face of God is cloudy or dark, when he is not propitious to us;
and again, God is said to make bright his face and to appear serene to
us, when he really shows himself kind and gracious to us. As then this
mode of speaking altogether suits this place, I wonder that some seek
extraneous interpretations.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iii.1.viii-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *Lest we perish.*
Here the pilot clearly owns, that he thought the life of man to be in
the power of God; for he concluded, that they must perish unless the
Lord brought aid. Imprinted then in the minds of all is this notion or
<span id="iii.1.viii-p14.1"></span>προληψις, that is, preconception,
that when God is angry or adverse, we are miserable, and that near
destruction impends over us; and another conviction is found to be in
the hearts of men, — that as soon as the Lord looks on us, his favor and
goodwill brings to us immediate safety. The Holy Spirit does not speak
here, but a heathen, and we know too how great is the impiety of
sailors, and yet he declares this by the impulse of nature, and there is
here no feigning; for God, as I have already said, extorts by necessity
a confession from the unbelieving, which they would gladly avoid.

<span id="iii.1.viii-p15"></span>Now what excuse can we have, if we
think our safety to be in our own hands, if we depend not wholly on God,
and if we neglect him in prosperity, as though we could be safe without
his help? These words then, spoken by the sailor, ought to be weighed by
us, ‘If so be that God’s face may appear bright to us, and that we
perish not.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) It now follows —

<span id="iii.1.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#007)<span id="iii.1.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ix-p2"></span>**7.** And they said every one to his
fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause
this evil *is* upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.

<span id="iii.1.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Et dixit vir (hoc est, quisque) ad
socium suum, Venite et jaciamus sortes, ut sciamus ob quam causam  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) malum hoc nobis: et jecerunt sortes, et
cecidit sors super Jonam.

<span id="iii.1.ix-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.ix-p6"></span><span id="iii.1.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ix-p7"></span>Jonah did not without reason mention this,
— that the passengers consulted together about casting lots; for we
hence learn, that it was no ordinary tempest: it appeared then to be a
token of God’s wrath. For, if strong wind arose, it would not have been
so strange, for such had been often the case; and if a tempest followed,
it would not have been a thing unusual. It must then have been something
more dreadful, as it filled men’s minds with alarms so that they were
conscious that God was present as an avenger: and we know, that it is
not common with ungodly men to recognize the vengeance of Gods except in
extreme dangers; but when God executes punishment on sins in an unusual
manner, then men begin to acknowledge God’s vengeance.

<span id="iii.1.ix-p8"></span>This very thing, Jonah now bears witness
to, *They said then each to his friend, Come, let us cast* *lots.* Was
it not an accustomed thing for them to cast lots whenever a tempest
arose? By no means. They had recourse, no doubt, to this expedient,
because they knew, that God had not raised up that tempest without some
very great and very serious cause. This is one thing: but I cannot now
pursue the subjects, I must therefore defer it until tomorrow.

<span id="iii.1.x"></span>

<span id="iii.1.x-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.1.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though we are
here disquieted in the midst of so many tossings, we may yet learn with
tranquil minds to recumb on thy grace and promise, by which thou
testifiest that thou wilt be ever near us, and not wait until by a
strong hand thou drawest us to thyself, but that we may be, on the
contrary, ever attentive to thy providence: may we know that our life
not only depends on a thread, but also vanishes like the smoke, unless
thou protectest it, so that we may recumb wholly on thy power; and may
we also, while in a cheerful and quiet state, so call on thee, that
relying on thy protection we may live in safety, and at the same time be
careful, lest torpor, which draws away our minds and thoughts from
meditating on the divine life, should creep over us, but may we, on the
contrary, so earnestly seek thee, morning and evening, and at all times,
that we may through life advance towards the mark thou hast set before
us, until we at length reach that heavenly kingdom, which Christ thy Son
has obtained for us by his own blood. Amen

<span id="iii.1.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-fourth.

<span id="iii.1.xi-p2"></span>We said in yesterday’s lecture, that it
was a proof of extreme fear, that the sailors and the rest cast lots;
for this is not usually done, except men see themselves to be destitute
of judgment and counsel.

<span id="iii.1.xi-p3"></span>But it must at the same time be observed,
that through error they cast lots: for they did not know, that if God
intended to punish each of them, they were worthy even of heavier
punishment. They would not indeed have thrown the blame on one man, if
each had well considered what he deserved before God. When a calamity
happens, it is the duty of every one to examine himself and his whole
life before God: then every one, from the first to the last, must
confess that he bears a just judgment. But when all demand together who
is guilty before God, they thus exonerate themselves, as though they
were innocent. And it is an evil that prevails at this day in the world,
that every one is disposed to cast the blame on others and all would
have themselves to be innocent before God; not that they can clear
themselves of every fault, but they extenuate their sins, as though God
could not justly pursue them with so much severity. As for instance,
when any one perceives that he had in various ways done wrong, he will
indeed confess in words that he is a sinner; but were any person to
enumerate and bring forward each of his sins he would say, “This is a
light offense, that is a venal sin; and the Lord deals not with us with
so much strict justice, that he means to bring on us instantly extreme
punishment.” When there is a slight offense, it is immediately referred
to by every one. Thus acted the sailors, of whom Jonah now speaks. Had
any one asked, whether they were wholly without fault, every one, no
doubt, would have confessed that he was a sinner before God; but yet
they cast lots as though one only was exposed to God’s judgment. How so?
because they did not think that their own sins deserved so heavy a
punishment. How much soever they might have offended, — and this they
really felt and were convinced of, — they yet did not make so much of
their sins as to think that they deserved any such judgment. This then
is the reason why they come to the lot; it was, because every one seemed
to himself to be blameless when he came to examine himself.

<span id="iii.1.xi-p4"></span>This passage, then, shows what is even
well known by common experience, — that men, though they know themselves
to be guilty before God, yet extenuate their sins and promise themselves
pardon, as though they could make an agreement with God, that he should
not treat them with strict justice, but deal with them indulgently.
Hence, then, is the hope of impunity, because we make light offenses of
the most grievous sins. Thus we find under the Papacy, that various
modes are devised, by which they absolve themselves before God and wipe
away their stains: the sprinkling of holy water cleanses almost all
sins; except a man be either an adulterer, or a murderer, or a sorcerer,
or ten times perjured, he hardly thinks himself to be guilty of any
crime. Then the expiations which they use, avail, as they think, to
obliterate all iniquities. Whence is this error? Even because they
consider God to be like themselves, and think not their sins to be so
great abominations before God. But this is no new thing; for we see what
happened in the time of Jonah; and from profane histories also we may
learn, that this error possessed everywhere the minds of all. They had
then daily expiations, as the Papists have their masses, their
pilgrimages, their sprinklings of holy water, and similar playthings
(<span id="iii.1.xi-p4.1"></span>*nugas* — trifles, fopperies): but as
under the Papacy there are reserved cases, so also in former times, when
any one had killed a father or mother, when any one had committed
incest, he stood in need of some extraordinary expiation; and if there
was any one of great renown on the earth, they applied to him, that he
might find out some new kind of expiation. An example of this error is
set before us here, when they said, *let us cast lots.* For except they
thought that one only was guilty, and not and every one would have
publicly confessed his sins, and would then have acknowledged that such
was the mass of them as to be enough to fill heaven and earth; but this
they did not. One man must have been the offender; but no one came
forward with such a confession: hence they cast lots.

<span id="iii.1.xi-p5"></span>It may now be inquired, whether this mode
of seeking out the truth was lawful; as they knew not through whose
fault the tempest arose, was it right to have recourse to lots? Some
have been too superstitious in condemning lots; for they have plainly
said, that all lots are wicked. Hence has come the name, lot-drawers;
(<span id="iii.1.xi-p5.1"></span>*sortilegi*) and they have thought that
lot-drawers differ nothing from magicians and enchanters. This has
proceeded from ignorance, for we know that the casting of lots has been
sometimes allowed. And Solomon certainly speaks, as of a common rule,
when he says of lots being cast into the bosom, and of the issue being
from Jehovah (<span id="iii.1.xi-p5.2"></span>[Pr
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033)<span
id="iii.1.xi-p5.2"></span>.) Solomon speaks not there of the arts of
magic but says that when lots are cast, the event is not by chance but
by God’s providence. And when Matthias was chosen in the place of Judas,
it was done by lot, (<span id="iii.1.xi-p5.3"></span>[Ac
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026)<span id="iii.1.xi-p5.3"></span>.)
Did the Apostles use this mode presumptuously? No, the Holy Spirit
presided over this election. There is then no doubt but that God
approved of that casting of lots. So also Joshua had recourse to the lot
when the cause of God’s displeasure was unknown, though it was evident
that God was angry with the people. Joshua, being perplexed by what was
unknown, did cast lots; and so Achan was discovered and his sacrilege.
That lot no one will dare condemn. Then what I have said is clear
enough, that those have been too superstitious who have condemned all
casting of lots without exception. But we must yet remember that lots
are not to be used indiscriminately. It is a part of the civil law, that
when a common inheritance is divided, it is allowed to cast lots: as it
belongs not to this or that person to choose, each must take the part
which the lot determines. So again it is lawful to cast lot in great
undertakings, when men are anywhere sent: and when there is a division
of labor, to prevent jealousy when one wishes to choose a certain part
for himself, the lot will remove all contentions. A lot of this kind is
allowed both by the word of God, and by civil laws. But when any one
adopts the lot without any reason, he is no doubt superstitious, and
differs not much from the magician or the enchanter. As for instance,
when one intends to go a journey, or to take anything in hand, if he
throws into his hat a white and a black lot, and says, “I will see
whether my going out today will be prosperous;” now this is of the
devil; for Satan by such arts deludes wretched men. If then any one
makes use of the lot without any just reason, he is, as I have said
without excuse.

<span id="iii.1.xi-p6"></span>But as to the other lots, such as we have
now noticed, they ought not to be viewed as precedents. For though
Joshua used the lot to bring to light the cause for which God was angry
with his people, it is not yet right for us to imitate what he did; for
Joshua was no doubt led by some peculiar influence to adopt this
measure. So also as to Saul, when he cast lots, and his son Jonathan was
discovered as the one who had tasted honey, it was an especial example.
The same thing must be also said of the lot mentioned here; for as the
sailors were trembling, and knew not the cause why the tempest arose,
and the fear of shipwreck seized them, they had recourse to the lot.
Were we continually to imitate such examples, such a liberty would not
certainly be pleasing, to God, nor consistent with his word. We must
therefore bear in mind, that there were some peculiar influences,
whenever God’s servants used the lot in doubtful and extreme cases
 <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) . This then is shortly the answer
to the question — Was it lawful for the sailors to cast lots, that they
might find out the person on account of whom they were in so much
danger? I now proceed to what follows —

<span id="iii.1.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#008)<span
id="iii.1.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p2"></span>**8.** Then said they unto him, Tell us,
we pray thee, for whose cause this evil *is* upon us; What *is* thine
occupation? and whence comest thou? what *is* thy country? and of what
people *art* thou?

<span id="iii.1.xii-p3"></span>**8.** Et dixerunt ei, Narra nunc nobis
quare malum hoc nobis contingerit, quodnam opus tuum et unde venias,
quae sit patria tua, et ex quo populosis?

<span id="iii.1.xii-p4"></span>**9.** And he said unto them, I *am* an
Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea
and the dry *land*

<span id="iii.1.xii-p5"></span>**9.** Et dixit ad eos Hebraeus ego sum,
et Jehovam Deum coelorum ego timeo, qui fecit mare et aridam.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p6"></span>**10.** Then were the men exceedingly
afraid, and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? For the men knew
that he fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had told them.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p7"></span>**10.** Et timuerunt viri timore magno,
et dixerunt ei, Quare hoc fecisti? Quia noverant viri quod a facie
Jehovae ipse fugeret; nam ipsis narraverat.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xii-p9"></span><span id="iii.1.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p10"></span>After the lot fell on Jonah, they
doubted not but that he was the guilty person, any more than if he had
been a hundred times proved to be so: for why did they cast lots, except
that they were persuaded that all doubt could thus be removed, and that
what was hid could thus be brought to the light? As then this persuasion
was fixed in their minds, that the truth was elicited, and was in a
manner drawn out of darkness by the lot, they now inquire of Jonah what
he had done: for they took this as allowed, that they had to endure the
tempest on his account, and also, that he, by some detestable crime, had
merited such a vengeance at Gods hand. We hence see that they cast lots,
because they fully believed that they could not otherwise find out the
crime on account of which they suffered, and also, that lots were
directed by the hidden purpose of God: for how could a certain judgment
be found by lot, except God directed it according to his own purpose,
and overruled what seemed to be especially fortuitous? These principles
then were held as certain in a manner by men who were heathens, — that
God can draw out the truth, and bring it to the light, — and also, that
he presides over lots, however fortuitous they may be thought to be.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p11"></span>This was the reason why they now asked
what Jonah *had done.* *Tell us,* then, *why has this evil happened to
us, what is thy work?* *etc.* By work here I do not mean what is wrong,
but a kind of life, or, as they say, a manner of living. They then asked
how Jonah had hitherto employed himself, and what sort of life he
followed. For it afterwards follows, *Tell us, whence comest thou, what
is thy country, and from what people art thou?* They made inquiries, no
doubt, on each particular in due order; but Jonah here briefly records
the questions.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p12"></span><span id="iii.1.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p13"></span>I now come to his answer, *He said to
them, I am an Hebrew; and I fear Jehovah the God of heaven, Who has
created the sea and the dry land*  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)
Here Jonah seemed as yet to evade, yea, to disown his crime, for he
professed himself to be the worshipper of the true God. Who would not
have said, but that he wished here to escape by a subterfuge, as he set
up his own piety to cover the crime before-mentioned? But all things are
not here in the first verse related; for shortly after, it follows, that
the sailors knew of Jonah’s flight; and that he had himself told them,
that he had disobeyed God’s call and command. There is then no doubt but
that Jonah honestly confessed his own sin, though he does not say so.
But we know, that it is a mode of speaking common among the Hebrews to
add in the last place what had been first said; and grammarians say,
that it is <span id="iii.1.xii-p14.1"></span>ὕστερον προτερον, (last
first,) when anything is left out in its proper place and then added as
an explanation. When therefore Jonah says that he was *an Hebrew,* and
worshipper of the true God, — this tended to aggravate his fault or
crime rather than to excuse it: for had he said only, that he was
conscious of having done wrong in disobeying God, his crime would not
have appeared so atrocious; but when he begins by sayings that known to
him was the true God, the framer of heaven and earth, the God of Israel,
who had made himself known by a law given and published, — when Jonah
made this introduction, he thereby removed from himself all pretenses as
to ignorance and misconception. He had been educated in the law, and
had, from childhood, been taught who the true God was. He could not then
have fallen through ignorance; and further, he did not, as the others,
worship fictitious gods; he was an Israelite. As then he had been
brought up in true religion, his sin was the more atrocious, inasmuch as
he had fallen away from God, having despised his command, and, as it
were, shaken off the yoke, and had become a fugitive.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p15"></span>We now then perceive the reason why
Jonah called himself here an Hebrew, and testified that he was the
worshipper of the true God. First, by saying that he was an Hebrew, he
distinguished the God of Abraham from the idols of the Gentiles: for the
religion of the chosen people was well known in all places, though
disapproved by universal consent; at the same time, the Cilicians and
other Asiatics, and also the Grecians, and the Syrians in another
quarter, — all these knew what the Israelites gloried in, — that the
true God had appeared to their father Abraham, and then made with him a
gratuitous covenant, and also had given the law by Moses; — all this was
sufficiently known by report. Hence Jonah says now, that he was an
Hebrew, as though he had said, that he had no concern with any
fictitious god, but with the God of Abraham, who had formerly appeared
to the holy Fathers, and who had also given a perpetual testimony of his
will by Moses. We see then how emphatically he declared, that he was an
Hebrew: secondly, he adds, *I fear Jehovah the God of heaven.* By the
word fear is meant worship: for it is not to be taken here as often in
other places, that is, in its strict meaning; but fear is to be
understood for worship: “I am not given”, he says, “to various
superstitions, but I have been taught in true religion; God has made
himself known to me from my childhood: I therefore do not worship any
idol, as almost all other people, who invent gods for themselves; but I
worship God, the creator of heaven and earth.” He calls him *the God of
heaven,* that is, who dwells alone as God in heaven. While the others
thought heaven to be filled with a great number of gods, Jonah here sets
up against them the one true God, as though he said, “Invent according
to your own fancy innumerable gods, there is yet but one, who possesses
the highest authority in heaven; for it is he who *made the sea and the
dry land.*  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) *”*

<span id="iii.1.xii-p17"></span>We now then apprehend what Jonah meant
by these words: he shows here that it was no wonder that God pursued him
with so much severity; for he had not committed a slight offense, but a
fatal sin. We now see how much Jonah had profited since the Lord had
begun severely to deal with him: for inasmuch as he was asleep yea, and
insensible in his sin, he would have never repented had it not been for
this violent remedy. But when the Lord roused him by his severity, he
then not only confessed that he was guilty, or owned his guilt in a
formal manner, (<span id="iii.1.xii-p17.1"></span>*defunctorie* — as
ridding one’s self of a business, carelessly;) but also willingly
testified, as we see, before men who were heathens, that he was the
guilty man, who had forsaken the true God, in whose worship he had been
well instructed. This was the fruit of true penitence, and it was also
the fruit of the chastisement which God had inflicted on him. If then we
wish God to approve of our repentance, let us not seek evasions, as for
the most part is the case; nor let us extenuate our sins, but by a free
confession testify before the whole world what we have deserved.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p18"></span><span id="iii.1.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p19"></span>It then follows, that the men feared
with great fear, and said, *Why hast thou done this?*  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) for they knew that he had fled from the
presence of Jehovah, for he had told them. And this is not unimportant —
that *the sailors feared with great fear:* for Jonah means that they
were not only moved by what he said, but also terrified, so that they
gave to the true God his glory. We indeed know that superstitious men
almost trifle with their own idols. They often entertain, it is true,
strange fears, but afterwards they flatter themselves, and in a manner
cajole their own hearts, so that they can pleasantly and sweetly smile
at their own fancies. But Jonah, by saying here that they *feared with
great fear,* means that they were so smitten, that they really perceived
that the God of Israel was a righteous judge, and that he was not such
as other nations fancied him to be, but that he was capable of affording
dreadful examples whenever he intended to execute his vengeance. We
hence see what Jonah means, when he speaks of great fear. At the same
time, two things ought to be noticed, — that they feared, because it was
easy for them to conclude from the Prophet’s words, that the God of
Israel was the only creator of heaven and earth, — and then, that it was
a great fear, which, as I have said, must be considered as serious
dread, since the fear which the unbelieving have soon vanishes.

<span id="iii.1.xii-p21"></span>But with regard to the reproof which the
sailors and other passengers gave to Jonah, the Lord returned to him
this as a reward which he had deserved. He had fled from the presence of
God; he had thus, as we have said taken away from God his supreme power:
for what becomes of God’s authority when any one of us rejects his
commands and flees away from his presence? Since Jonah then sought to
shun God, he was now placed before men. There were present heathens, and
even barbarians, who rebuked him for his sin, who were his censors and
judges. And the same thing we see happening often. For they who do not
willingly obey God and his word, afterwards abandon themselves to many
flagrant sins, and their baseness becomes evident to all. As, then, they
cannot bear God to be their Master and Teacher, they are constrained to
bear innumerable censors; for they are branded by the reproaches of the
vulgar, they are pointed at every where by the finger, at length they
are conducted to the gallows, and the executioner becomes their chief
teacher. The case was similar, as we see, with Jonah: the pilot had
before reproved his torpor, when he said, Do thou also call on thy God;
what meanest thou, O sleeper? thou liest down here like a log of wood,
and yet thou sees us perplexed and in extreme danger. As, then, the
pilot first so sharply inveighed against Jonah, and then all reproved
him with one mouth, we certainly find that he was made subject to the
condemnation of all, because he tried to deprive God of his supreme
power. If at any time the same thing should happen to us, if God should
subject us to the reproaches of men when we seek to avoid his judgment,
let us not wonder. But as Jonah here calmly answers, and raises no
clamor, and shows no bitterness, so let every one of us, in the true
spirit of meekness, acknowledge our own sins; when charged with them,
were even children our condemners, or were even the most contemptible of
the people to rise up against us, let us patiently bear all this; and
let us know that these kinds of censors befall us through the providence
of God. It now follows —

<span id="iii.1.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#011)<span
id="iii.1.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Then said they unto him, What
shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea
wrought, and was tempestuous.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Et dixerunt ad eum, Quid
faciemus tibi ut resideat mare a nobis? Quia mare ibat (id est,
commovebatur,) et erat tempestuosum.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p4"></span>**12.** And he said unto them, Take me
up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you:
for I know that for my sake this great tempest *is* upon you.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p5"></span>**12.** Et dixit illis, Tollite me, et
projicite me in mare, et residebit mare a vobis; quia novi ego, quod
propter me tempestas magna haec contingerit super vos (hoc est, sit
super vos.)

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p7"></span><span id="iii.1.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p8"></span>The sailors asked counsel of Jonah; and
hence it appears that they were touched with so much fear as not to dare
to do any thing to him. We hence see how much they had improved almost
in an instant, since they spared an Israelite, because they acknowledged
that among that people the true God was worshipped, the supreme King of
heaven and earth: for, without a doubt, it was this fear that restrained
them from throwing Jonah immediately into the sea. For since it was
certain that through his fault God was displeased with them all, why was
it that they did not save themselves by such an expiation? That they
then delayed in so great a danger, and dared not to lay hold instantly
on Jonah, was an evident proof that they were restrained, as I have
said, by the fear of God.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p9"></span>They therefore inquire what was to be
done, *What shall we do to thee, that the sea may be still to us?*
 <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) *for the sea was going,* etc. By
going Jonah means, that the sea was turbulent: for the sea is said to
rest when it is calm, but when it is turbulent, then it is going, and
has various movements and tossings. *The sea,* then, *was going and very
tempestuous*  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) We hence see that God
was not satisfied with the disgrace of Jonah, but he purposed to punish
his offense still more. It was necessary that Jonah should be led to the
punishment which he deserved, though afterwards, he was miraculously
delivered from death, as we shall see in its proper place.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p12"></span><span id="iii.1.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p13"></span>Jonah then answers, *Take me, and throw
me into the sea, and it will be still to you.* It may be asked whether
Jonah ought to have of his own accord offered himself to die; for it
seemed to be an evidence of desperation. He might, indeed, have
surrendered himself to their will; but here he did, as it were,
stimulate them, “*Throw me into the sea*,” he says; “for ye cannot
otherwise pacify God than by punishing me.” He seemed like a man in
despair, when he would thus advance to death of his own accord. But
Jonah no doubt knew that he was doomed to punishment by God. It is
uncertain whether he then entertained a hope of deliverance, that is,
whether he confidently relied at this time on the grace of God. But,
however it may have been, we may yet conclude, that he gave himself up
to death, because he knew and was fully persuaded that he was in a
manner summoned by the evident voice of God. And thus there is no doubt
but that he patiently submitted to the judgment which the Lord had
allotted to him. *Take me,* then, *and throw me into the sea*

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p14"></span>Then he adds, *The sea will be to you
still* Here Jonah not only declares that God would be pacified by his
death, because the lot had fallen upon him, but he also acknowledges
that his death would suffice as an expiation, so that the tempest would
subside: and then the reason follows — *I know,* he says, *that on my
account is this great tempest come upon you.* When he says that he knew
this, he could not refer to the lot, for that knowledge was common to
them all. But Jonah speaks here by the prophetic spirit: and he no doubt
confirms what I have before referred to, — that the God of Israel was
the supreme and only King of heaven and earth. This certainty of
knowledge, then, of which Jonah speaks, must be referred to his own
consciences and to the teaching of that religion in which he had been
instructed.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p15"></span>And now we may learn from these words a
most useful instruction: Jonah does not here expostulate with God, nor
contumeliously complain that God punished him too severely, but he
willingly bears his charged guilt and his punishment, as he did before
when he said, “I am the worshipper of the true God.” How could he
confess the true God, whose great displeasure he was then experiencing?
But Jonah, we see, was so subdued, that he failed not to ascribe to God
his just honor; though death was before his eyes, though God’s wrath was
burning, we yet see, that he gave to God, as we have said, the honor due
to him. So the same thing is repeated in this place, *Behold,* he says,
*I know that on my account has this great tempest happened* He who takes
to himself all the blame, does not certainly murmur against God. It is
then a true confession of repentance, when we acknowledge God, and
willingly testify before men that he is just, though, according to the
judgment of our flesh, he may deal violently with us. When however we
give to him the praise due to his justice, we then really show our
penitence; for unless God’s wrath brings us down to this humble state of
mind, we shall be always full of bitterness; and, however silent we may
be for a time, our heart will be still perverse and rebellious. This
humility, then, always follows repentance, — the sinner prostrates
himself before God, and willingly admits his own sin, and tries not to
escape by subterfuges.

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p16"></span>And it was no wonder that Jonah thus
humbled himself; for we see that the sailors did the same: when they
said that lots were to be cast, they added at the same time, “Come ye
and let us cast lots, that we may know why this evil has happened to
us.” They did not accuse God, but constituted him the Judge; and thus
they acknowledged that he inflicted a just punishment. And yet every one
thought himself to have been innocent; for however conscience might have
bitten them, still no one considered himself to have been guilty of so
great a wickedness as to subject him to God’s vengeance. Though, then,
the sailors thought themselves exempt from any great sin, they yet did
not contend with God, but allowed him to be their Judge. Since then
they, who were so barbarous, confined themselves within these bounds of
modesty, it was no wonder that Jonah, especially when he was roused and
began to feel his guilt, and was also powerfully restrained by God’s
hand, — it was no wonder that he now confessed that he was guilty before
God, and that he justly suffered a punishment so heavy and severe. We
ought then to take special notice of this, — that he knew that on his
account the storm happened or that the sea was so tempestuous against
them all. The rest we defer until tomorrow.

<span id="iii.1.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.1.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God that as thou urgest
us daily to repentance and each of us is also stung with the
consciousness of his own sins, — grant, that we may not grow stupid in
our vices, nor deceive ourselves with empty flatteries, but that each of
us may, on the contrary carefully examine his own life and then with one
mouth and heart confess that we are all guilty not only of light
offenses, but of such as deserve eternal death, and that no other relief
remains for us but thine infinite mercy and that we may so seek to
become partakers of that grace which has been once offered to us by thy
Son, and is daily offered to us by his Gospel, that, relying on him as
our Mediator, we may not cease to entertain hope even in the midst of
thousand deaths, until we be gathered into that blessed life, which has
been procured for us by the blood of thy only Son. Amen.

<span id="iii.1.xiv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-fifth

<span id="iii.1.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p2"></span>**13.** Nevertheless the men rowed hard
to bring *it* to the land; but they could not: for the sea wrought, and
was tempestuous against them.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p3"></span>**13.** Et quaerebant (vel, moliebantur,
proprie est fodiebant) viri ut reducerent navem, et non poterant; quia
mare ibat et turbulentum erat super eos.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p4"></span>**14.** Wherefore they cried unto the
Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not
perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent blood: for
thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased thee.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p5"></span>**14.** Et clamaverunt ad Jehovam, et
dixerunt, Obsecro, Jehova, ne quaeso, pereamus propter animam viri
hujus, et ne des super nos (hoc est, ne ponas) sanguinem innocentem;
quia, tu Jehova, sicuti placitum tibi est, fecisti.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p7"></span><span id="iii.1.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p8"></span>This verse shows that the sailors and the
rest were more inclined to mercy, when they saw that the holy Prophet
was willing to undergo the punishment which he had deserved. When
therefore, he confessed that he was guilty, and refused not to be
punished, they became anxious to spare his life, though they were
heathens, and also for the most part barbarians: and as each of them
could not but be frightened with his immediate danger, the wonder is
increased, that they had such regard for the life of one who alone was
in fault, and who had now freely confessed this. But the Lord so turned
their hearts, that they now saw more clearly how grievous a sin it was
to flee away from the call of God, and not to yield obedience, as we
have before observed, to his command. Many think that this is a light
offense, and readily indulge themselves in it: but it is not in the
power of men to weigh sins; the balance is deceitful when men estimate
their sins according to their own judgment. Let us then learn to ascribe
to God his own honor, — that he alone is Judge, and is far above us, and
can alone determine how grievous or how slight any sin is. But common
sense, except when men willfully deceive themselves by vain flatteries,
clearly teaches this, — that it is no light offense when we evade the
command of God; for, as we have stated, men do thus take away from God
his supreme authority; and what is left to God, when he governs not the
creatures whom he has formed, and whom he sustains by his power? The
Lord, then, designed to show here, that his displeasure could not be
otherwise pacified than by drowning Jonah in the sea; though, as we
shall presently see, he had something greater in view. But, in the
meantime, this is worthy of being observed, — that the Lord intended to
make Jonah an example, that all may now know that he is not to be
trifled with, but that he ought to be obeyed as soon as he commands any
thing.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p9"></span>The word which the Prophet uses has been
variously explained by interpreters. <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p9.1"></span>חתר, *chetar,* is properly, to dig; so that
some think it to be a metaphorical expression, as rowers seem to dig the
sea; and this sense is not unsuitable. Others carry the metaphor still
higher, — that the sailors searched out or sought means by which they
might drive the ship to land. But the other metaphor, as being less
remote, is more to be approved. The Latins call it to toil, (<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p9.2"></span>*moliri*) when the rowers not only apply
gently their oars, but when they make a greater effort. *The sailors,*
then, *toiled to bring back the ship*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) But for what purpose? To spare the life
of the man who had already confessed that he was guilty before God, and
that the storm, which threatened them all with a shipwreck, had arisen
through his fault: but he says that they could not, for the sea was
tempestuous, as we have already seen in our yesterday’s lecture.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p11"></span><span id="iii.1.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p12"></span>I come now to the second verse. *They
cried,* he says, *to Jehovah and said, We beseech*  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) *, Jehovah, let us not perish, we pray,
on account of the life of this man, and give not,* that is, lay not,
*innocent blood upon us*  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) The
Prophet now expresses more fully why the sailors toiled so much to
return to port, or to reach some shore, — they were already persuaded
that Jonah was a worshipper of the true God, and not only this, but that
he was a Prophet, inasmuch as he had told them, as we have seen, that he
had fled from the presence of God, because he feared to execute the
command which we have noticed. It was therefore pious (<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p14.4"></span>*reverentia*) fear that restrained the
sailors, knowing, as they did, that Jonah was the servant of the true
God. They, at the same time, saw, that Jonah was already standing for
his sin before God’s tribunal, and that punishment was demanded. This
they saw; but yet they wished to preserve his life.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p15"></span>Now this place shows, that there is by
nature implanted in all an abhorrence of cruelty; for however brutal and
sanguinary many men may be, they yet cannot divest themselves of this
feeling, — that the effusion of human blood is hateful. Many, at the
same time, harden themselves; but they apply a searing iron: they cannot
shake off horror, nay, they feel that they are detested by God and by
men, when they thus shed innocent blood. Hence it was that the sailors,
who in other respects hardly retained a drop of humanity, fled as
suppliants to God, when the case was about the death of man; and they
said, <span id="iii.1.xvi-p15.1"></span>אנה יהוה, *ane Ieve*, ‘We
beseech Jehovah:’ and the expression is repeated; which shows that the
sailors earnestly prayed that the Lord would not impute this as a sin to
them.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p16"></span>We hence see that though these men had
never known the doctrine of the law, they were yet so taught by nature
that they knew that the blood of man is dear and precious in the sight
of God. And as to us, we ought not only to imitate these sailors, but to
go far beyond them: for not only ought the law of nature to prevail
among us, but also the law of God; for we hear what God had formerly
pronounced with his own mouth,

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p17"></span>‘Whosoever sheddeth man’s blood, shed
shall his blood be,’ (<span id="iii.1.xvi-p17.1"></span>[Ge
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p18"></span>And we know also the reason why God
undertakes to protect the life of men, and that is, because they have
been created in his image. Whosoever then uses violence against the life
of man, destroys, as far as he can the image of the eternal God. Since
it is so, ought not violence and cruelty to be regarded by us with
double horror? We ought also to learn another thing from this doctrine:
God proves by this remarkable testimony what paternal feeling he
manifests towards us by taking our life under his own guardianship and
protection; and he even proves that we are really the objects of his
care, inasmuch as he will execute punishment and vengeance when any one
unjustly injures us. We then see that this doctrine on the one side
restrains us, that we may not attempt anything against the lives of our
brethren; and, on the other side, it assures us of the paternal love of
God, so that being allured by his kindness we may learn to deliver up
ourselves wholly to his protection.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p19"></span>I now come to the last clause of the
verse, *For thou, Jehovah, hast done as it has pleased thee.* The
sailors clearly prove here that they did not willingly shed innocent
blood. How then can these two things agree, — that the blood was
innocent, and that they were blameless? They adopted this excuse, — that
they obeyed God’s decree, that they did nothing rashly or according to
their own inclinations, but followed what the Lord had prescribed:
though, indeed, God had not spoken, yet what he required was really
evident; for as God demanded an expiation by the death of Jonah, so he
designed to continue the tempest until he was thrown into the deep.
These things the sailors now put forward. But we must notice, that they
did not cast the blame on God, as blasphemers are wont to do, who, while
they seek to exempt themselves from blame, find fault with God, or at
least put him in their own place: “Why then,” they say, “does he sit as
a judge to condemn us for that of which he is himself the author, since
he has so decreed?” At this day there are many fanatics who thus speak,
who obliterate all the difference between good and evil, as if lust were
to them the law. They at the same time make a covert of God’s
providence. Jonah wished not that such a thing should be thought of the
sailors; but as they well understood that God governed the world justly,
though his counsels be secret and cannot be comprehended by us, — as,
then, they were thus convinced, they thus strengthened themselves; and
though they gave to God the praise due to his justice, they at the same
time trembled lest they should be guilty of innocent blood.

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p20"></span>We now then see how reverently these men
spoke of God, and that so much religious fear possessed them, that they
did not rob God of his praise, *Thou Jehovah,* they said, *hast done as
it has pleased thee*  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) Do they here
accuse God of tyranny, as though he confounded all things without any
cause or reason? By no means. They took this principle as granted, —
that the will of God is right and just, yea, that whatever God has
decreed is beyond doubt just. Being then thus persuaded, they took the
will of God as the rule for acting rightly: “As thou, Jehovah, hast done
as it seemed good to thee, so we are blameless.” But at the same time it
is proper also to add, that the sailors do not vainly talk here of the
secret providence of God in order to impute murder to him, as ungodly
men and profane cavilers do at this day: but as the Lord made known his
purpose to them, they show that the storm and the tempest could not be
otherwise calmed and quieted than by drowning Jonah: they therefore took
this knowledge of God’s purpose as a certain rule to follow. At the same
time they fled, as I have said, to God, and supplicated his mercy, lest
in a matter so perplexed and difficult he should involve them in the
same punishment, as they were constrained to shed innocent blood. We now
then apprehend the meaning of this passage. Now it follows —

<span id="iii.1.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#015)<span id="iii.1.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvii-p2"></span>**15.** So they took up Jonah, and cast
him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging.

<span id="iii.1.xvii-p3"></span>**15.** Et sustulerunt Jonam, et
projecerunt in mare; et stetit mare a fervore suo.

<span id="iii.1.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvii-p6"></span>Jonah shows here that the tempest arose
through his fault; for the issue proved this with certainty. The sailors
had not only cast lots, but after Jonah was thrown into the sea the
storm calmed, and the sea became still, — this sudden change
sufficiently proved that Jonah was the only cause why they were so
nearly shipwrecked. For if the sea had not calmed immediately, but after
some interval of time, it might have been ascribed to chance: but as the
sea instantly rested, it could not be otherwise said than that Jonah was
condemned by the judgment of God. He was indeed cast into the sea by the
hands of men; but God so presided, that nothing could be ascribed to
men, but that they executed the judgment which the Lord had openly
demanded and required from them. This, then, is the import of this
verse. He now adds —

<span id="iii.1.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.1.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.1.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p2"></span>**16.** Then the men feared the Lord
exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p3"></span>**16.** Et imuerunt viri timore magno
Jehovam, et sacrificarunt sacrificium Jehovae, et voverunt vota.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p6"></span>Jonah now declares what fruit followed;
and first, he says, that the sailors feared the true God. He uses here
the proper name of God, Jehovah; for, as we have already seen, they were
addicted to their own superstitions, as each of them cried to his own
god: but it was a false notion; for they went astray after their own
superstitions. The Prophet now points out the difference, — that they
began to fear the true God. At the same time it may have been, that they
afterwards relapsed into their own errors; yet it ought not to be
overlooked that the Lord constrained them to entertain such a fear. The
Hebrews, as it has been already said, sometimes take fear in a general
sense, as meaning worship. It is said in <span
id="iii.1.xviii-p6.1"></span>[2 Kings
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#033)<span
id="iii.1.xviii-p6.1"></span>, of the new inhabitants of the land of
Canaan, who had been removed from Persia, that they “feared God,” that
is, that they imitated the legal rite in sacrifices while worshipping
God. But there is an addition in this place, which shows that the
meaning is more restricted, for it is said to have been a *great fear.*
Then Jonah means that the sailors and the passengers were not only
touched with the fear of God, but that they also had the impression that
the God of Israel was the supreme King of heaven and earth, that he held
all things under his hand and government. This fear no doubt led them to
true knowledge so as to know that they were previously deluded, and that
whatever the world had invented was mere delusion, and that the gods
devised by the fancies of men were nothing else but mere idols. We now
then perceive what Jonah means.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p7"></span>But we must here say somewhat more at
large of the fear of God. When the Scripture speaks of the fear of God,
it sometimes means the outward worship, and sometimes true piety. When
it designates the outward worship, it is no great thing; for hypocrites
usually perform their ceremonies, and thus testify that they worship
God: but yet, as they obey not God with sincerity of heart, nor bring
faith and repentance, they do nothing but trifle. But the fear of God is
often taken for true piety; and then it is called the beginning or the
chief point of wisdom, or even wisdom itself, as it is in <span
id="iii.1.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Job
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028)<span
id="iii.1.xviii-p7.1"></span>. The fear of God, then, or that pious
regard (<span id="iii.1.xviii-p7.2"></span>*reventia*) by which the
faithful willingly submit themselves to God, is the chief part of
wisdom.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p8"></span>But it also often happens that men are
touched by servile fear, so as to have a desire to satisfy God, while,
at the same time, they have even a wish to draw him down from his
throne. This servile fear is full of perverseness; for they, at the same
time, champ the bridle, as they cannot exempt themselves from his power
and authority. Such was this fear of which Jonah speaks; for all those
whom he mentions were not suddenly so changed as to devote themselves to
the true God: they had not indeed made such a progress as this; it was
not such real and thorough conversion of the soul as changed them into
new men. How, then, is it said that they feared? even because the Lord
extorted from them a confession at the time: it may have been that some
of them afterwards made a greater progress; but I speak now generally of
the whole. Because then it is said that they feared God, we are not
hence to conclude that they really repented, so as to become wholly
devoted to the God of Israel. But yet they were constrained to know and
to confess that the God of Israel was the only and the true God. How so?
because that dreadful judgment filled them with terror, so that they
perceived that he alone was God who had heaven and earth under his
command.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p9"></span>We now then see how that fear is to be
viewed, of which Jonah speaks. If they afterwards made no farther
progress, it only served to condemn them, that these sailors, having
perceived by a sure evidence who the only true God was, mingled with the
worship of him their wicked and ungodly superstitions, as many do even
in our day. The Papists hold this truth in common with us, — that there
is one true God, the framer of heaven and earth, yea, they come still
nearer, and say that the only-begotten Son of God is our Redeemer; but
yet we see how they contaminate the whole worship of God, and turn his
truth to a lie; for they blend the worship of God with that of idols, so
that there is nothing pure among them. But this main truth is however of
great service, when the Lord stretches forth his hand to miserable men;
for if there was no conviction of this under the Papacy that the word of
God is to be believed, and that Christ the Son of God is the King and
Head of the Church, we must have had to employ against them a long
circuitous argument; but now an access to them is easy: when we bring
against them the Law, and the Prophets, and the Gospel, they are
restrained by some measure of reverence, and dare not to reject the
authority of the Supreme God. We then see, that this fear is in itself
of no great value, if men remain fixed in their own mire; but when it is
the Lords purpose afterwards to call them, this fear opens for them the
door to true godliness. So it may have been, as I have said, that some
of these sailors and passengers had afterwards made better progress. But
this fear of itself could have done nothing more than to convict them,
so that no excuse could avail them before God’s tribunal; for a proof
had been given them, by which they might know that there was no other
God than He who was then worshipped by the chosen people.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds that they
*sacrificed a sacrifice to Jehovah*  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) They were accustomed before to offer
sacrifices to their idols; but now they testified that they worshipped
the God of Israel; for this is what sacrifices signify. But it must at
the same time be observed that they thereby expressed this confession,
that God confirmed the truth of his word. When, therefore, they
perceived that this whole affair was ordered by the will of God, they
were constrained to bear witness that he was the true God: this was the
end and design of sacrifices.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p12"></span>It may, however, be inquired, whether
that sacrifice pleased God. It is certain that whenever men bring
forward their own devices, whatever is otherwise worthy of approbation
in what they do, it cannot but be corrupted and vitiated by such a
mixture; for God, as it is well known, allows of no associate. And we
must remember that which is said in Ezekiel, ‘Go ye, sacrifice to the
devil, and not to me!’ God there repudiates all the sacrifices which
were wont to be offered by the people of Israel, because superstitions
were blended with them. God then shows that such a mixture is so
disapproved by him, that he chooses rather that the superstitious should
wholly give themselves up to the devils than that his holy name should
be thus profaned. Hence this sacrifice of itself was not lawful, nor
could it have pleased God; but it was, so to speak, by accident and
extrinsically that this sacrifice pleased God, — because he designed
thus to make known his glory. Though, then, he repudiated the sailors
themselves, yet it was his will that this act should bear a testimony to
his glory: as, for instance, a deed is often vicious with regard to men,
and yet in an accidental way it tends to set forth the glory of God.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p13"></span>And this ought to be carefully borne
in mind: there is at this day a dispute, yea a fierce contest, about
good works: and the Sophists ever deceive themselves by false reasoning;
(<span id="iii.1.xviii-p13.1"></span>παραλογισμῶ — sophistry) for they
suppose that works morally good are either preparatory to the obtaining
of grace, or meritorious towards attaining eternal life. When they speak
of works morally good, they refer only to the outward deeds; they regard
not the fountain or motive, nor even the end. When the heart of man is
impure, unquestionably the work which thence flows is also ever impure,
and is an abomination before God. When the end also is wrong, when it is
not man’s purpose to worship God in sincerity of heart, the deed,
however splendid it may appear, is filth in the presence of God. Hence
the Sophists are greatly deceived, and are very childish, when they say,
that works morally good please God, and are preparatory to grace and
meritorious of salvation. But can this be, that a work does not please
God, and yet avails to set forth his glory? I answer, that these two
things are perfectly consistent, and are in no way so contrary that they
cannot be easily reconciled. For God by accident, as I have said,
accommodates to his own glory what is in itself vicious; I say, in
itself, that is, with respect to men. Thus even under the Papacy the
Christian name serves to the glory of God, for there ever remains some
remnant. And how has it happened, that at this time the light of the
Gospel has shone forth, and that true religion has been restored at
least in many places? Even because the Lord has never suffered true
religion to be extinguished, though it has been corrupted: for baptism
under the Papacy, the very name of Christ as well as of the Church, and
the very form of religion — all these have become wholly useless; but
they have accidentally, as I have said, been of great service. When,
therefore, we regard the priests (<span
id="iii.1.xviii-p13.2"></span>*sacrificos* — the sacrificers) as well as
the people, we find nothing but a perverted worship of God; they
presumptuously and indiscriminately add their own superstitions and
devices to the word of God, and there is nothing pure among them. Since
then they thus blend together heaven and earth, they do nothing but
provoke God’s wrath against themselves.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p14"></span>We now then understand why Jonah says
that the sailors and passengers offered sacrifices. We must, at the same
time, remember what I have lately said, that sacrifice was, as it were,
a symbol of Divine worship: for even from the beginning this notion
prevailed among all, that sacrifices were to be offered to none but to
God; and heathens in all ages had no other opinion of sacrifices, but
that they thus manifested their piety towards their gods. Since then
sacrifices have been from the beginning offered to God alone, it
follows, that they at this day are wholly inexcusable who join
associates to God, and offer their sacrifices to mortals or to angels.
How can this be borne in Christians, since heathens have ever confessed
that they regarded those as gods to whom they were wont to offer their
sacrifices? Now then, since God declares that the chief sacrifice to him
is invocations as we read in <span id="iii.1.xviii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.1.xviii-p14.1"></span>, the whole of religion under the Papacy
must be perverted, as they pray not only to God but even to creatures:
for they hesitate not to flee to Peter or to Paul, yea, to their own
saints, real and fictitious, in the same manner as to the only true God.
Inasmuch, then, as they rob God of this chief right, we see that they
tread under foot the whole of religion by this sacrilege. Since, then,
heathen men testified that they worshipped Jehovah, the God of Israel,
by their external sacrifice, let us learn at this day not to transfer
the rightful honor of God to creatures; but let this honor of being
alone prayed to, be wholly and entirely reserved for him; for this, as
we have said is the chief and the most valuable sacrifice which he
demands and approves.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p15"></span>But Jonah also adds, that the sailors
*vowed vows to God* This is a part of thanksgiving; for we know that the
object, not only of the holy fathers, but also of the superstitious, in
making vows, has ever been this — to bind themselves to God, and also to
express their gratitude, and to make it evident, that they owed to him
both their life and every favor bestowed on them. This then has in all
ages been the reason for making, vows. When, therefore the sailors vowed
a vow to God, they renounced their own idols. They cried before to their
gods; but now they understand that they had cried in vain, and without
any benefit, as they had to no purpose uttered their cries in the air.
Now then they made their vows to the only true God; for they knew that
their lives were in his hand.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p16"></span>And here we may easily learn how
foolishly the Sophists of our day heap together all passages of
Scripture which make any mention of vows; for they think that we are to
be overwhelmed by that term alone, when we condemn their false vows. But
no one of us has ever denied or does deny, that it is lawful to vows
provided it be done according to what the Law and the Gospel prescribes.
What we hold is, — that men are not thoughtlessly to obtrude on God what
comes uppermost, but that they are to vow what he approves, and also,
that they regard a right and just end in vowing, even to testify their
gratitude to God. But in common vows which are made, there are the
grossest errors, as also in the whole of the Papal worship; for they vow
this and that to God indiscriminately, and regard not what the Lord
requires or approves: one, on certain days, abstains from meat; another
combs not his head: and a third trots away on some pilgrimage. All these
things, we know, are rejected by God. And further, when they vow nothing
but what God approves, it is yet done for a wrong purpose: for they seek
in this way to bind God to themselves, and the diabolical conceit of
merits ever possesses their minds. And, lastly, they consider not what
they can do; they vow perpetual celibacy when at the same time
incontinence burns them; and thus we see that, like the giants, they
fight with God himself; and, in the meantime, they allow themselves an
unbridled liberty as to whatever they vow.

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p17"></span>Let us then know, that whenever the
Scripture speaks of vows, we are to take for granted these two
principles, — that vows as they appertain to the worship of God, ought
not to be taken without any discretion, according to men’s fancy, but
ought to be regulated and guided by God’s rule, so that men may bring
nothing to God, except what they know to be approved by his word, — and
then, that they are to keep in view the right end, even to show by this
symbol their gratitude to God, to testify that they are preserved by his
kindness, as was the case with these sailors, who made a vow because
they thought that none but God was their deliverer; and so they
testified, that when they came safe to shore, they would make it known
that the God of Israel had showed mercy to them. It follows —

<span id="iii.1.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xix-p1"></span><span id="iii.1.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#017)<span id="iii.1.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xix-p2"></span>**17.** Now the Lord had prepared a great
fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three
days and three nights.

<span id="iii.1.xix-p3"></span>**17.** Et paravit Jehova piscem magnum
ad vorandum Jonam; et fuit Jonas in visceribus piscis tribus diebus et
tribus noctibus.

<span id="iii.1.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.1.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xix-p6"></span>What the Prophet here briefly relates
ought to be carefully weighed by us. It is easily passed over, when we
read in a few words that Jonah was swallowed up by a fish, and that he
was there three days and three nights: but though Jonah neither
amplified or illustrated in a rhetorical manner what is overlooked by
us, nor adopted any display of words, but spoke of the event as though
it were an ordinary thing, we yet see what the event itself really was:
Jonah was cast into the sea. He had been previously not only a
worshipper of the true God, but also a Prophet, and had no doubt
faithfully discharged his office; for God would not have resolved to
send him to Nineveh, had he not conferred on him suitable gifts; and he
knew him to be qualified for undertaking a burden so great and so
important. As Jonah then had faithfully endeavored to serve God, and to
devote himself to him through the whole of his past life, now that he is
cast into the sea as one unworthy of the common light, that he is cut
off from the society of men, and that he seems unworthy of undergoing a
common or an ordinary punishment, but is exiled, as it were, from the
world, so as to be deprived of light and air, as parricides, to whom
formerly, as it is well-known, this punishment was allotted — as then
Jonah saw that he was thus dealt with, what must have been the state of
his mind?

<span id="iii.1.xix-p7"></span>Now that he tells us that he was three
whole days in the inside of the fish, it is certain that the Lord had so
awakened him that he must have endured continual uneasiness. He was
asleep before he was swallowed by the fish; but the Lord drew him, as it
were, by force to his tribunal, and he must have suffered a continual
execution. He must have every moment entertained such thoughts as these,
“Why does he now thus deal with thee? God does not indeed slay thee at
once, but intends to expose thee to innumerable deaths.” We see what Job
says, that when he died he would be at rest and free from all evils,
(<span id="iii.1.xix-p7.1"></span>[Job
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#006)<span
id="iii.1.xix-p7.1"></span>.) Jonah no doubt continually boiled with
grief, because he knew that God was opposed to and displeased with him:
he doubtless said to himself, “Thou hast to do, not with men, but with
God himself, who now pursues thee, because thou hast become a fugitive
from his presence.” As Jonah then must have necessarily thus thought
within himself of God’s wrath, his case must have been harder than
hundred deaths, as it had been with Job and with many others, who made
it their chief petition that they might die. Now as he was not slain but
languished in continual torments, it is certain that no one of us can
comprehend, much less convey in words what must have come into the mind
of Jonah during these three days. But I cannot now discuss what remains;
I must therefore defer it to the next lecture.

<span id="iii.1.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xx-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.1.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou settest
before us this day thy holy Prophet as an awful example of thy wrath
against all who are rebellious and disobedient to thee, — O grant, that
we may learn so to subject all our thoughts and affections to thy word,
that we may not reject any thing that pleases thee, but so learn both to
live and to die to thee, that we may ever regard thy will, and undertake
nothing but what thou hast testified is approved by thee, so that we may
fight under thy banners, and through life obey thy word, until at length
we reach that blessed rest which has been obtained for us by the blood
of thy only begotten Son, and is laid up for us in heaven through the
hope of his Gospel. Amen.

<span id="iii.1.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xxi-p1"></span>lecture Seventy-sixth

<span id="iii.1.xxi-p2"></span>In yesterday’s lecture we began to
explain the last verse of the first chapter, in which Jonah said, that
*a fish was prepared by the Lord* We stated that it could not have been
otherwise but that Jonah, when he was in the inside of the fish, must
have felt the most grievous agonies, as though he had been doomed to
perpetual death, as long as he was deprived of the enjoyment of God’s
favor: and this fact will be further explained when his song comes under
our consideration.

<span id="iii.1.xxi-p3"></span>But now there is a question to be
considered and that is whether God created a fish to receive Jonah. The
expression, that God *prepared a fish*  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) seems indeed to mean this; for if the
fish had already been swimming in the sea, the Prophet might have
adopted another mode of speaking and said, that the Lord caused the fish
to meet him or that God had sent a fish; for so the Scripture usually
speaks: but a fish is said to have been prepared. This doubt may be thus
removed, — that though God may not have created the fish, he had yet
prepared him for this purpose; for we know that it was not according to
the course of nature that the fish swallowed Jonah, and also, that he
was preserved uninjured in his inside for three days and three nights. I
therefore refer what is said here, that a *fish was prepared,* to the
preservation of Jonah: for it is certain that there are some fishes
which can swallow men whole and entire. And William Rondelet, who has
written a book on the fishes of the sea, concludes that in all
probability it must have been the *Lamia.* He himself saw that fish, and
he says that it has a belly so capacious and, mouth so wide, that it can
easily swallow up a man; and he says that a man in armor has sometimes
been found in the inside of the Lamia. Therefore, as I have said, either
a whale, or a Lamia, or a fish unknown to us, may be able to swallow up
a man whole and entire; but he who is thus devoured cannot live in the
inside of a fish. Hence Jonah, that he might mark it out as a miracle,
says that the fish was prepared by the Lord; for he was received into
the inside of the fish as though it were into an hospital; and though he
had no rest there, yet he was as safe as to his body, as though he were
walking on land. Since then the Lord, contrary to the order of nature,
preserved there his Prophet, it is no wonder that he says that the *fish
was prepared by the Lord.* I come now to the second chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc28004.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.1.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p9"></span> *Calvin* lays no great stress on the
circumstance of the Book commencing with a <span
id="iii.1.ii-p9.1"></span>ו, but states what he thinks as its probable
import. The fact that other Books, such as Joshua, Judges, 1 Samuel,
Ezekiel, and other books, begin thus, is no proof that the copulative
here does not intimate what is here stated. *Marckius* and *Cocceius*
think that it imports a connection between the different Books of
Scripture; and if so, why may it not intimate a connection between this
Book and the former Prophecy of Jonah? *Junius* and *Tremelius* render
the <span id="iii.1.ii-p9.2"></span>ו “when,” and connect it with “then”
at the beginning of the third verse; and it may be so construed at the
beginning of most of the other Books. Adopting this rendering, we may
translate thus, —

<span id="iii.1.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.1.ii-p11"></span>1. When the word of Jehovah came to
Johah,  
the son of Amittai, saying

<span id="iii.1.ii-p12"></span>2. Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city,
and cry against her, for there wickedness has ascended before me.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p13"></span>3. Then Jonah arose to flee to Tarshish,
from the presence of Jehovah, and went down to Joppa,” etc.

<span id="iii.1.ii-p14"></span>This reads connected, and the passage
admits of this construction, for the copulative <span
id="iii.1.ii-p14.1"></span>ו in Hebrew, when repeated, may very
frequently be thus rendered, the first by “when,” and the second by
“then.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc28004.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.1.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p16"></span> *Marckius* wisely says on another
subject, but on a similar occasion, “<span
id="iii.1.ii-p16.1"></span>Extra Scripturam autem audacter hic sapiat
nemo;” — “but let no one be here rashly wise beyond Scripture.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc28004.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.1.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ii-p20"></span> There is some difference in the account
given. *Diodorus Siculus,* as quoted by *Marckius,* says, that if it was
in form oblong; one side was 150 stadia, the other 90; so that its
circumference must have been 480 stadia. A stadium is nearly equal to a
furlong, eight of which make a mile. It must then have been in circuit
about 60 miles. Its walls are reported to have been 100 feet *high* — 33
yards and 1 foot, and so *broad* that three chariots might run abreast,
and adorned by 1,500 towers, the height of which were 200 feet. From the
circumstance of having in it 120,000 not knowing the right hand from the
left, supposed to be infants, some think that its population must have
been above two million. It was situated on the river *Tigris* on the
eastern side, not far from the present *Mosul.*

<span id="iii.1.ii-p21"></span>In building this city, as reported by
*Bochart*, there were no less than 140 myriads of men for eight years. A
myriad being ten thousand, the number must have been one million, four
hundred thousand. Such a city none has ever built since, was the
declaration of Diodorus: and there has not probably on record an account
of such a city. That it had large gardens, and even fields, within its
walls, there can be no doubt. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc28004.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.1.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.iii-p15"></span> On this success of Jonah in meeting
with a ship, etc., *Marckius* has these appropriate remarks —  
“God sometimes not only suffers the wicked to advance prosperously in
their sins, but does not immediately restore the godly in their
declensions; nay, he gives them every facility for a time in their
downward course, in order that they may know themselves more, and that
the glory of God may become thereby more manifest. Foolish then is the
sinner, who, having begun life prosperously, concludes that the end will
be equally happy.”

<span id="iii.1.iii-p16"></span>*Matthew Henry’s* remarks are of the
same import, but still more striking — “Providence seemed to favor his
design, and gave him an opportunity to escape: we may be out of the way
of duty, and yet may meet with favorable gale. The ready way is not
always the right way.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc28004.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.1.vi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vi-p7"></span> This is no doubt its root. It is used
when Saul is said to *cast* a javelin at David, <span
id="iii.1.vi-p7.1"></span>[1Sa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#011)<span id="iii.1.vi-p7.1"></span>,
and when the Lord threatens to *cast* out the people from his land,
<span id="iii.1.vi-p7.2"></span>[Jer
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#013)<span id="iii.1.vi-p7.2"></span>.
It implies force and power. *Coverdale’s* rendering, as quoted by
*Henderson*, strikingly conveys its meaning, “But the Lord hurled a
great wynde into the sea.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc28004.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.1.vi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vi-p8"></span> This perhaps can hardly be said to be a
Hebrew idiom. *Marckius,* and also *Henderson*, think it to be a
metonymy, the ship is mentioned, instead of the mariners: there is in
<span id="iii.1.vi-p8.1"></span>[Lu
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#023)<span id="iii.1.vi-p8.1"></span>
an opposite metonymy, the sailors are taken for the ship. *Newcome*
renders the sentence, “and it was thought that the ship would be broken
in pieces.” If the metonymy be admitted, the rendering would be, “and
the mariners thought that they should be shipwrecked.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc28004.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.1.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vii-p8"></span> <span id="iii.1.vii-p8.1"></span>מלחים,
from <span id="iii.1.vii-p8.2"></span>מלה, salt, “salt-men;” so
“mariners,” in our language, from <span
id="iii.1.vii-p8.3"></span>*mare*, are literally sea-men; and sailors
are sail-men. <span id="iii.1.vii-p8.4"></span>Nautae, in Latin, and
<span id="iii.1.vii-p8.5"></span>ναυται in Greek, being from <span
id="iii.1.vii-p8.6"></span>navis and <span
id="iii.1.vii-p8.7"></span>ναυς, are properly, ship-men. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc28004.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.1.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vii-p15"></span> “Sides,” <span
id="iii.1.vii-p15.1"></span>ירכתי, mean no doubt the lower parts.
*Jerome* renders it, <span id="iii.1.vii-p15.2"></span>*ad interiora
navis;* the Septuagint, <span id="iii.1.vii-p15.3"></span>εις την κοίλην
του πλοίου — to the belly cavity of the ship. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc28004.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.1.vii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iii.1.vii-p16"></span> “We see in this instance the great
danger in which unconscious sinners are often involved, that the solace
sought by them departs from them, that a dead sleep remains, and even
increases under God’s judgment, and that in the performance of duty the
godly are sometimes more slothful than the ungodly.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc28004.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.1.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p7"></span> <span id="iii.1.viii-p7.1"></span>רב
החבל, the master of the rope or roping: ὁ πρωρευς, the prowman, the
boatswain. — *Sept. Nauclerus*, pilot, is the word used by *Calvin.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc28004.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.1.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p8"></span> םדרנ ךל-המ, “τί σὺ ρεγχεις — why dost
thou snore?” — *Sept.* “<span id="iii.1.viii-p8.1"></span>Quid tu sopore
deprimeris — why art thou oppressed with deep sleep?” — *Jerome*. “<span
id="iii.1.viii-p8.2"></span>Quid dormis — why sleepest thou?” —
*Dathius.* “How is it, thou art fast asleep?” — *Henderson*. “What ails
thee? Sleeping!” — *Benjoin*. The first pare is well rendered by the
last author, but not the other; for םדרנ, only found as a verb in
Niphal, ever means a *deep* sleep. It is applied to Sisera, in Jael’s
tent, <span id="iii.1.viii-p8.3"></span>[Jud
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#021)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p8.3"></span>, and to the sleep of death, <span
id="iii.1.viii-p8.4"></span>[Ps
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p8.4"></span>. The rendering then ought to be, “What ails
thee? Being fast asleep.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc28004.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.1.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p13"></span> Calvin is quite right here. The verb
תשעתי occurs only here in Hithpael; and once as a verb in Kal, <span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.1"></span>[Jer
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.1"></span>, ותשע, they “shine,” applied to fat men,
and once as a participle, applied to iron, תושע לזרב, “bright iron,” or
iron brightened, or made to shine, <span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.2"></span>[Eze
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.2"></span>. It occurs as a noun in three other
places, תשע, <span id="iii.1.viii-p13.3"></span>[Canticles
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.3"></span>, תותשע in <span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.4"></span>[Job
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#005)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.4"></span>, and תוחשע in <span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.5"></span>[Ps
146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.5"></span>. The idea of shining, brightness, or
splendor, comports better with the context than that of thought, as
given in our version in the two last places. It occurs once in its
Chaldec form in <span id="iii.1.viii-p13.6"></span>[Da
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003)<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.6"></span>, and there, no doubt, it means thought, or
intention, or design. Following the usual import of the Hithpael
conjugation, we may render the word here, “It may be, that God will
himself shine upon us;” which means “will show himself gracious to us.”
The Septuagint gives the sense, but not the ideal meaning of the verb,
διασωση, *may save,* and so does <span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.7"></span>*Pagininus*, placeatur — *may* be
*pacified.* Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* are wrong here: they follow
our common version. *Dathius* retains the right idea, “<span
id="iii.1.viii-p13.8"></span>se nobis clementem exhibeat.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc28004.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.1.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.viii-p16"></span> “The servants of God are sometimes
surpassed, reproved, and stimulated, by those far below them, yea, even
by brute animals: a salutary admonition, from whatever quarter it may
come, ought never be despised.” — *Marckius.*  
“If the professors of religion do an ill thing, they must expect to hear
of it from those who make no such profession.” — *M. Henry.*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc28004.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.1.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.ix-p4"></span> <span id="iii.1.ix-p4.1"></span>בשלמי,
this is a singular combination, two relatives with two prepositions —
“through what — for what.” It is in a more complete form in the next
verse, <span id="iii.1.ix-p4.2"></span>באשר למי; <span
id="iii.1.ix-p4.3"></span>ש in the first instance stands for <span
id="iii.1.ix-p4.4"></span>אשר, what. The first may be rendered
consistently with the context, “through whom — for whom:” but the
context in the eight verse requires it to be “through what — for what.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc28004.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.1.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xi-p7"></span> Similar is the view given by *Jerome*.
“We ought not, for this example, to put implicit confidence in lots, nor
to connect with it the instance recorded in the Acts, when Matthias was
chosen an Apostle by lot, since privileges granted to individuals cannot
make a common rule, (<span id="iii.1.xi-p7.1"></span>*cum privilegia
singulorum non possint legem* facere communem.”)

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc28004.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.1.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p14"></span> This answer reverses the order of the
questions. He answers the last question first. “Whence comest thou, and
what is thy country?” The answer is, “I am Hebrew.” The previous
question was, “What is thy work,” or occupation? To this he answers, “I
fear Jehovah,” etc. This was his calling, his work, his occupation.
“Fear,” of course, includes worship and service. This ought to be the
work and occupation of all. But to the first question, as to what evil
he had done, he gives no answer. *Calvin* supposes that the whole is not
here related, but is to be gathered from what follows. It is, however,
probable that he had previously told them, that is, before the storm
arose, that he was fleeing from the presence of the Lord: he therefore
left them to conclude what evil it was which he had done. It may be
inquired why he said that he was “Hebrew,” and not that he was an
Israelite, as the case really was, for he belonged to the ten tribes,
and not to the kingdom of Judah; and Israelites, and not Hebrews seem to
have been then the common name of the ten tribes. The reason may be,
that as the Israelites were then for the most part idolatrous, he wished
to show that he was a true descendant of the patriarchs, who were God’s
faithful servants, real Hebrews, passengers, sojourners, and pilgrims,
as the word imparts, on the earth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc28004.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.1.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p16"></span> “<span id="iii.1.xii-p16.1"></span>Non
Deos quos invocatis, et qui salvare non possunt, sed Deum coeli qui mare
fecit et aridam, mare in quo fugio, aridam de qua fugio,” etc. —
*Jerome*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc28004.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.1.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xii-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.1.xii-p20.1"></span>מה-זאת עשית, — “What this thou hast done?”
“<span id="iii.1.xii-p20.2"></span>τί τουτο εποίησας — what this thou
hast done?” — *Sept.* “<span id="iii.1.xii-p20.3"></span>Quid (*i.e.*,
cur) hoc fecisti — why hast thou done this?” — *Marckius;* so *Jerome,*
and *Drusius,* and *Dathius.* “What is this thou hast done?” —
*Henderson.* It is not a question, requiring a reason for what he had
done, but rather an exclamation — “What an evil is this which thou has
done!” They judged of it by the effects; for they knew before that he
had fled from the presence of the Lord; and now they perceived how great
an evil it was. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc28004.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.1.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p10"></span> Literally, “that the sea may cease
from upon us.” The waves were rolling over them; hence <span
id="iii.1.xiii-p10.1"></span>מעלינו, from upon us. That the sea may be
calm *around* us, is to give a meaning to the word which it never has. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc28004.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.1.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xiii-p11"></span> <span id="iii.1.xiii-p11.1"></span>כי
הים הולך ומער, “<span id="iii.1.xiii-p11.2"></span>ὅτι η θαλασσα
επορευετο και εξηγειρε μαλλον κλυδωνα — for the sea went and more raised
the swell.” — *Sept.* “<span id="iii.1.xiii-p11.3"></span>Quia mare ibat
et intumescebat; — for the sea did go and swell.” — *Jerome, Grotius,*
and the *Vulgate.* “For the sea grew more and more tempestuous.” —
*Newcome.* The verb <span id="iii.1.xiii-p11.4"></span>הולך, connected
as here with another verb, does not always mean increase, but
continuance. See <span id="iii.1.xiii-p11.5"></span>[Ge
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#003)<span
id="iii.1.xiii-p11.5"></span>; <span id="iii.1.xiii-p11.6"></span>[Es
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#004)<span
id="iii.1.xiii-p11.6"></span>. Literally it is, “For the sea *was* going
on, and was tempestuous,” that is, it continued to be tempestuous. An
increase of violence seemed not to have been hardly possible, for a
shipwreck was previously dreaded. *Jerome,* in a strain rather
imaginary, but striking, says, “*For the sea went and did swell,* — it
*went*, as it had been commanded, — it went, to manifest the vengeance
of its Lord, — it went, to prosecute a runaway Prophet; and it *swelled*
at every moment, and rose, as it were, in larger billows, while the
mariners were delaying, to show that they could not put off the
vengeance of its Creator.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc28004.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p10"></span> Literally, “and the men labored to
return to dry land.” The ideal meaning of <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p10.1"></span>חתר is to dig, or to dig through, <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p10.2"></span>[Job
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016)<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p10.2"></span>; <span id="iii.1.xvi-p10.3"></span>[Eze
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007)<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p10.3"></span>: but it is here in its secondary sense of
laboring or toiling. <span id="iii.1.xvi-p10.4"></span>להשיב, to return,
must be taken here intransitively, though generally it bears in Hiphil a
transitive sense. “<span id="iii.1.xvi-p10.5"></span>Καί παρεβιαζοντο οι
ανδρες του επιστρεψαι προς την γην — And the men strove to return to
land.” — *Sept.* And the men rowed hard to regain the land.” —
*Henderson.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc28004.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p13"></span> <span id="iii.1.xvi-p13.1"></span>אנה
and <span id="iii.1.xvi-p13.2"></span>נא are particles of entreaty or
exclamation, and may be rendered, “I, or, we pray,” according to the
context. Here they should be, “We pray.” They are sometimes rendered,
Oh! Alas! Now. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc28004.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.1.xvi-p14.1"></span>Hoc
est, ne nobis imputes caedem viri justi — Impute not unto us the
slaughter of a just man.” — *Marckius.* See <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p14.2"></span>[Jud
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#024)<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p14.2"></span>; <span id="iii.1.xvi-p14.3"></span>[Mt
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p14.3"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc28004.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.1.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xvi-p21"></span> Some render this sentence in the
present tense, as *Marckius*, “<span id="iii.1.xvi-p21.1"></span>Tu enim
Jehovah sicut vis facis — for thou, Jehovah, doest as thou willest.” The
verbs are in the past tense, but this tense in Hebrew includes often
both times, — “Thou hast done and doest, as thou hast willed and
willest:” and this seems to be the full import of the passage.
*Mercerius,* quoted by Poole, gives this paraphrase, — “All these things
have taken place through thine appointment, — that Jonah came to the
ship, that a storm has been raised, that the lot has fallen on Jonah,
and that he has confessed his sin: we unwillingly do this dreadful deed,
but this is understood to be thy will.” *Drusius* took the words as
referring to the time then present, for he expresses the meaning thus:
“<span id="iii.1.xvi-p21.2"></span>Tu vis ut in mare dejeciatur: fiat
igitur quod vis; nam voluntati tuae quis resistat? Thou willest that he
should be cast into the sea: be then that done which thou willest; for
who can resist thy will?” According to this view, it is an expression of
acquiescence in God’s will respecting Jonah. But both *Newcome* and
*Henderson* retain our common version. *Dathius* reads, “<span
id="iii.1.xvi-p21.3"></span>Tu enim, O Jova, pro arbitratu tuo agis. —
For thou, O Jehovah, doest according to thine own will.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc28004.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.1.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xviii-p11"></span> “The first,” says *Adam Clarke,*
“that perhaps was ever offered on board a vessel, since the ark floated
on the waters of the great deluge.”  
How uselessly have learned men often employed their talents, trying to
improve what is simply and plainly related. *Jerome* allegorizes this
act of the mariners, and says that their sacrifice was that of praise. A
Jewish Rabbi, *Jonathan,* makes an addition to the sentence — that they
*said* that they would sacrifice to Jehovah; and *Grotius* adopts his
addition. Another Rabbi, *Elieser,* has fabricated a fine tale, that
they returned immediately to Joppa, went up to Jerusalem, and were
circumcised! The fact alone is stated here, as to when and where we know
nothing, and it signifies nothing to us; only that the most obvious
import of the narrative is, that they *did* offer a sacrifice on board
the vessel, immediately after the storm ceased. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc28004.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.1.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.1.xxi-p4"></span> The verb <span
id="iii.1.xxi-p4.1"></span>מנה does not necessarily include the idea of
creation, but its meaning is, to distribute, to arrange, to order, to
provide, to prepare; and yet this preparation may involve the exercise
of a creative power, as in the case of the gourd mentioned in the fourth
chapter, for it is the same verb. Though it might be an indigenous
plant, yet to provide it so quickly in one night was the act of Divine
power. So also as to this fish, it might or it might not have been one
usually found in that part of the sea. To provide it, but bringing it to
the spot, was as much a miracle as to provide it by a new act of
creation. To allow the one and to deny the other, is wholly
unreasonable. The whole was clearly miraculous: and the discovery of any
such fish now does not in the least render the transaction less
miraculous. Every part of it must be ascribed to a Divine interposition;
and let those stumble who are resolved to stumble. It has been supposed
to have been the “whale,” because the word <span
id="iii.1.xxi-p4.2"></span>κητος is used in the reference made to Jonah
in <span id="iii.1.xxi-p4.3"></span>[Mt
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)<span
id="iii.1.xxi-p4.3"></span>: but that word is a general term applied to
a large fish, and does not necessarily mean the whale. <span
id="iii.1.xxi-p4.4"></span>κητος, says *Ribera*, in his comment on
Jonah, <span id="iii.1.xxi-p4.5"></span>non certae speciei, sed generis
nomen est, et piscem quemvis magnum significat. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Jonah](cc28005)
