[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28020)  [Next](cc28022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.3"></span>

<span id="v.3-p1"></span>Chapter 3

<span id="v.3.i"></span>

<span id="v.3.i-p1"></span><span id="v.3.i-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001)<span id="v.3.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.i-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to the bloody city! it *is* all
full of lies *and* robbery; the prey departeth not;

<span id="v.3.i-p3"></span>**1.** O urbs sanguinaria! Tota mendacio
*(vertunt)* rapina plena est; non recedit praeda (*vel*, non recedet
praeda.)

<span id="v.3.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.i-p5"></span><span id="v.3.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.i-p6"></span>The Prophet, as I have said, more clearly
expresses here the reason why the vengeance of God would be so severe on
the Ninevites, — because they had wholly given themselves up to
barbarous cruelty; and hence he calls it the bloody city. *Bloody city!*
he says. The exclamation is emphatical. Though <span
id="v.3.i-p6.1"></span>הו, *eu,* sometimes means Woe; yet it is put here
as though the Prophet would have constrained Nineveh to undergo its
punishment, *O sanguinary city,* then, the *whole of it is full* of
<span id="v.3.i-p6.2"></span>כחש *cachesh*: the word signifies leanness
and the Prophet no doubt joins here together two words, which seem to
differ widely, and yet they signify the same thing. For <span
id="v.3.i-p6.3"></span>פרק, *perek,* means to lay by; and <span
id="v.3.i-p6.4"></span>כחש, *cachesh,* is taken for a lie or vanity,
when there is nothing solid in what is said: but the Prophet, I doubt
not, means by both words the spoils of the city Nineveh. It was then
full of leanness for it had consumed all others; it was also full of
spoils, for it had filled itself. But the meaning of the Prophet is in
no way dubious; for at length he adds, *Depart shall not the prey;* that
is as some think, it shall not be withdrawn from the hands of
conquerors; but others more correctly think that a continued liberty in
plundering is intended, that the Assyrians were constantly employed in
pillaging and kept within no bounds.

<span id="v.3.i-p7"></span>We hence see that the Prophet now shows why
God says, that he would be an adversary to the Ninevites, because he
could not endure its unjust cruelty. He bore with it indeed for a time;
for he did not immediately execute his judgment; but yet he never forgot
his own people.

<span id="v.3.i-p8"></span>As, then, God has once declared by the mouth
of his Prophet that he would be the avenger of the cruelty which the
Assyrians had exercised, let us know that he retains still his own
nature; and whatever liberty he may for a time grant to tyrants and
savage wild beasts, he yet continues to be a just avenger. It is our
duty calmly to bear injuries, and to groan to him; and as he promises to
be at length our helper, it behaves us to flee to him, and to ask him to
succor us, so that seeing his Church oppressed, and tyrants exercising
licentiously their power, he may hasten the time to restrain them. If
then we were at all times to continue thus resigned under God’s
protection, there is no doubt but that he would be ready even at this
day to execute a similar judgment to that which the city Nineveh and its
people had to endure.

<span id="v.3.ii"></span>

<span id="v.3.ii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="v.3.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God. that as we have now
heard of punishments so dreadful denounced on all tyrants and
plunderers, this warning may keep us within the limits of justice, so
that none of us may abuse our power to oppress the innocent, but, on the
contrary, strive to benefit one another, and wholly regulate ourselves
according to the rule of equity: and may we hence also receive comfort
whenever the ungodly molest and trouble us, and doubt not but that we
are under thy protection, and that thou art armed with power sufficient
to defend us, so that we may patiently bear injuries, until at length
the ripened time shall come for thee to help us, and to put forth thy
power for our preservation; nor let us cease to bear our evils with
patience, as long as it may be thy will to exercise us in our present
warfare, until having gone through all one troubles, we come to that
blessed rest which has been provided for us in heaven by Christ Jesus
our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.3.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.3.iii"></span>

<span id="v.3.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fourth

<span id="v.3.iv"></span>

<span id="v.3.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.3.iv-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#002)<span id="v.3.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.iv-p2"></span>**2.** The noise of a whip, and the noise of
the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the
jumping chariots.

<span id="v.3.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Sonitus flagelli, et sonitus
commotionis rotae, et equus concutiens, et quadriga exultans;

<span id="v.3.iv-p4"></span>**3.** The horseman lifteth up both the
bright sword and the glittering spear: and *there is* a multitude of
slain, and a great number of carcases; and *there is* none end of
*their* corpses; they stumble upon their corpses:

<span id="v.3.iv-p5"></span>**3.** Eques ascendere faciens, et flamma
gladii, et fulgur lanceae, et multitudo occisi (est mutatio numeri,
occisorum,) et pondus cadaverum (hoc est etiam multitudo,) et nullus
finis cadaveribus ejus; impingent in cadavera ejus:

<span id="v.3.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.3.iv-p7"></span><span id="v.3.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.iv-p8"></span>The Prophet represents here as in a lively
picture, what was nigh the Assyrians; for he sets forth the Chaldeans
their enemies, with all their preparations and in their quick movements.
 <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) *The sound of the whip,* he
says; the whips, made a noise in exciting the horses: *the sound of the
rattling of the wheel;* that is, great shall be the haste and celerity,
when the horses shall be forced on by the whip; *the horse* also shaking
the earth, *and the chariot bounding; the horseman making it to ascend;*
and then, *the flame of the sword and the lightning of the spear* He
then says, that there would be such a slaughter, that the whole place
would be full of dead bodies.

<span id="v.3.iv-p14"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet
means: for as Nineveh might have then appeared impregnable the Prophet
confirms at large what he had said of its approaching ruin, and thus
sets before the eyes of the Israelites what was then incredible.

<span id="v.3.iv-p15"></span><span id="v.3.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.iv-p16"></span>As to the words, some interpreters connect
what we have rendered, *the horseman makes to ascend,* with what
follows, that is, he makes to *ascend the flame of the sword and the
lightning of the spear* But as a copulative comes between, it seems
rather to be an imperfect sentence, meaning, that the horseman makes to
ascend or mount, that is, his horses, by urging them on. With regard to
the word <span id="v.3.iv-p16.1"></span>להב, *leb,* it means I have no
doubt, a flame. By this word, I know, is also understood metaphorically
the brightness of swords, which appears like a flame: but the Prophet
immediately adds *lightning* As then he says that spears lighten, I
doubt not but that for the same reason he meant to say that swords
flame. All these things were intended for the purpose of fully
convincing the Israelites that Nineveh, however much it was supplied
with wealth and power, was yet approaching its ruin, for its enemies
would prevail against it: and therefore he adds, that all the roads
would be full of dead bodies, that the enemies could not enter without
treading on them everywhere. It follows —

<span id="v.3.v"></span>

<span id="v.3.v-p1"></span><span id="v.3.v-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#004)<span id="v.3.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.v-p2"></span>**4.** Because of the multitude of the
whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that
selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her
witchcrafts.

<span id="v.3.v-p3"></span>**4.** Ob multitudinem scortationum
meretricis pollentis gratia, magistrae veneficiorum, vendentis gentes in
scortationibus suis, et nationes in suis veneficiis.

<span id="v.3.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.v-p5"></span><span id="v.3.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.v-p6"></span>The Prophet mentions again the cause why God
would execute so dreadful a vengeance on that city, which yet procured
by its splendor so much glory and respect among all people: and God
seems in a manner to have but little regard for the order of the world
when he thus overturns great cities. For since he is the Creator of the
whole world, it seems to be his proper office to protect its various
parts, especially those which excel in beauty, for they seem to deserve
a higher regard. When therefore any splendid city is demolished, such
thoughts as these occur to us, — That God is either delighted with the
ruin of the world, or is asleep in heaven, and that thus all things
revolve by chance and contingency. Therefore the Prophet shows, that God
had just reasons for decreeing the ruin of Nineveh, and for deforming
that beauty, that it might not deceive the eyes of men. Hence he
compares Nineveh to a harlot. The similitude seems not to be very
suitable: but yet if we take a nearer view of things, the Prophet could
not have more fitly nor more strikingly set forth the condition of that
city. He had before mentioned its barbarous cruelty, and said, that it
was the den of lions, and that savage and bloody wild beasts dwelt
there. He now begins to speak of the frauds and crafty artifices by
which the kings of this world attain for themselves both wealth and
power. The Prophet then makes the city Nineveh to be like a harlot for
this reason, — because it had not only brought under its power
neighboring nations by threats and terrors, and also by cruelty, but
because it had ensnared many by oblique arts and fraudulent means, by
captious dealings and allurements. This is the reason why it is now
called a *harlot* by the Prophet.

<span id="v.3.v-p7"></span>The Prophets of God seem indeed to speak but
with little reverence of great cities and empires: but we know that it
rightly belongs to the Spirit of God, that in exercising his own
jurisdiction, he should uncover the base deeds of the whole world, which
otherwise would lie concealed and even under the appearance of virtues
deceive the eyes and senses of the simple: and as men so much flatter
themselves, and are inebriated with their own delusions, it is necessary
that those who are too self-indulgent and delicate should be roughly
handled. As then kings ever set up their own splendor that they may
dazzle the eyes of the simple, and seem to have their own greatness as a
beautiful covering, the Spirit of God divests them of these masks. This
then is the reason why the Prophet speaks here, in no very respectful
terms, of that great monarchy which had attracted the admiration of all
nations. For when the Spirit of God adopts a humble and common mode of
speaking, men, blinded by their vices, will not acknowledge their own
baseness; nay, they will even dare to set up in opposition those things
which cover their disgraceful deeds: but the Spirit of God breaks
through all these things, and dissipates those delusions by which men
impose on themselves.

<span id="v.3.v-p8"></span>Such is the reason for this similitude; *On
account of the multitude, he says, of the whoredoms of the harlot, who
excels in favor* It is said by way of concession that Nineveh was in
great favor, that is, that by her beauty she had allured to herself many
nations, like a harlot who attains many lovers: and thus the Prophet
allows that Nineveh was beautiful. But he adds that she was *the
mistress of sorceries* <span id="v.3.v-p8.1"></span>כשף, *casheph,*
means sorcery, and also juggling: we may then render <span
id="v.3.v-p8.2"></span>כשפים, *cashaphim*, used here, juggleries,
(*praestigias* — sleights of hand.) But the Prophet seems to allude to
filters or amatory potions, by which harlots dementate youths. As then
harlots not only attract notice by their beauty and bland manners and
other usual ways; but they also in a manner fascinate unhappy youths,
and use various arts and delusions; so the Prophet under this word
comprehends all the deceits practiced by harlots; as though he said,
“This harlot was not only beautiful, but also an enchantress, who by her
charms deceived unhappy nations like a strumpets who dementates unhappy
youths, who do not take care of themselves.”

<span id="v.3.v-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *Who sells nations by her
whoredoms, and tribes by her sorceries* Though Nahum still carries on
the same metaphor, he yet shows more clearly what he meant by whoredoms
and sorceries, — even the crafts of princes, by which they allure their
neighbors, and then reduce them to bondage. Then all the counsels of
kings (which they call policies)  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) are here, by the Spirit of God, called
sorceries or juggleries, and also meretricious arts. This reproof, as I
have already said, many deem to have been too severe; for so much
majesty shone forth then in the Assyrians, that they ought, as they
think, to have been more respectfully treated. But it behaved the Spirit
of God to speak in this forcible language: for there is no one who does
not applaud such crafty proceedings. Where any one, without mentioning
princes, to ask, Is it right to deceive, and then by lies, deceptions,
perjuries, cavils, and other arts, to make a cover for things? — were
this question asked, the prompt answer would be, that all these things
are as remote as possible from virtue, as nothing becomes men more than
ingenuous sincerity. But when princes appear in public, and make this
pretense, that the world must be ruled with great prudence, that except
secret counsels be taken, all kingdoms would immediately fall into ruin,
— this veil covers all their shameful transactions, so that it becomes
lawful for them, and even praiseworthy, to deceive one party, to
circumvent another, and a third to oppress by means of deception. Since
then princes are praised for their craftiness, this is the reason why
the Prophet here takes away, as it were by force, the mask, under which
they hide their base proceedings; “They are,” he says, “meretricious
arts, and they are sorceries and juggleries.”

<span id="v.3.v-p11"></span>It is of one city, it is true, that he
speaks here; but the Prophet no doubt describes in this striking
representation how kingdoms increase and by what crafty means, — first,
by robberies, — and then by artful dealings, such as would by no means
become honest men in the middle class of life. But princes could never
succeed, except they practiced such artifices. We yet see how they are
described here by the Spirit of God, — that they are like strumpets
given to juggleries, and to other base and filthy arts, which he calls
whoredoms. But I have said, that the meaning of the Prophet can be more
clearly elicited from the second clause of the verse, when he says that
the Ninevites made a merchandise of the nations. We see indeed even at
this day that princes disturb the whole world at their pleasure; for
they deliver up innocent people to one another, and shamefully sell
them, while each hunts after his own advantage, without any shame; that
he may increase his own power, he will deliver others into the hand of
an enemy. Since then there are crafty proceedings of this kind carried
on too much at this day, there is no need that I should attempt to
explain at any length the meaning of the Prophet. I wish that examples
were to be sought at a distance. Let us proceed —

<span id="v.3.vi"></span>

<span id="v.3.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.3.vi-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005)<span id="v.3.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.vi-p2"></span>**5.** Behold, I *am* against thee, saith
the Lord of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I
will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.

<span id="v.3.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Ecce Ego ad te, inquit Jehova
exercituum, et retegam fimbrias tuas super faciem tuam, et ostendam
gentibus nuditatem tuam, et regnis foeditatem tuam:

<span id="v.3.vi-p4"></span>**6.** And I will cast abominable filth upon
thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock.

<span id="v.3.vi-p5"></span>**6.** Et projiciam super te sordes (vel,
inquinamenta) et ignominia afficiam te, et ponam te quasi stercus (alii
vertunt; alii autem, quasi exemplum; dicam postea de ipsa voce.)

<span id="v.3.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.3.vi-p7"></span><span id="v.3.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.vi-p8"></span>The Prophet confirms here what he has said
of the fall of Nineveh; but, as it was stated yesterday, he introduces
God as the speaker, that his address might be more powerful. God then
testifies here to the Assyrians, that they should have no strife or
contention with any mortal being, but with their own judgment; as though
he said, “There is no reason for thee to compare thy forces with those
of the Chaldeans; but think of this — that I am the punisher of thy
crimes. The Chaldeans indeed shall come; chariots shall make a noise and
horses shall leap, and horsemen shall shake the earth; they shall
brandish the flaming swords, and their spears shall be like lightning;
but there is no reason for thee to think that the Chaldeans will, of
themselves, break in upon thee: for I guide them by my hidden
providence, as it is my purpose to destroy thee; and now the time is
come when I shall execute on thee my judgment.”

<span id="v.3.vi-p9"></span>*I am,* he says, *Jehovah of hosts*. The
epithet <span id="v.3.vi-p9.1"></span>צבאות *tsabaut,* must be referred
to the circumstance of this passage; for God declares here his own
power, that the Assyrians might not think that they could by any means
escape. He then adds*, I will disclose thy extremities on thy face* He
alludes to the similitude which we have lately observed; for harlots
appear very fine, and affect neatness and elegance in their dress; they
not only put on costly apparel, but also add disguises. Though then this
fine dress conceals the baseness of strumpets, yet, were any to take the
clothes of a harlot and throw them over her head, all her beauty would
disappear, and all men would abhor the sight: to see her concealed parts
disclosed would be a base and filthy spectacle. So God declares that he
would strip Nineveh of its magnificent dress, that she might be a
detestable sight, only exhibiting her own reproach. We now then
apprehend the Prophet’s meaning; as though he said, “Nineveh thinks not
that she is to perish. — How so? Because her own splendor blinds her:
and she has willfully deceived herself, and, by her deceits, has dazzled
the eyes of all nations. As then this splendor seems to be a defense to
the city Nineveh, *I the Lord,* he says, *will disclose her hidden
parts;* I will deprive the Assyrians of all this splendor in which they
now glory, and which is in high esteem and admiration among other
nations.”

<span id="v.3.vi-p10"></span>And this passage ought to be especially
noticed; for, as I have said, true dignity is not to be found in the
highest princes. Princes ought, indeed, to seek respect for themselves
by justice, integrity, mercy, and a magnanimous spirit: but they only
excel in mean artifices; then they shamelessly deceive, lie, and swear
falsely; they also flatter, even meanly, when circumstances require;
they insinuate themselves by various crafty means, and by large promises
decoy the simple. Since then their true dignity is not commonly regarded
by princes, this passage ought to be observed, so that we may know that
their elevation, which captivates the minds of men, is an abomination
before God; for they do not discern things, but are blind, being dazzled
by empty splendor.

<span id="v.3.vi-p11"></span>*Disclose,* then, he says, *will I thy
shame* He says first, *Disclose will I thy fringes on thy face;* and
then *I will show to the nations thy nakedness* And the nakedness of
great kings is shown to the nations when the Lord executes his
vengeance: for then even the lowest of the low will dare to pass
judgment, — “He deserved to perish with shame, for he exercised tyranny
on his own subjects, and spared not his own neighbors; he never was a
good prince; nay, he only employed deceits and perjuries.” When,
therefore princes are cast down, every one, however low, becomes a
judge, and ascends as it were, the tribunal to burden and load them with
reproaches. And hence the Prophet says, in the person of God, *Disclose
will I thy fringes on thy face, and will show to the nations thy
nakedness, and to kingdoms thy filthiness.*

<span id="v.3.vi-p12"></span><span id="v.3.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.vi-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will besprinkle thee
with filth,* or defilements. The Prophet still alludes to the similitude
of a harlot, who is well and sumptuously adorned, and by her charms
captivates the eyes of all: but when any one takes mire and filth from
the middle of the road, and bespatters her with it, there is then no one
who will not turn away his eyes from so filthy an object. But we have
already explained the import of this. God is indeed said to besprinkle
kingdoms with defilements, when he casts them down; for they all begin
freely to express their opinion: and those who before pretended great
admiration, now rise up and bring forth many reproachful things. Then it
is, that the Lord is said to besprinkle great kingdoms with filth and
defilements.

<span id="v.3.vi-p14"></span>He then adds, *I will disgrace thee* <span
id="v.3.vi-p14.1"></span>נבל, *nubel,* is to fall, and it is applied to
dead bodies; but it means also to disgrace, as it is to be taken here.
*I will make thee as the dung* Some think <span
id="v.3.vi-p14.2"></span>רואי, *ruai,* to be dung, or something fetid:
but as it comes from <span id="v.3.vi-p14.3"></span>ראה, *rae*, to see,
and is in many parts of Scripture taken for vision or view, they are
more correct, in my judgment, who render it thus, *I will make thee an
example;* so Jerome renders it; as though he said, “Thou shalt be a
spectacle to all nations.”  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) And
Nineveh is said to be made an example, because its ruin was more
memorable than that of any other which had previously happened. Thou
shalt then *be a spectacle;* that is, the calamity which I now denounce
shall attract the observation of all. It afterwards follows —

<span id="v.3.vii"></span>

<span id="v.3.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.3.vii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#007)<span id="v.3.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.vii-p2"></span>**7.** And it shall come to pass, *that*
all they that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is
laid waste: who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for
thee?

<span id="v.3.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Et accidet ut quisquis te viderit
recedat abs te, et dicat, Vastata est Nineveh: quis condolebit ei? unde
quaeram consolatores tibi?

<span id="v.3.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.vii-p5"></span><span id="v.3.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.vii-p6"></span>When he says, <span
id="v.3.vii-p6.1"></span>כל-ראיך, *cal-raik*, ‘whosoever sees thee,’ we
hence learn again that <span id="v.3.vii-p6.2"></span>רואי, *ruai,* at
the end of the last verse, is to be taken for example or spectacle; for
the Prophet proceeds with the same subject: *I will make thee,* he says,
*an example,* or a spectacle. — For what purpose? *that whosoever sees
thee may depart from thee*  <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) And
it was an evidence of horror, though some think it to have been a reward
for her cruelty, that no one came to Nineveh, but that she was forsaken
by all friends in her desolation. And they take in the same sense what
follows, *Who will condole with her? and whence shall I seek comforters
for thee?* For they think that the Ninevites are here reproached for
their cruelty, because they made themselves so hated by all that they
were unworthy of sympathy; for they spared none, they allowed themselves
full liberty in injuring others, they had gained the hatred of all the
world. Hence some think that what is here intimated is, that the
Ninevites were justly detested by and so that no one condoled with them
in so great a calamity, inasmuch as they had been injurious to all: “It
shall then happen, that whosoever sees thee shall go far away from thee
and shall say, Wasted is Nineveh; who will condole with her? Whence
shall I call comforters to her?”

<span id="v.3.vii-p8"></span>But I know not whether this refined meaning
came into the Prophet’s mind. We may explain the words more simply, that
all would flee far away as a proof of their horrors and that the
calamity would be such, that no lamentation would correspond with it.
Who will be able to console with her? that is, were the greatness of her
calamity duly weighed, though all were to weep and utter their meanings,
it would not yet be sufficient: all lamentations would be far unequal to
so great a calamity. The Prophet seems rather to mean this. *Who* then
*shall condole with her?* and whence shall I seek comforters, as though
he said, “The ruin of so splendid a city will not be of an ordinary
kind, but what cannot be equaled by any lamentations.” It then follows —

<span id="v.3.viii"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.3.viii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008)<span id="v.3.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p2"></span>**8.** Art thou better than populous No,
that was situate among the rivers, *that had* the waters round about it,
whose rampart *was* the sea, *and* her wall *was* from the sea?

<span id="v.3.viii-p3"></span>**8.** An melior es quam No (id est,
Alexandria,) Amon (vertunt quidam, populosum; alii putant esse nomen
Regis; an igitur melior es quam Alexandria populosa,) quae habitabat in
fluviis? Mare in circuitu ejus, cujus fossa erat mare, et a mari murus
ejus;

<span id="v.3.viii-p4"></span>**9.** Ethiopia and Egypt *were* her
strength, and *it was* infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.

<span id="v.3.viii-p5"></span>**9.** Aethiopia fortitudo ejus et
Aegyptus; et nullus finis; Aphrica et Libyae fuerunt in auxilium ejus

<span id="v.3.viii-p6"></span>**10.** Yet *was* she carried away, she
went into captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at
the top of all the streets: and they cast lots for her honourable men,
and all her great men were bound in chains.

<span id="v.3.viii-p7"></span>**10.** Etiam ipsa in transmigrationem
abiit ad captivitatem; etiam parvuli ejus allisi sunt in capite omnium
platearum; et super proceres ejus (vel, honorabiles, ad verbum) jecerunt
sortem, et magnetes ejus vincti sunt compedibus.

<span id="v.3.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.3.viii-p9"></span><span id="v.3.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p10"></span>The Prophet, in order to gain credit to
his prophecy, produces here the ensample of Alexandria. It is indeed
certain, from many testimonies of Scripture, that Alexandria is called
No, which was a very ancient city, situated on the confines of Africa,
and yet in Egypt. It might, at the same time, be, that the Alexandrians
formerly had their own government, at least their own kings: and this is
probable; for the Prophet says here, that Egypt and Ethiopia, as well as
Africa and the Libyan nations, were the confederates of this city. It
may hence then be concluded, that Alexandria was not then a part of
Egypt, but had its own government, and was in alliance with the
Egyptians, as with the other nations. But as Egypt, after the death of
our Prophet, was in part overthrown by the Assyrians, and in part by the
Chaldeans, some interpreters think, that the Prophet speaks of a ruin
which had not yet taken place.  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)
But this would not harmonize with his design; for the Prophet shows
here, as in a mirror, that the chief empires fall according to the will
of God, and that cities, the richest and the best fortified, come to
nothing, whenever it pleases God. Unless, then, the destruction of
Alexandria was notorious and everywhere known, the Prophet could not
have suitably adduced this example: I therefore doubt not but that
Alexandria had been then demolished. It is no matter of wonder that it
afterwards returned to its former state and became rich; for the
situation of the city was most commodious, not so much on account of the
fertility of the land, as on account of its traffic; for ships from the
Mediterranean sailed up near to it. It had, indeed, on one side, the
lake Marcotis, which is not very healthy; and then the sea fortified it;
and Pharos was a neighboring island: but yet the city was inhabited by
many, and adorned with splendid buildings; for the advantage of traffic
drew together inhabitants from all quarters. It was afterwards built
again by Alexander of Macedon. But it is evident enough that it had been
already an opulent city: for Alexander did not build a new city but
enlarged it.  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) Let us now come to
the words of the Prophet.

<span id="v.3.viii-p13"></span>*Shall it be better to thee than to
Alexandria?* The word <span id="v.3.viii-p13.1"></span>אמון, *amun*,
some render populous; and I am inclined to adopt this meaning, which has
been received nearly by the consent of all. Others have supposed it to
be the name of a king; but as proof fails them, I leave to themselves
their own conjecture. *Shall it then be better to thee than to
Alexandria?* For *it stood,* he says, *between the rivers* Alexandria
had the Nile, as it were, under its own power; for it was then divided
into many parts, so that it intersected the city in various places. So
then he says, that Alexandria dwelt between the rivers; for it divided
the Nile, as it suited its convenience, into several streams.

<span id="v.3.viii-p14"></span>Then he says, *The sea was around her:*
for it was surrounded on one side by the sea, and protected by the
island Pharos, which had a tower, not only for the sake of defense, but
that ships coming in from the Mediterranean, might have a signal, by
which they might direct their course straight to the harbor. *The sea*
then *was around her;* for the sea encircled more than half of the city;
and then the lake Mareotis was on the other side to the south. He
afterwards adds*, And its wall* or moat *was the sea* The word is
written with <span id="v.3.viii-p14.1"></span>י, *iod,* <span
id="v.3.viii-p14.2"></span>חיל, *chil*; but it means a wall or a moat,
though Latins render antemurale — a front-work: for they were wont
formerly to fortify their cities with a double wall, as old buildings
still show. According to these interpreters <span
id="v.3.viii-p14.3"></span>חיל, *chil,* is the inner wall, and so they
render its front-work: and there was also an outer wall towards the sea.
But we may take <span id="v.3.viii-p14.4"></span>חיל, *chil,* for a moat
or a trench; and it is easy to find from other passages that it was a
trench rather than a front-work. It is said that the body of Jezebel was
torn by dogs in the trench, and the word there is <span
id="v.3.viii-p14.5"></span>חיל, *chil*. As to the object of the Prophet,
he evidently intended to show, that Alexandria was so well fortified,
that Nineveh had no reason to think herself to be in a safer state; for
its fortress was from the sea, and also from Ethiopia, on account of the
munitions which he has mentioned. Then he speaks of *Africa* and
*Egypt,* and the Libyan nations,  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) and says in short, that there was no
end of her strength; that is, that she could seek the help of many
friends and confederates: many were ready to bring aid, even Africa,
Ethiopia, and the Lybians.

<span id="v.3.viii-p16"></span><span id="v.3.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p17"></span>*Yet,* he says, *she departed into
captivity a captive;* that is, the inhabitants of Alexandria have been
banished, and the city become as it were captive, for its inhabitants
were driven here and there. *Dashed,* he says, *have been their little
ones at the head of every street* The Prophet means, that so great a
power as that of Alexandria did not prevent the conquerors to exercise
towards her the most barbarous cruelty; for it was a savage act to dash
little children against stones, who ought on account of their tender
age, to have been spared. There was indeed no reason for raging against
them, for they could not have been deemed enemies. But yet the Prophet
says that Alexandria had been thus treated; and he said this, that
Nineveh might not trust in her strength, and thus perversely despise
God’s judgment, which he now denounced on it. He adds, *They cast lots
on her princess and bound were her great men with fetters* In saying
that lots were cast, he refers to an ancient custom; for when there was
any dispute respecting a captive, the lot was cast: as for instance,
when two had taken one man, to prevent contention, it was by lot
determined who was to be his master. So then he says that lots were cast
on their princes. This usually happened to the common people and to the
lowest slaves; but the Prophet says that the conquerors spared not even
the princes. They were therefore treated as the lowest class; and though
they were great princes, they were led into captivity and bound with
chains, in the same manner with the meanest and the lowest of the
people. They were not treated according to their rank; and there was no
differences between the chief men and the most degraded of the humbler
classes; for even the very princes were so brought down, that their lot
differed not from that of the wretched; for as common people are usually
treated with contempt, so were the chiefs of Alexandria treated by their
enemies.

<span id="v.3.ix"></span>

<span id="v.3.ix-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="v.3.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since by thy awful
judgments thou dost show thy displeasure at the pride of this world, we
may be ruled by the spirit of meekness, and in such a manner humble
ourselves willingly under thy hand, that we may not experience thy
dreadful power in our destruction, but being, on the contrary, supported
by thy strength, we may keep ourselves in our own proper station and in
true simplicity, and, at the same time, relying on thy protection, we
may never doubt, but thou wilt sustain us against all the assaults of
our enemies, however violent they may be, and thus persevere in the
warfare of the cross which thou hast appointed for us, until we be at
length gathered into that celestial kingdom, where we shall triumph
together with thy Son, when his glory shall shine in us, and all the
wicked shall be destroyed. Amen.

<span id="v.3.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.3.x"></span>

<span id="v.3.x-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifth

<span id="v.3.xi"></span>

<span id="v.3.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xi-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#011)<span id="v.3.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xi-p2"></span>**11.** Thou also shalt be drunken: thou
shalt be hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of the enemy.

<span id="v.3.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Etiam tu inebriaberis, tu eris
abscondita; etiam tu quaeres robur (*vel*, suppetias) ab hoste (*vel,
propter hostem.*)

<span id="v.3.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xi-p5"></span><span id="v.3.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xi-p6"></span>Nahum, after having adduced the example of
Alexandria, now shows that nothing would be able to resist God, so that
he should not deal with Nineveh in the same manner; and he declares that
this would be the case, *Thou also,* he says, *shalt be inebriated*.
Well known is this metaphor, which often occurs in Scripture: for the
Prophets are wont frequently to call punishment a cup, which God
administers. But when God executes a heavy punishment, he is said to
inebriate the wicked with his cup. The Prophet says now, that the
chastisement of Nineveh would make her like a drunken man, who, being
overcome with wine, lies down, as it were, stupefied. Hence by this
metaphor he intended to set forth a most severe punishment: *Thou* then
*shalt be also inebriated* The particle <span
id="v.3.xi-p6.1"></span>גם, *gam,* is here emphatical; it was
introduced, that the Ninevites might know, that they could not possibly
escape the punishment which they deserved; for God continues ever like
himself. *Thou* then *shalt be also inebriated* This would not be
consistent, were not God the judge of the world to the end. There is
then a common reason for this proceeding; hence it necessarily follows,
— since God punished the Alexandrians, the Assyrians cannot escape his
hand, and be exempt from punishment.

<span id="v.3.xi-p7"></span>He adds, *Thou shalt be hidden* Some refer
this to shame, as though the Prophet had said, — “Thou indeed showest
thyself now to be very proud, but calamity will force thee to seek
hiding-places, in which to conceal thyself.” But I am more inclined to
this meaning, — that Nineveh would vanish away, as though it never had
been; for to be hidden is often taken in Hebrew in the sense of being
reduced to nothing.

<span id="v.3.xi-p8"></span>He afterwards says, *Thou shalt also seek
strength, or supplies, from the enemy.* The words <span
id="v.3.xi-p8.1"></span>מעוז מאויב, *meouz meavib,* may admit of two
meanings, — either that she will humbly solicit her enemies, — or that
on account of her enemies she will flee to some foreign aid; for the
preposition <span id="v.3.xi-p8.2"></span>מ, *mem,* may be taken in both
senses. If we adopt the first meaning, then I think that the Prophet
speaks not of the Babylonians, but of the other nations who had been
before harassed by the Assyrians. Thou shalt now then humbly pray for
the aid of those who have been hitherto thine enemies, — not because
they had provoked thee, but because thou hast as an enemy treated them.
Now it is an extreme misery, when we are constrained to seek the help of
those by whom we are hated, and hated, because we have by wrongs
provoked them. But the other sense is more approved, for it is less
strained: *Thou shalt also seek aids on account of the enemy;* that is,
as strength to resist will fail thee, thou wilt seek assistance from thy
neighbors.  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) It follows —

<span id="v.3.xii"></span>

<span id="v.3.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#012)<span id="v.3.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xii-p2"></span>**12.** All thy strong holds *shall be
like* fig trees with the firstripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall
even fall into the mouth of the eater.

<span id="v.3.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Omnes munitiones tuae ficus cum
maturis (fructibus;) si moveantur, cadunt super os comedentis.

<span id="v.3.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xii-p5"></span><span id="v.3.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet here declares that the
strongholds of the Assyrians would avail them nothing; whether they
trusted in the number of their men, or in their walls, or in other
defenses, they would be disappointed; for all things, he says, will of
themselves fall, even without being much assailed. And he employs a very
apposite similitude, “Thy fortifications,” he says, “which thou thinkest
to be very strong, shall be like figs; for when the fruit is ripe, and
any comes to the tree, as soon as he touches it or any of the branches,
the figs will fall off themselves.” We indeed know that there is not
much firmness in that fruit; when it is ripe, it immediately falls to
the ground, or if it hangs on the branches, a very little shaking will
bring it down. We now see the design of the Prophet.

<span id="v.3.xii-p7"></span>And hence an useful doctrine may be
deduced: whatever strength men may seek for themselves from different
quarters, it will wholly vanish away; for neither forts, nor towers, nor
ramparts, nor troops of men, nor any kind of contrivances, will avail
any thing; and were there no one to rise against them, they would yet
fall of themselves. It afterwards follows —

<span id="v.3.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#013)<span id="v.3.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiii-p2"></span>**13.** Behold, thy people in the midst of
thee *are* women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto
thine enemies: the fire shall devour thy bars.

<span id="v.3.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Ecce populus tuus mulieres in
medio tui; inimicis tuis aperiendo aperientur portae terrae tuae;
vorabit ignis vectes tuos.

<span id="v.3.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xiii-p5"></span><span id="v.3.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet declares here, that the hearts
of them all would become soft and effeminate when God would proceed to
destroy Nineveh. We have said before that the hearts of men are so in
the hand of God, that he melts whatever courage there may be in them,
whenever he pleases: and God prepares men for ruin, when he debilitates
their hearts, that they cannot bear the sight of their enemies. God
indeed can leave in men their perverseness, so that they may ever run
furiously into ruin, and not be able, with a courageous heart, to repel
the attacks of their enemies; but he often softens their hearts and
deprives them of power, that he may make more evident his judgment: God
does not, however, always work in the same way; for variety in his
judgments is calculated to do us good, for thereby our minds are more
powerfully awakened. Were his proceedings uniformly the same, we could
not so well distinguish the hand of God, as when he acts now in this
way, and then in another. But, as I have already said, it is what is
well known, that God enervates men and strips them of all courage, when
he gives them over to destruction.

<span id="v.3.xiii-p7"></span>So now the Prophet speaks of the
Ninevites, *Behold,* he says, *thy people are women*  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) The demonstrative particle, Behold, is
here emphatical: for the Assyrians, no doubt, ridiculed, as a fable, the
prediction of the Prophet; and it was what the Israelites found it
difficult to believe. This is the reason why the Prophet pointed out, as
by the finger, what surpassed the comprehensions of men. By saying, *in
the midst of thee,* he intimates, that though they should be separated
from their enemies and dwell in a fortified city, they should yet be
filled with trembling. This amplification deserves to be noticed: for it
is nothing wonderful, when an onset frightens us, when enemies join
battle with us, and when many things present themselves before our eyes,
which are calculated to deprive us of courage; but when we are
frightened by report only concerning our enemies, and we become
fainthearted, though walls be between us, it then appears evident, that
we are smitten by the hand of God; for when we see walls of stone, and
yet our hearts become brittle like glass, is it not evident, that we are
inwardly terrified by the Lord, as it were, through some hidden
influence, rather than through intervening and natural causes? We now
then perceive the Prophet’s meaning, when he says, that the people would
become women, or effeminate, in the midst of the city, in its very
bowels; as though he had said, that they would not cease to tremble,
even while they were dwelling in a safe place.

<span id="v.3.xiii-p9"></span>*By opening, opened shall be thy gates,*
he says, *to thy enemies*. He shows again, that though the Assyrians
were fortified, every access would be made open to their enemies, as
though there was no fortress. By saying, *the gates of thy land,* it is
probable that he speaks not only of the city, but of all their
strongholds. The Assyrians, no doubt, fortified many cities, in order to
keep afar off the enemy, and to preserve the chief seat of the empire
free from danger and fear. I therefore understand the Prophet as
referring here to many cities, when he says, *By opening, opened shall
be the gates of thy land to thine enemies and fire shall consume thy
bars* He means, that though they had before carefully fortified the
whole land around, so that they thought themselves secure from all
hostile invasion, yet all this would be useless; for the fire would
consume all their bars. By fire, the Prophet understands metaphorically
the judgment of God. For as we see that so great is the vehemence of
fire, that it melts iron and brass, so the Prophet means, that there
would be no strength which could defend Nineveh and its empire against
the hand of God. It follows —

<span id="v.3.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiv-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#014)<span id="v.3.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiv-p2"></span>**14.** Draw thee waters for the siege,
fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make
strong the brickkiln.

<span id="v.3.xiv-p3"></span>**14.** Aquas obsidionis hauri tibi, robora
munitiones tuas, ingredere in lutum, calca caementum, fortifica fornacem
(vel, laterem; alii vertunt, tene, vel, apprehende.)

<span id="v.3.xiv-p4"></span>**15.** There shall the fire devour thee;
the sword shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like the cankerworm:
make thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself many as the locusts.

<span id="v.3.xiv-p5"></span>**15.** Illic vorabit te ignis,
exterminabit te gladius, comedet te quasi bruchus (alii vertunt, quasi
bruchum;) multiplicari (ad verbum, vel, multiplicando; est <span
id="v.3.xiv-p5.1"></span>כירק quasi bruchus,) multiplicare quasi
locusta.

<span id="v.3.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xiv-p7"></span><span id="v.3.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiv-p8"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject,
— that the Ninevites would labor in vain, while striving anxiously and
with every effort to defend themselves against their enemies. The
meaning then is, “That though thou remittest no diligence, yet thou
shalt lose all thy labor; for thou wilt not be able to resist the
vengeance of God; and thou deceives thyself if thou thinkest that by the
usual means thou canst aid thyself; for it is God who attacks thee by
the Babylonians. How much soever then thou mayest accumulate of those
things which are usually employed to fortify cities, all this will be
useless.” *Draw for thyself,* he says, *waters for the siege;* that is,
lay up provisions for thyself, as it is usually done, and have water
laid up in cisterns; *strengthen thy fortresses,* that is, renew them;
*enter into the clay* for the sake of treading the mortar: *fortify,* or
cement, or join together; the brick-kiln (for what some think that <span
id="v.3.xiv-p8.1"></span>חזק, *chezek,* means, here is to hold, or to
lay hold, is wholly foreign to the Prophet’s meaning:) to *fortify* then
the *brick- kiln,* that is, the bricks which come forth from the kiln,
nothing else than to construct and join them together, that there might
be a solid building: for we know that buildings often fall, or are
overturned, because they are not well joined together: and he refers to
the mode of building which historians say was in use among the
Assyrians. For as that country had no abundance of stones, they supplied
the defect by bricks. We now then understand the intention of the
Prophet.

<span id="v.3.xiv-p9"></span><span id="v.3.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiv-p10"></span>But he adds, *There shall the fire consume
thee* There is much importance in the adverb of place, *there,* which he
uses: there also, he says*, shall the fire eat thee up:* for he
expresses more than before, when he said, that the Assyrians would weary
themselves in vain in fortifying their city and their empire; for he
says now, that the Lord would turn to their destruction those things in
which they trusted as their defenses; *There* then *shall the fire
consume thee* We now then see what the Prophet means.

<span id="v.3.xiv-p11"></span>We must at the same time observe, that he
mentions water; as though he said, However sparingly and frugally thy
soldiers may live, being content with water as their drink, (for it is
necessary, when we would firmly resist enemies, to undergo all
indulgences, and if needs be to endure want, at least the want of
delicate meat and drink,) — though thy soldiers be content with water,
and seek not water fresh from the spring or the river, but drink it from
cisterns, and though thy fortresses be repaired, and thy walls carefully
joined together in a solid structure, by bricks well fitted and
fastened, *yet there shall the fire consume thee;* that is, thy
frugality, exertion, and care, not only will avail thee nothing, but
will also turn out to thy ruin; for the Lord pronounces accursed the
arrogance of men, when they trust in their own resources.

<span id="v.3.xiv-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *Exterminate thee
shall the sword;* that is, the Lord will find out various means by which
he will consume thee. By the fire, then, and by the sword, will he waste
and destroy thee. He then says, *He will consume thee as the chafer* we
may read the last word in the nominative as well as in the objective
case — He as a chafer will consume thee. If we approve of this
rendering, then the meaning would be, — “As chafers in a short time
devour a meadow or standing corn, so thy enemies shall soon devour thee
as with one mouthful.” We indeed know, that these little animals are so
hurtful, that they will very soon eat up and consume all the fruit; and
there is in these insects an astonishing voracity. But as the Prophet
afterwards compares the Assyrians to chafers and locusts, another sense
would be more suitable, and that is, — that God’s judgment would consume
the Assyrians, as when rain, or a storm, or a change of season, consumes
the chafers; for as these insects are very hurtful, so the Lord also
exterminates them whenever he pleases.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) He afterwards adds, *to be
multiplied;* which is, as I have said, a verb in the infinitive mood.
But the sentence of the Prophet is this, *by multiplying as the chafer,
to multiply as the locusts:* but why he speaks thus, may be better
understood from the context; the two following verses must be therefore
added —

<span id="v.3.xv"></span>

<span id="v.3.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xv-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#016)<span id="v.3.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xv-p2"></span>**16.** Thou hast multiplied thy merchants
above the stars of heaven: the cankerworm spoileth, and flieth away.

<span id="v.3.xv-p3"></span>**16.** Multiplicasti negotiatores tuos
quasi stellas coelorum; bruchus praedatus est et avolat.

<span id="v.3.xv-p4"></span>**17.** Thy crowned *are* as the locusts,
and thy captains as the great grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in
the cold day, *but* when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place
is not known where they *are*

<span id="v.3.xv-p5"></span>**17.** Principes tui (vel, coronati;
deducitur enim a רזכ quod significat coronam; sed malo vertere,
egregios, vel, praestantissimos quosque; principes ergo tui, vel, eximii
tui) quasi locusta, et duces tui quasi locusta locustarum (est quidem
aliud nomen, sed non possumus certo distinguere inter illas species,
quemadmodum dictum est Jaelis 1 capite,) quae castramentantur (id est,
considunt) in maceriis (id est, clausuris) in die frigoris: sol exortus
est, et migrarunt; et non cognoscitur locus earum ubi.

<span id="v.3.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xv-p7"></span><span id="v.3.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xv-p8"></span>From these words we may learn what the
Prophet before meant, when he said that the Assyrians were like locusts
or chafers; as though he said, — “I know that you trust in your great
number; for ye are like a swarm of chafers or locusts; ye excel greatly
in number; inasmuch as you have assembled your merchants and traders as
the stars of heaven.” Here he shows how numerous they were. But when he
says, *The chafer has spoiled, and flies away,* he points out another
reason for the comparison; for it is not enough to lay hold on one
clause of the verse, but the two clauses must be connected; and they
mean this, — that the Assyrians, while they were almost innumerable,
gloried in their great number, — and also, that this vast multitude
would vanish away. He then makes an admission here and says, by
multiplying thy merchants, thou hast multiplied them; but when he says,
as chafers and as locusts, he shows that this multitude would not
continue, for the Lord would scatter them here and there. As then the
scattering was nigh, the Prophet says that they were chafers and
locusts.

<span id="v.3.xv-p9"></span>We now understand the design of the Prophet:
He first ridicules the foolish confidence with which the Assyrians were
inflated. They thought, that as they ruled over many nations, they could
raise great armies, and set them in any quarter to oppose any one who
might attack them: the Prophet concedes this to them, that is, that they
were very numerous, *by multiplying thou hast multiplied;* but what will
this avail them? They shall be locusts, they shall be chafers. — How so?
A fuller explanation follows, *Thou hast multiplied thy merchants as the
stars of heaven*: but this shall be temporary; for thou shalt see them
vanishing away very soon; they shall be like the chafers, who, being in
a moment scattered here and there, quit the naked field or the meadow.
But by merchants or traders some understand confederates; and this
comparison also, as we have before seen, frequently occurs in the
Prophets: and princes at this day differ nothing from traders, for they
outbid one another, and excel in similar artifices, as we have elsewhere
seen, by which they carry on a system of mutual deception. This
comparison then may be suitable, *Thou hast multiplied thy traders,* —
*tes practiciens.* But the meaning of the Prophet may be viewed as still
wider; we may apply this to the citizens of Nineveh; for the principal
men no doubt were merchants: as the Venetian of the present day are all
merchants, so were the Syrians, and the Ninevites, and also the
Babylonians. It is then nothing strange, that the Prophet, by taking a
part for the whole should include under this term all the rich*, Thou
hast then multiplied thy merchants*  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)

<span id="v.3.xv-p15"></span>He has hitherto allowed them to be very
numerous; but he now adds, *The chafer has spoiled, and flies away* The
verb means sometimes to spoil, and it means also to devour: The chafer
then has devoured, and flies away; that is, “Thy princes, (as he
afterwards calls them,) or thy principal men, have indeed devoured; they
have wasted many regions by their plunders, and consumed all things on
every side, like the chafers, who destroy the standing corn and all
fruits: thou hast then been as a swarm of chafers.” For as chafers in
great numbers attack a field, so Nineveh was wont to send everywhere her
merchants to spoil and to denude the whole land. “Well,” he says “the
chafer has devoured, but he flies away, he is scattered; so it shall
happen,” says the Prophet, “to the citizens of Nineveh.” And hence he
afterwards adds,

<span id="v.3.xv-p16"></span><span id="v.3.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xv-p17"></span>*And thy princes are as locusts:* this
refers to the wicked doings, by which they laid waste almost the whole
earth. As then the locusts and chafers, wherever they come, consume
every kind of food, devour all the fields, leave nothing, and the whole
land becomes a waste; so also have been thy princes; *they have been as
locusts and thy leaders as the locusts of locusts,* that is, as very
great locusts; for this form, we know, expresses the superlative degree
in Hebrew. Their leaders were then like the most voracious locusts for
the whole land was made barren by them, as nothing was capable of
satisfying their avarice and voracity.

<span id="v.3.xv-p18"></span>The Prophet then adds, They are locusts,
who *dwell in the mounds during the time of cold; but when the sun
rises, not known any more is their place* He now shows, that it would
not be perpetual, that the Ninevites would thus devour the whole earth,
and that all countries would be exposed to their voracity; for as the
locusts, he says, hide themselves in caverns, and afterwards fly away,
so it shall happen to thy princes. But this passage may be taken to
mean, — that the Ninevites concealed themselves in their hiding-places
during the winter, and that when the suitable time for plundering came,
they retook themselves in different directions, and took possession of
various regions, and brought home plunder from the remotest parts. This
meaning may be elicited from the words of the Prophet; and the different
clauses would thus fitly coalesce together, that when the Ninevites left
their nests, they dispersed and migrated in all directions. I do not at
the same time disapprove of the former meaning: they are then like
locusts, who *lodge in mounds during the time of cold; but when the sun
rises,* — that is, when the season invites them, (for he speaks not of
the winter sun,) but when the heat of the sun prevails and temperate the
air, — then, he says, the locusts go forth and *fly away, and known no
more is their place* He means, in short, that the Ninevites plundered,
and that they did so after the manner of locusts; and that a similar end
also was nigh them; for the Lord would destroy them, yea, suddenly
consume them, so that no trace of them could be found. It follows —

<span id="v.3.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvi-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018)<span id="v.3.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvi-p2"></span>**18.** Thy shepherds slumber, O king of
Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell *in* *the dust*: thy people is scattered
upon the mountains, and no man gathereth *them*

<span id="v.3.xvi-p3"></span>**18.** Dormitaverunt pastores tui, rex
Assur; jacuerunt fortes tui; dispersus est populus tuus super montes, et
nemo congregans.

<span id="v.3.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xvi-p5"></span><span id="v.3.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvi-p6"></span>He confirms the preceding verse, and says
that there would be no counsel nor wisdom in the leading men: for the
*shepherds* of the king of Assyria were his counselors, in whose wisdom
he trusted, as we know that kings usually depend on their counselors:
for they think that there is in them prudence enough, and therefore they
commit to them the care of the whole people. But the Prophet ridicules
the confidence of the king of Assyria, because the shepherds would not
have so much vigilance as to take care of themselves, and of the people,
and of the whole kingdom. He speaks in the past tense, either to show
the certainty of the prediction, or because the change of tenses is
common in Hebrew. *Lie still,* he says, *shall thy mighty men;*  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) that is, they shall remain idle; they
shall not be able to sally out against their enemies, to stop their
progress. *They shall* then *lie still:* and then he says, *Scattered
are thy people* <span id="v.3.xvi-p9.3"></span>פוש, *push,* is not to
scatter; hence I doubt not, but that there is a change of letter, that
<span id="v.3.xvi-p9.4"></span>ש, *schin,* is put for <span
id="v.3.xvi-p9.5"></span>ץ, *tzaddi;* and I am surprised that some
derive the verb from <span id="v.3.xvi-p9.6"></span>פוש, *push*, when,
on the contrary, it is from <span id="v.3.xvi-p9.7"></span>פוף, *puts*,
and the change of these two letters is common in Hebrew. *Thy people*
then *are dispersed on the mountains and there is no one to assemble
them*

<span id="v.3.xvi-p10"></span>By these words the Prophet means, that
such would be the scattering of the whole kingdom, that there would be
no hope of restoration; *There will* then *be none to assemble them* He
had said before that the chiefs or mighty men would be still. Though it
would be needful to go forth to check the progress of their enemies; yet
he says, *They shall idly lie down:* He refers here to their sloth. But
the people who ought to be quiet at home, as being weak and feeble,
*shall be dispersed on the mountains, and no one will be there to gather
them* It follows —

<span id="v.3.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvii-p1"></span><span id="v.3.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019)<span id="v.3.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvii-p2"></span>**19.** *There is* no healing of thy
bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall
clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed
continually?

<span id="v.3.xvii-p3"></span>**19.** Non est contractio (vel, cicatrix)
fracturae tuae; dolore est plena plaga tua; omnes qui audierint famam
tuam (id est, de te) percutient manum super te; quia super quem non
transiit malitia tua jugiter?

<span id="v.3.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.3.xvii-p5"></span><span id="v.3.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here more clearly, that
when the empire of Nineveh should be scattered, it would be an incurable
evil, that every hope of a remedy would be taken away. Though the wicked
cannot escape calamity, yet they harbor false expectations, and think
that they can in a short time gather new strength. Hence, in order to
take from them this hope, the Prophet says, that there would be no
*contraction of the fracture*  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250)
And this is a striking similitude; for he compares the ruin of Nineveh
to a wound which cannot be seamed and healed. There is then no
contraction; some render it, a wrinkle, but improperly. *There is* then
*no contraction:* and he adds, *Thy stroke is full of pain;*  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) that is, the pain of thy stroke cannot
be allayed. This is one thing, — that the ruin of Nineveh would be
irreparable.

<span id="v.3.xvii-p9"></span>Then he says, *Whosoever shall hear the
report, shall strike the hand on thy account* Many give this rendering,
They shall clap the hand over thee, or with the hands; and they think
that the singular is put for the plural number. But as in Hebrew to
strike the hand is a token of consent, it would not be unsuitable to
say, that the Prophet means, that wherever the report of this calamity
would be heard, all would express their approbation, “See, God has at
length proved himself to be the just avenger of so much wickedness.” To
strike the hand is said to be done by those who make an agreements or
when any one pledges himself for another.  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) As then in giving pledges, and in
other compacts, men are said to strike the hand; so also all shall thus
give their assent to God’s judgment in this case, “O how rightly is this
done! O how justly has God punished these tyrants, these plunderers.”
*They will* then *strike the hand on thy account;* that is, “This thy
ruin will be approved;” as though he said, “Not only before God art
thou, Nineveh, accursed, but also according to the consent of all
nations.” And thus he intimates, that Nineveh would perish in the
greatest dishonor and disgrace. It sometimes happens that an empire
falls, and all bewail the event: but God here declares, that he would
not be satisfied with the simple destruction of the city Nineveh without
adding to it a public infamy, so that all might acknowledge that it
happened through his righteous judgment.

<span id="v.3.xvii-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *For upon whom has
not thy wickedness passed continually?* This is a confirmation of the
last clause; and this reason will suit both the views which have been
given. If we take the striking of the hand for approbation, this reason
will be suitable. — How? For all nations will rejoice at thy
destruction, because there is no nation which thou hast not in many ways
injured. So also, in token of their joy, all will congratulate
themselves, as though they were made free; or they will clap their
hands, that is, acknowledge that thou hast been destroyed by the
judgment of God, because all had experienced how unjustly and
tyrannically thou hast ruled. As then thy wickedness has been like a
deluge, and hast nearly consumed all the earth, all will clap or shake
their hands at thy ruin.

<span id="v.3.xvii-p13"></span>And he says, *continually,* to show that
God’s forbearance had been long exercised. Hence, also, it appears, that
the Assyrians were inexcusable, because, when God indulgently spared
them, they did not repent, but pursued their wicked ways for a long
course of time. As then to their sinful licentiousness they added
perverseness, every excuse was removed. But the Prophet does, at the
same time, remind the Israelites, that there was no reason for them to
be cast down in their minds, because God did not immediately execute
punishment; for by the word <span id="v.3.xvii-p13.1"></span>תמיד,
*tamid,* he insinuates, that God would so suspend for a time his
judgment as to Nineveh, that his forbearance and delay might be an
evidence of his goodness and mercy. We hence see that the Prophet here
opposes the ardor of men, for they immediately grow angry or complain
when God delays to execute vengeance on their enemies.

<span id="v.3.xvii-p14"></span>He shows that God has a just reason for
not visiting the wicked with immediate punishment; but yet the time will
come when it shall appear that they are altogether past recovery, — the
time, I say, will come, when the Lord shall at length put forth his hand
and execute his judgment.

<span id="v.3.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.3.xviii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="v.3.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are not
able to keep a firm footing in the way of justice and uprightness, — O
grant, that, being governed by thy Spirit, we may restrain ourselves
from doing any harm, and thus abstain from all evil deeds, and that we
may labor to do good to all, so that we may, by experience, find that
all are protected by thee, who so conform themselves to the rule of thy
Law, that they take no advantage of the simple, either for the purpose
of ruining or of injuring them, but who, being content with their own
small portion, know that there is nothing better than to be wholly
subject to thee, and to thy guidance: and may we thus live in
forbearance and justice towards our neighbors, that we may, at the same
time, rely on thy mercy, by which alone we can be defended, and made
safe against so many assaults of Satan and of the wicked, until, having
at length completed the course of our warfare, we shall come into that
blessed rest which has been prepared for us in heaven by Christ Jesus
our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.3.xviii-p3"></span>End of the Commentaries on Nahum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc28021.htm#fr_238) <span
id="v.3.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.iv-p9"></span> It appears from *Marckius* that *Theodoret*
and *Cyril* regarded this verse, with *Calvin,* as a description of the
Chaldean army after having invaded Nineveh, but that *Jerome* and
*Cocceius* viewed it as a delineation of the state of Nineveh in the
Prophet’s time; and with the last *Newcome* agrees, while *Henderson*
coincides with the former. The version given by them is all nearly the
same. It seems certainly more consistent with the order of the poem to
regard the verse as describing the state of Nineveh at the time, for the
sacking of Nineveh had been before very minutely delineated. Having done
this, the Prophet may be supposed to give here a reason for the dreadful
catastrophe which he had mentioned. Entertaining this view, and
differing from others as to the meaning of some of the clauses, I offer
the following version of the three verses, —

<span id="v.3.iv-p10"></span>*1. Oh! The city of blood! All of deceit;  
Of plunder it is full, none can search out the spoil:* —

<span id="v.3.iv-p11"></span>*2. The sound of the whip, and the sound of
the rattling wheel!  
And the horse prancing, and the chariot bounding!  
The horseman mounting,  
And the flaming of the sword and the glittering of the spear!  
And a multitude dancing, and a mass inactive!  
And no end to her people!  
*Who *are fallen, with their nations,*

<span id="v.3.iv-p12"></span>*3. Through the many fornications of the
harlot,  
That exults in beauty,* and *possesses enchantments;  
Who sells nations by her fornications,  
And tribes by her enchantments.*

<span id="v.3.iv-p13"></span><span id="v.3.iv-p13.1"></span>ימיש,
“search out,” I derive from <span id="v.3.iv-p13.2"></span>מש, which is
to feel for the purpose of exploring, and then, to explore or search
out; see <span id="v.3.iv-p13.3"></span>[Ge
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#034)<span id="v.3.iv-p13.3"></span>.
The second verse contains a simple enumeration of what the city
exhibited. <span id="v.3.iv-p13.4"></span>רב חלל, “a multitude dancing”
or piping, the <span id="v.3.iv-p13.5"></span>ו being dropped in <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.6"></span>חלל, as it is in <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.7"></span>חללים, pipers, <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.8"></span>[1Ki
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#040)<span id="v.3.iv-p13.8"></span>.
Then as a contrast comes the dead, heavy, inactive mass, <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.9"></span>כבד פגד. “To her people” or nations, <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.10"></span>לגויה, <span id="v.3.iv-p13.11"></span>τοις
εθνεσιν αυτης. — *Sept.* In the word <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.12"></span>בנויתם, I take that <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.13"></span>ת is a mistake for <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.14"></span>ה. If taken for carcasses, it wants a <span
id="v.3.iv-p13.15"></span>ו before <span id="v.3.iv-p13.16"></span>ת;
see <span id="v.3.iv-p13.17"></span>[Ps
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)<span id="v.3.iv-p13.17"></span>.
The third verse must be connected with the second, as it has otherwise
no grammatical construction. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc28021.htm#fr_239) <span
id="v.3.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.v-p10"></span> <span id="v.3.v-p10.1"></span>*Practicas*,
used here evidently in a sense not classical, meaning the crafty tactics
of politicians. The word *practic,* in English, was, at one time, used
in a bad sense, signifying what was *sly* and *artful,* or *crafty;* and
*practice* too was employed to designate a *trick,* or a *stratagem.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc28021.htm#fr_240) <span
id="v.3.vi-p14.4"></span>

<span id="v.3.vi-p15"></span> The *Septuagint* favors this meaning,
“<span id="v.3.vi-p15.1"></span>εις παραδειγμα—for an example.” In this
sense *Grotius* and *Piscator* take the word. *Henderson,* with less
propriety, renders it “gazingstock,” the word of our version. *Newcome*
translates it “dung,” according to the Rabbins. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc28021.htm#fr_241) <span
id="v.3.vii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.3.vii-p7"></span> Literally, “Every one of thy seers shall
hasten from thee.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc28021.htm#fr_242) <span
id="v.3.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p11"></span> So does *Newcome,* but with no
countenance from the passage. The verb in the 10th verse which refers to
the captivity of No, is in the past tense. Most commentators regard the
event as having passed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc28021.htm#fr_243) <span
id="v.3.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p12"></span> Opinions differ as to No. *Bochart*
supposed it to be *Diospolis,* near Mendes, in Lower Egypt. *Henderson*
says, that later commentators are in favor of *Thebes,* the ancient
capital of Upper Egypt. It is of no consequence to the present purpose
which it was. It was some celebrated city in Egypt, whose ruin was well
known in the Prophet’s time. Both the Rabbins and early Fathers thought
that it was what was afterwards called Alexandria. But most probably it
was a city which had lost its name and existence from the catastrophe
that is here mentioned. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc28021.htm#fr_244) <span
id="v.3.viii-p14.6"></span>

<span id="v.3.viii-p15"></span> The original names in this verse are
<span id="v.3.viii-p15.1"></span>כוש, supposed to be Ethiopia, — <span
id="v.3.viii-p15.2"></span>מצרים, Egypt, here, either Upper or Lower, —
<span id="v.3.viii-p15.3"></span>פוט, Put, a country to the west of
Lower Egypt, its inhabitants the descendants of Ham, <span
id="v.3.viii-p15.4"></span>[Ge
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)<span id="v.3.viii-p15.4"></span>,
— <span id="v.3.viii-p15.5"></span>לובים, Lybians, who occupied the
region between Put and Numidia. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc28021.htm#fr_245) <span
id="v.3.xi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.3.xi-p9"></span> Thou shalt seek a refuge from the enemy. —
*Newcome.* But <span id="v.3.xi-p9.1"></span>מעוז is rather a defense,
aid, assistance, that which affords strength. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc28021.htm#fr_246) <span
id="v.3.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiii-p8"></span> Both *Homer* and *Virgil* have this
comparison. “<span id="v.3.xiii-p8.1"></span>Αχαιδες ουκ ετ Αχαιοι —
Grecian women, not Grecians.” — “<span id="v.3.xiii-p8.2"></span>O! vere
Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges — O truly Phrygian women, but not
Phrygians.”

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc28021.htm#fr_247) <span
id="v.3.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xiv-p13"></span> *Grotius* agrees in this view, though
*Newcome* takes the former, explaining, “as the locust,” that is, in a
manner equally unsparing. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc28021.htm#fr_248) <span
id="v.3.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xv-p10"></span> The latter clause of the last verse and
this verse and the following are evidently connected. The first, <span
id="v.3.xv-p10.1"></span>התכבד, hath <span id="v.3.xv-p10.2"></span>י
added to it in ten or more copies, and may be deemed an imperative as
well as the other, and in the feminine gender; *Calvin* takes it an
infinitive. This would be literal rendering —

<span id="v.3.xv-p11"></span>Increase thyself as the chafer,  
Increase thyself as the locust,

<span id="v.3.xv-p12"></span>16. Multiply thy merchants more than the
stars of heaven:  
The chafer spoils, and flies away:

<span id="v.3.xv-p13"></span>*17. Thy crowned ones* shall be *as the
locusts,  
And thy rulers as the gibbous caterpillar;  
Which lodge in the fences in the cold day;  
The sun rises and they flit away,  
And not known is the place where they* are.

<span id="v.3.xv-p14"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc28021.htm#fr_249) <span
id="v.3.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvi-p7"></span> <span id="v.3.xvi-p7.1"></span>*Fortes
tui*, <span id="v.3.xvi-p7.2"></span>אדיריך, thy eminents, thy nobles.
“The shepherds,” the governers of the people, <span
id="v.3.xvi-p7.3"></span>נמו, slumber; and the nobles, the princes,
<span id="v.3.xvi-p7.4"></span>ישכנו, rest, sit still, without making
any effort: then it follows, —

<span id="v.3.xvi-p8"></span>*Dispersed are thy people on the
mountains,  
And* there is *no gatherer.*

<span id="v.3.xvi-p9"></span>Calvin is mistaken as to the meaning of the
verb <span id="v.3.xvi-p9.1"></span>פוש: it means more properly, than
the other, a dispersed state. It is applied in <span
id="v.3.xvi-p9.2"></span>[Le 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#005)<span
id="v.3.xvi-p9.2"></span>, and in other places, to the *spreading* of
leprosy. When so used, it is in Kal. It is here, and here only, in
Niphal. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc28021.htm#fr_250) <span
id="v.3.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvii-p7"></span> <span id="v.3.xvii-p7.1"></span>אין-כהה
לשברך — No stopping or restraining to thy breach. The word is applied to
the restraint put on men’s wickedness, <span
id="v.3.xvii-p7.2"></span>[1Sa
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#013)<span id="v.3.xvii-p7.2"></span>,
and to the checking and restraining of the spread of leprosy, <span
id="v.3.xvii-p7.3"></span>[Le
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#028)<span id="v.3.xvii-p7.3"></span>.
The breach or breaking was such that there was no stopping of it from
becoming entire and complete. The Septuagint gives the meaning—”<span
id="v.3.xvii-p7.4"></span>ουκ εστιν εασις τη συντριβη σου — there is no
healing to thy breach.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc28021.htm#fr_251) <span
id="v.3.xvii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvii-p8"></span> Rather, “grievous is thy stroke.” The
verb is <span id="v.3.xvii-p8.1"></span>נחלה, from <span
id="v.3.xvii-p8.2"></span>חלה, to be languid, and sometimes, to make
languid, grievous or afflictive, and then in Niphal, as here, to be
grievous. See the same clause in <span id="v.3.xvii-p8.3"></span>[Jer
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019)<span id="v.3.xvii-p8.3"></span>.
As a noun it is rendered “grief” in <span id="v.3.xvii-p8.4"></span>[Isa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011)<span id="v.3.xvii-p8.4"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc28021.htm#fr_252) <span
id="v.3.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.3.xvii-p10"></span> The phrase here used, <span
id="v.3.xvii-p10.1"></span>תקע כף, is found in three other places, <span
id="v.3.xvii-p10.2"></span>[Ps
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001)<span id="v.3.xvii-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="v.3.xvii-p10.3"></span>[Prov.
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#018), [Prov.
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#026)<span
id="v.3.xvii-p10.3"></span>. In the first it is a symptom of joy; and in
the two other places, in the sense here mentioned. — *Ed.*

<span id="v.3.xvii-p11"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scripture Translations](cc28022)
