[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28010)  [Next](cc28012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.2"></span>

<span id="iv.2-p1"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="iv.2.i"></span>

<span id="iv.2.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.i-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)<span id="iv.2.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.i-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to them that devise iniquity, and
work evil upon their beds! when the morning is light, they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hand.

<span id="iv.2.i-p3"></span>**1.** Vae cogitantibus iniquitatem et
fabricantibus malitiam super cubilibus suis! Quum illuxerit mane,
exequentur eam, quia est ad potentiam manus ipsorum.

<span id="iv.2.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.i-p6"></span>The Prophet does not here speak only against
the Israelites, as some think, who have incorrectly confined this part
of his teaching to the ten tribes; but he, on the contrary, (in
discharging his office, addresses also the Jews. He refers not here to
idolatry, as in the last chapter; but inveighs against sins condemned in
the second table. As then the Jews had not only polluted the worship of
God, but also gave loose reins to many iniquities, so that they dealt
wrongfully with their neighbors, and there was among them no attention
to justice and equity, so the prophet inveighs here as we shall see,
against avarice, robberies, and cruelty: and his discourse is full of
vehemence; for there was no doubt such licentiousness then prevailing
among the people, that there was need of severe and sharp reproofs. It
is at the same time easy to perceive that his discourse is mainly
directed against the chief men, who exercised authority, and turned it
to wrong purposes.

<span id="iv.2.i-p7"></span>*Woe,* he says, *to those who meditate on
iniquity, and devise*  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) *evil on
their beds, that, when the morning shines, they may execute it* Here the
Prophet describes to the life the character and manners of those who
were given to gain, and were intent only on raising themselves. He says,
that in their beds they were meditating on iniquity, and devising
wickedness. Doubtless the time of night has been given to men entirely
for rest; but they ought also to use this kindness of God for the
purpose of restraining themselves from what is wicked: for he who
refreshes his strength by nightly rest, ought to think within himself,
that it is an unbecoming thing and even monstrous, that he should in the
meantime devise frauds, and guiles, and iniquities. For why does the
Lord intend that we should rest, except that all evil things should rest
also? Hence the Prophet shows here, by implication, that those who are
intent on devising frauds, while they ought to rest, subvert as it were
the course of nature; for they have no regard for that rest, which has
been granted to men for this end, — that they may not trouble and annoy
one another.

<span id="iv.2.i-p9"></span>He afterwards shows how great was their
desire to do mischief, *When it shines in the morning, he says, they
execute it* He might have said only, They do in the daytime what they
contrive in the night: but he says, *In the morning;* as though he had
said, that they were so heated by avarice, that they rested not a
moment; as soon as it shone, they were immediately ready to perpetrate
the frauds they had thought of in the night. We now then apprehend the
import of the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iv.2.i-p10"></span>He now subjoins, *For according to their
power is their hand* As <span id="iv.2.i-p10.1"></span>אל, *al,* means
God, an old interpreter has given this rendering, Against God is their
hand: but this does not suit the passage. Others have explained it thus,
For strength is in their hand: and almost all those well-skilled in
Hebrew agree in this explanation. Those who had power, they think, are
here pointed out by the Prophet, — that as they had strength, they dared
to do whatever they pleased. But the Hebrew phrase is not translated by
them; and I greatly wonder that they have mistaken in a thing so clear:
for it is not, There is power in their hand; but their hand is to power.
The same mode of speaking is found in <span id="iv.2.i-p10.2"></span>[Pr
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#000)<span id="iv.2.i-p10.2"></span>, and
there also many interpreters are wrong; for Solomon there forbids us to
withhold from our neighbor his right, When thine hand, he says, is for
power; some say, When there is power to help the miserable. But Solomon
means no such thing; for he on the contrary means this, When thine hand
is ready to execute any evil, abstain. So also the Lord says in <span
id="iv.2.i-p10.3"></span>[De 28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#000)<span
id="iv.2.i-p10.3"></span>,

<span id="iv.2.i-p11"></span>“When the enemy shall take away thy
spoils,  
thy hand will not be for power;”

<span id="iv.2.i-p12"></span>that is, “Thou wilt not dare to move a
finger to restrain thy enemies; when they will plunder thee and rob thee
of thy substance, thou wilt stand in dread, for thy hand will be as
though it were dead.” I come now to the present passage, Their hand is
for power:  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) the Prophet means, that
they dared to try what they could, and that therefore their hand was
always ready; whenever there was hope of lucre or gains the hand was
immediately prepared. How so? Because they were restrained neither by
the fear of God nor by any regard for justice; but their hand was for
power, that is, what they could, they dared to do. We now then see what
the Prophet means as far as I can judge. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iv.2.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.ii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002)<span id="iv.2.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ii-p2"></span>**2.** And they covet fields, and take
*them* by violence; and houses, and take *them* away: so they oppress a
man and his house, even a man and his heritage.

<span id="iv.2.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et concupiverunt agros et rapiunt;
et domos, et auferunt; et vexant virum et domum ejus, virum et
haereditatem ejus.

<span id="iv.2.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ii-p6"></span>Micah confirms here what is contained in
the former verse; for he sets forth the alacrity with which the
avaricious were led to commit plunder; nay, how unbridled was their
cupidity to do evil. As soon as they have coveted any thing, he says,
they take it by force. And hence we gather, that the Prophet, in the
last verse, connected wicked counsels with the attempt of effecting
them; as though he had said, that they indeed carefully contrived their
frauds, but that as they were skillful in their contrivances, so they
were not less bold and daring in executing then.

<span id="iv.2.ii-p7"></span>The same thing he now repeats in other
words for a further confirmation, *As soon as they have coveted fields,
they seize them by force; as soon as they have coveted houses they take
them away;* they oppress a man and his house together;  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) that is, nothing escaped them: for as
their wickedness in frauds was great, so their disposition to attempt
whatever they wished was furious. And well would it be were there no
such cruel avarice at this day; but it exists every where, so that we
may see, as in a mirror, an example of what is here said. But it behaves
us carefully to consider how greatly displeasing to God are frauds and
plunders, so that each of us may keep himself from doing any wrong, and
be so ruled by a desire of what is right, that every one of us may act
in good faith towards his neighbors, seek nothing that is unjust, and
bridle his own desires: and whenever Satan attempts to allure us, let
what is here taught be to us as a bridle to restrain us. It follows —

<span id="iv.2.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.iii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#003)<span id="iv.2.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Therefore thus saith the Lord;
Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not
remove your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: for this time *is*
evil.

<span id="iv.2.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Propterea sic dicit Jehova, Ecce
ego cogitans super familiam hanc malum, quod non submovebitis ab illo
(sic est ab verbum; a quo submovebitis) colla vestra, et non ambulabitis
in altitudine; quia tempus malum hoc.

<span id="iv.2.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet shows now that the avaricious
were in vain elevated by their frauds and rapacity, because their hope
would be disappointed; for God in heaven was waiting his time to appear
against them. Though they had anxiously heaped together much wealth, yet
God would justly dissipate it altogether. This is what he now declares.

<span id="iv.2.iii-p7"></span>*Behold,* he says, *thus saith Jehovah, I
am meditating evil against this family*  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) There is here a striking contrast between
God and the Jews, between their wicked intentions and the intentions of
God, which in themselves were not evil, and yet would bring evil on
them. God, he says, thus speaks, Behold, I am purposing; as though he
said, “While ye are thus busying yourselves on your beds, while ye are
revolving many designs while ye are contriving many artifices, ye think
me to be asleep, ye think that I am all the while meditating nothing;
nay, I have my thoughts too, and those different from yours; for while
ye are awake to devise wickedness I am awake to contrive judgment.” We
now then perceive the import of these words: it is God that declares
that he meditates evil, and it is not the Prophet that speaks to these
avaricious and rapacious men; and the evil is that of punishment,
inasmuch as it is the peculiar office of God to repay to all what they
deserve, and to render to each the measure of evil they have brought on
others.

<span id="iv.2.iii-p9"></span>*Ye shall not, he says, remove your necks
from under it.* Since hypocrites always promise to themselves impunity,
and lay hold on subterfuges, whenever God threatens them, the Prophet
here affirms, that though they sought every escape, they would yet be
held bound by God’s hand, so that they could not by any means shake off
the burden designed for them. And this was a reward most fully deserved
by those who had withdrawn their necks when God called them to
obedience. They then who refuse to obey God, when he requires from them
a voluntary service, will at length be drawn by force, not to undergo
the yoke, but the burden which will altogether overwhelm them. Whosoever
then will not willingly submit to God’s yoke, must at length undergo the
great and dreadful burden prepared for the unnamable.

<span id="iv.2.iii-p10"></span>Ye will not then be able to withdraw your
necks, and *ye shall not walk in your height.* He expresses still more
clearly what I have referred to, — that they were so elated with pride,
that they despised all threatening and all instruction: and this
presumption became the cause of perverseness; for were it not that a
notion of security deceived men, they would presently bend, when God
threatens them. This then is the reason why the Prophet joins this
sentence, *ye shall no more walk in your height;* that is, your
haughtiness shall then surely be made to succumb; *for it will be a time
of evil* He means, as I have said, that those who retain a stir and
unbending neck towards God, when he would lay on them his yoke, shall at
length be made by force to yield, however rebellious they may be. How
so? For they shall be broken down, inasmuch as they will not be
corrected. The Prophet then adds —

<span id="iv.2.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.iv-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004)<span id="iv.2.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iv-p2"></span>**4.** In that day shall *one* take up a
parable against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, *and* say,
We be utterly spoiled: he hath changed the portion of my people: how
hath he removed *it* from me! turning away he hath divided our fields.

<span id="iv.2.iv-p3"></span>**4.** In die illo tollent super eos
parabolam, et lugebunt (sunt quidem verba singularis numeri, <span
id="iv.2.iv-p3.1"></span>ישא et <span id="iv.2.iv-p3.2"></span>נהה;
caeterum indefinita est locutio; nam qui subau diunt conductios homines,
quibus solebat injungi haec provincia, ut lugubres cantus conciperent ad
cladem aliquam, nescio an assecuti sint mentem Prophetae: tamen hoc
relinquo in medio, quia alibi vidimus fuisse tunc cantores in luctu,
quemadmodum etiam alibi erunt Praeficae, hoc est, mulieres
lamentatrices; caeterum malo indefinite accipere; Tollent igitur super
vos parabolam et lugebunt) luctu lamentabili (vel, lamento lamenti,)
dicendo, Vastando vastati sumus; partem populi mei mutavit; quomodo
tollent a nobis ad restituendum? Agros nostros dividet.

<span id="iv.2.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iv-p6"></span>The verse is in broken sentences; and hence
interpreters vary. But the meaning of the Prophet appears to me to be
simply this, *In that day they shall take up a proverb against you;*
that is, it will not be an ordinary calamity, but the report concerning
it will go forth every where so that the Jews will become to all a
common proverb. This is one thing. As to the word <span
id="iv.2.iv-p6.1"></span>משל, *meshil,* it is taken, we know, for a
weighty saying, and in the plural, weighty sayings, called by the
Latins, sentences (*sententias*) or sayings, (*dicta,*) and by the
Greeks, apophthegmata. <span id="iv.2.iv-p6.2"></span>αποφθεγματα, But
these sayings were thus called weighty by the Hebrews, because he who
elevated his style, made use especially of figurative expressions, to
render his discourse nobler and more splendid.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) Hence many render this word, enigmas. It
accords well with the Prophet’s meaning, to suppose, that proverbial
sayings would spread every where respecting the Jews, especially as
calamities were usually described in a plaintive song. They shall *then*
mourn over you with lamentable mourning. But this ought to be referred
to the fact, — that the calamity would be every where known. It yet
seems that this sentence is applied afterwards to the Jews themselves,
and not unsuitably. But it is an indefinite mode of speaking, since the
Prophet speaks not of one or two men, but of the whole people.

<span id="iv.2.iv-p8"></span>They shall then mourn in this manner,
*Wasted, we have been wasted: the portion of my people has he changed* —
(it is the future instead of the past) — *He has* then *changed the
portion of my people* This may be applied to God as well as to the
Assyrians; for God was the principal author of this calamity; he it was
who changed the portion of the people: for as by his blessing he had
long cherished that people, so afterwards he changed their lot. But as
the Assyrians were the ministers of God’s vengeance, the expression
cannot be unsuitably applied to them. The Assyrian then has taken away
*the portion of my people* And then he says, *How has he made to
depart,* or has taken away, or removed *from me,* (literally, to *me,*)
*to restore,* — though <span id="iv.2.iv-p8.1"></span>שבב, *shibeb,* may
be from the root <span id="iv.2.iv-p8.2"></span>שוב, *shub*, it yet
means the same, — *How* then *has he taken away from us to restore our
fields he divides,* that is, which he has divided; for the relative
<span id="iv.2.iv-p8.3"></span>אשר, *asher,* is understood and there is
also a change of time. Now as the discourse, as I have said, is in
broken sentences, there are various interpretations. I however think
that the Prophet simply means this — *How as to restoring has he taken
away our fields, which he hath divided?* that is, How far off are we
from restitution? for every hope is far removed, since the Lord himself
has divided among strangers our land and possession; or since the
enemies have divided it among themselves; for it is usual after victory,
for every one to seize on his own portion. Whether then this be
understood of the Assyrians, or rather be referred to God, the meaning
of the Prophet seems clearly to be this, — that the Jews were not only
expelled from their country but that every hope of return was also taken
away, since the enemies had parted among themselves their inheritance,
so that they who had been driven out, now in vain thought of a
restitution.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) But I read this in
the present time; for the Prophet introduces here the Jews as uttering
this lamentation, — “It is now all over with us, and there is no remedy
for this evil; for not only are we stripped of all our property and
ejected from our country, but what has been taken away by our enemies
cannot be restored to us, inasmuch as they have already parted our
possessions among themselves, and every one occupies his own portion and
his own place, as though it were his own inheritance. We have therefore
to do, not only with the Assyrians in general, but also with every
individual; for what every one now occupies and possesses he will
defend, as his rightful and hereditary possession.”

<span id="iv.2.iv-p16"></span>Some conjecture from this verse, that the
discourse belongs rather to the Israelites, who were banished without
any hope of return; but no necessity constrains us to explain this of
the Israelites; for the Prophet does not declare here what God would do,
but what would be the calamity when considered in itself. We have indeed
said already in many places, that the Prophets, while threatening, speak
only of calamities, desolations, deaths, and destructions, but that they
afterwards add promises for consolation. But their teaching is
discriminative: when the Prophets intend to terrify hypocrites and
perverse men, they set forth the wrath of God only, and leave no hope;
but when they would inspire with hope those who are by this means
humbled, they draw forth comfort to them even from the goodness of God.
What is here said then may fitly and really be applied to the Jews. It
follows —

<span id="iv.2.v"></span>

<span id="iv.2.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.v-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#005)<span id="iv.2.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.v-p2"></span>**5.** Therefore thou shalt have none that
shall cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the LORD.

<span id="iv.2.v-p3"></span>**5.** Itaque non erit tibi projiciens
funiculum ad sortem in coetu Jehovae.

<span id="iv.2.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.v-p6"></span>Here the Prophet concludes his discourse
respecting God’s design to cleanse Judea from its perverse and wicked
inhabitants, that it might no longer be the inheritance of one people.
For the land, we know, had been given to the posterity of Abraham, on
the condition, that it was to be held by them as an heritage: and we
also know, that a line was determined by lot whenever the year of
Jubilee returned, that every one might regain his own possession. The
Prophet now testifies that this advantage would be taken away from the
Jews, and that they would hereafter possess the land by no hereditary
right; for God, who had given it, would now take it away.

<span id="iv.2.v-p7"></span>*There shall not then be one to cast a line
by lot in the assembly of Jehovah.* And he seems here to touch the Jews,
by calling them the assembly of Jehovah. He indeed adopted them, they
were the people of God: but he intimates that they were repudiated,
because they had rendered themselves unworthy of his favor. He
therefore, by calling them ironically *the assembly of Jehovah,* denies
that they rightly retained this name, inasmuch as they had deprived
themselves of this honor and dignity. It now follows —

<span id="iv.2.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.2.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.vi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006)<span id="iv.2.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.vi-p2"></span>**6.** Prophesy ye not, *say they to them
that* prophesy: they shall not prophesy to them, *that* they shall not
take shame.

<span id="iv.2.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Ne stilletis; stillabunt; non
stillabunt illis (*hoc est*, super eos;) non apprehendet ignominias
(*sic est ad verbum*.)

<span id="iv.2.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.vi-p6"></span>Here the conciseness of the expressions has
made interpreters to differ in their views. Some read thus, *Distill ye
not,* — *they will distill;* that is, the Jews speak against the
prophets, and with threats forbid them, as with authority, to address
them. The Hebrew word, distill, means the same as to speak; though at
the same time it is applied more commonly to weighty addresses than to
such as are common and ordinary. If any understands*, they will
distill,* or speak, of the Jews, then the Prophet points out their
arrogance in daring to contend with God’s prophets, and in trying to
silence and force them to submission. We indeed find that ungodly men
act thus, when they wish to take away the liberty of teaching from God’s
prophets; for they resist as though they themselves were doubly and
treble prophets. So also in this place, *Distill ye not,* that is, the
Jews say, Let not the servants of God prophesy. But some think that a
relative is understood, *Distill ye not* for them who distill; as though
he had said, that ungodly men would not bear God’s prophets and thus
would prevent and restrain them, as much as they could, from speaking.
Others make this distinction, *Distill ye not,* — *they shall distill;*
as though the Jews said the first, and God the second. Distill ye not, —
this was the voice of the ungodly and rebellious people, who would cast
away from them and reject every instruction: but God on the other side
opposed them and said, *Nay, they shall distill;* ye forbid, but it is
not in your power; I have sent them: though ye may rage and glamour a
hundred times, it is my will that they should proceed in their course.

<span id="iv.2.vi-p7"></span>We hence see how various are the
explanations: and even in the other part of the verse there is no more
agreement between interpreters: *They shall not distill;* respecting
this clause, it is sufficiently evident, that God here intimates that
there would be now an end to all prophecies. How so? Because he would
not render his servants a sport, and subject them to reproach. This is
the true meaning: and yet some take another view, as though the Prophet
continued his sentence, *They shall not distill,* lest the people should
receive reproaches; for the ungodly think, that if they close the mouths
of the prophets, all things would be lawful to them, and that their
crimes would be hid, in short, that their vices would not be called to
an account; as though their wickedness was not in itself sufficiently
reproachful, were God to send no prophets, and no reproof given. No
doubt, profane men are so stupid as to think themselves free from every
reproach, when God is silent, and when they put away from themselves
every instruction. Hence some think, that this passage is to be
understood in this sense. But I consider the meaning to be that which I
have stated; for he had before said, *Distill ye not who distill;* that
is, Ye prophets, be no longer troublesome to us; why do you stem our
ears? We can no longer bear your boldness; be then silent. Thus he
expressly introduced the Jews as speaking with authority, as though it
was in their power to restrain the prophets from doing their duty. Now
follows, as I think, the answer of God*, They shall not distill,* that
he may not get reproaches: Since I see that my doctrine is intolerable
to you, since I find a loathing so great and so shameful, I will take
away my prophets from you: I will therefore rest, and be hereafter
silent. — Why? “Because I effect nothing; nay, I subject my prophets to
reproaches; for they lose their labor in speaking, they pour forth words
which produce no fruit; for ye are altogether irreclaimable. Nay, as
they are reproachfully treated by you, their condition is worse than if
they were covered with all the disgrace of having been criminal. Since
then I subject my prophets to reproach I will not allow them to be thus
mocked by you. They shall therefore give over, they shall prophesy no
longer.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) ”

<span id="iv.2.vi-p16"></span>But the Lord could not have threatened the
Jews with any thing worse or more dreadful than with this immunity, —
that they should no more hear anything which might disturb them: for it
is an extreme curse, when God gives us loose reins, and suffers us, with
unbridled liberty, to rush as it were headlong into evils, as though he
had delivered us up to Satan to be his slaves. Since it is so, let us be
assured that it is an awful threatening, when he says*, They shall not
distill,* lest they should hereafter become objects of reproach.

<span id="iv.2.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.2.vii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.2.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou art
pleased to try our patience by requiring mutual justice and the offices
of love and benevolence, — O grant, that we may not be wolves one to
another, but show ourselves to be really thy children, by observing all
those duties of justice and kindness which thou commandest, and thus
follow what is right and just through the whole course of our life, that
we may at length enjoy that blessedness which is laid up for us in
heaven, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.2.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.2.viii-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-fourth

<span id="iv.2.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.ix-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#007)<span id="iv.2.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ix-p2"></span>**7.** O *thou that art* named the house of
Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straitened? *are* these his doings? do
not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly?

<span id="iv.2.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Qui diceris domus Jacob, an reductus
est in angustias Spiritus Jehova? (alii vertunt, an imminutus est
Spiritus Jehovae; <span id="iv.2.ix-p3.1"></span>קצר significat
coarctare, significat etiam imminuere apud Hebraeos; sed melius quadrat
sensus ille quem reddidi.) An haec sunt opera ejus? Annon verba mea bona
sunt cum eo (hoc est, apud cum) qui rectus ambulat?

<span id="iv.2.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.ix-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet now reproves the Israelites
with greater severity, because they attempted to impose a law on God and
on his prophets and would not endure the free course of instruction. He
told us in the last verse, that the Israelites were inflated with so
much presumption, that they wished to make terms with God: “Let him not
prophesy” they said, as though it were in the power of man to rule God:
and the Prophet now repeats, *Is the Spirit of Jehovah straitened?* as
though he said, Ye see the intent of your presumption, and how far it
proceeds; for ye wish to subject God’s Spirit to yourselves and to your
own pleasure. The prophets doubtless did not speak of themselves, but by
the bidding and command of God. Since then the prophets were the organs
of the Holy Spirit, whosoever attempted to silence them, usurped to
himself an authority over God himself, and in a manner tried to make
captive his Spirit: for what power can belong to the Spirit, except he
be at liberty to reprove the vices of men, and condemn whatever is
opposed to God’s justice? When this is taken away, there is no more any
jurisdiction left to the Holy Spirit. We now then see what the Prophet
means in this place: he shows how mad a presumption it was in the
Israelites to attempt to impose silence on the prophets, as though they
had a right to rule the Spirit of God, and to force him to submission.

<span id="iv.2.ix-p7"></span>*Is the Spirit of Jehovah straitened?* And
this mode of speaking ought to be noticed, for it possesses no ordinary
emphasis; inasmuch as the Prophets by this reproof; recalls the
attention of these perverse men to the author of his teaching; as though
he had said, that the wrong was not done to men, that war was not
carried on with them, when instruction is prohibited, but that God is
robbed of his own rights and that his liberty is taken away, so that he
is not allowed to execute his judgment in the world by the power of his
Spirit.

<span id="iv.2.ix-p8"></span>And farther, the Prophet here ironically
reproves the Israelites, when he says*, O thou who art called the house
of Jacob, is the Spirit of Jehovah reduced to straits?* For if heathens,
who have never known the teaching of religion, and to whom no heavenly
mysteries have been revealed, had said, that they would have nothing to
do with the prophets, it would have been much more endurable; for what
wonder would it be for ignorant men to repudiate all instruction? But it
was monstrous for the Israelites, who gloried in the name of God, to
dare to rise up so rebelliously against the prophets: they always
boasted of their own race, as though they surpassed all the rest of the
world, and were a holy nations separated from all others. Hence the
Prophet says, “Ye wish to be called the house of Jacob; what is your
excellency and dignity, except that you have been chosen by God to be
his peculiar people? If then you have been habituated to the teaching of
God, what fury and madness it is, that you cannot bear his prophets, but
wish to close their mouths?” We now then see the point of this irony,
when the Prophet says that they were *called the house of Jacob* He
seems at the same time to intimate, in an indirect way, that they were a
spurious race. As they were called by other prophets, Amorites and
Sodomites: even so in this place the Prophet says, “Ye are indeed the
house of Jacob, but it is only as to the name.” They were in reality so
degenerated, that they falsely pretended the name of the holy patriarch;
yea, they falsely and mendaciously boasted of their descent from holy
men, though they were nothing else but as it were rotten members.
Inasmuch then as they had so departed from the religion of Abraham and
of other fathers, the Prophet says, “Thou art indeed called what thou
art not.”

<span id="iv.2.ix-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *Are these his works?*
Here he brings the Israelites to the proof, as though he said, How comes
it, that the prophets are so troublesome and grievous to you, except
that they sharply reprove you, and denounce on you the judgment of God?
But God is in a manner forced, except he was to change his nature, to
treat you thus sharply and severely. Ye boast that you are his people,
but how do you live? *Are these his works?* that is, do you lead a life,
and form your conduct according to the law laid down by him? But as your
life does not in any degree correspond with what God requires, it is no
wonder that the prophets handle you so roughly. For God remains the
same, ever like himself; but ye are perfidious, and have wholly
repudiated the covenant he has made with you. Then this asperity, of
which ye are wont to complain, ought not to be deemed unjust to you.

<span id="iv.2.ix-p10"></span>He then subjoins, *Are not my words good
to him who walks uprightly?* Here the Prophet more distinctly shows, why
he had before asked, Whether their works were those of the Lord; for he
compares their life with the doctrine, which on account of its severity
displeased them; they said that the words of the prophets were too
rigid. God here answers, that his words were gentle and kind, and
therefore pleasant, that is, to the pious and good; and that hence the
fault was in them, when he treated them less kindly than they wished.
The import of the whole then is, that the word of God, as it brings life
and salvation to man, is in its own nature gracious, and cannot be
either bitter, or hard, or grievous to the pious and the good, for God
unfolds in it the riches of his goodness.

<span id="iv.2.ix-p11"></span>We hence see that God here repudiates the
impious calumny that was cast on his word; as though he had said, that
the complaints which prevailed among the people were false; for they
transferred the blame of their own wickedness to the word of God. They
said that God was too severe: but God here declares that he was gentle
and kind, and that the character of his word was the same, provided men
were tractable, and did not, through their perverseness, extort from him
anything else than what he of himself wished. And the same thing David
means in <span id="iv.2.ix-p11.1"></span>[Ps
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000)<span id="iv.2.ix-p11.1"></span>,
when he says that God is perverse with the perverse: for in that passage
he intimates, that he had experienced the greatest goodness from God,
inasmuch as he had rendered himself docile and obedient to him. On the
contrary, he says, God is perverse with the perverse; that is, when he
sees men obstinately resisting and hardening their necks, he then puts
on as it were a new character, and deals perversely with them, that is,
severely, as their stubbornness deserves; as for a hard knot, according
to a common proverb, a hard wedge is necessary. We now then perceive the
meaning of this passage, that *God’s words are good to those who walk
uprightly;* that is they breathe the sweetest odour, and bring nothing
else but true and real joy: for when can there be complete happiness,
except when God embraces us in the bosom of his love? But the testimony
respecting this love is brought to us by his word. The fault then is in
us, and ought to be imputed to us, if the word of God is not delightful
to us.

<span id="iv.2.ix-p12"></span>Some expound this whole passage
differently, as though the Prophet relates here what was usually at that
time the boast of the Israelites. They hence think that it is a
narrative in which he represents their sentiments; (*narrationem esse
mimiticam;*) as though the Prophet introduced here the ungodly and the
rebellious animating one another in their contempt of God’s word, *O
thou who art called the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of Jehovah
straitened?* Hypocrites, we know, are so blind and intoxicated by a
false confidence, that they hesitate not heedlessly to abuse all the
favors of God. As then God had conferred a great excellency on his
people, they thus emboldened one another, — “Are we not the children and
posterity of Abraham? What will it avail us to be a holy and chosen
race, and the peculiar people of God, and a royal priesthood, if we are
to be thus unkindly treated? We find that these prophets shamefully
reprove us: where is our dignity, except we show that we have more
privileges than other nations?” These interpreters therefore think the
meaning to be this, — that they make a show of their own privileges,
that they might with more liberty reject every instruction, and shake
off every yoke. And when it is said, *Is the Spirit of God diminished?*
these interpreters regard this as meaning, that they were satisfied with
the solemn promise of God, and that as they were a holy race, they now
superciliously despised all the prophets, — “Is the Spirit of God dead,
who was formerly the interpreter of the everlasting covenant, which God
made with us? Has he not testified that we should be to him a holy and
elect people? Why then do ye now attempt to reduce to nothing this
sacred declaration of the Holy Spirit, which is inviolable?” It is then
added, *Are these his works?* “Ye talk of nothing but of threats and
destruction; ye denounce on us numberless calamities: but God is
beneficent and kind in his nature, patient and merciful; and ye
represent him to us as a tyrant; but this view is wholly inconsistent
with the nature of God.” And, in the last place, God subjoins, as these
interpreters think, an exception, — “All these are indeed true, if
faithfulness exists among you, and the authority of my word continues;
*for my words are good,* but not to all without any difference: be
upright and sincere, and ye shall find me dealing kindly, gently,
tenderly, and pleasantly with you: then my rigor will cease, which now
through my word so much offends and exasperates you.”

<span id="iv.2.ix-p13"></span>This meaning may in some measure be
admitted; but as it is hard to be understood, we ought to retain the
former, it being more easy and flowing. There is nothing strained in the
view, that the Prophet derides the foolish arrogance of the people, who
thought that they were sheltered by this privilege, that they were the
holy seed of Abraham. The Prophet answers that this titular superiority
did not deprive God of his right, and prevent him to exercise his power
by the Spirit. “*O thou then who art called the house of Jacob;* but
only as far as the title goes: the Spirit of God is not reduced to
straits. But if thou boastest thyself to be the peculiar people of God,
are these thy works the works of God? Does thy life correspond with what
he requires? There is no wonder then that God chastises you so severely
by his word, for there is not in you the spirit of docility, which
allows the exercise of his kindness.”  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)

<span id="iv.2.ix-p19"></span>But though the Prophet here upbraids the
ancient people with ingratitude, yet this truth is especially useful to
us, which God declares, when he says that his word is good and sweet to
all the godly. Let us then learn to become submissive to God, and then
he will convey to us by his word nothing but sweetness, nothing but
delights; we shall then find nothing more desirable than to be fed by
this spiritual food; and it will ever be a real joy to us, whenever the
Lord will open his mouth to teach us. But when at any time the word of
the Lord goads and wounds, and thus exasperates us, let us know that it
is through our own fault. It follows —

<span id="iv.2.x"></span>

<span id="iv.2.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.x-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#008)<span id="iv.2.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.x-p2"></span>**8.** Even of late my people is risen up as
an enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by
securely as men averse from war.

<span id="iv.2.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et qui antehac populus meus, quasi in
hostem surrexit ex adverso; vestem decoris (alii vertunt, pallium et
tunicam; sed nulla est copula, et <span id="iv.2.x-p3.1"></span>אדר
significat decorem, ideo possumus vertere vestem decoris) praedati estis
a transeuntibus cum fiducia, perinde ac si reverterentur a praelio.

<span id="iv.2.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.x-p6"></span>As the words of the Prophet are concise,
they contain some obscurity. Hence interpreters differ. First, as to the
word <span id="iv.2.x-p6.1"></span>אתמיל, *atmul,* some think it to be
one word, others divide it into <span id="iv.2.x-p6.2"></span>את, *at*
and <span id="iv.2.x-p6.3"></span>מול, *mul,* which means, over against,
opposite; and they regard it of the same import with <span
id="iv.2.x-p6.4"></span>ממול, which immediately follows. But as the
repetition would be frigid, the Prophet no doubt intended that it should
be taken here in its proper sense, and its meaning is yesterday. But
this time is not strictly taken by the Hebrews, for they take yesterday
as meaning the past time, even when many years have elapsed. I have
therefore rendered it *formerly*, which suits this place. There is also
another difference as to the sense of the text, for some think that this
<span id="iv.2.x-p6.5"></span>אתמול, *atmul*, is to be joined to the
verb <span id="iv.2.x-p6.6"></span>קומם, *kumum;* but it is rather to be
connected with the word <span id="iv.2.x-p6.7"></span>עמי, *omi,* *My
people formerly* There is another diversity, that is, as to the term
<span id="iv.2.x-p6.8"></span>אויב, *avib*, for some apply it to God,
and others to the people; that they rose up or stood one against
another. For this verb is explained in two ways: some view it as a verb
neuter, They stand against the enemy; and others render it, They rise up
against the enemy; and this second meaning is most approved, and
harmonizes best with the context.

<span id="iv.2.x-p7"></span>I will now refer to what I consider to be
the real meaning. The Prophet, in the first place, says, that the people
were formerly under the power and government of God, but that now they
were become wholly alienated from him. *Formerly,* then, *it was my
people,* as though God now renounced all friendship with them. “I have
hitherto owned you as my people, but hereafter I shall have nothing to
do with you, for the whole authority of my word is by you entirely
abolished; ye have violated your faith: in short, as you have destroyed
my covenant, ye have ceased to be my people; for whatever favor I have
conferred on you, you have deprived yourselves of it by your wickedness;
and though I have adopted you, yet your wickedness now strips you of
this privilege.” This is one thing.

<span id="iv.2.x-p8"></span>It then follows, *They have risen up as
against an enemy.* I consider a note of likeness to be here understood.
The Prophet says simply, *Against an enemy have they risen up;* but I
regard the meaning to be, that they had risen up as against an enemy;
that is that they had made God, their best father, their enemy, inasmuch
as they had by their crimes provoked his displeasure.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) He then confirms this truth by saying,
that they practiced robberies among themselves. We indeed know that
hypocrites ever hide themselves under their religious rites, and spread
them forth as their shield whenever they are reproved. Hence the Prophet
says, that they were not to be deemed the people of God for spending
their labors on sacrifices, for they were at the same time robbers, and
plundered innocent men.

<span id="iv.2.x-p12"></span>*The garment of comeliness,* he says, or,
the garment and the cloak, (about such words I do not labor much,) *they
take away from those who pass by securely;*  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) that is from all who are peaceable. For
when there is a suspicion of war, or when a traveler does any mischief,
he rightly deserves to be punished. But the Prophet says here, that they
were robbed, who passed by securely as though they were in a safe
country. “When travelers fear nothing, ye strip them of their garments,
as though they were returning from war: as they are wont, when war is
over, to seize on spoils wherever found, and no one can keep his own; so
now, during peace, ye take to yourselves the same liberty, as though all
things were exposed to plunder, and ye were in a hostile country, lately
the scene of warfare.”

<span id="iv.2.x-p16"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of the
Prophet. He first intimates that the people were now rejected by God,
for they had rendered themselves, by their most abandoned life, wholly
unworthy of his benefits; and at the same time he reproves their
ingratitude that having been the people of God, they choose to make war
with him rather than to observe the covenant which he had made for their
safety; for it was a most shameful wickedness in them, since they had
been chosen from the whole world to be a peculiar people, to prefer
going to war with God rather than to live quietly under his protection.
And that they did rise up against God he proves, for they gave
themselves up to robberies; they plundered, even during times of peace,
which circumstance greatly aggravated their wickedness. It now follows —

<span id="iv.2.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.xi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#009)<span id="iv.2.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xi-p2"></span>**9.** The women of my people have ye cast
out from their pleasant houses; from their children have ye taken away
my glory for ever.

<span id="iv.2.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Mulieres populi mei expulistis e
domo delectationum ipsarum, (est quidem mutatio numeri, sed hoc nihil ad
rem;) a parvulis earum abstulistis decus (vel, ornamentum) meum
perpetuo.

<span id="iv.2.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xi-p6"></span>He proceeds with the same subject, that
they refrained from no acts of injustice. It was indeed a proof of
extreme barbarity not to spare women and children, for they are both
weak and helpless. Their sex exempts women from violence, and their age,
children.  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) Even in wars, women, and
also children, escape in safety. We hence see that the Prophet, by
stating a part for the whole, proves here that the people had addicted
themselves to cruelty really barbarous; they were not restrained from
exercising it, no, not even on women and children. Since it was so, it
follows, that their boast of being the chosen people was vain and
fallacious.

<span id="iv.2.xi-p10"></span>*House of delights* he ascribes to the
women who, being the weaker sex, prefer being at home and in the shade,
rather than going abroad. The more necessary it was that their recesses
should remain safe to them. Now, what was taken away from the children,
God calls it *his ornament;* for his blessing, poured forth on children,
is the mirror of his glory: he therefore condemns this plunder as a
sacrilege. The word <span id="iv.2.xi-p10.1"></span>לעולם, *laoulam,*
designates the continuance of their crimes, as though he had said, that
they were cruel without ever showing any repentance. Now it follows —

<span id="iv.2.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.xii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#010)<span id="iv.2.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xii-p2"></span>**10.** Arise ye, and depart; for this
*is* not *your* rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy *you*,
even with a sore destruction.

<span id="iv.2.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Surgite, abite, quia non est haec
requies; quoniam polluta est; dissipavit dissipatione violenta
(interponitur copula, et dissipatione; ideo poterimus commode vertere,
dissipavit et quidem dissipatione violenta, (vel, roborata; id enim
significat verbum <span id="iv.2.xii-p3.1"></span>נמרף.)

<span id="iv.2.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xii-p6"></span>Here again the Prophet checks the foolish
confidence of the people. The land of Canaan, we know, had been honored
by God with the distinction of being a rest; yea God called it, not only
the rest of the people, but also his own rest,

<span id="iv.2.xii-p7"></span>‘I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall
enter into my rest,’  
(<span id="iv.2.xii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)<span
id="iv.2.xii-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.2.xii-p8"></span>The land of Canaan then was a sort of
rest, hidden under the wings of God; for the Lord had assigned it as an
inheritance to his chosen people. As God then dwelt in that land, and
had also given it to the children of Abraham, that they might rest there
in safety, and as this was also one of the blessings contained in the
Law, hypocrites said, pursuing their usual course of falsely and
groundlessly claiming to themselves the favors of God, that they could
not be thence expelled, and that those Prophets were falsifiers who
dared to change any thing in God’s covenant. This is the reason why the
Prophet now says,

<span id="iv.2.xii-p9"></span>*Arise, depart; this is not your rest.*
“False confidence,” he says, “deceives you, as ye think that ye are
inseparably fixed in your habitation. God indeed has made such a
promise, but this condition was added, — If ye will stand faithful to
his covenant. Now ye are become covenant-breakers: ye think that he is
fast bound to you; all the cords are loosened; for as ye have
perfidiously departed from the Law of God, there is now no reason for
you to think that he is under any obligation to you. There is then no
ground for you to boast of being a holy people; you have indeed the
name, but the reality has ceased to be: therefore *arise and depart:*
but to sit still securely and proudly will avail you nothing, for God
will now drive you afar off: and I now declare to you that you must
arise and depart, for ye cannot rest in this land against the will of
God: and God will now thrust you out of it.” We now perceive the real
meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.2.xii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *For it is polluted;
he will scatter you with violent scattering*  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) Here again he vindicates God from their
calumny and ungodly murmurings. We indeed know how difficult it was to
bring down that people, who were steeped in so great a perverseness. And
we find that the Prophet had a hard contest with the hypocrites, for the
multitude had ever this language in their mouths, — What! is it of no
moment that God has favored us with so many and so remarkable promises?
Is our adoption nothing but a mockery? Has he in vain given us this land
by an hereditary right? Since then hypocrites thus brought forward their
privileges in opposition to God, and yet abused them, it was necessary
to convince them to the contrary, and this is what the Prophet does
here, — “Ye call,” he says, “this land your rest, but how do you rest in
it? God has commanded you to observe the Sabbath, for he dwells among
you to sanctify you: but ye live disorderly, and carry on war with God
himself: have not your pollutions obliterated that holy rest, which has
been enjoined on you by God? Ye then see that this change has happened
through your fault, that is, that God has ceased to call this land, as
he was wont formerly to do, your and his own rest. *It is not* then
*your rest;* he will therefore *scatter* you *with violent* or strong
*scattering:* Ye in vain promise to yourselves rest in this land, since
ye carry on war with God, and cease not to provoke his wrath against
you.” It follows —

<span id="iv.2.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)<span id="iv.2.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** If a man walking in the spirit
and falsehood do lie, *saying,* I will prophesy unto thee of wine and of
strong drink; he shall even be the prophet of this people.

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Si vir ambulans in spiritu et
fallaciter mantiens, stillem tibi pro vino et pro sicera, tunc erit
stillans populi hujus (hoc est, hic demum erit Propheta populi hujus:
sicut etiam priore membro proprie vertendum est, si prophetem.)

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.2.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet points out here another vice
by which the people were infected — that they wished to be soothed with
flatteries: for all the ungodly think that they are in a manner exempt
from God’s judgment, when they hear no reproof; yea they think
themselves happy, when they get flatterers, who are indulgent to their
vices. This is now the disease which the Prophet discovers as prevailing
among the people. Jerome sought out a meaning quite different here, as
in the former verses; but I will not stop to refute him, for it is
enough to give the real meaning of the Prophet. But as before he
rendered women, princes, and thus perverted entirely the meaning, so he
says here, I would I were a vain Prophet, that is, walking in vanity,
and mendacious; as though Micah said “I wish I were false in denouncing
on you the calamities of which I speak; for I would rather announce to
you something joyful and favorable: but I cannot do this, for the Lord
commands what is different.” But there is nothing of this kind in the
words of the Prophet. Let us then return to the text.

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p7"></span>*If a man walks in the spirit, and
deceitfully lies,*  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) etc. Almost all
interpreters agree in this, — that to walk in the spirit, is to announce
any thing proudly and presumptuously; and they take spirit for wind or
for deceits. But I doubt not, but that to walk in the spirit was then a
common mode of speaking, to set forth the exercise of the prophetic
office. When therefore any one was a Prophet, or one who discharged that
office, or sustained the character of a teacher, he professed himself to
have been sent from above. The Prophets were indeed formerly called the
men of the spirit, and for this reason, because they adduced nothing
from themselves or from their own heads; but only delivered faithfully,
as from hand to hand, what they had received from God. To walk in the
spirit then means, in my view, the same thing as to profess the office
of a teacher. When therefore any one professed the office of a teacher,
what was he to do? “If I,” says Micah, “being endued with the Spirit,
and called to teach, wished to ingratiate myself with you, and preached
that there would be an abundant increase of wine and strong drink, all
would applaud me; for if any one promises these things, he becomes *the
prophet of this people.”*

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p13"></span>In short, Micah intimates that the
Israelites rejected all sound doctrine, for they sought nothing but
flatteries, and wished to be cherished in their vices; yea, they desired
to be deceived by false adulation to their own ruin. It hence appears
that they were not the people they wished to be deemed, that is, the
people of God: for the first condition in God’s covenant was, — that he
should rule among his people. Inasmuch then as these men would not
endure to be governed by Divine power, and wished to have full and
unbridled liberty, it was the same as though they had banished God far
from them. Hence, by this proof, the Prophet shows that they had wholly
departed from God, and had no intercourse with him. If there be then any
man walking in the spirit, let him, he says, keep far from the truth;
for he will not otherwise be borne by this people. — How so? Because
they will not have honest and faithful teachers. What is then to be
done? Let flatterers come, and promise them plenty of wine and strong
drink, and they will be their best teachers, and be received with great
applause: in short, the suitable teachers of that people were the
ungodly; the people could no longer bear the true Prophets; their desire
was to have flatterers who were indulgent to all their corruptions.

<span id="iv.2.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xiv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.2.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we cannot
otherwise really profit by thy word, than by having all our thoughts and
affections subjected to thee, and offered to thee as a sacrifice, — O
grant, that we maysuffer thee, by the sound of thy word, so to pierce
through everything within us, that being dead in ourselves, we may live
to thee,and never suffer flatteries to become our ruin but that we may,
on the contrary, patiently endure reproofs, however bitter they may be,
only let them serve to us as medicine, by which our inward vices may be
cleansed, until at length being thoroughly cleansed and formed into new
creatures, we may, by a pious and holy life, really glorify thy name,
and be received into that celestial glory, which has been purchased for
us by the blood of thy only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="iv.2.xiv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-fifth

<span id="iv.2.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.2.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.2.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p2"></span>**12.** I will surely assemble, O Jacob,
all of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them
together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their
fold: they shall make great noise by reason of *the multitude of* men.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p3"></span>**12.** Congregans congregabo te totum
Jacob; colligens colligam residuum Israel; simul ponam eum tanquam oves
Bosra, tanquam gregem in medio ovilis sui; tumultuabuntur prae hominibus
(id est, propter hominum multitudinem.)

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p4"></span>**13.** The breaker is come up before
them: they have broken up, and have passed through the gate, and are
gone out by it: and their king shall pass before them, and the LORD on
the head of them.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p5"></span>**13.** Ascendet effractor coram ipsis;
frangent et transibunt portam, et egredientur per ipsam; et transibit
rex ipsorum coram ipsis; et Jehova in capite ipsorum.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p7"></span><span id="iv.2.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p8"></span>The exposition of this passage is twofold.
The greater part of interpreters incline to this view, — that God here
promises some alleviation to the Israelites, after having sharply
reproved them, and threatened them with utter ruin. They therefore apply
this passage to the kingdom of Christ, as though God gave hope of a
future restoration. But when I narrowly weigh every thing, I am, on the
contrary, forced to regard these two verses as a commination, that is,
that the Prophet here denounces God’s future vengeance on the people.
As, however, the former opinion is almost universally received, I will
briefly mention what has been adduced in its favor, and then I shall
return to state the other meaning, which I prefer.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p9"></span>It is suitable to the kingdom of Christ to
say, that a people who had been dispersed should be gathered under one
head. We indeed know how miserable a dispersion there is in the world
without him, and that whenever the Prophets speak of the renovation of
the Church, they commonly make use of this form of expression, that is,
that the Lord will gather the dispersed and unite them together under
one head. If then the passage be referred to the kingdom of Christ, it
is altogether proper to say, that God *by gathering will gather the
whole of Jacob.* But a restriction is afterwards added, that no one may
extend this restoration to the whole race of Abraham, or to all those
who, according to the flesh, derived their descent from Abraham as their
father: hence the word <span id="iv.2.xvi-p9.1"></span>שארית, *sharit,*
is laid down. Then the whole of Jacob is not that multitude, which,
according to the flesh, traced their origin from the holy Patriarchs,
but only their residue. It then follows, *I will set them together as
the sheep of Bozrah,* that is, I will make them to increase into a
large, yea, into an immense number; for they shall make a tumult, that
is, a great noise will be made by them, as though the place could not
contain so large a number. And they explain the next verse thus, — *A
breaker shall go before them,* that is, there shall be those who, with a
hand, strong and armed, will make a way open for them; inasmuch as
Christ says that the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, (<span
id="iv.2.xvi-p9.2"></span>[Mt
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="iv.2.xvi-p9.2"></span>)
they then mean that the people will have courageous leaders, whom
nothing will stop from breaking through, and that they will also lead
the whole people with them. They shall therefore go forth through the
gate, and their king shall pass through. This also well agrees with the
kingdom of Christ. For whenever God declares that he will be propitious
to his Church, he at the same time adds, that he will give a king to his
people; for their safety had been placed in that kingdom, which had been
erected by the authority and command of God himself. It is therefore a
common thing, and what occurs everywhere in the Prophets, that God would
give a king from the seed of David to his people, when it would be his
will to favor them with complete happiness. Thus they understand that a
king shall pass on before them, which is the office of a leader, to show
them the way. *And Jehovah shall be at their head;* that is, God himself
will show himself to be the chief king of his people, and will ever
defend by his help and grace those whom he adopts as his people.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p10"></span>But I have already said that I more
approve of another. exposition: for I see not how the Prophet could pass
so suddenly into a different strain. He had said in the last verse that
the people could endure no admonitions, for they only desired flatteries
and adulation. He now joins what I have lately referred to respecting
the near judgment of God, and proceeds, as we shall see, in the same
strain to the end of the third chapter: but we know that the chapters
were not divided by the Prophets themselves. We have therefore a
discourse continued by the Prophet to the third chapter; not that he
spoke all these things in one day; but he wished to collect together
what he had said of the vices of the people; and this will be more
evident as we proceed. I will now come to the words.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p11"></span>*Gathering, I will gather thee, the whole
of Jacob; collecting, I will collect the remnant of Israel.* God has two
modes of gathering; for he sometimes gathers his people from dispersion,
which is a singular proof of his favor and love. But he is said also to
gather, when he assembles them together to devote and give them up to
destruction, as we say in French, *Trousser;* and this verb is taken
elsewhere in the same sense, and we have already met with an instance in
Hosea. So, in the present passage, God declares that there would be a
gathering of the people, — for what purpose? Not that being united
together they might enjoy the blessings of God, but that they might be
destroyed. As then the people had united together in all kinds of
wickedness, so God now declares, that they should be gathered together,
that the one and the same destruction might be to them all. And he adds,
*the remnant of Israel;* as though he said, “Whatever shall remain from
slaughters in wars and from all other calamities, such as famine and
pestilence, this I will collect, that it may be wholly destroyed.” He
mentions the remnant, because the Israelites had been worn out by many
evils, before the Lord stretched forth his hand at last to destroy them.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p12"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *I will set them
together as the sheep of Bozrah;* that is, I will cast them into one
heap. Bozrah was a city or a country of Idumea; and it was a very
fruitful place, and had the richest pastures: hence <span
id="iv.2.xvi-p12.1"></span>[Isa
34](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#000)<span id="iv.2.xvi-p12.1"></span>,
in denouncing vengeance on the Idumeans, alludes at the same time to
their pastures, and says, “God will choose for himself fat lambs and
whatever is well fed, and will also collect fatness, for the Lord has a
sacrifice in Bozrah.” So also, in this place, the Prophet says, that the
Jews, when collected together as it were into a bundle, shall be like
the *sheep of Bozrah.* And he further adds, *as the sheep in the middle
of the sheepfolds,* though some render it, leading: <span
id="iv.2.xvi-p12.2"></span>דבר, *daber,* sometimes means to lead; but I
see no reason why it should be drawn so far from its meaning in this
connection. I take it as signifying a sheepfold, because sheep are there
collected together. Some interpreters consider that a siege is referred
to here, that is, that God would confine the whole people within cities,
that they might not be open to the incursions of enemies; but I extend
the meaning much wider, namely, that God would gather the people, in
order at last to disperse them. *I will* then *gather them,* as I have
already said, *Je vous trousserai; as the sheep of Bozrah in the middle
of the sheep fold; and there shall be a noise on account of their
number;* that is, “Though ye now glory in your number, this will avail
you nothing; for I shall be able to reduce you all to strait, so that
you may, as ye deserve, perish together.”

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p13"></span><span id="iv.2.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p14"></span>It follows, *Ascend shall a breaker
before them;* that is, they shall be led in confusion; and the gate
shall also be broken, that they may go forth together; for the passage
would not be large enough, were they, as is usually done, to go forth in
regular order; but the gates of cities shall be broken, that they may
pass through in great numbers and in confusion. By these words the
Prophet intimates, that all would be quickly taken away into exile. *And
they shall go forth, he says through the gate, and their king shall pass
on before if them* The Prophet means here, that the king would be made
captive; and this was the saddest spectacle: for some hope remained,
when the dregs of the people had been led into Chaldea; but when the
king himself was led away a captive, and cast into prison, and his eyes
pulled out, and his children slain, it was the greatest of misery. They
were wont to take pride in their king, for they thought that their
kingdom could not but continue perpetually, since God had so promised.
But God might for a time overturn that kingdom, that he might afterwards
raise it anew, according to what has been done by Christ, and according
to what had been also predicted by the Prophets. “Crosswise, crosswise,
crosswise, (*transversa*) let the crown be, until its lawful possessor
comes.” We then see that this, which the Prophet mentions respecting
their king, has been added for the sake of amplifying.

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p15"></span>He afterwards adds, *Jehovah shall be at
the head of them;* that is, He will be nigh them, to oppress and wholly
to overwhelm them. Some consider something to be understood, and of this
kind, that Jehovah was wont formerly to rule over them, but that now he
would cease to do so: but this is too strained; and the meaning which I
have stated seems sufficiently clear, and that is, — that God himself
would be the doer, when they should be driven into exile, and that he
would add courage to tyrants and their attendants, in pursuing the
accursed people, in order to urge on more and more and aggravate their
calamities and thus to show that their destruction vault happen through
his righteous judgment. We now then understand the real meaning of the
Prophet.  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc28011.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.2.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.i-p8"></span> Literally, work; but <span
id="iv.2.i-p8.1"></span>פעל means to work not only with the hands, but
also with the mind; and hence, to contrive, to devise, to machinate.
*Henderson* has “fabricate,” while *Newcome,* less suitably, retains the
word, “work.” *Marckius* justly observes, that the working here is not
external but internal, the framing, the setting in order, the
preparation of evil in the mind. The Prophet points out here that source
from which outward evils proceed. What numberless schemes, both good and
evil, are concocted and arranged by men on their beds! “They set their
wits on work to invent ways of accomplishing their desire. They devise
iniquity with a great deal of cursed art and policy; they plot how to do
it effectually, and yet so as not to expose themselves. This is called
working evil; they are working it in their heads.” — *Henry.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc28011.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.2.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.i-p13"></span> The original is, <span
id="iv.2.i-p13.1"></span>כי יש-לאל ידם *Marckius* after having referred
to *Calvin’s* version, says, that he prefers that of *Junius* and
*Tremelius* which is as follows: “<span id="iv.2.i-p13.2"></span>Quum
est in potestate manus ipsoram — When it is in the power of their hand,”
<span id="iv.2.i-p13.3"></span>כי is taken as an adverb of time. The
phrase is found in four other places, — <span
id="iv.2.i-p13.4"></span>[Ge
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#029)<span id="iv.2.i-p13.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.2.i-p13.5"></span>[De
28:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#032)<span id="iv.2.i-p13.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.2.i-p13.6"></span>[Ne
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#005)<span id="iv.2.i-p13.6"></span>;
and <span id="iv.2.i-p13.7"></span>[Pr
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#027)<span id="iv.2.i-p13.7"></span>.
So that to render <span id="iv.2.i-p13.8"></span>אל here “God,” as it is
done by the Septuagint, Theodoret, and Jerome, and some others, must be
wrong. <span id="iv.2.i-p13.9"></span>כי is rendered “because” both by
*Newcome* and *Henderson*, but not so suitably as to the sense. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc28011.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.2.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ii-p8"></span> This verse presents an instance of
parallelism not uncommon, in which the first and the last line
correspond, and the second and the third; as will be seen in the
following version: —

<span id="iv.2.ii-p9"></span>*And they covet fields and forcibly seize*
them*,  
And houses, and they take* them *away;  
Yea, they oppress the young man and his house,  
And the old man and his inheritance.*

<span id="iv.2.ii-p10"></span>There must be some distinction between
<span id="iv.2.ii-p10.1"></span>גבר, which I render, “the young man,”
and <span id="iv.2.ii-p10.2"></span>איש, rendered above, “the old man.”
The first means, robust, strong; and the second is a common term for
man, but sometimes signifies a husband, and also a man in years. We may,
indeed in harmony with the passage, consider the first as meaning a
householder, and the latter as signifying a husbandman. The fields in
the first line are the same with the inheritance in the last: and houses
and a house are mentioned in the two intervening lines. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc28011.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.2.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iii-p8"></span> The word <span
id="iv.2.iii-p8.1"></span>משפחה, family, no doubt designates the people
of Israel, so called, either for their descent from the same father, or
for their adoption by God as his people, designed to live in subjection
to him as a family to its head. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc28011.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.2.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iv-p7"></span> Very similar is the description of <span
id="iv.2.iv-p7.1"></span>משל by *Lowth* in his Praelections; he
describes it as that style which is sententius, figurative, and sublime
— <span id="iv.2.iv-p7.2"></span>*Sententiosum, figuratum, et sublime
docendi genus* He says also that the word means often a saying, anaxiom,
a short sentence compactly formed — <span id="iv.2.iv-p7.3"></span>*est
quoevis sententia sive axioma scite graviterque dictum, paucis
concinnatum, et ad* <span id="iv.2.iv-p7.4"></span>γνωμων <span
id="iv.2.iv-p7.5"></span>*firmam compositum,* <span
id="iv.2.iv-p7.6"></span>[1Sa
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014)<span id="iv.2.iv-p7.6"></span>,
Prael. 4. And this is evidently its meaning here, — a common saying,
everywhere known. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc28011.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.2.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.2.iv-p9"></span> Most commentators agree as to the general
meaning of this verse, which is clearly stated here: but their versions
differ. *Newcome,* following the Septuagint, renders the verbs in the
first and second lines in a passive sense, but *Henderson* gives them an
active meaning, supplying “one” as the nominative case, *i.e.,* the
person, who utters the lamentation afterwards mentioned. The two last
lines are the most difficult. *Marckius* has this version, —

<span id="iv.2.iv-p10"></span><span id="iv.2.iv-p10.1"></span>Quomodo
subtraxit mihi!  
Avertenti agros nostros distribuit!

<span id="iv.2.iv-p11"></span>That of *Junius* and *Tremelius* is
essentially the same, only the verbs are put in the present tense.
*Newcome’s* rendering is this, —

<span id="iv.2.iv-p12"></span>How hath he withdrawn it form me!  
To an apostate he hath divided our fields!

<span id="iv.2.iv-p13"></span>To call the king of Babylon an apostate,
seems incongruous, as it cannot be applied to any one but who has turned
away from true religion. The most obvious and literal rendering is that
given by *Marckius,* with the exception of the tense. I offer the
following version of the whole verse, with no alteration in the text,
except the supplying of a <span id="iv.2.iv-p13.1"></span>ו before <span
id="iv.2.iv-p13.2"></span>אמר which is found in several MSS., —

<span id="iv.2.iv-p14"></span>*In that day shall be taken up concerning
you a proverb,  
And lament a lamentation will the oppressed,  
And say will the desolate,* — *“We are destroyed,  
The portion of my people he changes;  
How he takes away from me!  
To the alienator of my fields he divides* them!

<span id="iv.2.iv-p15"></span>It is a proverb, a common saying, and a
lament, that would be uttered, as the Prophet foretells, at the time of
the expulsion of the people from the land, when it would be taken
possession of by their enemies. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc28011.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.2.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.vi-p8"></span> *Newcome,* apparently on the authority of
the Septuagint, joins a part of the last verse to this, and gives this
rendering,—

<span id="iv.2.vi-p9"></span>*In the congregation of Jehovah prophesy
not, O ye that prophesy:  
They shall not prophesy to these:  
*For *he shall remove* from himself *reproaches.*

<span id="iv.2.vi-p10"></span>The last line he applies to the true
prophet, that he would not subject himself to disgrace by exercising his
office. *Henderson’s* version is the following: —

<span id="iv.2.vi-p11"></span>Prophesy not; those shall prophesy  
Who will not prophesy of these things:  
Reproaches are incessant.

<span id="iv.2.vi-p12"></span>This is viewed as being altogether the
language of the people, interdicting the true prophets, specifying those
whom they approved, and deprecating the reproaches cast upon them by the
true prophets. Another version, which is materially adopted by *Calvin,*
is admitted by our Author as not unsuitable, but he prefers the one
given above. The main objection is to the last line, which in the
original is this, —

<span id="iv.2.vi-p13"></span><span id="iv.2.vi-p13.1"></span>לא יׂג
כלמות

<span id="iv.2.vi-p14"></span>The last word is plural, and means
reproaches; and the verb <span id="iv.2.vi-p14.1"></span>יסג is in the
third person of the future tense, and may be derived either from <span
id="iv.2.vi-p14.2"></span>סוג, to recede, to depart, or from <span
id="iv.2.vi-p14.3"></span>גסג, to remove, both in a transitive and
intransitive sense. Having an objective case, it cannot be the first
verb, and must be the second in its transitive meaning. Then the
rendering is, He will not, or let him not, or let none remove
reproaches. This being the literal rendering of this sentence, we must
now consider what version of the former part will correspond best with
it. It is that no doubt adopted by Calvin, though the last clause cannot
admit of the meaning he attaches to it. The people say, “Prophesy ye not
who prophesy;” God answers, “They shall not prophesy to these;” and then
the Prophet adds, speaking of God, “He will not remove reproaches;” that
is, he will not remove them by his prophets with the view of amending
their reproachful conduct.

<span id="iv.2.vi-p15"></span>The last clause is evidently viewed as an
anomalous construction by *Henderson;* for he renders it as though the
plural noun were the nominative case to the verb in the singular number,
and this because the latter precedes the former. There may be instances
of this in Hebrew, but it is by no means a common usage; though it be so
in the *Welsh* language, which in so many of its peculiarities is very
much like Hebrew. This sort of construction is the ordinary one in that
language: a plural noun has commonly a verb in the singular number, when
placed before it. This sentence in Welsh would be exactly the same as in
Hebrew—<span id="iv.2.vi-p15.1"></span>*Nid ymadawa gwaradwyddiadau* The
noun in the plural number is the nominative case to the preceding verb,
which is in the singular number, and the verb too is in the future
tense, and is yet understood as having the meaning of the present tense.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc28011.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.2.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.ix-p14"></span> *Newcome,* adopting <span
id="iv.2.ix-p14.1"></span>האמר, as found in four MSS., renders the first
part of the verse as the language of the people, though not in the sense
of those referred to by Calvin. His version is as follows: —

<span id="iv.2.ix-p15"></span>Doth the house of Israel \[Jacob\] say,  
“Is the Spirit of Jehovah straightened?  
Are these his doings?”

<span id="iv.2.ix-p16"></span>“Straightened,” *i.e.*, confined to a few,
such as Micah. And by “doings,” he means the judgments before announced.
*Henderson* regards the “doings,” or, as he renders them, “operations,”
in the same light, though he views the words as spoken by the Prophet,
and renders the first line thus, —

<span id="iv.2.ix-p17"></span>What language, O house of Jacob!

<span id="iv.2.ix-p18"></span>The first word, <span
id="iv.2.ix-p18.1"></span>האמור, as it is in our text, is viewed by
*Henderson*, as well as by *Marckius*, as a passive participle,
signifying *what is said* or *spoken*, and the <span
id="iv.2.ix-p18.2"></span>ה prefixed is considered as a note of
exclamation. But the objection made to our common version is not valid,
that <span id="iv.2.ix-p18.3"></span>אמר in Niphael, when it means
*being called* or *named,* has uniformly an <span
id="iv.2.ix-p18.4"></span>ל after it, for we have an instance to the
contrary in <span id="iv.2.ix-p18.5"></span>[Jer
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032)<span id="iv.2.ix-p18.5"></span>,
<span id="iv.2.ix-p18.6"></span>עוד התפח ולא-יאמר, “and it shall no more
be called Tophet.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc28011.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.2.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.x-p9"></span> *Newcome* gives the same meaning to this
part of the line, though another to the former part,—

<span id="iv.2.x-p10"></span>But of old my people hath risen up as an
enemy.

<span id="iv.2.x-p11"></span>*Henderson’s* version is the same. The word
rendered “of old” means “yesterday,” and expresses often past time
indefinitely. It is once rendered “of old,” <span
id="iv.2.x-p11.1"></span>[Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)<span id="iv.2.x-p11.1"></span>;
but in other places, “heretofore,” “in times past;” but “formerly,” or
“of late,” would be the most suitable expression in this passage. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc28011.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.2.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.x-p13"></span> The literal rendering of these two lines
may be given thus:—

<span id="iv.2.x-p14"></span>From off the garment the mantle ye shall
strip  
From those who pass by securely, returning from war.

<span id="iv.2.x-p15"></span>Or the last words, <span
id="iv.2.x-p15.1"></span>שובי מלחמה, “averters of war,” may designate
people of a peaceable disposition, and “war” may be taken for strife or
contention; then the rendering would be, “who turn away from
contention.” *Newcome,* on the authority of one MS., which has <span
id="iv.2.x-p15.2"></span>שבי, gives this version, “captives of war,”
which seems unsuitable to this passage. *Marckius* renders the phrase
thus, <span id="iv.2.x-p15.3"></span>*aversi belli,* seu, *a bello,*
“turning away from war,” or, “shy of war.” This view evidently comports
best with the context. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc28011.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.2.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xi-p7"></span> This verse presents several anomalies. We
have “women” and the verbs in the plural, and then “house,” “*her*
delights,” and “*her* children.” It may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iv.2.xi-p8"></span>*The women of my people ye drive away,  
*Each *from the house of her delights;  
From off her children ye take away my ornament forever.*

<span id="iv.2.xi-p9"></span>The word rendered in our version “flory,”
is <span id="iv.2.xi-p9.1"></span>הדר, which means ornament, beauty.
*Piscator* says, <span id="iv.2.xi-p9.2"></span>*pulchras vestes quas
Deus illis donavit* — “the beautiful garments which God gave them.” God
claimed the land of Canaan and all its blessings as his own. They took
these away without restoring them according to the law. *Henderson*
justly observes, that “ornament” is to be taken “collectively for the
ornamental clothes which they wore, and with which they had been
provided by Jehovah.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc28011.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.2.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xii-p11"></span> The original is <span
id="iv.2.xii-p11.1"></span>תחבל וחבל נמרף, which, according to
Parkhurst, is, “It is bound;” that is, bound over to punishment, “and
the bond is grievous;” or, as it may be rendered, strong; which is only
found in Niphal in two other places, <span
id="iv.2.xii-p11.2"></span>[1Ki
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.2.xii-p11.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.2.xii-p11.3"></span>[Job
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025)<span id="iv.2.xii-p11.3"></span>.
In the first it is rendered, grievous, — “a grievous crime,” and in the
second, forcible, — “How forcible are the right words!”

<span id="iv.2.xii-p12"></span>But most others attach the idea of
corruption and destruction to <span id="iv.2.xii-p12.1"></span>חבל: and
*Newcome* takes the verb here in a passive sense, and gives this
rendering of the distich, —

<span id="iv.2.xii-p13"></span>*“Because it is polluted, it shall be
destroyed,  
And the destruction* shall be *great.”*

<span id="iv.2.xii-p14"></span>Some render the verb actively, “It,”
*i.e.* the land, “shall destroy you,” a reference being made, as it is
thought, to what is said in <span id="iv.2.xii-p14.1"></span>[Le
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025)<span
id="iv.2.xii-p14.1"></span>. The version of Marckius is this, —

<span id="iv.2.xii-p15"></span>*“*<span
id="iv.2.xii-p15.1"></span>*Quando quidem impuritas corrumpet,  
Et corruptio acris.”* —

<span id="iv.2.xii-p16"></span>*Seeing that impurity will destroy* it,
*  
And a violent destruction.*

<span id="iv.2.xii-p17"></span>The previous word <span
id="iv.2.xii-p17.1"></span>טמאה is here taken as a noun. But the most
literal, and the most satisfactory, is the rendering of *Newcome.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc28011.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.2.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p8"></span> Perhaps a more literal rendering would
be thus,—

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p9"></span>If a man, the follower of the spirit and
of deception,  
Speaks falsely, “I will prophesy to thee of wine and of strong drink,”  
He then becomes the prophet of this people.

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p10"></span>To walk after, or to follow, “the wind,”
as some render <span id="iv.2.xiii-p10.1"></span>רוח, seems by no means
proper. The phrase means the same as “the man of the spirit” in <span
id="iv.2.xiii-p10.2"></span>[Ho
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007)<span id="iv.2.xiii-p10.2"></span>
*Newcome* changes the whole form of the passage, though not the meaning,
except in one instance. Guided by the Syriac version, Houbigant and the
Septuagint, without the sanction of any MS., he gives this version, —

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p11"></span>*If a man, walking* in *the spirit of
falsehood and lies,  
Prophesy unto thee for wine and for strong drink,  
He shall be the prophet of this people.*

<span id="iv.2.xiii-p12"></span>He puts “*for* wine,” etc., and not
“*of* wine:” but the latter rendering is much more suitable to the
context. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc28011.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.2.xvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p16"></span> *Calvin* is not singular in his view of
this passage. *Scott* takes the same view, while *Henry* regards the
passage as containing a promise, and so do *Marckius, Newcome,* and
*Henderson.* But some have considered the words as those of the false
prophets, referred to in the eleventh verse, and that Micah answers them
in the next chapter. There is no sufficient ground for this opinion. Of
those who regard the passage as including a promise, some apply it to
the restoration from the Babylonian captivity, and others to spiritual
restoration by the gospel. But the passage, viewed by itself, and in its
connection with the next chapter, bears evidently the appearance of a
commination: there are especially two words which manifestly favor this
view, — <span id="iv.2.xvi-p16.1"></span>תהימנה and <span
id="iv.2.xvi-p16.2"></span>הפרף; both are taken generally, if not
uniformly, in a bad sense. The first means to tumultuate, to be
turbulent and riotous, to be clamorous and noisy; the second signifies
to demolish, to break through, to destroy, and in every instance in
which it is found as a personal noun, it means a destroyer or a robber.
— See <span id="iv.2.xvi-p16.3"></span>[Ps
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004)<span id="iv.2.xvi-p16.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.2.xvi-p16.4"></span>[Eze
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#010)<span
id="iv.2.xvi-p16.4"></span>; <span id="iv.2.xvi-p16.5"></span>[Da
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#014)<span
id="iv.2.xvi-p16.5"></span>. The first is a verb in the second person
plural of the future tense, and in the feminine gender, because of the
comparison made in the former lines to sheep and a flock. The verbs in
the 12th verse are all in the future tense, and the two first in the
13th are in the past, according to what is common in prophecies, but
must be rendered as futures. I propose the following version of the
passage, —

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p17"></span>*12. Gathering, I will gather Jacob, the
whole of thee;  
Assembling, I will assemble the residue of Israel;  
Together will I set them as the sheep of Bozrah,  
As a flock in the midst of its fold;* —*  
Ye shall be more noisy than men.*

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p18"></span>*13. Ascend* shall *the breaker in the
sight of them,  
*— *they shall break through,  
And pass the gate, yea, they shall go forth through it,  
And pass shall their king before them,  
And Jehovah* shall be *at their head,  
*or, *for their leader.*

<span id="iv.2.xvi-p19"></span>— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Micah](cc28012)
