[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork05)  [Next](gork07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

### CHAPTER III

### THE BHAGAVÂN WITH CERTAIN OF HIS HOUSEHOLDER DISCIPLES

<span class="margnote">God is formless and with form.</span><span
class="smallcaps">One</span> day in winter a certain householder
disciple, who was a college professor, came to see the Bhagavân. Srî
Râmakrishna was seated on the southern veranda of His room, and He was
smiling. After a short conversation He asked: "Do you prefer to meditate
on God with form or without form?" The disciple hesitated and answered:
"I prefer to meditate upon God as the formless Being rather than as a
Being with form." The Bhagavân replied: "That is good. There is no harm
in looking at Him from this or the other point of view. Yes, to think of
Him as the formless Being is quite right. But do not go away with the
idea that that alone is true and that all else is false. Meditating

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

upon Him as a Being with form is equally right. You, however, must hold
on to your particular conception of God until you have realized and seen
God."

<span class="margnote">Image Worship.</span>The disciple asked:
"Bhagavan, one may believe that God is with form, but surely He is not
in the earthen images that are worshipped?" Srî Râmakrishna replied: "My
dear sir, why do you say earthen images? The image of the Divine Being
is made of the spirit." The disciple could not understand the meaning of
this, but answered: "Yet should it not be one's duty to make clear to
those who worship images that God is not the same as the images and that
at the time of worship they should think of God Himself and not of the
image made of clay?" The Bhagavân said: "The Lord of the universe
teaches mankind. He who has made the sun and moon, men and brutes; He
who has created things for them to live upon, parents to tend and rear
them; He who has done so many things will surely do something to bring
them to the light. The Lord dwells in the temple of the human body. He
knows our innermost thoughts. If there is anything wrong in image
worship, does He not know that all worship is

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

meant for Him? He will be pleased to accept it knowing that it is for
Him. Why should you worry yourself about things which are beyond your
reach? Try to realize God and love Him. This is your first duty.

"You speak of images made of clay. Well, there often comes a necessity
for worshipping such images and symbols. In Vedanta it is said, the
absolute Existence-Intelligence-Bliss pervades the universe and
manifests itself through all forms. What harm is done by worshipping the
Absolute through images and symbols? We see little girls with their
dolls. How long do they play with them? So long as they are not married.
After marriage they put away those dolls. Similarly, one needs images
and symbols so long as God is not realized in His true form. It is God
Himself who has provided these various forms of worship. The Master of
the universe has done all this to suit different men in different stages
of spiritual growth and knowledge. The mother so arranges the food for
her children that each one gets what is best for him. Suppose a mother
has five children with one fish to cook for all. She will make different
dishes of it that she may give to each just what suits him,—the rich

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

*polâo* for one, soup for another, fried fish for a third, fish with
sour tamarind for a fourth. and so on, exactly according to the power of
digestion of each. Do you now understand?"

The disciple replied: "Yes, Bhagavan, now I do. But, Revered Sir, how
can one fix one's mind on God?"

<span class="margnote">How to fix one's mind on God.</span>Srî
Râmakrishna: To that end one must always sing forth the Holy Name of God
and talk without ceasing of His glory and attributes. Then one must seek
the company of holy men. One must from time to time visit the Lord's
devotees or those who have given up attachment to the things of the
world for the sake of the Lord. It is, however, difficult to fix one's
mind upon God in the midst of worldly cares and anxieties; hence the
necessity of going into solitude now and again with a view to meditating
on Him. <span class="margnote">Solitude necessary.</span>In the first
stage of one's spiritual life one cannot do without solitude. When
plants are young, they stand in need of fences around them for their
protection; otherwise goats and cattle will destroy them. The depth of
the heart, the retired corner, and the forest are the three places for
meditation.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One should also
practise discrimination. One should discriminate between the Real and
the unreal, between matter and spirit. It is thus that one will shake
off one's love for the things of the world and attachment to sensual
pleasures, wealth, fame, power.

<span class="margnote">Avadhuta and a kite.</span>Turning to Bijoy, who
had come in, the Bhagavân continued: Shivanâth, the leader of the Brâhmo
Samâj, has great cares, he has to edit a newspaper and do various other
works In attending to worldly affairs, one naturally loses peace of mind
and is overwhelmed with worries and anxieties. It is said in the
Bhâgavat that Avadhuta <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) made
twenty-four Gurus. The kite was one of them. In a certain place some
fishermen were catching fish, a kite swooped down and snatched a fish.
Seeing the kite with the fish in its claw, hundreds of crows flew after
him and began to caw, making a great noise. In whatever direction the
kite flew, the crows followed. When he flew to the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

south, they pursued him; when he flew to the north, they were after him,
and he found no peace in any direction. At last the kite dropped the
fish. Then the crows flew after the fish and the kite rested calmly on
the branch of a high tree. He thought within himself: "That fish was the
cause of all this trouble. Now that I no longer have it, I am happy and
in perfect peace." The Avadhuta learned from this kite that as long as a
man is attached to worldly objects, so long he has toil, cares, anxiety,
unrest and unhappiness. When attachment is gone, all works end, and then
comes peace. But work without attachment is good; it does not bring
unrest.

<span class="margnote">Avadhuta and a bee.</span>It is very difficult,
however, to work and remain unattached. A few only can accomplish it.
Those who have attained to God-consciousness, like the sage Nârada, work
for the good of humanity. Avadhuta made another Guru—a bee. What trouble
a bee takes to collect honey! But it is not for its own use; some one
else comes and takes the honey from the comb. The Avadhuta learned from
the bee that it is not wise to collect anything. Truly spiritual men
should depend absolutely upon God and should not

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

desire to possess anything. But this is not possible for householders.
They will have to support their families and therefore they should
gather and possess. A fowl does not gather into barns, but when it has a
number of young ones, then it brings food for them in its bill.

<span class="margnote">Practice of non-attachment.</span>Perform all
your duties with your mind always fixed on God. As for your parents,
wife and children, serve them as your own, but always remember they do
not belong to you, that they are the children of God. You are also a
child of God and your own people are those who love God. The tortoise
moves about in the water in quest of food; where do you think her mind
is? On the water's edge where her eggs are laid. In the same manner you
may go about in the world, but take good care that your mind always
rests upon the hallowed feet of the Lord.

Suppose you have not acquired true love for the Lord? If in this state
you enter the world, then you will surely get entangled. Misfortune,
grief, misery, sorrow, suffering and the various diseases of the body
will disturb the balance of your mind; and the more you will throw
yourself into the affairs of the world and trouble

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

yourself about worldly matters, the more your attachment to the world
will be increased. Rub your hand with oil if you desire to break open
the jackfruit, else the milky exudation of the fruit will stick to your
hands. First rub your soul with the oil of love and devotion to the
Lord, then you may come in contact with the affairs of the world. <span
class="margnote">Need of solitude.</span>But to this end solitude is the
one thing needful. If you want butter, you must curdle the milk and set
it in a place where no one can disturb it; otherwise the curd will not
stand. Then churn it and the butter will rise. Similarly the neophyte
should sit in solitude and not be disturbed by worldly-minded people;
then through the churning of the settled mind by the practice of
meditation the butter of Divine Love will be acquired. If you give your
mind to God in solitude, you will obtain the spirit of true renunciation
and absolute devotion. If you give the same mind to the world, it will
grow worldly and think of woman and gold.

The world may be likened to water, and the mind to milk. Pure milk once
mixed with water cannot be separated from it; but if it is first turned
into butter and then placed in water,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

it can remain separate. Let the milk of your mind be turned into the
butter of Divine Love by means of religious practices in solitude. The
mind then will never get mixed with the water of worldliness, but will
rise above and remain unattached to the world. Having attained true
knowledge and devotion the mind will stand apart from the world.

<span class="margnote">Lust and gold unreal.</span>Along with this,
practise discrimination. "Lust and gold" are unreal; God is the one
Reality. What uses has money? It can give one food, clothes, house, the
luxuries and comforts of life, but it cannot bring spiritual perfection
or God-vision. Therefore the acquisition of wealth should not be the
highest end and aim of life. In this manner you should discriminate.
Similarly by discrimination you will overcome your attachment to
personal beauty. Think what the body of a beautiful woman is made of.
Like all bodies it is of flesh and blood, skin and bones, fat and
marrow, etc. The wonder is that man loses sight of God and gives his
mind purely to such transitory objects of sense.

The disciple asked: "Bhagavan, is it possible to see God?"

Srî Râmakrishna: Certainly. The following

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="margnote">Means of God-vision.</span>are some of the means
of seeing God: Going from time to time into solitude; singing forth His
name and His attributes; discrimination.

The disciple: Bhagavan, what state of mind leads to God-vision?

Srî Râmakrishna: Cry to God with a yearning heart and then you will see
Him. People will shed a jugful of tears for the sake of their wife or
children; they will be carried away by a stream of their own tears for
the sake of money; but who sheds a tear for God? Cry for Him, not for
show, but with a longing and yearning heart. The rosy light of the dawn
comes before the rising sun; likewise a longing and yearning heart is
the sign of God-vision that comes after.

Extreme longing is the surest way to God-vision. Through extreme longing
the mind remains fixed on the Supreme Being. One should have faith like
that of an innocent child and such longing as a child has when it wants
to see its mother. There was a boy named Jatila. He used to go to school
alone through the woods. Often he felt lonely and afraid. He told his
mother about it and she said to him: "Why art thou fearful, my child?
Thou

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

must call Krishna whenever thou art frightened." "Who is Krishna,
mother?" the boy asked. The mother answered: "Krishna is thy brother."
<span class="margnote">Power of faith and true longing.</span>After that
when Jatila was passing true through the woods alone and felt
frightened, he called aloud, "Brother Krishna!" When no one came, he
cried again: "O Brother Krishna, where art thou? Come to me and protect
me; I am frightened." Hearing the call of this faithful child, Krishna
could no longer remain away. He appeared in the form of a young boy and
said: "Here am I, thy brother! Why art thou frightened? Come with me, I
will take thee to school." Then having escorted him to school, Lord
Krishna said to him: "I will come to thee whenever thou callest me; do
not be afraid." Such is the power of true faith and true longing.

You can see God if your love for Him he as strong as the strength of
these three attachments How to love put together: namely, the attachment
God. of a miser to his wealth, that of a mother to her new-born child,
and that of a chaste wife to her husband.

To see God one must love Him with the whole heart and soul. One must
make one's prayers

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

reach the Divine Mother. Absolute self-resignation to the will of the
Divine Mother is the surest way to God-vision. As the kitten resigns
itself to the will of its mother, so a devotee shall resign himself to
the will of the Divine Mother. The kitten knows nothing more than to cry
"Mew, mew," and the mother-cat may keep her young one on the bare floor
of the kitchen or on the downy bed of the householder. The kitten is
always contented. Similarly the true devotee should always cry unto the
Divine Mother and be contented with whatever She wishes to do with him.

<span class="margnote">Fetters of the soul.</span>God-consciousness does
not come so long as there are three things in the heart,—shame, hatred
and fear. These three and caste pride are the fetters of the soul. When
these fetters are broken, freedom is attained. Bound by fetters is Jiva
(the ego), free from fetters is Shiva (God).

Every man has certain debts to pay,—a debt to the Divine Spirit, a debt
to the sages, debt to mother, to father, to the wife. No man can
renounce everything without paying off these debts. But if his soul be
intoxicated with Divine Love and become mad after God, then he is free
from all duties and debts. Then who

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

is his father, who is his mother and who is his wife? <span
class="margnote">Madness of Divine Love.</span>He behaves like a madman
who is free from all bondage and who has no duty to perform. Do you know
what that madness of Divine Love is? In that state one forgets the world
and becomes unconscious of one's own body which is so dear to one.
Chaitanya Deva possessed this madness of ecstasy. He had neither hunger,
nor thirst, nor sleep, nor consciousness of his physical form. The
meaning of the word Chaitanya is "indivisible and absolute
intelligence." Vaishnava Charan used to say that Chaitanya Deva, the
Incarnation of Divine Love, was like a bubble on the ocean of that
Absolute Intelligence.

<span class="margnote">Divine Love and ecstasy.</span>Divine Love is the
rarest thing in the world. He who can love God as a devoted wife loves
her husband, attains to Divine Love. Pure love is difficult to acquire.
In pure love the whole heart and soul must be absorbed in God. Then will
come ecstasy. In ecstasy a man remains dumb with wonder. Outward
breathing stops entirely, but inward breathing continues: as when aiming
a gun, a man remains speechless and without breathing. In Divine Love
one entirely forgets the external world with all its charms and
attractions;

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

even one's own body, which is so dear to one, is easily forgotten. In
ecstasy, when the breathing stops, the whole mind remains absolutely
fixed upon the Supreme. All nerve currents run upward with tremendous
force and the result is Samâdhi or God-consciousness. Those who are mere
scholars (Pandits) and have not attained Divine Love, confound the minds
of others.

<span class="margnote">Pride.</span>Some people are proud of their
wealth, their fame and social position, but these things are transitory.
None can take them away after death. It is not good to be proud of
wealth. You may say, "I am wealthy," but then there are millionaires,
multimillionaires, and so on. In the evening fireflies think that they
are lighting the world; but when the stars begin to shine, their pride
is subdued. The stars in turn think that they are lighting the world,
but when the moon shines, the stars are put to shame. The moon, too,
believes that her light illumines everything; but lo! the dawn appears
and the rising sun effaces the light of the moon. If wealthy people
thought of these things, they would no longer be proud of their wealth.

A householder! Revered Sir, we are householders;

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

please give us some further instructions.

Srî Râmakrishna: First know God, then perform the duties of a
householder.

Householder: Revered Sir, is this world unreal?

<span class="margnote">The world unreal.</span>Srî Râmakrishna: So long
as a man does not realize God, so long it is real; because at that time
he makes mistakes and through self-delusion says: "Me and mine." Being
fettered by this self-delusion, he drowns in the sea of lust and
worldliness, and becomes so blinded by ignorance that he cannot see the
way out. You yourself can notice how transitory the world is. Look at
this house; how many people have come and gone; how many people have
been born and have died in it! Now it exists, now it does not; it is
ephemeral. Those whom you call your own will vanish when your eyes are
closed. If you have no one in the household, still you are bound and
cannot go anywhere because of some distant relative. The way is open,
but the fish cannot escape from the net. The silkworm makes its own
cocoon, but does not know how to get out and consequently dies in it.

A householder should take care of his children,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="margnote">How a householder should live in the
world.</span>but at the same time he should think of them as Baby
Krishna, or as children of God. Serve your father as God, and your
mother as Divine Mother. After realizing God, if a man lives with his
wife, he has no physical relation with her. Both live like Bhaktas or
true devotees. They talk of spiritual subjects and spend their time in
thinking of God and in caring for His Bhaktas. They serve God who dwells
in all beings.

Householder: But, Revered Sir, we do not find any such husbands and
wives.

Râmakrishna: Yes, there are some, but they are very rare. Worldly people
do not easily recognize them. But in order to live like this both must
he spiritual. If both enjoy Divine Love, then such a life is possible;
otherwise there will be no harmony, but discord and trouble between
husband and wife. Perhaps the wife will complain, saying: "Why did I
marry this man! What pleasure does he give me? He simply sits quietly
and thinks of God. He is losing his mind."

A devotee: These are some of the obstacles; but there may be others. The
children may be disobedient or may be diseased. Then, Revered Sir, what
is to be done?

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

Râmakrishna: It is very difficult for a householder to practise
devotion. There are many obstacles. You all know them very
well,—disease, sorrow, poverty, disharmony with the wife, disobedience
and evil tendencies in the children; but there is a way out of it. One
should occasionally live in solitude and pray and struggle hard to
attain to God.

A householder: Revered Sir, is it necessary to leave one's home?

Râmakrishna: Not for good; but occasionally when you find opportunity,
for a day or two, leaving behind responsibility, care and anxiety. But
during this time you should not mix with worldly people or think of
worldly affairs. Either live alone, or in the company of some saint or
holy man.

Householder: Revered Sir, how can we know or recognize a saint?

<span class="margnote">How to recognize a saint.</span>Râmakrishna: He
is a saint whose heart, soul, and inner nature have turned towards God;
he who has renounced woman and wealth. A saint does not look at women
with the eye of desire; if he comes near a woman, he sees the Divine
Mother in her and worships her. His thoughts are always on God and his
words are of Him. He sees God everywhere

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

and knows that by serving others, he serves Him. These are some of the
outward signs of a saint.

Householder: Revered Sir, is it necessary to remain long in solitude?

Râmakrishna: Until right discrimination is acquired.

Householder: Revered Sir, what is right discrimination?

<span class="margnote">Right discrimination.</span>Râmakrishna: God is
Truth, the world is untruth; this is discrimination. Truth means that
which is unchangeable and permanent, and untruth is that which is
changeable and transitory. He who has right discrimination knows that
God alone is the Reality; all other things are unreal. When right
discrimination comes, then rises intense desire to know God. As long as
one loves untruth, such as the pleasures and comforts of the body, fame,
honor and wealth, so long one does not desire to know God, the Truth.
Right discrimination between Truth and untruth leads one to search after
God.

Another householder devotee: Bhagavan, we have heard that Thou hast
attained to ecstasy and God-consciousness; wilt Thou please explain when
and how such a state comes?

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="margnote">Ecstasy.</span>Râmakrishna: Ecstasy does not come
to one who has not realized God. When a fish rises from deep water, it
disturbs the surface of the water, and the larger the fish, the greater
the disturbance. Therefore, a person in the state of ecstasy sometimes
laughs, sometimes weeps, sometimes sings, sometimes dances, but one
cannot remain in that state of ecstasy for a long time.

Householder devotee: Bhagavan, we have heard that Thou hast seen God. If
this be true, please make us see Him also.

<span class="margnote">Work necessary for God-vision.</span>Râmakrishna:
Everything depends upon the will of the Lord. What can man do? One may
repeat His Holy Name, but sometimes tears flow and sometimes not. At the
time of meditation, one day you may have perfect concentration and
another day you will not be able to fix your mind at all. Work is
necessary for God-vision. Once I was passing by a pool, the surface of
which was covered by a thick scum; I saw a poor man pushing the scum to
one side to look at the water. This showed me that if you wish to see
the water, you must push aside the scum. That act of pushing is like the
work which removes all the impurities of the heart, Then

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God is visible.
Concentration, meditation, repetition of the Name of the Lord,
charitable works, self-sacrifice, these works will remove the scum of
ignorance which covers the water of Divinity in the pool of the heart.

Mahima, <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) who had joined the group of
devotees, exclaimed: Oh yes, Bhagavan, such works are absolutely
necessary. Tireless labor is needed to attain great results. How much we
must study! Innumerable are the sciences, Scriptures and philosophies.

Râmakrishna: How much can you study? What results can you get by mere
discrimination? First try to realize God. Have faith in the words of
your Guru, and perform some good work. If you have not found a Guru, a
true spiritual master, earnestly pray to God. He will show you what He
is like. What can you know by reading books? Before you enter a
market-place, you can hear only a loud confused uproar; but when you go
near, all confusion will vanish and you will distinguish what each

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

one is calling. Before you reach the shore, you hear the roar of the
waves; but when you come near, you see vessels, sea-gulls, birds, and
you can count the waves. <span class="margnote">Book knowledge and
realization.</span>One cannot realize Divinity by reading books. There
is a vast difference between book knowledge and realization. After
realization, all books, sciences and Scriptures seem to he like
worthless straw. It is necessary first to make acquaintance with the
landlord. Why are you so anxious to know beforehand how many houses, how
many gardens, how many stocks and bonds he possesses? If you ask the
servants, they will not tell you; nor will they notice you. But if you
can once become acquainted with the landlord, by whatever means, you
will learn about his possessions in a moment, and the servants then will
bow down to you and honor you.

A devotee: Bhagavan, how can one make acquaintance with the Landlord?

Râmakrishna: For that, I say, work is necessary. What is the use of
sitting quietly and saying, "God exists"? If you merely sit on the shore
of a lake and say: "There are fish in this lake," will you catch any? Go
and get the things necessary for fishing, get a rod and line

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and bait and throw some lure in the water. Then from the deep water the
fish will rise and come nearer, and you will be able to see and catch
them. You wish me to show you God while you sit quietly by, without
making the least effort. How unreasonable! You would have me set the
curds, churn the butter, and hold it before your mouths. You ask me to
catch the fish and place it in your hands. How unreasonable! If a man
desires to see the King in his palace, he will have to go to the palace
and pass through all the gates; but if after entering the outermost gate
he exclaims, "Where is the King?" he will not find him. He must go on
through the seven gates, then he will see the King.

Mahima: Bhagavan, by what kind of work can God be attained?

<span class="margnote">Work and grace.</span>Râmakrishna: There is no
difference in work. Do not think that this work will lead to God and
that will not. Everything depends upon His Grace. Whatever work you
perform with sincerity and earnest longing will attract His Grace and
help towards realization. Through His Grace the conditions for
realization will become perfect. These conditions are association with
the holy, right discrimination

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

of the Real from the unreal, and the finding of the real Guru, or true
spiritual master. If your family depends upon you, perhaps your brother
will assume its responsibility for you. Perhaps your wife will not
hinder you in your spiritual life, but will rather help you; or perhaps
you will not marry at all and will not be attached to the world in any
way. When such conditions become absolutely favorable, the realization
of God becomes easy.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the father and his dying
son.</span>Once a man's son lay at the point of death and none could
help him. Some one, however, said: "There is but one hope. If you can
get the venom of a cobra mixed with a few drops of rain-water fallen
under the constellation of *Swâti* in a human skull, by it your son's
life will be saved." The father looked and found that the constellation
of *Swâti* would be in the ascendant on the morrow; so he prayed,
saying: "O Lord, do Thou make possible all these conditions and spare
the life of my son." With extreme earnestness and longing in his heart
he set out on the following evening and searched diligently in a
deserted spot for a human skull. At last he found one under a tree and
watched, praying. Suddenly a shower came up and a few drops of

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

rain lodged in the upturned skull. He said to himself: "Now I have the
water in the skull under the right constellation." Then he prayed
earnestly: "Grant, Lord, that the rest may also come." In a short time
he discovered a toad not far from the skull, and he prayed again. Then
from the grass sprang a cobra to snatch the toad, but at that moment the
toad jumped over the skull and the venom of the cobra fell into it. With
overwhelming gratitude the anxious father cried out: "Lord, by Thy Grace
all impossible things are possible. Now I know that my son's life will
be saved." Therefore I say, if you have true faith and earnest longing,
you will get everything by the Grace of the Lord. <span
class="margnote">Non-attachment necessary.</span>God cannot be obtained
so long as the mind is not absolutely free from all worldly attachment.
A true sage is one who cannot hoard anything for himself. There is a
saying: "A fowl of the air and a true sage do not gather stores; they do
not keep anything for the morrow." As regards myself, I cannot keep
anything even for my personal needs. I cannot put away any object, even
a clove, for the future. At one time I thought of going to Benares, but
afterwards I discovered that I had to carry clothes and take money with

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

me, so it was impossible for me to go. (Turning to Mahima) But you are
householders, you can have both this and that, both the world and the
spiritual life.

Mahima: Bhagavan, "this" cannot remain long.

Râmakrishna: When I was practising renunciation, one day I went to the
Ganges near the *Panchavati* and took up a handful of earth and a
handful of coins; then I began to discriminate, saying that earth and
gold are one and the same; earth is gold and gold is earth; and after
realizing the sameness, I threw both into the river. I prayed to my
Divine Mother, saying: "O Mother, I do not desire material wealth or
earthly prosperity, but only that Thou dwell within my heart." When the
mind renounces attachment to lust and wealth, it turns towards God and
ultimately becomes attached to Him. Then that which was bound becomes
free. To be turned away from God is bondage. The mind is like the needle
of a scale and God is the central point of balance. When the weight of
worldly attachment is in the heart, the scale drops to one side and the
needle of the mind is deflected from the central point or God. The
heavier the weight, the

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

greater is the deflection. Why does a child cry after its birth? It
thinks, as it were: "I was enjoying Divine Communion, but now I have
lost it. Where have I come and where is my God, where is my God?" For
you (to Mahima) the renunciation should be in the mind only. You should
remain in the world, but unattached to it.

Mahima: Revered Sir, can the world exist for the mind which is fixed on
God?

Râmakrishna: Of course it will exist; otherwise where will it go? I see
that wherever I remain, I am in the kingdom of God. <span
class="margnote">The kingdom of God is everywhere.</span>Verily I say
unto you, this world is the kingdom of God. Râmachandra, the Divine
Incarnation and the Hero of the epic Râmâyana, said to his father that
he would renounce the world and go to a spiritual Guru in order to
attain spiritual wisdom. The father summoned the great sage Vashishta to
reason with his son. Vashishta saw that Râma had intense dispassion for
the world; he then said to him. "O Râma, first discriminate with me,
then renounce the world." By right discrimination Râma realized that God
manifests Himself in the form of Jiva, or the individual soul and the
world. Everything lives and exists

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

in and through His Being. Then Râma kept silent.

Some time ago Vaishnava Charan said that perfect knowledge of God is
attained when one perceives Him in all human beings. I have now come to
a stage of realization in which I see that God is walking in every human
form and manifesting Himself alike through the sage and the sinner, the
virtuous and the vicious. Therefore when I meet different people, I say
to myself: "God in the form of the saint, God in the form of the sinner,
God in the form of the unrighteous and God in the form of the
righteous." He who has attained to such realization goes beyond good and
evil, above virtue and vice, and realizes that the Divine will is
working everywhere.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the monk and the Zemindar.</span>There
was a Hindu monastery in a certain village. The monks of the monastery
went out every day with begging bowls to gather food. One day, a monk,
passing by, saw a Zemindar severely beating a poor man. The holy man,
being very kind-hearted, entreated the Zemindar to stop beating the man.
The Zemindar, blind with rage, immediately turned on the monk and poured
upon him the venom of his anger. He

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

beat him until he was knocked unconscious on the ground. Another man,
seeing his condition, went to the monastery and told what had happened.
His brother monks ran to the spot where the holy man was lying. They
lifted him and brought him to the monastery and laid , him in a room;
but the holy man still remained unconscious for a long time. Sorrowful
and anxious, his brothers fanned him, bathed his face, put milk into his
mouth and tried to nurse him back to life. Gradually they brought him
back to consciousness. The holy man opened his eyes and looked at his
fellow-brethren. One of them, desiring to know whether he could
recognize his friends, asked him in a loud voice: "Mahârâj, dost thou
recognize him who is feeding thee with milk?" The holy man answered in a
feeble voice: "Brother, he who beat me is now feeding me." And
Râmakrishna added: But one cannot realize this oneness of the Spirit
unless one has reached God-consciousness.

<span class="margnote">Resignation.</span>Live in the world like a dead
leaf. As a dead leaf is carried by the wind into a house or on the
roadside and has no choice of its own, so let the wind of Divine Will
blow you wherever it chooses. Now it has placed you in the world, be
contented.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again when it will
carry you to a better place, be equally resigned. The Lord has kept you
in the world, what can you do? Resign everything to Him, even your own
dear self; then all trouble will be over. You will see then that He is
doing everything; everywhere is the will of Râma <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) (God).

<span class="margnote">Parable of the pious weaver.</span>In a certain
village there lived a weaver. He was very spiritual; everyone trusted
and loved him. The weaver went to the market to sell his cloth. If a
customer asked the price of it, he would say: "By the will of Râma the
thread cost one Rupee, by the will of Râma the labor cost four Annas, by
the will of Râma the profit is two Annas, by the will of Râma the price
of the cloth as it stands is one Rupee and six Annas." People had such
confidence in him that they would immediately pay the price and take the
cloth. This man was a true devotee. At night after dinner he would sit
for a long time and meditate on God and repeat His Holy Name. Once it
was late into the night; he could not sleep;

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

he was sitting alone in the courtyard near the entrance, smoking. A gang
of robbers was passing that way. They wanted a carrier, and seeing this
man, they dragged him away with them. Then they broke into a house and
stole a great many things, some of which they piled on the poor weaver's
head. At this moment the watchman came up, the robbers ran away and the
poor weaver with his load was caught. He had to spend that night in
confinement. Next morning he was brought before the judge. The people of
the village, hearing what had happened, came to see the weaver. They
unanimously declared: "My lord, this man has not stolen anything." The
judge then asked the weaver to describe what had occurred. The weaver
said: "My lord, by the will of Râma, I was sitting in the courtyard; by
the will of Râma it was very late in the night; I, by the will of Râma,
was meditating upon God and repeating His Holy Name; when, by the will
of Râma, a band of robbers passed that way; by the will of Râma they
dragged me away with them; by the will of Râma they broke into a house;
by the will of Râma they piled a load on my head; when, by the will of
Râma, the watchman came up and, by the will of Râma, I was caught.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then, by the will
of Râma, I was kept in prison, and this morning the will of Râma has
brought me before thee." The judge, seeing the innocence and
spirituality of the man, ordered him to be released. Coming out, the
weaver said to his friends, "The will of Râma has released me." <span
class="margnote">Everything depends on God's will.</span>Whether you
live in the world or renounce it, everything depends upon the will of
Râma. Throwing your whole responsibility upon God, do your work in the
world. If you cannot do this, what else can you do?

If a clerk be imprisoned, when the term of his sentence is over and he
comes out, tell me, will he pass his time in dancing for joy over his
release or resume his work as clerk? So when the householder is
liberated from the prison of the world, will he spend his life in
rejoicing over his liberation? He may continue to perform his duties as
householder, if he so desires. He who has attained wisdom makes no
distinction between this place and that place; to him all positions are
equal. He who has found God here has also found Him there. When the tail
of a tadpole drops off, it can live both in water and on land. When the
tail of ignorance drops off, man becomes free. He

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

can then live both in God and in the world equally well.

<span class="margnote">The world like a dream.</span>Those who follow
monistic (Advaita) Vedanta, however, look upon this world as unreal,
like a dream. According to them Paramâtman, or the Over-Soul, is the
witness of the three states of consciousness,—waking, dream and
dreamless sleep. All these are ideas. The dream state is just as real as
the waking state. Let me tell you a story.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the farmer and his only
child.</span>There was a farmer who was a monist; he had attained to
some realization. He lived like any other farmer with his family, and he
had a child. He and his wife had extreme love for this son because he
was their only child. The farmer himself was a very spiritual man. He
was respected and loved by everyone in the village. Once he was working
in the field, when suddenly a man brought the news of his son's severe
illness. He went home, called physicians, took great care, but could not
save the child's life. Everybody in the household was overwhelmed with
grief, but the farmer looked as if nothing had happened. He consoled
others by saying, "What can be gained by mourning over the child?" The
next day he went to the field as

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

usual, and after finishing his work he came home and found his wife and
the other members of the family still weeping and wailing and plunged in
deep sorrow. The wife reproached him, saying: "How heartless you are!
you have not shed a single tear for your only child." The farmer then
calmly replied: "Shall I tell you why I do not weep? Last night I had a
wonderful dream. I saw that I was a king, and the father of eight
beautiful children, and that I was enjoying all the pleasures and
comforts of life. Suddenly I woke up and the dream passed away. Now I am
in great confusion,—whether I shall weep and wail for my eight children
or for this only one." The farmer was an Advaita Jnâni, therefore he
realized that the waking state was as unreal as the dream state, and
that the one permanent Reality was Âtman. But I accept all states as
true,—the state of Samâdhi, which is the fourth state, and again, the
waking, dream and dreamless sleep state. I accept Brahman the Absolute
and Mâyâ, Jiva (the individual soul) and the world. If I do not take
all, a portion will be missing and the weight will be less.

A devotee: How could the weight be less?

Râmakrishna: Brahman the Absolute is with

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="margnote">The Absolute and the phenomenal.</span>the
individual souls and the phenomenal world. First, when a person is
discriminating by saying: "Not this, not this," he leaves the individual
egos and the phenomenal world aside; then after reaching the Absolute,
when he returns, he realizes that the Absolute appears as the phenomenal
world. In a wood-apple there are seeds, pulp and the shell. When I take
the pulp, I leave out the seeds and the shell; but when I speak of the
weight of the wood-apple, the weight of the pulp alone would not be
equal to it. You will have to weigh the pulp, seeds, shell and
everything. That which has pulp has also seeds and shell. Similarly,
that which is the Absolute has also all phenomena. Therefore I take both
the Absolute Reality and the phenomenal reality. I do not blow away the
phenomenal world by calling it a dream, because then the weight will be
less.

Mahima: This is a wonderful harmony. From the Absolute to the phenomenal
and from the phenomenal to the Absolute.

Râmakrishna: Those who are Jnânis (monists) look at the world as a
dream, but the realistic Bhaktas take every state as real. There are
some cows who pick only certain tufts of grass

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

and give very little milk; but there are other cows who eat all kinds of
grass and give plenty of milk. The Jnânis may be compared to the former,
and the Bhaktas to the latter. The highest of the Bhaktas take both the
Absolute and the phenomenal; therefore when they come down from the
Absolute to the plane of relativity, they continue to enjoy the Absolute
through the phenomenal. <span class="margnote">Meaning of Om.</span>(To
Mahima) You explain Om as containing three letters, A-u-m.

Mahima: Revered Sir, A-u-m means creation, preservation and destruction.

Râmakrishna: But for me it is like the sound d-o-n-g of a big bell,
which is at first audible, then inaudible, and ultimately melts away
into infinite space. So the phenomenal melts away in the Absolute; the
gross, subtle and causal states lose themselves in the Great Cause, the
Absolute; the waking, dream and dreamless sleep states become merged in
the fourth state, Samâdhi. When the bell sounds, it creates waves like
those in the ocean when a heavy stone is thrown into it. From the
Absolute phenomena come out, from the same Absolute, which is the great
First Cause, have also evolved the gross, subtle and causal bodies.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From the same
Absolute, again, which is the fourth state, come the other three states
of consciousness. The waves of the ocean are once more dissolved in the
ocean. By this illustration of d-o-n-g I show that the eternal word *Om*
is symbolic of the evolution and involution of phenomena from and into
the Absolute. I have *seen* all these things. My Divine Mother has shown
me that in the infinite ocean of the Absolute, waves rise and again
merge into it. In that infinite spiritual space millions of planets and
worlds rise and are dissolved. I do not know what is written in your
books; I have seen all this.

Mahima: Those who had realized, did not write the books. They were
intoxicated by their own realization. They forgot everything, how could
they write? To write something is to have a calculating intellect.
Others having learned from them, have written and their writings are
known as Scriptures.

<span class="margnote">When is attained worldly attachment
vanishes.</span>God Râmakrishna: Worldly people say that it is
impossible to be free from attachment to worldliness. But when God is
attained, all worldly attachment vanishes. After realizing the absolute
bliss of God-consciousness one cannot enjoy sense-pleasures or run after
fame, honor or any

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

worldly object. Moths after once seeing the light do not return to the
darkness. As much as one thinks of God and meditates on Him, by so much
will one lose one's taste for worldly pleasures. As much as one's love
and devotion for God increases, by so much will diminish worldly desires
and care for the body. Then one will look upon every woman as mother,
upon his own wife as a spiritual helpmate; all animal passions will
disappear; Divine spirituality will come, and non-attachment to the
world; then one will become absolutely emancipated even in this life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[66:\*](gork06.htm#fr_18) "Avadhuta" is a
Sanskrit title which is given to one who has become the absolute master
of nature and who has realized God. Such a great soul was Dattâtreya. In
the Purânas he is called the Avadhuta. He was also the author of the
"Avadhuta Gitâ," a famous work on the Advaita Vedânta.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[81:\*](gork06.htm#fr_19) Mahima was the first
name of a Brâhmin Zemindar and a scholar who was known as Mahima Charan
Chuckravarti. He lived the life of a pure and spiritual householder and
regarded Râmakrishna as the greatest Hindu sage of the age.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[90:\*](gork06.htm#fr_20) The word Râma refers
to the Divine Hero described in the Hindu epic called "Râmâyana." It is
also a name which the Hindu Bhaktas use for the Supreme Lord of the
universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Visit to the Pandit Vidyâsâgara](gork07)
