[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork11)  [Next](gork13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### VISIT TO A HINDU PANDIT AND PREACHER

i

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> was the day of the great car festival
of Jagannâth. The streets of Calcutta were crowded with people. Boys and
girls were playing along the way and amusing themselves by blowing horns
and pipes made of palm-leaves. A light rain was falling and the roads
were wet and muddy. <span class="margnote">Âbesha of
Râmakrishna.</span>About four o'clock in the afternoon the Bhagavân came
out of Ishân's <span id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74) house and entered a
carriage which was waiting for Him at the door. Immediately after taking
his seat He lost sense-consciousness and went  into that state of pure
God-consciousness which He had often called His *Âbesha*. The disciples
followed their Divine

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Master on foot,
for they were eager to be present at this memorable meeting with Pandit
Sasadhar, <span id="fr_75"></span>[\*](#fn_75) the great preacher of the
Vedânta philosophy and religion.

The Pandit was visiting a friend in Calcutta. As Srî Râmakrishna's
carriage drew up at the entrance-door, He was warmly welcomed by the
host and his people. Coming upstairs the Bhagavân met Sasadhar advancing
towards Him. He appeared to be a middle-aged man with a fair complexion
and around his neck was thrown a rosary of Rudrâksha beads. He came
forward with a reverential air, saluted the Bhagavân, and led Him to the
parlor which was intended for His reception. The disciples and others
went in after Him and seated themselves as near Him as they could. Among
the many disciples present was Narendra. The Bhagavân, smiling in His
semiconscious state,

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

said: "Very good, very good! Well, what kind of lectures do you give?"

Sasadhar: Revered Sir, I try to explain the truth taught by the Holy
Scriptures.

Bhagavân: For this age Bhakti Yoga, communion with God by love, devotion
and self-surrender, as practised by the Rishi Nârada, is enjoined. There
is hardly time for Karma Yoga, for doing the works laid upon man by the
Scriptures. Do you not see that the well-known decoction of the ten
medicinal roots (Dasamul Pâchan) is not the medicine for fevers of the
present day? The patient runs the risk of being carried off before the
medicine has had time to take effect. "Fever-mixture" is therefore the
order of the day. Teach them Karma if you like, but leave aside the head
and tail of the fish. I tell people not to bother with the long ritual
of Sandhyâ, but to repeat only the short Gâyatri. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76) You are welcome to talk of work to such
people if you must.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="margnote">Effect of lectures on worldly men.</span>Give
thousands of lectures, you cannot do anything with worldly men. Can you
drive a nail into a stone wall? The head will be broken without making
any impression on the wall. Strike the back of an alligator with a
sword, it will receive no impression. The mendicant's bowl (of
gourd-shell) may have been to the four great holy places of India but
still be as bitter as ever. But you will learn this gradually. A calf
cannot stand on its legs all at once. It falls down, gets up, falls
again, and then it learns to stand and run. You do not know who is a
Bhakta (godly) and who is worldly; but that is not your fault. When a
heavy storm blows, one cannot distinguish Tamarind from Mango-tree.

It is true, however, that no one can absolutely renounce all works
without realizing God. The question is, how long should Sandhyâ
(rituals) and other ceremonial works be practised? So long as the Holy
Name of the Lord does not bring tears of love to the eyes and produce
horripilation in the body. When you are uttering "Om Râma," if tears of
love come to your eyes, you will know for certain that the term of your
Karma (works and duties) is over. You are no longer obliged to perform
Sandhyâ and

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

other works. You have risen above Karma. When the fruit appears, the
blossom drops off. The true Bhakti is the fruit, while work is the
blossom.

When the daughter-in-law of the house is with child, she cannot do much
work; so the mother-in-law daily reduces the number of her duties. As
the time of her delivery draws near, the mother-in-law seldom allows her
to do anything; and when the child is born, she fondles and caresses it
and ceases altogether to work.

<span class="margnote">All rituals end in Samâdhi.</span>Sandhyâ merges
into Gâyatri; Gâyatri into Om, and Om ultimately loses itself in
Samâdhi. As the sound of a bell—Ding, dong—gradually fades away into the
Infinite, so the soul of a Yogi gradually rises with the Nâda (the sound
of Om) and becomes merged in the Absolute Brahman in Samâdhi. Into this
Samâdhi eventually enter all Karma,—Sandhyâ, Gâyatri and other works. In
this manner the Jnânis are freed from all rituals and religious
exercises.

ii

As the Bhagavân was talking of Samâdhi, a strange heavenly expression
came over His sweet, radiant face. He lost all outward consciousness.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After remaining
speechless in this state for some time, He came down and like a child
said, "Give me a little water." This call for water was the usual sign
of His return to the plane of sense-consciousness. Then He murmured: "O
Mother! The other day Thou didst show me Vidyâsâgara. Then I desired to
see a Pandit and Thou hast brought me here."

<span class="margnote">The necessity of practice.</span>Turning to
Sasadhar, the Bhagavân said: My son, add to your spiritual strength, go
through devotional exercises a little longer. You have hardly got up
into the tree, how can you expect to lay your hand upon its fruit? But
you are doing all this for the good of others. Saying this the Bhagavân
bowed to Sasadhar and continued: When I first heard your name, I
inquired whether this Pandit was merely an ordinary Pandit or one who
had attained right discrimination (Viveka) and dispassion (Vairâgya). He
is not a true Pandit who does not possess right discrimination.

<span class="margnote">The Divinely-commissioned teacher.</span>If there
has been a commission (Âdesha) from the Supreme, then there is no harm
in teaching others. Such a Divinely-commissioned-teacher is invincible.
No one can defeat him. If one single ray from the Goddess of Wisdom
falls upon a man,

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

it brings to him such power that before him the greatest Pandits become
like worms of the earth. When a lamp is lighted, swarms of moths rush of
themselves towards it without waiting to be called. So he who has
received a Divine commission, for him there is no need to seek followers
or to make known the time of his lectures. His own power of attraction
is so great that people of their own accord crowd around him. Then kings
and nobles flock to him saying: "We have brought mangoes, sweets, money,
jewels and shawls; of these what will you accept?" To such people I say:
"Take them away, I do not want any of them."

Does a magnet ever say to the iron, "Come to me?" No; drawn by the
magnet, it goes of itself. Such a man may not be a Pandit, still do not
think for a moment that he lacks in knowledge. Is true wisdom acquired
by reading books? There is no end to the wisdom of one who has received
a Divine commission. That wisdom comes from God and therefore it is
endless. In our country in measuring grain, one man weighs and the other
pushes small heaps of grain on to him. In like manner when the
Divinely-commissioned teacher gives instruction, my Mother, standing
behind, pushes

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

toward him the heaps of Divine wisdom and the supply is never exhausted.
When the gracious look of the Divine Mother falls upon one, can there be
any lack of wisdom? Therefore I ask whether you have received any
commission (Âdesha) from the Lord?

Hâzrâ (to the Pandit): Oh! I dare say he must have received something of
that kind. Is it not so?

Sasadhar's host: He has not obtained Âdesha, but he is lecturing only
from a sense of duty.

<span class="margnote">Value of lectures without Divine
commission.</span>Bhagavân: If a man has received no Divine commission,
what good will his lectures do? In the course of his lecture a Brâhmo
said: "Brethren, I used to drink, I used to do this and that." Hearing
this the people began to talk: "What does this fellow say? He used to
drink!" Thus this statement produced just the opposite effect in the
minds of the audience. Unless the speaker be a good spiritual man, his
lectures do not help mankind in any way. A subjudge once said to me:
"Sir, you begin to preach, then I will also be ready." I answered: "My
friend, listen. There was a large pond in a certain village. Some people
used to throw dirt around the water's edge and otherwise defile the
pond. Good

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

men of the village spoke to the offenders axed entreated them, but could
not produce the slightest impression upon their minds. The offenders
continued to violate the, sanitary laws. Every morning abuses were
showered upon their heads, but all in vain. At last when the municipal
authorities put up a notice forbidding everyone to commit such acts and
sent a peon with their badge to punish the offenders, from that moment
nobody dared throw dirt near the pond." <span class="margnote">Badge of
authority.</span>Therefore I say a badge of authority is necessary;
otherwise no one will listen to your words. A true speaker is one who is
authorized by the Supreme and who holds the badge of Divine commission.
Every man and woman must obey and bow down to him.

A true teacher of mankind must possess great spiritual power (Sakti). In
Calcutta there are many veteran wrestlers. One must try one's strength
on such men and not on novices in wrestling. Chaitanya Deva was an
Avatâra. Tell me how much of that which he did is now preserved? What
good will be done by the lectures of one who does not hold the badge of
Divine authority? Therefore I say: "You must first be absorbed in the
Holy feet of the Almighty."

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

iii

There are infinite ways which lead to the sea of immortality. The main
thing is to fall into that sea; it matters not how one gets there.
Suppose there is a reservoir of nectar, a single drop of which falling
into the mouth will make one immortal. You may drink of it either by
jumping into the reservoir or by slowly walking down along its slope.
The result will be the same even if you are pushed or thrown into it by
another. Taste a little of that nectar and become immortal.

<span class="margnote">Different paths to God.</span>Innumerable are the
paths. Jnâna, Karma, Bhakti are all paths which lead to the same goal.
If you have intense longing you will surely reach God. Yoga (communion
with God) is of four kinds: Jnâna Yoga, Karma Yoga, Râja Yoga, and
Bhakti Yoga.

<span class="margnote">Jnâna Yoga.</span>Jnâna Yoga is communion with
God by means of right discrimination and knowledge in its highest sense.
The object of a Jnâni is to know and realize the Absolute. He
discriminates between the Absolute Reality and the unreal phenomena by
saying: "Not this," "Not this," until he comes to a point

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

where all discrimination between the Real and the unreal ceases and the
Absolute Brahman is realized in Samâdhi.

<span class="margnote">Karma Yoga.</span>Karma Yoga is communion with
God by means of work. It is what you are teaching. The performance of
duties by house-holders not for the sake of obtaining their results but
for glorifying the Supreme is that which is meant by this method of
Yoga. Again, worship, repetition of the Name of the Lord, and other
devotional exercises are also included in it, if they are done without
attachment to their fruits and for the glorification of God. The end of
Karma Yoga is the same as the realization of the Impersonal Absolute or
the Personal God or both.

<span class="margnote">Râja Yoga.</span>Râja Yoga leads to this
communion through concentration and meditation. It has eight steps. The
first is Yama, which consists in non-injuring, truthfulness,
non-covetousness, chastity, and the non-receiving of gifts. The second
is Niyama, which includes austerities, forbearance, contentment, faith
in the Supreme Being, charity, study, and self-surrender to the Supreme
Will. The practice of various physical postures is comprised in Asana,
the third; while Prânâyâma or breathing

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

exercises constitute the fourth step. The fifth is Pratyâhâra and
consists in making the mind introspective and one-pointed. Concentration
or Dhâranâ is the next; Dhyâna or meditation is the seventh, and Samâdhi
or the state of superconsciousness the eighth.

<span class="margnote">Bhakti Yoga.</span>Bhakti Yoga is communion by
means of love, devotion, and self-surrender (Bhakti), It is especially
adapted to this age.

The path of absolute knowledge is exceedingly difficult. The term of
human life at the present day is short and entirely dependent on
material food. Moreover, it is almost impossible to get rid of the idea
that the soul is one with the body. Now a Jnâni or philosopher may
declare: "I am not this body, gross or subtle; I am one with Brahman,
the Absolute. I am not subject to the necessities and conditions of the
body,—hunger, thirst, birth, death, disease, grief, pleasure, pain."
Such assertions, however, will not make him free from these bodily
conditions so long as he is on the plane of relativity. He may be
compared to a person who is suffering from the intense pain of a wound
but who is trying to deny it by mere words of mouth.

When the Kundalini is awakened, true

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhakti, Divine
Love and ecstasy are attained. Through Karma Yoga one can easily attain
to various psychic powers. But when Karma Yoga leads to Bhakti Yoga,
Divine realization comes. Then all duties, rituals, ceremonials, drop
off like the petals of a flower when the fruit has grown. When a child
is born, the young mother does not discharge any other duties, but
fondles the child the whole day. As she is free from all household
duties, so a Bhakta becomes free from the bondage of work after
realizing God. The true Bhakta says: "O Mother, Karma with attachment I
fear, for it proceeds from selfish motives, and as a man soweth so shall
he reap. I see again that work without attachment is exceedingly
difficult. If I work through attachment I shall forget Thee; therefore I
do not desire such Karma. Grant that my work may become less and less so
long as I do not attain to Thee. Till then may I have strength to do
unattached the little work that is left for me, and may I be blessed
with unselfish love and devotion to Thee! Mother, so long as I do not
realize Thee may my mind be not attached to new works and new desires!
But when Thou wilt command me to work I shall do it not for myself but
only for Thee."

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

A devotee: Revered Sir, what is Hatha Yoga?

<span class="margnote">Hatha Yoga.</span>Râmakrishna: Hatha Yoga deals
entirely with the physical body. It describes the methods by which the
internal organs can be purified and perfect health can be acquired. It
teaches how to conquer the various powers of Prâna and the muscles,
organs and nerves of the body. But in Hatha Yoga the mind must always be
concentrated on the physical body. A Hatha Yogi possesses many powers,
such as the power of levitation; but all these powers are only the
manifestations of physical Prâna. There was a juggler who in the midst
of his tricks suddenly turned his tongue upward and drew it back into
the post-nasal canal, stopping respiration. Instantly all the activities
of his body were suspended. People thought that he was dead, so they
buried him. For several years he remained buried in that state. In some
way the grave was opened and he regained consciousness. Immediately he
began to repeat the same conjuring words with which he had been casting
the spell before he lost consciousness. So the practice of Hatha Yoga
will bring one control over the body, but it will carry one only so far.
Râja Yoga, on the contrary, deals with

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

the mind and leads to spiritual results through discrimination,
concentration and meditation.

<span class="margnote">Concentration.</span>Perfect concentration of the
mind is necessary in the path of Râja Yoga. Mind is like the flame of a
lamp. When the wind of desire blows, it is restless; when there is no
wind, it is steady. The latter is the state of mind in Yoga. Ordinarily
the mind is scattered, one portion here, another portion there. It is
necessary to collect the scattered mind and direct it towards one point.
If you want a whole piece of cloth, you will have to pay the full price
for it. Yoga is not possible if there be the least obstacle in the way.
If there be a small break in the telegraphic wire, the message will not
reach its destination. A Yogi controls his mind, the mind does not
control him. When the mind is absolutely concentrated, the breath stops,
and the soul enters into Samâdhi.

<span class="margnote">Kumbhaka.</span>This state of breathlessness is
called Kumbhaka. It can be attained through Bhakti Yoga also. When the
emotion (Bhakti) reaches its climax, the breath stops and the mind
becomes fixed. If a man is sweeping and some one comes and tells him:
"Mr. So and So is dead; have you heard?"

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The sweeper, if
the dead man be not his relation, will exclaim unconcernedly: "Is that
so? Is he dead? He was a good man. I am sorry"; but he goes on sweeping.
If, however, he hears of the death of a dear relative, he is so stunned
that the broom drops from his hand and he sinks to the ground crying
out, "God help me!" At this time his breath stops, his mind is fixed
upon his grief and he cannot think of anything else. Again, have you not
seen among women how, when one of them is struck with wonder either by
seeing or hearing something unexpectedly, her breath will stop, her mind
become fixed and the body remain so motionless that the other women will
exclaim: "What is the matter? Have you lost your senses?"

<span class="margnote">Meditation.</span>At the time of true meditation
the body and senses become absolutely still like a piece of wood. When I
first saw Keshab Sen in the Âdi (original) Brâhmo-Samâj, I saw him
sitting in meditation with other members; his mind was entirely
withdrawn from the external world and his body was perfectly motionless
like a wooden stump; then I said to Mathura Bâbu: "This man has hooked
the fish." Meditation is possible even with eyes wide open,

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

even when one is conversing with another. Suppose you have a toothache.
You may perform all works, but your mind will remain concentrated on the
spot where the pain is. Similarly, if you have true concentration on
God, your mind will remain fixed even when your body is moving or your
mouth is speaking. I used to close my eyes at the time of meditation.
Then I thought: "If God exists after closing the eyes. why should He not
exist while the eyes are open?" I opened my eyes and saw the Divine
Being everywhere. Man, animals, insects, trees, creepers, moon, sun,
water, earth, in and through all these the Infinite Being is manifesting
Himself. He who thinks upon God for a long time possesses Divine
Substance within him. Through him flow Divine powers. A great singer, or
one who is perfect in instrumental music or in any other art or science,
also possesses a portion of Divine power. This is the doctrine of the
Bhagavad Gitâ,—"Wherever there are signs of greatness, there is the
manifestation of Divine power."

A devotee: Revered Sir, what happens after death?

Râmakrishna: Keshab Sen asked me the same question. So long as a man
remains in

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="margnote">What happens after death.</span>ignorance, in
other words, so long as he has not realized God, he will be subject to
rebirth; but after Divine realization one does not come back to this
earth, nor is he born in any other world. Potters after making earthen
pots dry them in the sun. Have you not seen that there are pots which
are baked in fire and others that are unbaked? When a pot of unbaked
clay is broken, the potter uses the same clay to make a new pot; but if
a baked pot is broken, the pieces are of no further use and he throws
them away. Similarly, when the ego is not baked in the fire of wisdom,
after death it will appear in another form and be born again and again.
If a fried grain is planted .it will not germinate; in the same manner,
he whose inner nature is fried in the fire of wisdom is no longer
subject to evolution, but attains to absolute freedom from rebirth.

<span class="margnote">Dualistic and monistic Vedânta.</span>In the
Purânas the doctrine of dualistic Vedânta prevails, which teaches that
the Jiva (the individual soul) is one thing and God is another: "I am
distinct and separate from you." This body is like a bowl; mind,
intellect and egoism are like water within it, while the Personal God is
the sun which is reflected in the water; and this

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

reflection or image of the Divine Being can be perceived by the Jiva in
ecstasy. In monistic Vedânta, however, Brahman, the Absolute, is the
Reality and all else is unreal like a dream. Egoism is like a stick
which lies upon the waters of the infinite ocean of
Existence-Intelligence-Bliss Absolute, and makes it appear as divided;
but when the stick is removed, the apparent division ceases and the
waters of the ocean remain undivided. The knowledge of this indivisible
oneness brings the highest state of Samâdhi, where this egoism is
entirely obliterated. But the great spiritual teachers like
Sankarâchârya <span id="fr_77"></span>[\*](#fn_77) kept a little egoism
of knowledge to teach mankind.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

A true Jnâni, or knower of the Absolute, may be recognized by certain
signs. <span class="margnote">The signs of a true Jnâni.</span>A real
Jnâni does harm to no one. His nature becomes like that of an innocent
child. As a burnt rope retains its shape and appears from a distance
like a real rope, but in truth a breath can blow it away, so the egoism
of a Jnâni is merely apparent. A child has no attachment for anything.
It may build a toy house; if anyone touches it, it cries; but the next
moment it will itself break it to pieces. So a true Jnâni lives in the
world, but unattached. He may possess things of great value, but he has
no attachment for them. In monistic Vedânta the waking state is no more
real than the dream state. <span class="margnote">Parable of a
wood-cutter and his dream.</span>A wood-cutter was dreaming a happy
dream, but being suddenly awakened by some one, he exclaimed with
annoyance: "Why did you awaken me? I was a king and the father of seven
children. My children were all receiving education in the various
sciences. I was seated on the throne and ruling over my country. Why did
you destroy so happy and

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

delightful a state?" The man replied: "Oh! It was only a dream. What
does it matter?" The wood-cutter said: "Get away, you fool! You do not
understand that my being a king was as real as my wood-cutting. If it be
true that I am a wood-cutter, then it is equally true that I was a
king."

<span class="margnote">Jnâna and Vijnâna.</span>Jnâna is to know the
Âtman through the path of discrimination: "Not this, not this." When
this discrimination leads to Samâdhi, then the Âtman can be apprehended.
But Vijnâna is complete knowledge or realization. Some have heard of
milk, some have seen it, but others have tasted it. So with God. Those
who have heard of Him are still in ignorance; those who have seen Him
are Jnânis; but those who have tasted or realized Him are Vijnânis.
After seeing God, when one makes acquaintance with Him and realizes Him
as the nearest and dearest of all, that is Vijnâna. At first it is
necessary to discriminate "Not this, not this," that is, God is not the
elements of nature, He is not the senses or sense-powers, He is not this
mind, not this intellect, not this egoism; He is beyond all the
categories of nature. To go to the roof, one must climb step by step,
leaving one step after another. The staircase

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

is not the same as the roof. After coming out on the roof, however, one
can easily see that both roof and staircase are of the same material.
The same Infinite Brahman appears as the Personal God, Jiva, and the
twenty-four categories of nature. You may ask why this earth is so hard
and solid, if it has come out of Brahman? His omnipotence can make
everything possible.

iv

Râmakrishna (to old Gopâl, Swami Advaitânanda): What! Do you still wish
to visit holy places?

Gopâl: Yes, Bhagavan, I would like to travel a little more.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the bird on the mast.</span>Râm Bâbu
(to Gopâl): The Bhagavan says, after travelling to many places one
should settle of down in one spot. This he explains by the parable of
the bird on a ship's mast. A bird was sitting on the mast of a vessel as
it sailed out to sea. After a long time the bird realized that there
were no trees around or land in sight. He flew towards the north to find
land, but being disappointed, he returned to the mast, rested a while
and flew towards the south. Still finding no shore, he came back again,
tired and exhausted. In the

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

same manner he went in all directions, but finding nothing but water and
water everywhere, he at last rested on the mast and became content.

Râmakrishna: So long as God seems to be outside, in different places, so
long there is ignorance. But when God is realized within, that is true
knowledge. <span class="margnote">Parable of a man seeking a
light.</span>A man woke up at midnight and desired to smoke. He wanted a
light, so he went to a neighbor's house and knocked at the door. Someone
opened the door and asked him what he wanted. The man said: "I wish to
smoke. Can you give me a light?" The neighbor replied: "What is the
matter with you? You have taken so much trouble and awakened us at this
hour, when in your hand you have a lighted lantern." What a man wants is
already with him; but he still wanders here and there in search of it.

Râm Bâbu: Bhagavan, now I have understood why a Guru asks his disciple
to visit holy places, to give him experience and to increase his faith
in his teachings.

Pandit: Revered Sir, how far did your Holiness go on pilgrimages?

Râmakrishna (smiling): Well, I went to

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

<span class="margnote">Pilgrimages.</span>some places. Hâzrâ went
farther and higher up, to Hrishikesha <span
id="fr_78"></span>[\*](#fn_78) in the Himâlayas. I did not go so far or
so high up. The vulture and the kite soar very high, but their eyes are
all the while directed to the charnel-pits below. Do you know what the
charnel-pits are? Lust and gold. If in going on a pilgrimage a man does
not acquire Bhakti, then his pilgrimage is fruitless; for Bhakti is the
end of all; it is the one thing needful.

Do you know what the vulture and the kite are? They are those who talk
on lofty subjects and say: "We have performed most of the works enjoined
in the Holy Scriptures," but whose minds are immersed in worldliness and
strongly attached to wealth, name, fame, and sense-pleasures.

Pandit: Yes, Revered Sir, that is true. Going on a pilgrimage is like
casting aside the precious stone worn on the breast of Vishnu and
wandering about in search of other jewels.

Râmakrishna: Again, you should know that although you may give thousands
of instructions, still they will not produce results until

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

the time is ripe. A child before going to sleep says to its mother:
"Mamma dear, awaken me when I shall feel hungry." The mother replies:
"Do not worry about that, my child; thy hunger will awaken thee." In the
same manner one yearns after God when the proper time comes for it.

<span class="margnote">Three classes of religious
teachers.</span>Physicians can be divided into three classes. First,
those who, when called in, look at the patient, feel his pulse,
prescribe the necessary medicines and then ask the patient to take them.
If the patient declines to do so, they do not care. This is the lowest
class. Similarly there are spiritual teachers who do not care to know
whether their instructions have been practised or whether they have
produced good results in their disciples. There are other physicians who
not only ask the patient to take the prescribed drug but who reason with
him if he refuses to take it. These belong to the medium class.
Similarly those spiritual teachers who not only instruct their pupils
but reason with them and gently persuade them to follow their teachings,
are better than those of the first class. But the best physicians, who
belong to the highest class, use force on the patient if he does not
listen to their gentle persuasions.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They may go so far
as to make him swallow the medicine by force if necessary. Similarly the
best spiritual masters use force on their disciples to bring them into
the path of the Lord. These teachers belong to the highest class.

Pandit: Revered Sir, if there are such spiritual teachers, like the
physicians of the highest class, then why dost Thou say that the
spiritual awakening cannot come before the time is ripe?

Bhagavân: Yes, it is true; but suppose the medicine does not get into
the stomach? What will the physician do then? Even the best of them are
quite helpless. <span class="margnote">Fit vessels.</span>To give proper
instruction one must first choose fit vessels. You do not examine the
capabilities of your pupils. But I ask those who come to me: "Whom have
you to care for you?" Suppose a young man has no father or that his
father has left him with debts; how is it possible for him to give his
heart and soul to God? Do you hear, my child?

Pandit: Yes, Bhagavan, I am all attention.

<span class="margnote">Grace of God.</span>The conversation then passed
to another subject,—the Grace of God. The Bhagavân said: Once a number
of Shikh soldiers came to the Temple. I met them before the Temple of
the Divine Mother. One

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

of them said: "God is all-merciful." I asked: "Indeed, is it so? How did
you come to know it?" "Why, Sir, is not the Lord feeding and taking care
of us?" I said: "Is that so extraordinary? God is the Father of us all.
If the father does not look after his own children, who will? Shall
outsiders from another neighborhood come and take care of them?"

Narendra: Then we should not call Him merciful?

Bhagavân: Am I forbidding you to call Him all-merciful? What I mean is
that the Lord is our nearest and dearest and not like a stranger.

Pandit: Priceless are these words!

The Bhagavân here asked for a fresh glass of water. He would not take
the one already offered and it was therefore carried away. It appeared
that he looked upon it as unfit to be offered to the God in Him, being
made impure by the "feverish" touch of some wicked men.

Pandit (to Hâzrâ): You who live with the Bhagavân day and night must
enjoy the highest bliss.

Bhagavân (smiling): This day I have had the rare pleasure of looking at
the moon of the second lunar day. Do you know why I say the moon

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

of the second lunar day? Sitâ <span id="fr_79"></span>[\*](#fn_79) said
to Râvana: "Thou art the full moon, and my Râma Chandra is the moon of
the second lunar day." Râvana was highly pleased, for he did not
understand the meaning. Sitâ meant to say that the fortune of Râvana had
reached its climax like the full moon and that now it must be on the
wane; but the fortune of Râma Chandra is like the moon of the second
lunar day, which will increase day by day.

Here the Bhagavân rising to take leave, the Pandit and his friends bowed
down before Him with great reverence and devotion. He then departed,
followed by His disciples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[261:\*](gork12.htm#fr_74) Ishân Chunder
Mookerjee was a pious Brâhmin householder. He regarded Srî Râmakrishna
as the Incarnation of Divine Wisdom.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[262:\*](gork12.htm#fr_75) Pandit Sasadhar
Tarkachurâmoni was a Sanskrit scholar of great renown and an eloquent
preacher of the philosophy and religion of Vedânta. By his powerful
speeches he succeeded in checking the materialistic tendency of the
Hindu students of Bengal. He also gave rational explanations of the
rituals and ceremonies described in the Hindu Scriptures.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[263:\*](gork12.htm#fr_76) Gâyatri is the most
sacred and the most universally used of all Vedic prayers among the
Hindus. It is a Sanskrit *Mantram* or formula which means: "Let us
meditate on that glorious self-effulgent light of the Divine Sun; may He
enlighten our *Buddhi* or understanding." This is still the daily prayer
of all the Hindus of the upper three castes.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[279:\*](gork12.htm#fr_77) Sankarâchârya was the
greatest exponent of the Vedânta philosophy in India. He lived about the
beginning of the eighth century of the Christian era. His Commentaries
on the Upanishads, the Vedânta sutras, and on the Bhagavad Gitâ have
shown the profound depth of his philosophical reasoning, He became a
*Sannyâsin* when he was eight years old. He wrote his famous
Commentaries in Sanskrit at the age of twelve and finished his literary
work when he was sixteen years old. Then for sixteen years he preached
monistic Vedânta, and established monastic orders and monasteries in the
four corners of India. He finished his glorious and eventful career when
he reached the age of thirty-two. He <span id="page_280">p. 280</span>
is regarded in India as the Incarnation of Shiva and the embodiment of
Divine Wisdom.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[284:\*](gork12.htm#fr_78) Hrishikesha is a
sacred place of pilgrimage on the banks of the holy river Ganges at the
foot of the Himâlayas.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[288:\*](gork12.htm#fr_79) Sitâ, the faithful
and devoted wife of Lord Râma Chandra, who is regarded as an Incarnation
of God. She was stolen by Râvana, King of Ceylon, who brought her to his
capital, Lankâ. Hence the war described in the epic Râmâyana, which
ended with the destruction of Râvana and many of his people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Gathering of Disciples at the Temple](gork13)
