[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork04)  [Next](gork06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### CHAPTER II

### SRÎ RÂMAKRISHNA WITH HIS DISCIPLES AT THE TEMPLE

THE Bhagavân was in His room seated in His usual place on the small
platform beside His bed. It was Sunday and the room was filled with a
large number of devotees. Among them was a young college student only
nineteen years of age named Narendra, who afterwards became the
world-renowned Swâmi Vivekânanda. Everyone noticed even at that time
that he was a sincere and earnest seeker after Truth and that his mind
was above all worldly concerns. His eyes were shining with spiritual
light, his face was aglow with innocence and simplicity, and his words
were full of spiritual power. The Bhagavân was discoursing on worldly
people who ridicule the worshippers of God. Especially addressing
Narendra, He asked: What do you say, Narendra? Worldly

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

men will speak all manner of things against godly people, but they
should act like the elephant. When an elephant passes through a public
road, dogs run after him and bark at him; but the elephant turns a deaf
ear to their barking and goes on his own way. Suppose, my boy, people
should speak ill of you behind your back, what would you think of them?

Narendra: I would look upon them as a lot of barking dogs.

<span class="margnote">God dwells in all.</span>The Bhagavân laughed and
said: No, my friend, do not go so far as that. You should love everyone;
no one is a stranger; God dwells in all beings; without Him nothing can
exist. When Prahlâda <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15) realized Him,
the Lord asked him to crave a boon. Prahlâda replied: "When I have seen
Thee, what other boon do I need?" The Lord asked him again. He then
prayed: "If Thou wishest to grant me a boon, do Thou forgive those who
have persecuted me." Prahlâda meant that by persecuting him they had
persecuted the Lord dwelling within him. Know that God resides in all
things animate and inanimate. Hence everything is an object of worship,
be

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

it men, beasts or birds, plants or minerals In our relation with men all
that we can do is to take heed to ourselves that we mix with good people
and avoid bad company. It is true, however, that God resides in bad
people also, yes, even in a tiger; but surely it does not follow that we
should embrace a tiger. It may be asked: Why should we run away from a
tiger when God is dwelling in that form? To this the answer is that God
abiding in our hearts directs us to run away from the tiger. Why should
we not obey His will?

<span class="margnote">Parable of the disciple and the mad
elephant.</span>In a certain forest there lived a sage who had a number
of disciples. He taught his disciples the truth: "God dwells in all
things. Knowing this, you should bend your knee before every object."
One day a disciple went out into the forest for wood. On his way he saw
a man riding a mad elephant and shouting: "Get out of the way, get out
of the way! This is a mad elephant." The disciple, instead of running
away, remembered his master's teaching and began to reason: "God is in
the elephant as well as in me. God cannot be hurt by God, so why should
I run away?" Thus thinking, he stood where he was and saluted the
elephant

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

as he came nearer. The driver (Mâhoot) kept on shouting: "Get out of the
way!" but the disciple would not move, until he was snatched up by the
mad elephant and dashed to one side. The poor boy, bruised and bleeding,
lay on the ground unconscious. The sage, hearing of the accident, came
with his other disciples to carry him home. When after some time the
unfortunate pupil recovered consciousness, he described what had
happened. The sage replied: My boy, it is true that God is manifest in
everything. But if He is in the elephant, is He not equally manifest in
the driver (Mâhoot)? Tell me why you did not pay heed to the warning of
the driver?

<span class="margnote">God in everything.</span>The Bhagavân continued:
In the sacred Scriptures it is written, "God dwells in water"; but some
water can be used for divine service, or for drinking purposes, some for
bathing or washing, while dirty water cannot be touched even. In the
same manner, although God resides in all human beings, still there are
good men and bad men, there are lovers of God and those who do not love
God. We should recognize Divinity in all, but we should not mix with bad
people or with those who do not love God. Our relation with

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

them must not be very close. It is wise to avoid the company of such
people.

Narendra: <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16) What attitude should we
hold when wicked people come to disturb our peace or do actually offend
us?

Bhagavân: A person living in society should have a little Tamas (the
spirit of resisting evil) Resistance of for purposes of self-protection.
But evil this is necessary only for outward show, its object being to
prevent the wicked from doing harm to you. At the same time you should
not do actual injury to another on the ground that he has done injury to
you.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the snake and the holy
man.</span>There was a large venomous snake in a field. No one dared to
go that way. One day a holy man (Mahâtmâ) passed by that road and the
serpent  ran after the sage to bite him. But when the snake approached
the holy man, he lost all his ferocity and was overpowered by the
gentleness of the Yogi. Seeing him, the sage said: "Well, my friend,
think you to bite me?" The snake was abashed and made no reply. At this
the sage continued: "Hearken, friend; do not injure anyone in future."
The snake bowed and nodded

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

assent. The sage went his way, and the snake entered his hole and
thenceforward began to live a life of innocence, without attempting to
harm anyone. In a few days all the neighborhood concluded that the snake
had lost his venom and was no longer dangerous; so everyone began to
tease him. They pelted him with stones or dragged him mercilessly by the
tail, and there was no end to his troubles. Fortunately the sage again
passed that way, and seeing the bruised and battered condition of the
snake, was very much moved and inquired the cause. "Holy Sir," the snake
replied, "this is because I do not injure anyone after your advice. But
alas! they are so merciless!" The sage smilingly said: "My friend, I
simply advised you not to bite anyone; but I did not tell you not to
frighten others. Although you should not bite any living creature, still
you should keep people at a distance by hissing at them." And Srî
Râmakrishna added: There is no harm in "hissing" at wicked men and at
your enemies, showing that you can protect yourself and know how to
resist evil. Only you must be careful not to pour your venom into the
blood of your enemy. Resist not evil by causing evil in return.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="margnote">Love for all.</span>One of the devotees present
said: But when a person is annoyed with me, Bhagavan, I feel unhappy. I
feel that I have not been able to love everyone equally.

Râmakrishna: When you feel that way, you should have a talk with that
person and try to make peace with him. If you fail after such attempts,
then you need not give it further thought. Take refuge with the Lord.
Think upon Him. Do not let your mind be disturbed by any other thing.

Devotee: Christ and Chaitanya have both taught us to love all mankind.

<span class="margnote">A true devotee always calm.</span>Râmakrishna:
You should love everyone because God dwells in all beings. But to wicked
people you should bow down at a distance. (To Bijoy, smiling) Is it true
that people blame you because you mix with those who believe in a
Personal God with form? A true devotee of God should possess absolute
calmness and never be disturbed by the opinions of others. Like a
blacksmith's anvil, he will endure all blows and persecutions. and yet
remain firm in his faith and always the same. <span
class="margnote">Company of  the wicked.</span>Wicked people may say
many things about you and blame you; but if you long for God, you should
endure with patience.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One can think on
God even dwelling in the midst of wicked people. The sages of ancient
times, who lived in forests, could meditate on God although surrounded
by tigers, hears, and other wild beasts. The nature of the wicked is
like that of a tiger or bear. They attack the innocent and injure them.
You should he especially cautious in coming in contact with the
following: First, the wealthy. A person who possesses wealth and many
attendants can easily do harm to another if he so desires. You should be
very guarded in speaking with him; sometimes it may even be necessary to
agree with him in his opinion. Second, a dog. When a dog barks at you,
you must not run, but talk to him and quiet him. Third a bull. When a
bull chases you, you should always pacify him by talking to him. Fourth
a drunkard. If you make him angry, he will call you names and swear at
you. You should address him as a dear relative, then he will be happy
and obliging.

When wicked people come to see me, I am very careful. The character of
some of them is like that of a snake. They may bite you unawares. It may
take a long time and much discrimination to recover from the effects of

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

that bite. Or you may get so angry at them that you will wish to take
revenge. It is necessary, however, to keep occasionally the company of
holy men. Through such association right discrimination will come.

<span class="margnote">Four classes of individual souls.</span>There are
four classes of *Jivas*, or individual souls: First, *Baddha*, the
bound; second, *Mumukshu*, the seeker after freedom; third, *Mukta*, the
emancipated; and fourth, *Nitya-mukta*, the eternally free. This world
is like a net, the soul is the fish, and the Lord of the phenomenal
world is the fisherman. When a fisherman draws in his net, some of the
fish try to escape by rending the net, that is, they struggle for
freedom. So are the souls of the second class, the *Mumukshus*, the
seekers after freedom. But among the fish that struggle, only a few
escape. Similarly, a few souls only attain to freedom and they belong to
the third class, the *Muktas*. There are some fish, however, that are
naturally cautious and never fall into the net. Such are the souls of
the fourth class, the *Nitya-muktas*, who are never caught in the net of
the phenomenal world, but who remain eternally free, like Nârada <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17) and others like him. Most of the fish,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

however, fall into the net and have not the sense to know that they are
going to die there. When caught, they try to run away and hide in the
mud at the bottom by swimming with the net. They make no effort to get
out of the net, but go deeper and deeper into the mud. These may be
compared to the souls who are bound fast in the world. They are caught
in the net, but they delude themselves by thinking that they are happy.
They remain attached to worldliness. They plunge into the mire of
worldly evils and are content, while those who are seeking after freedom
or who are emancipated do not like worldliness and do not care for
sense-pleasures.

<span class="margnote">Bound souls. </span>Those who are thus caught in
the net of the world are the *Baddha*, or bound souls. No one can awaken
them. They do not come to their senses even after receiving blow upon
blow of misery, sorrow and indescribable suffering. The camel loves
thorny bushes, and although his mouth bleeds when he eats them, still he
does not cease to love them dearly and no one can keep him away from
them. The bound souls may meet with great grief and misfortune, but
after a few days they are just as they were before. The wife

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

may die or become unchaste, the man will marry again; his son may die,
he will be extremely sorrowful, but he will soon forget him. The mother
of the boy may be overwhelmed with grief for a short time, but in a few
days she will once more be concerned for her personal appearance and
will deck herself with jewels and finery. Such worldly people may be
left paupers after marrying their sons and daughters, yet they will
still beget children every year. They may lose their fortune by a
lawsuit, but they will again go to the courts. They may not be able to
support their children, to educate, feed, clothe, or house them
properly, still they will continue to have more. They are like the snake
with a musk-rat in its mouth. As the snake cannot swallow the rat
because of its strong odor, neither can it throw it out because of its
own bent teeth, so these bound souls, *Baddhas*, although they may
occasionally feel that the world is unreal, can neither give it up nor
can they fix their minds on the Reality of the universe. I once saw a
relative of Keshab Chunder Sen, who was quite old, still playing cards
as if the time for meditating on God had not come for him.

There is another sign of a *Baddha*, or worldly

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

soul. If you remove him from the world and put him in a better place, he
will pine away and die. He will work like a slave to support his family,
and he will not hesitate to tell lies, to deceive or to flatter in order
to earn his livelihood. He looks upon those who worship God or who
meditate on the Lord of the universe as insane. He never finds time or
opportunity to think of spiritual subjects. Even at the hour of death he
will think and talk of worldly things. Whatever thought is strongest in
the minds of worldly people comes out at the time of death. If they
become delirious, they rave of nothing but material objects. They may go
to places of worship, but so long as their minds are attached to the
world, worldly thoughts will rise at the last moment. As a parrot may be
taught to utter the Lord's Holy Name, but when attacked by a cat,
screams and gives its natural cry; so they may repeat the Holy Name of
the Lord, but when attacked by death, the natural tendency of their
minds will predominate. <span class="margnote">What thou thinkest thou
shalt become.</span>It is said in the Bhagavad Gitâ that the future is
determined by the thought that is uppermost at the moment of death, and
in the Purâna there is a story that King Bharata was born as a deer

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

because when he died, his mind was fixed on the thought of a deer. He
who passes away thinking of God and meditating on Him, does not come
back to this world.

A devotee: Bhagavan, will a man who thinks of God, but who does not
meditate on Him at the time of death, be born again?

<span class="margnote">Concentration and meditation</span>Srî
Râmakrishna: An ordinary soul who has no faith in God may think of Him
for a time, but easily forgets Him again and becomes attached to the
world. If, however, he concentrates his mind upon God at the last moment
of his life, his heart and soul become purified and remain so even after
death. People suffer on so much because they have no faith and in God.
In order to be able to think meditation. of God at the time of death we
must prepare our mind by constant practice. The practice of meditation
on God will create a tendency of mind to think of Him spontaneously even
at the last moment.

A devotee: Bhagavan, what condition of mind is necessary for a worldly
person to attain to freedom?

Râmakrishna: If by the Grace of the Lord strong dispassion for worldly
things arises in his mind, then such a person becomes free from

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="margnote">Dispassion.</span>all earthly attachment. What is
this *strong* dispassion? Let me tell you. Ordinary dispassion makes the
mind think of the Lord occasionally, but there is no longing in the
heart. Strong dispassion, on the contrary, makes the mind dwell
constantly on the Lord with the same intense longing as a mother feels
for her only child. He who has strong dispassion does not want anything
but the Lord. He looks at the world as a deep well and is always fearful
lest he may fall into it. Earthly relations seem to him very distant. He
does not seek their company. His whole heart and soul yearn for God. He
does not think of his family, nor does he think of the morrow. He also
possesses great spiritual force.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the farmer and the canal.</span>Let me
explain this to you by a parable: In a certain place there had been a
long drought. The farmers were irrigating their fields by canals,
bringing water from a long distance. One farmer had great determination
and force of character. One morning he made up his mind that he would
continue to dig his canal until he had connected it with the river and
brought the water to his field. He was so busy digging that he lost
account of time. The hour for luncheon came

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

and passed. His wife called him to come home, wash and eat. "The
luncheon is getting cold. Leave your work until to-morrow," she urged.
At first he paid no heed to her words, but when she repeated her
request, he bade her go home and not disturb him any more. "You have no
sense," he said, "with this terrible drought we cannot grow anything.
There will be no food for the children, the whole family will die of
starvation. I have resolved that this very day I shall bring the water
of the river to my field; then I shall think of washing and eating."
Hearing this, his wife ran home, The farmer worked hard the whole day
and toward evening he joined the canal to the river and sat on one side
with great delight as he saw the stream of water running into his field.
His mind was then peaceful and happy. He went home and called his wife,
saying: "Now give me a little oil and fill my pipe," and he washed, ate
a hearty dinner and enjoyed a sound sleep. This kind of determination
and firmness of purpose must be at the back of strong dispassion.
Another farmer who was trying to bring water to his field was likewise
called by his wife at the hour of the noonday meal. "It is getting late,
come home, and wash

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and eat," she said, and at once he dropped his spade and replied: "My
dear, when you ask me to go, I must go." So his field remained dry. As a
farmer cannot irrigate his field, so a devotee cannot attain to God
without firm determination.

When God is attained through such strong dispassion, all worldly
attachment fades away. A householder may then live with his family, but
he becomes unattached and there is no more danger for him. If there be
two magnets, one very large and the other very small, which do you
suppose will attract a piece of iron? The larger one of course. God is
the greatest magnet. Compared to Him the attraction of the world is
small and powerless.

A devotee: Bhagavan, why are we so bound to the world that we cannot see
God?

<span class="margnote">Send of "I"</span>Râmakrishna: The sense of "I"
in us is the greatest obstacle in the path of God-vision. It covers the
Truth. When "I" is dead, all troubles cease. If by the mercy of the Lord
one realizes "I am a non-doer," instantly that man becomes emancipated
in this life. This sense of "I" is like a thick cloud. As a small cloud
can hide the glorious sun, so this cloud of "I" hides the glory of the
Eternal

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sun. If the cloud
is dispersed by the mercy of a Guru, or spiritual master, the glory of
Infinite becomes visible. When Râma, the Divine Incarnation in a human
form, was walking in the forest, Lakshmana (the individual soul), who
was at a short distance, could not see Him because Sitâ or Mâyâ, or the
sense of "I," was standing between. Look at me. I cover my face with
this handkerchief and you cannot see me; still my face is there. So God
is the nearest of all, but because of the sense of "I" you do not see
Him. The soul in its true nature is absolute Existence, Intelligence and
Bliss, but on account of Mâyâ or the sense of "I," it has forgotten its
real Self and has become entangled' in the meshes of the various
limitations of mind and body.

<span class="margnote">Money is power.</span>Each attribute limits the
soul and modifies its nature. He who dresses smartly will naturally sing
love-songs, play cards and carry a cane, and such things will appeal to
him. If you have a pencil in your hand, you will unconsciously scribble
on anything; such is the power of the pencil. Money has great power.
When a man becomes wealthy his nature is entirely changed. He is a
different being. A poor Brâhmin, for instance,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

used to come here. He was very humble. He lived on the other side of the
Ganges. One day as I was landing from a boat, I saw him sitting at the
riverside. Seeing me, he shouted in a disrespectful tone, "Hello! is it
you, my good fellow?" Immediately I understood by his manner that he had
got hold of some money, otherwise he would not dare to address me thus.
A toad had a Rupee in its hole. An elephant was coming that way and
passed over the hole. The toad was very angry; it came out and was about
to kick the elephant, saying: "How darest thou pass over me?" Such is
the power of wealth! It makes one so egotistic.

<span class="margnote">Seven stages of spiritual evolution.</span>This
sense of "I," however, vanishes at the approach of Divine wisdom, which
leads to superconsciousness (Samâdhi) and eventually to
God-consciousness. But it is very difficult to acquire this Divine
wisdom. It is said in the Vedas that when the mind reaches the seventh
stage of the spiritual evolution, the soul enters into Samâdhi and
instantly its sense of "I" disappears. The mind naturally dwells in the
first three stages, the realm of worldly tendencies and animal
propensities, and becomes attached to lust and

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

wealth. When the mind dwells in the purified heart, spiritual light is
perceived by the soul. At that time the soul exclaims: "What is this!
What is this!" When it rises near the throat and remains there, the
devotee loves to hear and speak of God. When the mind rises still
higher, near the space between the eyebrows, it beholds the vision of
the Infinite Being, whose nature is absolute
Existence-Intelligence-Bliss. The soul then desires to touch and embrace
that Being, but fails. As a light within a lantern can be seen but
cannot be touched from outside, so the soul beholds the vision but
cannot lay hold on it. cannot enter into it, cannot become one with it.
In the seventh stage, however, the mind is bereft of the sense of "I,"
enters into God-consciousness and realizes its oneness with the
Infinite.

Devotee: Bhagavan, what happens after reaching the seventh stage when
Divine wisdom comes? What does the man see?

Râmakrishna: It cannot be described by words. In the seventh stage when
the mind goes into its causal form, Samâdhi comes and what happens then
no one can tell.

This sense of "I" which makes one worldly

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="margnote">Difference between soul and God.</span>and
attached to lust and wealth is the cause of bondage. The difference
between the Supreme and the individual soul is created by this sense of
"I" which stands between. If you hold a stick on the surface of a
stream, the water will appear to be divided into two parts, but in
reality the water is one. It appears as two because of the stick. The
sense of "I" may be compared to this stick. Remove this limiting adjunct
and the current will be one and unbroken. What is this sense of "I"
which clings to man? That which says: "I am this, I am that. I possess
so much wealth. I am great and powerful; who is greater than I?" If a
thief has stolen ten Rupees and been detected, the owner takes his money
first, then beats him, then hands him over to the police and finally
puts him in jail. <span class="margnote">The worldly "I."</span>The
worldly "I" says: "Doesn't he know that he stole ten Rupees which
belonged to me? How dared he?"

Devotee: Bhagavan, if we cannot get rid of worldliness except by losing
the sense of "I" in Samâdhi, is it not better to follow the path of
wisdom which leads to Samâdhi, since in the path of devotion the sense
of "I" still remains?

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="margnote">Difficult to be  rid of "I."</span>Râmakrishna:
Very few can get rid of the sense of "I" through Samâdhi. It generally
clings to us. We may discriminate a thousand times, but the sense of "I"
is bound to return again and again. You may cut the branches of a
fig-tree to-day, but to-morrow you will see that new twigs are
sprouting. If this sense of "I" will not leave, then let it stay as the
servant of God. "O God! Thou art my Lord, I am Thy servant!" <span
class="margnote">Servant "I" of a Bhakta.</span>Think in this way: "I am
His servant, I am His Bhakta, devotee." There is no harm in this kind of
"I." Sweet things cause dyspepsia and acidity, but crystallized
sugar-candy is harmless. The path of wisdom is very difficult. It cannot
be followed so long as the sense of "I" is connected with the body. In
this age the consciousness of the body and the sense of "I" cannot be
overcome easily. But in the path of devotion, through prayer and the
repetition of His Holy Name with extreme longing, God can be reached
without fail.

Devotee: Bhagavan, dost Thou teach us to renounce the worldly "I" and
not the sense of the servant "I"?

Râmakrishna: Yes, the servant "I" or "I am the servant of God," "I am
His devotee,"

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

this egoism is not bad but on the contrary it helps us to realize God.

Devotee: Bhagavan, does he who has the sense of the servant "I" possess
passion and anger?

Râmakrishna: If this attitude of a servant be genuine and perfect, then
passion and anger will drop off leaving only a scar in the mind. This
"I" of a Bhakta or devotee does no harm to any living creature. It is
like a sword which, after touching the Philosopher's Stone, is turned to
gold. The sword retains the same form but it cannot cut or injure
anyone. The dry leaves of the cocoanut-tree drop off in the wind,
leaving a mark on the trunk; that mark proves that there was a leaf
there at one time. Similarly, the scar of the sense of "I" remains in
the mind of one who has realized God, but his whole nature is
transformed into that of an innocent child. <span class="margnote">A
child's "I"</span>The child's sense of "I" is not attached to worldly
objects. He may like a thing at one moment, but the next moment he may
dislike it. You can take from him an object of great value by giving him
a doll worth a penny. To a child everyone is equal, there is none
greater or smaller. Therefore a child has no sense of caste or creed. If
his

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

mother says: "He is your brother," however low his caste may he, the
child will sit with him and eat with him without feeling dislike or
difference of any kind.

<span class="margnote">True devotion and love.</span>Some Bhaktas after
attaining to Samâdhi or God-consciousness, when they return, retain the
sense of "I" as "I am His servant, I am His devotee." They do not lose
the sense of "I" entirely but keep a small portion of it to repeat the
Holy Name of the Lord, to sing His praises, to love and serve Him.
Again, those who constantly practise this sense of "servant I"
eventually reach the Supreme Lord. This is the path of Bhakti or
devotion. But true devotion is very rare. True devotion leads to intense
love for God; and when that intense love comes, the Divine Being is not
very far. In that intense love the sense of worldliness is wiped out
entirely and the whole heart and soul rest upon nothing but the Lord of
the universe. Some are born with this intense love for God; it is
natural with them. Its expression is to be found even in their
childhood. At that tender age even, they cry for God. There are many
examples of such born Bhaktas like Prahlâda and others. Ordinary
devotion which is confined by scriptural

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

laws of sacrifice and worship is preparatory. As in hot weather one fans
oneself for a breath of air so long as the breeze is not blowing, but
when the breeze springs up, the fan is no longer needed; so when the
breeze of intense love begins to blow in the soul, all devotional
exercises like repetition of the Name of the Lord, sacrifice, prayers
and asceticism become unnecessary. Devotion without intense love is the
sign of unripe Bhakti. When it ripens, it leads into Divine Love, which
is perfect and which brings the highest realization.

A disciple: Bhagavan, how can God be realized?

<span class="margnote">Pure heart.</span>Râmakrishna: God can be
realized by the purified heart alone. Ordinarily the mind is stained
with worldliness. <span class="margnote">God is like a magnet.</span>The
mind may be compared to a needle. If a needle be covered with thick mud,
it is not attracted by the magnet; but when the mud is washed off, the
magnet attracts it. <span class="margnote">Power of
repentance.</span>Similarly, when the mind is covered with the mud of
worldliness, it does not feel the attraction of the Lord; but whosoever
repents, saying: "O Lord, I shall never again commit such an act," and
sheds tears of true repentance, washes off

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

all impurities and the magnet of the Lord then attracts the needle of
the mind. Instantly superconsciousness comes and is followed by
God-vision.

<span class="margnote">The mercy of the Lord.</span>A man may make
thousands of attempts, but nothing can be accomplished without the mercy
of the Lord. Without His mercy no one can see Him. Nor is it an easy
thing to obtain His mercy. The egotistic sense of "I" which says: "I am
the doer," must be abandoned entirely before the Divine mercy can be
felt. So long as there is a steward in charge of the storehouse, if any
come to the master and beg him, saying: "Master, wilt thou not come to
the storehouse and give me this thing?" he will reply: "The steward is
there, what need have I to go?" In like manner, so long as the ego
thinks of himself as the "doer" and the master of the storehouse of the
heart, the Real Master does not enter there. The mercy of the Lord is
the surest way to God-vision. He is the sun of wisdom. <span
class="margnote">God, the Sun of Wisdom.</span>A single ray of this
Eternal Sun illumines this world, and by that light we are conscious of
ourselves and of one another and we acquire various kinds of knowledge.
If He turns that light towards His

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="margnote">Illustration of a bull's-eye lantern.</span>own
face, then He becomes visible to His Bhakta or devotee. In the night the
watchman goes from place to place holding in his hand the bull's-eye
lantern. By its light he sees everyone's face and people see each other,
but no one can see him. If any one wishes to see the watchman, he must
beg him to turn the light towards himself. Similarly, he who wishes to
see the Lord must pray to Him thus: "O Lord, in Thy mercy do Thou turn
the light of Thy wisdom towards Thine own face that I may behold Thee."
If there be no light in a house, that is the sign of extreme poverty.
Therefore one must light the lamp of wisdom within the heart. "O mind,
why dost thou not see the face of the Divine Mother by lighting the lamp
of wisdom in the chamber of the soul!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[37:\*](gork05.htm#fr_15) See note page
[128](gork07.htm#page_128).

<span id="fn_16"></span>[40:\*](gork05.htm#fr_16) Narendra was a
Sannyâsin disciple of Râmakrishna. He was afterwards known as the Swâmi
Vivekânanda.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[44:\*](gork05.htm#fr_17) See note page
[168](gork08.htm#page_168).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Bhagavân With Certain of His Householder
Disciples](gork06)
