[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork00)  [Next](gork02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> is the authorized English edition of
the "Gospel of Râmakrishna." For the first time in the history of the
world's Great Saviours, the exact words of the Master were recorded
*verbatim* by one of His devoted disciples. These words were originally
spoken in the Bengali language of India. They were taken down in the
form of diary notes by a householder disciple, "M." At the request of
Srî Râmakrishna's Sannyâsin disciples, however, these notes were
published at Calcutta during 1902–1903 A.D., in Bengali, in two volumes,
entitled "*Râmakrishna Kathâmrita*."

At that time "M" wrote to me letters authorizing me to edit and publish
the English translation of his notes, and sent me the manuscript in
English which he himself translated, together with a true copy of a
personal

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

letter <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) which Swâmi Vivekânanda wrote
to him.

At the request of "M" I have edited and remodelled the larger portion of
his English manuscript; while the remaining portions I

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

have translated directly from the Bengali edition of his notes. The
marginal headings, foot-notes, and index, as well as the division of the
Gospel into fourteen chapters, were added by me. I have endeavored to
make every word of this edition as literal, simple, and colloquial as
possible.

Some repetitions are purposely kept to show how the Master used the same
illustrations on different occasions during the course of His eloquent
conversations.

The completed work is now offered to the Western World with the sincere
hope that the sublime teachings of Srî Râmakrishna may open the
spiritual sight of seekers after Truth, and bring peace and freedom to
all souls struggling for realization.

<span class="smallcaps">Swâmi Abhedânanda.</span>

   <span class="smallcaps">New York</span>,  
December 15, 1907.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:\*](gork01.htm#fr_0) Swami Vivekânanda's
letter to "M."

(*True Copy*.)

<span class="smallcaps">Dehra Doon</span>,  
24th Nov., 1897.

My dear Master Mahasaya:

Many thanks for your second leaflet. It is indeed wonderful. The move is
quite original, and never the life of a great teacher was brought before
the public untarnished by the writer's mind as you are doing. The
language also is beyond all praise. So fresh, so pointed, and withal so
plain and easy.

I cannot express in adequate terms how I have enjoyed them. I am really
in a transport when I read them. Strange, isn't it? Our teacher and Lord
was so original and each one of us will have to be original or nothing.
I now under. stand why none of us attempted his life before. It has been
reserved for you, this great work. He is with you evidently. With all
love and namaskar.

(Sd.) <span class="smallcaps">Vivekânanda</span>.

P.S.—Socratic dialogues are Plato all over. You are entirely hidden.
Moreover, the dramatic part is infinitely beautiful. Everybody likes
it—here or in the West.

(Sd.) V.

This letter of Swami Vivekânanda shows that the words of the Master were
accurately recorded by "M."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](gork02)
