[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Cry of the 4th Aethyr,  
Which is Called PAZ**[**1**](#1)

The Stone is translucent and luminous, and no images enter therein.

A voice says: Behold the brilliance of the Lord, whose feet are set upon
him that pardoneth transgression. Behold the six-fold Star that flameth
in the Vault, the seal of the marriage of the great White King and his
black slave[**2**](#2).

So I looked into the Stone, and beheld the six-fold Star: the whole
Aethyr is as tawny clouds, like the flame of a furnace. And there is a
mighty host of Angels, blue and golden, that throng it, and they cry:
Holy, Holy, Holy art thou, that art not shaken in the earthquakes, and
in the thunders! The end of things is come upon us; the day of
be-with-us is at hand! For he hath created the universe, and overthrown
it, that he might take his pleasure thereupon.

And now, in the midst of the Aethyr, I beheld that god.

He hath a thousand arms, and in each hand is a weapon of terrible
strength. His face is more terrible than the storm, and from his eyes
flash lightnings of intolerable brilliance. From his mouth run seas of
blood. Upon his head is a crown of every deadly thing. Upon his forehead
is the upright tau, and on either side of it are the signs of blasphemy.
And about him clingeth a young girl, like unto the king's daughter that
appeareth in the ninth Aethyr. But she is become rosy by reason of his
force, and her purity hath tinged his black with blue.

They are clasped in a furious embrace, so that she is torn asunder by
the terror of the god; yet so tightly clingeth she about him, that he is
strangled. She hath forced back his head, and his throat is livid with
the pressure of her fingers. Their joint cry is an intolerable anguish,
yet it is the cry of their rapture, so that every pain, and every curse,
and every bereavement, and every death of everything in the whole
universe, is but one little gust of wind in that tempest-scream of
ecstasy[**3**](#3).

The voice thereof is not articulate. It is in vain to seek comparison.
It is absolutely continuous, without breaks or beats. If there seem to
be vibration therein, it is because of the imperfection of the ears of
the seer.

And there cometh an interior voice, which sayeth to the seer that he
hath trained his eyes well and can see much; and he hath trained his
ears a little, and can hear a little; but his other senses hath he
trained scarcely at all, and therefore the Aethyrs are almost silent to
him on those planes. By the senses are meant the spiritual correlations
of the senses, not the physical senses. But this matters little, because
the Seer, so far as he is a seer, is the expression of the spirit of
humanity[**4**](#4). What is true of him is true of humanity, so that
even if he had been able to receive the full Aethyrs, he could not have
communicated them.

And an Angel speaks: Behold, this vision is utterly beyond thine
understanding. Yet shalt thou endeavour to unite thyself with the
dreadful marriage-bed.

So I am torn asunder, nerve from nerve and vein from vein, and more
intimately --- cell from cell, molecule from molecule, and atom from
atom, and at the same time all crushed together. Write down that the
tearing asunder *is* a crushing together[**5**](#5). All the double
phenomena are only two ways of looking at a single phenomenon; and the
single phenomenon is Peace. There is no sense in my words or in my
thoughts. "Faces half- formed arose." This is the meaning of that
passage; they are attempts to interpret Chaos, but Chaos is Peace.
Cosmos is the War of the Rose and the Cross[**6**](#6). That was "a
half-formed face" that I said then. All images are useless.

Blackness, blackness intolerable, before the beginning of the light.
This is the first verse of Genesis. Holy art thou, Chaos, Chaos,
Eternity, all contradictions in terms!

Oh, blue! blue! blue! whose reflection in the Abyss is called the Great
One of the Night of Time; between ye vibrateth the Lord of the Forces of
Matter.

O Nox, Nox qui celas infamiam infandi nefandi, Deo solo sit laus qui
dedit signum non scribendum. Laus virgini cuius stuprum tradit salutem.

O Night, that givest suck from thy paps to sorcery, and theft, and rape,
and gluttony, and murder, and tyranny, and to the nameless Horror, cover
us, cover us, cover us from the Rod of Destiny; for Cosmos must come,
and the balance be set up where there was no need of balance, because
there was no injustice, but only truth. But when the balances are equal,
scale matched with scale, then will Chaos[**7**](#7) return.

Yea, as in a looking-glass, so in thy mind, that is backed with the
false metal of lying, is every symbol read averse. Lo! everything
wherein thou hast trusted must confound thee, and that thou didst flee
from was thy saviour. So therefore didst thou shriek in the Black
Sabbath when thou didst kiss the hairy buttocks of the goat, when the
gnarled god tore thee asunder, when the icy cataract of death swept thee
away[**8**](#8).

Shriek, therefore, shriek aloud; mingle the roar of the gored lion and
the moan of the torn bull, and the cry of the man that is torn by the
claws of the Eagle, and the scream of the Eagle that is strangled by the
hands of the Man. Mingle all these in the death-shriek of the Sphinx,
for the blind man hath profaned her mystery. Who is this, Oedipus,
Tiresias, Erinyes? Who is this, that is blind and a seer, a fool above
wisdom? Whom do the hounds of heaven follow, and the crocodiles of hell
await[**9**](#9)? Aleph, vau, yod, ayin, resh, tau, is his
name[**10**](#10).

Beneath his feet is the kingdom, and upon his head the crown. He is
spirit and matter; he is peace and power; in him is Chaos and Night and
Pan, and upon BABALON his concubine, that hath made him drunk upon the
blood of the saints that she hath gathered in her golden cup, hath he
begotten the virgin that now he doth deflower. And this is that which is
written: Malkuth shall be uplifted and set upon the throne of
Binah[**11**](#11). And this is the stone of the philosophers that is
set as a seal upon the tomb of Tetragrammaton, and the elixir of life
that is distilled from the blood of the saints, and the red powder that
is the grinding-up of the bones of Choronzon.

Terrible and wonderful is the Mystery thereof, O thou Titan that hast
climbed into the bed of Juno! Surely thou art bound unto, and broken
upon, the wheel[**12**](#12); yet hast thou uncovered the nakedness of
the Holy One, and the Queen of Heaven is in travail of child, and his
name shall be called Vir, and Vis, and Virus, and Virtus, and Viridis,
in one name that is all these, and above all these[**13**](#13).

Desolate, desolate is the Aethyr, for thou must return unto the
habitations of the Owl and the Bat, unto the Scorpions of the sand, and
the blanched eyeless beetles that have neither wing nor horn. Return,
blot out the vision, wipe from thy mind the memory thereof; stifle the
fire with green wood; consume the Sacrament; cover the Altar; veil the
Shrine; shut up the Temple and spread booths in the market place; until
the appointed time come when the Holly One shall declare unto thee the
Mystery of the Third Aethyr.

Yet be thou wake and ware, for the great Angel Hua is about thee, and
overshadoweth thee, and at any moment he may come upon thee unawares.
The voice of PAZ is ended.

Biskra, Algeria.  
December 16, 1909. 9 - 10:30 a.m.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <span id="1"></span>PAZ = {Leo}{Taurus}{Caput Draconis}. This
    {Taurus} = 7 = Atu V, The Hierophant. He is Microprosopus, the
    Demiurge, appearing in the House of the Sun. Cf. the 9th Aire, where
    His Bride is similarly placed.
2.  <span id="2"></span>This is common Alchemical symbolism; it occurs
    also in Tibetan mythology. The meaning is always the same; that here
    stated.
3.  <span id="3"></span>This all refers to "Love under will," the Law by
    which the universe proceeds.
4.  <span id="4"></span>He is 666, the Angel of Tiphereth, the Middle
    Kingdom of the Sephiroth, Mankind.
5.  <span id="5"></span>Again the logic of the Supernals.
6.  <span id="6"></span>It is "Love under will", which unites them.
7.  <span id="7"></span>Chaos is the Great Father, in one particular
    aspect.
8.  <span id="8"></span>See *Liber CCCLXX* and elsewhere.
9.  <span id="9"></span>Refers to Atu 0.
10. <span id="10"></span>This path joins the Sephiroth 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, o
    9, and 10. It adds to 687 = 3 x 229. 229 is \\{HEB:Aleph} a possible
    spelling of Aiwass (in Hebrew) o in full. \|{HEB:Vau} o /{HEB:Yod} o
    {HEB:Ayin} / o {HEB:Resh}\\ o \|{HEB:Taw} o
11. <span id="11"></span>This mystery of the Daughter awakening the eld
    of the all-Father and thus perpetuating Tetragrammaton is of great
    importance.
12. <span id="12"></span>Refers to Ixion, who embraced Juno in the form
    of a cloud.
13. <span id="13"></span>Vi, Veri, Universum Vivus Vici, the motto of
    the Seer as Magister Templi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
