[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# **The Cry of the 27th Aethyr, Which is Called ZAA**[**1**](#1)

There is an angel with rainbow wings, and his dress is green[**2**](#2)
with silver, a green veil over silver[**3**](#3) armour. Flames of many-
coloured fire dart from him in all directions. It is a woman of some
thirty years old, and she has the moon for a crest, and the moon is
blazoned on her heart, and her sandals are curved silver, like the moon.

And she cries: Lonely am I and cold in the wilderness of the
stars[**5**](#5). For I am the queen of all them that dwell in Heaven,
and the queen of all them that are pure upon earth, and the queen of all
the sorcerers of hell[**6**](#6).

I am the daughter of Nuit, the lady of the stars. And I am the Bride of
them that are vowed unto loneliness[**7**](#7). And I am the mother of
the Dog Cerberus[**8**](#8). One person am I, and three gods[**9**](#9).

And thou who hast blasphemed me shalt suffer knowing me. For I am cold
as thou art cold, and burn with thy fire[**10**](#10). Oh, when shall
the war of the Aires and the elements be accomplished[**11**](#11)?

Radiant are these falchions of my brothers, invisibly about me, but the
might of the aethyrs beneath my feet beareth me down. And they avail not
to sever the Kamailow[**12**](#12). There is one in green armour, with
green eyes, whose sword is of vegetable fire[**13**](#13). They shall
avail me. My son is he[**14**](#14), ---and how shall I bear him that
have not known man?

All this time intolerable rays are shooting forth to beat me back or
destroy me; but I am encased in an egg of blue-violet, and my form is
the form of a man with the head of a golden hawk[**15**](#15). While I
have been observing this, the goddess has kept up a continuous wail,
like the baying of a thousand hounds[**16**](#16); and now her voice is
deep and guttural and hoarse, and she breathes very rapidly words that I
cannot hear. I can hear some of them now.

UNTU LA LA ULULA UMUNA TOFA LAMA LE LI NA AHR IMA TAHARA ELULA ETFOMA
UNUNA ARPETI ULU ULU ULU MARABAN ULULU MAHATA ULU ULU
LAMASTANA[**17**](#17).

And then her voice rises to a shriek, and there is a
cauldron[**18**](#18) boiling in front of her; and the flames under the
cauldron are like unto zinc flames[**19**](#19), and in the cauldron is
the Rose, the Rose of 49 petals[**20**](#20), seething in it. Over the
cauldron she has arched her rainbow wings; and her face is bent over the
cauldron, and she is blowing opalescent silvery rings on to the Rose;
and each ring as it touches the water bursts into flame, and the Rose
takes new colours[**21**](#21).

And now she lifts her head, and raises her hands to heaven, and cries: O
Mother[**22**](#22), wilt thou never have compassion on the children of
earth? Was it not enough that the Rose should be red with the blood of
thine heart[**23**](#23), and that its petals should be by 7 and by 7?

She is weeping, weeping[**24**](#24). And the tears grow and fill the
whole stone with moons[**25**](#25). I can see nothing and hear nothing
for the tears, though she keeps on praying. "Take of these
pearls[**26**](#26), treasure them in thine heart. Is not the Kingdom of
the Abyss accurst?" She points downward to the cauldron; and now in it
there is the head of a most cruel dragon[**27**](#27), black and
corrupted. I watch, and watch; and nothing happens.

And now the dragon rises out of the cauldron, very long and slim (like
Japanese Dragons, but infinitely more terrible), and he blots out the
whole sphere of the stone[**28**](#28).

Then suddenly all is gone, and there is nothing in the stone save
brilliant white light and flecks like sparks of golden fire; and there
is a ringing, as if bells were being used for anvils. And there is a
perfume which I cannot describe; it is like nothing that one can
describe, but the suggestion is like lignum aloes[**29**](#29). And now
all these things are there at once in the same place and
time[**30**](#30).

Now a veil of olive and silver[**31**](#31) is drawn over the stone,
only I hear the voice of the angel[**32**](#32) receding, very sweet and
faint and sorrowful, saying: Far off and lonely in the secret stone is
the unknown, and interpenetrated is the knowledge with the will and the
understanding. I am alone. I am lost, because I am all and in all; and
my veil is woven of the green earth and the web of stars. I love; and I
am denied, for I have denied myself. Give me those hands, put them
against my heart. Is it not cold? Sink, sink, the abyss of time remains.
It is not possible that one should come to ZAA. Give me thy face. Let me
kiss it with my cold kisses. Ah! Ah! Ah! Fall back from me. The word,
the word of the aeon is MAKHASHANAH[**33**](#33){SUP:1}. And these words
shalt thou say backwards: ARARNAY OBOLO MAHARNA TUTULU NOM LAHARA EN
NEDIEZO LO SAD FONUSA SOBANA ARANA BINUF LA LA LA ARPAZNA
UOHULU[**34**](#34){SUP:2}. when thou wilt call my burden unto
appearance, for I who am the Virgin goddess am the pregnant goddess, and
I have cast down my burden even unto the borders of the
universe[**35**](#35){SUP:3}. They that blaspheme me are stoned, and my
veil[**36**](#36){SUP:4} is fallen about me even unto the end of
time[**37**](#37){SUP:5}.

Now there arises a great raging of thousands and thousands of mighty
warriors flashing through the aethyr so thickly that nothing is to be
seen but their swords, which are like blue-gray plumes. And the noise is
confused, thousands of battle-cries harmonizing to a roar, like the roar
of a monstrous river in flood. And all the stone is dull, dull gray. The
life is gone from it[**39**](#39){SUP:1}.

There is no more to see.

Sidi Aissa, Algeria. November 24, 1909, 8-9 p.m.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <span id="1"></span>ZAA = {Leo}{Taurus}{Taurus} =
    {HEB:Tet}{HEB:Vau}{HEB:Vau} = 21. A mystery of Atu XVIII, "The
    Moon". {Pisces} in which {Venus} is exalted.

2.  <span id="2"></span>Possibly the traditional green of the huntress.

3.  <span id="3"></span>Colour of {Moon}.

4.  <span id="4"></span>The green of Venus is perhaps the natural veil
    of Luna, her external show.

5.  <span id="5"></span>For {Moon} is virgin, and the path of
    {HEB:Gemel} crosses the wilderness of the Abyss.

6.  <span id="6"></span>Diana Trivia is thus described. She is the
    Virgin Goddess of Pure Love; and the Lady of Heaven. She is the
    Virgin Goddess of Pure Love; and she is Hecate, the waning Moon,
    presiding over Witchcraft. (See Macbeth, etc.)

7.  <span id="7"></span>{Virgo} = IX = The Hermit (opposite {Pisces} in
    the Zodiac).

8.  <span id="8"></span>The Jackals of Atu XVIII.

9.  <span id="9"></span>{Moon} = {HEB:Gemel} = 3. Cerberus has three
    heads.

10. <span id="10"></span>For the {Moon} is the Sensorium; she reflects
    man's spiritual state in terms of sensuous experiences.

11. <span id="11"></span>i.e. the coefficients of the Circle and the
    Square be commensurable. "When" means "Through what mode of
    resolution?" --- "On what plane?"

12. <span
    id="12"></span>{GRK:Kappa}{GRK:alpha}{GRK:mu}{GRK:eta}{GRK:lambda}{GRK:omicron}
    {GRK:sigma}, a camel, i.e. {HEB:Gemel} Jimmel.
    {GRK:Kappa}{GRK:alpha} {GRK:mu}{GRK:alpha}
    {GRK:iota}{GRK:lambda}{GRK:omicron} {GRK:sigma}, a rope. And Jimmel
    is likened to a rope, a threefold ({HEB:Gemel} = 3) cord linking
    Kether and Tiphereth.

13. <span id="13"></span>The Angel of {HEB:Dalet} = {Venus} who is
    green, and {HEB:Dalet} "avails" {HEB:Gemel}, crossing it on the Tree
    by joining Chokmah and Binah. That is, the Love of these Supernals
    balances the Isolation of the Virgin Moon.

14. <span id="14"></span>{Moon} in 20x {Pisces} at nativity of 666.  

15. <span id="15"></span>i.e. I assume the god-form of Horus, Sol in the
    Womb of the Night-sky blue of Binah, who is the Mother of all Stars
    and thus is potent against Hecate.

16. <span id="16"></span>The hounds that follow Hecate. The jackals of
    Atu XVIII. Quote A.C. "Ode to Hecate".

17. <span id="17"></span>The Lunar language. "Ye hounds! Ho! Ho!
    Tally-ho! sent the poison of the path --- Here! There! Bark! Sweep
    around! There goes the quarry down the glade of mossy rock. The
    foremost has caught him. Tally ho! Tally ho! Tally ho! pull him
    down! Tally-ho boys! Wind the mort! Tally ho! Tally ho! The hunt is
    ended." ULU = "Hail" plus "come" = very nearly "Ahoy!"

18. <span id="18"></span>The witches' cauldron.

19. <span id="19"></span>Ultra violet of {Pisces}.

20. <span id="20"></span>{Venus} in {Pisces}.

21. <span id="21"></span>All this paragraph refers to Atu XIV
    Sagittarius, for she is now in her huntress form. Hence the
    Alchemical and rainbow symbolism.

22. <span id="22"></span>he appeals to Binah, the highest form of Luna.

23. <span id="23"></span>This is the use to which BABALON puts the Blood
    of the Masters of the Temple (see [12th Aethyr](aetyr12)) to vivify
    the rose of Universal Creation, i.e. The Attainment of the Master of
    the Temple fills the World with Life and Beauty. Hecate does not
    understand this, or else she regards it as hostile to her own
    Formula.

24. <span id="24"></span>{Water} of {Pisces}.

25. <span id="25"></span>She can produce nothing but images of herself.

26. <span id="26"></span>Pearls, the M.T.'s secreted by Binah round the
    specks of dust which they have become.

27. <span id="27"></span>A veil or mask of Khephra (in Atu XVIII).

28. <span id="28"></span>All Hecate can see of the Great Work of 8x =
    3{square x} is the Black Brotherhood; i.e., the failure of that
    Work.

29. <span id="29"></span>Sagittarius (Atu XIV) again. The phenomena are
    the experiences of the attained Master of the Temple.

30. <span id="30"></span>The attainment has destroyed the conditions of
    physical manifestation.

31. <span id="31"></span>Olive --- Water in Malkuth (Queen Scale) also
    Water (Emperor Scale). Silver is Luna in Queen Scale.

32. <span id="32"></span>Hecate now aspires to Binah, accepts the
    Formula of Love (kisses), surrenders her nature ("Fall back" etc.)
    and so finds the Word.

33. <span
    id="33"></span>{HEB:Heh}{HEB:Nun}{HEB:Aleph}{HEB:Shin}{HEB:Aleph}{HEB:Koph}{HEB:Aleph}
    {HEB : Mem} = 418. A word of 8 letters is necessary to perform the
    Great work on one whose Formula is 3: 8x = 3{square x}. The Seer
    "knew" that this Word was *not* the correct Word, which is
    Abrahadabra = 418. But on writing it down in Hebrew, as above, he
    saw that it was the correct word after all. Observe that this proves
    the Angel to have been an Intelligence not of the Seer's conscious
    mind. Had he given the Word which the Seer knew, it might have been
    derived from his subconscious Self. Furthermore, this Word contains
    more than the mere 418 because of its 8 letters suiting the special
    Formula required by this particular Angel, whereas the other Word is
    a general Formula, being of 11 letters, all Magick being referred
    to 11. so far as ABRAHADABRA is specialized, it refers to the Work
    of 5x = 6{square x}, there being 5 alephs and 6 other letters. In
    the Latin script also Makhashanah does have 11 letters. Again, the
    operation of the Cauldron (above) is described by the 5 consonants
    of this Word.

    {HEB:Mem} = {Water} (Water)  
    {HEB:Koph} = Wheel (Rose)  
    {HEB:Shin} = Fire {Dee}  
    {HEB:Nun} = {Scorpio}  
    {HEB:Heh} = Binah

34. <span id="34"></span>

35. <span id="35"></span>Translation: "Hither, O Holy one/ whose burden
    pulls at thy spine/ Ho! Ho! Ho! The two-headed God (Janus) ploughs
    thy back/ sows habitations upon thy back/ thou many-phallused queen/
    of princely loves/ which are all sodomies/ so that the holy ones
    laugh and shake with laughter/ while the lords of mischief/ spend
    upon thee/ TUTULU (this word cannot be translated. See *Liber VII*).
    down bounces from thy back/ the merry mad foetus-faces/ an emission/
    Gather ye sun-roses, sun-roses gather ye from the split backside of
    the Virgin (Earth).

36. <span id="36"></span>The Word of the Master has gone forth into
    every part of the world.  
    Therefore it is always possible to call Him forth to one's
    assistance by the proper use of the above Formula.

37. <span id="37"></span>Symbols of Binah.

38. <span id="38"></span>Same as above.

39. <span id="39"></span>Many of these Visions end in some way
    unconnected with the substance of the Aethyr. One must not look for
    coherence in such places. They are merely episodes on the return
    journey, useful to break the shock. analogy: one might see a cab
    accident while returning to one's house from the theatre. This
    spectacle need have no connection with either the play or one's home
    life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
