[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In nomine BABALON Amen.

Restriction unto Choronzon[**1**](#1.md).

**The Tenth Aethyr**[**2**](#2) **is Called ZAX**[**3**](#3.md)**.**

This Aethyr being accursèd, and the seer forewarned, he taketh these
precautions for the scribe.

First let the scribe be seated in the centre of the circle in the desert
sand, and let the circle be fortified by the Holy Names of God ---
Tetragrammaton and Shaddai El Chai and Ararita.

And let the Demon be invoked within a triangle, wherein is inscribed the
name of Choronzon, and about it let him write ANAPHAXETON ---
ANAPHANETON -- PRIMEUMATON, and in the angles MI-CA-EL[**4**](#4.md): and
at each angle the Seer shall slay a pigeon[**5**](#5.md), and having done
this, let him retire to a secret place, where is neither sight nor
hearing, and sit within his black robe, secretly invoking the
Aethyr[**6**](#6.md). And let the Scribe perform the Banishing Rituals of
the Pentagram and Hexagram[**7**](#7.md), and let him call upon the Holy
Names of God, and say the Exorcism of Honorius[**8**](#8.md), and let him
beseech protection and help of the Most High.

And let him be furnished with the Magick Dagger[**9**](#9.md), and let him
strike fearlessly at anything that may seek to break through the circle,
were it the appearance of the Seer himself. And if the Demon pass out of
the triangle, let him threaten him with the Dagger, and command him to
return. And let him beware lest he himself lean beyond the circle. And
since he reverenceth the Person of the Seer as his Teacher, let the Seer
bind him with a great Oath to do this.

Now, then, the Seer being entered within the triangle, let him take the
Victims and cut their throats, pouring the blood within the Triangle,
and being most heedful that not one drop fall without the Triangle; or
else Choronzon should be able to manifest in the universe.

And when the sand hath sucked up the blood of the victims, let him
recite the Call of the Aethyr apart secretly as aforesaid. Then will the
Vision be revealed, and the Voice heard.

*The Oath*

I, Omnia Vincam, a Probationer of A{.·.} A{.·.}, hereby solemnly promise
upon my magical honour, and swear by Adonai the angel that guardeth me,
that I will defend this magic circle of Art with thoughts and words and
deeds. I promise to threaten with the Dagger and command back into the
triangle the spirit incontinent, if he should strive to escape from it;
and to strike with a Dagger at anything that may seek to enter this
Circle, were it in appearance the body of the Seer himself. And I will
be exceeding wary, armed against force and cunning; and I will preserve
with my life the inviolability of this Circle, Amen.

And I summon mine Holy Guardian Angel to witness this mine oath, the
which if I break, may I perish, forsaken of Him. Amen and Amen.

**The Cry of the 10th Aethyr,  
Which is Called ZAX**

There is no being in the outermost Abyss, but constant forms come forth
from the nothingness of it[**10**](#10.md).

Then the Devil of the Aethyr, that mighty devil Choronzon, crieth aloud,
Zazaz[**11**](#11.md), Zazas, Nasatanada Zasas.

I am the Master of Form[**12**](#12.md), and from me all forms proceed.

I am I. I have shut myself up from the spendthrifts, my gold is safe in
my treasure-chamber, and I have made every living thing my concubine,
and none shall touch them, save only I. And yet I am scorched, even
while I shiver in the wind. He hateth me and tormenteth me. He would
have stolen me from myself, but I shut myself up and mock at him, even
while he plagueth me. From me come leprosy and pox and plague and cancer
and cholera and the falling sickness. Ah! I will reach up to the knees
of the Most High, and tear his phallus with my teeth, and I will bray
his testicles in a mortar, and make poison thereof, to slay the sons of
men[**13**](#13.md).

(Here the Spirit stimulated the voice of Frater P., which also appeared
to come from his station and not from the triangle.)

I don't think I can get any more; I think that's all there is.

(The Frater was seated in a secret place covered completely by a black
robe[**14**](#14.md), in the position called the "Thunderbolt". He did not
move or speak during the ceremony.)

Next the Scribe was hallucinated, believing that before him was a
beautiful courtesan whom previously he had loved in Paris. Now, she
wooed him with soft words and glances, but he knew these things for
delusions of the devil, and he would not leave the circle.

The demon then laughed wildly and loud.

(Upon the Scribe threatening him, the Demon proceeded, after a short
delay.)

They have called me the God of laughter, and I laugh when I will slay.
And they have thought that I could not smile, but I smile upon whom I
would seduce. O inviolable one, that canst not not be
tempted[**15**](#15.md). If thou canst command me by the power of the Most
High, know that I did indeed tempt thee, and it repenteth me. I bow
myself humbly before the great and terrible names whereby thou hast
conjured and constrained me. But thy name is mercy, and I cry aloud for
pardon. Let me come and put my head beneath thy feet, that I may serve
thee. For if thou commandest me to obedience in the Holy names, I cannot
swerve therefrom, for their first whispering is greater than the noise
of all my temptests. Bid me therefore come unto thee upon my hands and
knees that I may adore thee, and partake of thy forgiveness. Is not thy
mercy infinite?

(Here Choronzon attempts to seduce the Scribe by appealing to his pride.

But the Scribe refused to be tempted, and commanded the demon to
continue with the Aethyr.

There was again a short delay.)

Choronzon hath no form, because he is the maker of all form; and so
rapidly he changeth from one to the other as he may best think fit to
seduce those whom he hateth, the servants of the Most High.

Thus taketh he the form of a beautiful woman, or of a wise and holy man,
or of a serpent that writheth upon the earth ready to
sting[**16**](#16.md).

And, because he is himself, therefore he is no self; the terror of
darkness, and the blindness of night, and the deafness of the adder, and
the tastelessness of stale and stagnant water, and the black fire of
hatred, and the udders of the Cat of slime; not one thing, but many
things. Yet, with all that, his torment is eternal. The sun burns him as
he writhes naked upon the sands of hell, and the wind cuts him bitterly
to the bone, a harsh dry wind, so that he is sore athirst. Give unto me,
I pray thee, one drop of water from the pure springs of Paradise, that I
may quench my thirst.

(The Scribe refused.)

Sprinkle water upon my head. I can hardly go on[**17**](#17.md).

(This last was spoken from the triangle in the natural voice of the
Frater, which Choronzon again simulated. But he did not succeed in
taking the Frater's form --- which was absurd!

The Scribe resisted the appeal to his pity, and conjured the demon to
proceed by the names of the Most High. Choronzon attempted also to
seduce the faithfulness of the Scribe. A long colloquy ensued. The
Scribe cursed him by the Holy Names of God, and the power of the
Pentagram.[**17**](#17).md)

I feed upon the names of the Most High. I churn them in my jaws, and I
void them from my fundament. I fear not the power of the Pentagram, for
I am the Master of the Triangle. My name is three hundred and thirty and
three, and that is thrice one[**18**](#18.md). Be vigilant, therefore, for
I warn thee that I am about to deceive thee. I shall say words that thou
wilt take to be the cry of the Aethyr, and thou wilt write them down,
thinking them to be great secrets of Magick power, and they will be only
my jesting with thee.

(Here the Scribe invoked the Angels, and the Holy Guardian Angel of the
Frater P. . . . The demon replied:)

I know the name of the Angel of thee and thy brother P. . . ., and all
thy dealings with him are but a cloak for thy filthy sorceries.

(Here the Scribe averred that he knew more than the demon, and so feared
him not, and ordered the demon to proceed.)

Thou canst tell me naught that I know not, for in me is all Knowledge:
Knowledge is my name. Is not the head of the great Serpent arisen into
Knowledge[**19**](#19.md)?

(Here the Scribe again commanded Choronzon to continue with the call.)

Know thou that there is no Cry in the tenth Aethyr like unto the other
Cries, for Choronzon is Dispersion, and cannot fix his mind upon any one
thing for any length of time. Thou canst master him in argument, O
talkative one; thou wast commanded, wast thou not, to talk to Choronzon?
He sought not to enter the circle, or to leave the triangle, yet thou
didst prate of all these things.

(Here the Scribe threatened the demon with anger and pain and hell. The
demon replied:)

Thinkest thou, O fool, that there is any anger and any pain that I am
not, or any hell but this my spirit? Images, images, images, all without
control, all without reason. The malice of Choronzon is not the malice
of a being; it is the quality of malice, because he that boasteth
himself "I am I", hath in truth no self, and these are they that are
fallen under my power, the slaves of the Blind One that boasted himself
to be the Enlightened One. For there is no centre, nay, nothing but
Dispersion.

Woe, woe, woe, threefold to him that is led away by talk, O talkative
One.

O thou that hast written two-and-thirty books of Wisdom, and art more
stupid than an owl, by thine own talk is thy vigilance wearied, and by
my talk art thou befooled and tricked, O thou that sayest that thou
shalt endure. Knowest thou how nigh thou art to destruction? For thou
that art the Scribe hast not the understanding[**20**](#20.md) that alone
availeth against Choronzon. And wert thou not protected by the Holy
Names of God and the circle, I would rush upon thee and tear thee. For
when I made myself like unto a beautiful woman, if thou hadst come to
me, I would have rotted thy body with the pox, and thy liver with
cancer, and I would have torn off thy testicles with my teeth. And if I
had seduced thy pride, and thou hadst bidden me to come into the circle,
I would have trampled thee under foot, and for a thousand years shouldst
thou have been but one of the tape-worms that is in me. And if I had
seduced thy pity, and thou hadst poured one drop of water without the
circle, then would I have blasted thee with flame. But I was not able to
prevail against thee.

How beautiful are the shadows of the ripples of the sand!

Would God that I were dead.

For know that I am proud and revengeful and lascivious, and I prate even
as thou. For even as I walked among the Sons of God, I heard it said
that P. . . . could both will and know, and might learn at length to
dare, but that to keep silence he should never learn. O thou that art so
ready to speak, so slow to watch, thou art delivered over unto my power
for this. And now one word was necessary unto me, and I could not speak
it. I behold the beauty of the earth in her desolation, and greater far
is mine, who sought to be my naked self. Knowest thou that in my soul is
utmost fear? And such is my force and my cunning, that a hundred times
have I been ready to leap, and for fear have missed. And a thousand
times am I baulked by them of the City of the Pyramids, that set snares
for my feet. More knowledge have I than the Most High, but my will is
broken, and my fierceness is marred by fear, and I must speak, speak,
speak, millions of mad voices in my brain.

With a heart of furious fancies, Whereof I am Commander, With a burning
spear And a horse of Air To the wilderness I wander.

(The idea was to keep the Scribe busy writing, so as to spring upon him.
For, while the Scribe talked, Choronzon had thrown sand into the circle,
and filled it up. But Choronzon could not think fast and continuously,
and so resorted to the device of quotation.

The Scribe had written two or three words of "Tom o'Bedlam," when
Choronzon sprang within the circle (that part of the circumference of
which that was nearest to him he had been filling up with sand all this
time), and leaped upon the Scribe, throwing him to the earth. The
conflict took place within the circle. The Scribe called upon
Tetragrammaton, and succeeded in compelling Choronzon to return into his
triangle. By dint of anger and of threatening him with the Magick Staff
did he accomplish this. He then repaired the circle. The discomfited
demon now continued:)

All is dispersion. These are the qualities of things.

The tenth Aethyr is the world of adjectives, and there is no substance
therein.

(Now returneth the beautiful woman who had before tempted the Scribe.
She prevailed not.)

I am afraid of sunset, for Tum is more terrible than Ra, and Khephra the
Beetle is greater than the Lion Mau.

I am a-cold.

(Here Choronzon wanted to leave the triangle to obtain wherewith to
cover his nakedness. The Scribe refused the request, threatening the
demon. After a while the latter continued:)

I am commanded, why I know not, by him that speaketh. Were it thou, thou
little fool, I would tear thee limb from limb. I would bite off thine
ears and nose before I began with thee. I would take thy guts for
fiddle- strings at the Black Sabbath.

Thou didst make a great fight there in the circle; thou art a goodly
warrior!

(Then did the demon laugh loudly. The Scribe said: Thou canst not harm
one hair of my head.)

I will pull out every hair of thy head, every hair of thy body, every
hair of thy soul, one by one. (Then said the Scribe: Thou hast no
power.)

Yea, verily I have power over thee, for thou hast taken the Oath, and
art bound unto the White Brothers, and therefore have I the power to
torture thee so long as thou shalt be.

(Then said the Scribe unto him: Thou liest.)

Ask of thy brother P. . . ., and he shall tell thee if I lie!

(This the Scribe refused to do, saying that it was no concern of the
demon's.)

I have prevailed against the Kingdom of the Father, and befouled his
beard; and I have prevailed against the Kingdom of the Son, and torn off
his Phallus; but against the Kingdom of the Holy Ghost shall I strive
and not prevail. The three slain doves are my threefold blasphemy
against him; but their blood shall make fertile the sand[**21**](#21.md),
and I writhe in blackness and horror of hate, and prevail not.

(Then the demon tried to make the Scribe laugh at Magick, and to think
that it was all rubbish, that he might deny the names of God that he had
invoked to protect him; which, if he had doubted but for an instant, he
had leapt upon him, and gnawed through his spine at the neck.

Choronzon succeed not in his design.)

In this Aethyr is neither beginning nor end, for it is all hotch- potch,
because it is of the wicked on earth and the damned in hell. And so long
as it be hotch-potch, it mattereth little what may be written by the
sea-green incorruptible Scribe.

The horror of it will be given in another place and time, and through
another Seer, and that Seer shall be slain as a result of his revealing.
But the present Seer, who is not P. . . ., seeth not the horror, because
he is shut up, and hath no name.

(Now was there some further parleying betwixt the demon and the Scribe,
concerning the departure and the writing of the word, the Scribe not
knowing if it were meet that the demon should depart.

Then the Seer took the Holy Ring, and wrote the name BABALON, that is
victory over Choronzon, and he was no more manifest.)

(This cry was obtained on Dec. 6, 1909, between 2 and 4:15 p.m., in a
lonely valley of fine sand, in the desert near Bou-Sada. The Aethyr was
edited and revised on the following day.)

After the conclusion of the Ceremony, a great fire was kindled to purify
the place, and the Circle and Triangle were destroyed.

**NOTE BY SCRIBE**

Almost from the beginning of the ceremony was the Scribe overshadowed,
and he spoke as it were in spite of himself, remembering afterwards
scarcely a word of his speeches, some of which were long and seemingly
eloquent.

All the time he had a sense of being protected from Choronzon, and this
sense of security prevented his knowing fear.

Several times did the Scribe threaten to put a curse upon the demon; but
ever, before he uttered the words of the curse, did the demon obey him.
For himself, he knoweth not the words of the curse.

Also is it meet to record in this place that the Scribe several times
whistled in a Magical manner, which never before had he attempted, and
the demon was apparently much discomforted thereat.

Now knoweth the Scribe that he was wrong in holding much converse with
the demon; for Choronzon, in the confusion and chaos of his thought, is
much terrified by silence. And by silence can he be brought to obey.

For cunningly doth he talk of many things, going from subject to
subject, and thus he misleadeth the wary into argument with him. And
though Choronzon be easily beaten in argument, yet, by disturbing the
attention of him who would command him, doth he gain the victory.

For Choronzon feareth of all things concentration and silence: he
therefore who would command him should will in silence: thus is he
brought to obey.

This the Scribe knoweth; for that since the obtaining of the Accursed
Tenth Aethyr, he hath held converse with Choronzon. And unexpectedly did
he obtain the information he sought after having long refused to answer
the demon's speeches.

Choronzon is dispersion; and such is his fear of concentration that he
will obey rather than be subjected to it, or even behold it in another.

The account of the further dealings of Choronzon with the Scribe will be
found in the Record of Omnia Vincam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <span id="1"></span>Choronzon is described by Sir Edward Kelly as
    "that mighty devil", as the first and deadliest of all the powers of
    evil. Rightly so, for although he is not a person, he is the
    metaphysical contrary of the whole Process of Magick.
2.  <span id="2"></span>The three Governors of this Aethyr, Lexarp,
    Comanan, and Tabiton, are drawn from the "little Black Tablet" of
    Spirit, which united the four watchtowers of the elements. (See
    *Equinox* I, No. VII, Plate III; facing p. 234). The one extra
    letter, L, is the eighth of the reversed letters beneath the bars of
    the Calvary Crosses in the watch-towers to form trilateral names
    which designate malignant forces. These letters are thus impurities
    introduced into the perfection of the Elementary Schema. (That they
    should be attributed to the element of spirit, which harmonizes and
    sanctifies the four, is a sublime mystery. The arcanum is declared
    --- as far as may be --- in this book 418 itself). The other 7
    letters form the name PARAOAN, which is the central governor of the
    22nd Aire; but here is a correspondence with I, the center letter of
    LIN; this Aire discloses the glory of the Table 7 x 7, which is pure
    spirit, the rose which is the heart of Babalon.
3.  <span id="3"></span>ZAX = {Caput Draconis}{Taurus}{Spirit}. Z is the
    Sun in His southern declination, i.e. at his weakest effect on an
    hemisphere. Follows the Bull, the type of the "Dying Gods", and the
    element of Earth. This letter X occurs only in this, the 15th and
    30th Aires. In the 15th, water is the prima materia which is treated
    by being placed between the pillars of judgement. In the 30th, it
    represents the reduction to mere matter of the false structure of
    the Aeon of the false formula. Here X is the basis, without
    constructive possibilities, of the universe; thus the whole formula
    represents the weakening of the energy of the Sun, and the falling
    into incoherent elements of all that is organized.
4.  <span id="4"></span>For this arrangement see the Geotia of Lemegeton
    of Solomon the Kin
5.  <span id="5"></span>Concerning the bloody sacrifice, see *Book 4*,
    part 3, cap. 12. For the pigeons see the text.
6.  <span id="6"></span>The greatest precautions were taken at the time,
    and have since been yet further fortified, to keep silence
    concerning the rite of evocation. The Major Adept is warned most
    seriously against attempting to emulate this operation, which is (in
    any case) improper for him to perform. To call forth Choronzon,
    unless one be wholly above the Abyss, is to ensure the most
    appalling and immediate catastrophe.
7.  <span id="7"></span>These are given in the *Equinox* Vol. I, No. 2.
8.  <span id="8"></span>Given in the French translation by Eliphaz Levi:
    and in the English by Aleister Crowley in "The Winged Beetle." ("The
    Magician" is the title of that poem, see p. 228.)
9.  <span id="9"></span>See *Book 4*, part 2, caps. 4 and 8.
10. <span id="10"></span>It is very difficult to give a good
    metaphysical interpretation of this statement. But to one who is
    given this perception, the words will appear to be the natural and
    inevitable expression of the facts.
11. <span id="11"></span>These words are from some vision of old time:
    by them Adam was said to have opened the gates of Hell. These are
    the traditional words which open the Abyss.
12. <span id="12"></span>This (and many following assertions) must not
    be taken as true. Choronzon is in no sense the master of anything.
    It is the personification of a moral idea in a much more far-fetched
    way than that in which we say "Venus is the Lady of Love". For one
    can imagine Venus as a living individual being, while Choronzon is
    essentially not any sort of person.
13. <span id="13"></span>Various elements had been bound up into a
    "bundle" by the energy of the Call, and thus constituted a momentary
    unity capable of sensation and of expression. The obsessing idea of
    any such being, conscious that it is not a true organism, and
    threatened with immediate dissolution, which in its rudimentary
    psychology it is bound to dread, is of necessity, fear; and fear
    breeds pain, malice, and envy. Above all there is an insane hatred
    for the supposed creator because the supposed blessing of creation
    has been withheld from the "bundle".
14. <span id="14"></span>That of modesty, none less.
15. <span id="15"></span>Here the assumed character of this courtesan
    who was a marvelous mistress of irony as of fascination, intrudes
    upon that of the demon proper.
16. <span id="16"></span>He actually assumed these forms at the time.
17. <span id="17"></span>In this Aethyr are certain silences maintained.
18. <span id="18"></span>{HEB:Nun-
    final}{HEB:Vau}{HEB:Zain}{HEB:Nun}{HEB:Vau}{HEB:Resh}
    {HEB:Vau}{HEB:Chet} = 333 = 3 x 111, and 111 = {HEB:Peh- final}
    {HEB:Lamed}{HEB:Aleph} = {HEB:Aleph} = 1. 333 also is {GRK:alpha}
    {GRK:kappa} {GRK:rho} {GRK:alpha} {GRK:sigma} {GRK:iota}
    {GRK:alpha}, impotence, lack of control; and {GRK:alpha}{GRK:kappa}
    {GRK:omicron}{GRK:lambda}{GRK:alpha}{GRK:sigma}{GRK:io
    ta}{GRK:alpha}, dispersion. The seer had no idea of these
    correspondences: nor had Dr. Dee and Sir Edward Kelly, from whom we
    have the name.
19. <span id="19"></span>Dath. The doctrine of the "Fall" and the
    "Stooping Dragon" must be studied carefully. *Equinox* Vol. I, Nos.
    2 and 3, have much information, with diagrams, in the "Temple of
    Solomon the King". See also *Liber 777*. This question of the Abyss
    must be thoroughly understood. The entire system of initiation of
    the A{.·.} A{.·.} depend on these theorems. (See "One Star in
    Sight").
20. <span id="20"></span>Originally, for "understanding" was written
    "power". Choronzon was always using some word that did not represent
    his thought, because there is no proper link between his thought and
    speech. Note that he never seems able to distinguish between the
    Frater and the Scribe, and addresses first one, then the other, in
    the same sentence.
21. <span id="21"></span>This actually happened. On returning to
    Bou-Sada on another journey this spot had begun to show signs of
    vegetation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
