[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Cry of the 9th Aethyr,  
Which is Called ZIP**[**1**](#1)

(The terrible Curse that is the Call of the Thirty Aethyrs sounds like a
song of ecstasy and triumph; every phrase in it has a secret meaning of
blessing.)

The Shew-stone is of soft lucent white, on which the Rose-Cross shows a
brilliant yet colourless well of light.

And now the veil of the stone is rent with as clap of thunder, and I am
walking upon a razor-edge of light suspended over the Abyss, and before
me and above me are ranged the terrible armies of the Most High, like
unto those in the 11th Aethyr, but there is one that cometh forth to
meet me upon the ridge, holding out his arms to me and saying:

(v. I.) Who is this that cometh forth from the Abyss from the place of
rent garments, the habitation of him that is only a name? Who is this
that walketh upon a ray of the bright, evening star?

*Refrain*. Glory unto him that is concealed, and glory unto her that
beareth the cup, and glory unto the one that is the child and the father
of their love. Glory unto the star, and glory unto the snake, and glory
unto the swordsman of the sun. And worship and blessing throughout the
Aeon unto the name of the Beast, four-square, mystic, wonderful!

(v. II.) Who is this that travelleth between the hosts, that is poised
upon the edge of the Aethyr by the wings of Maut? Who is this that
seeketh the House of the Virgin? *Refrain*

(v. III.) This is he that hath given up his name. This is he whose blood
hath been gathered into the cup of BABALON[**2**](#2).This is he that
sitteth, a little pile of dry dust, in the city of the Pyramids.
*Refrain*

(v. IV.) Until the light of the Father of all kindle that death.

Until the breath touch that dry dust. Until the Ibis be revealed unto
the Crab, and the sixfold Star become the radiant Triangle[**3**](#3).
*Refrain*

(v. V.) Blessed is not I, not thou, not he, Blessed without name or
number who hath taken the azure of night, and crystallized it into a
pure sapphire-stone, who hath taken the gold of the sun, and beaten it
into an infinite ring, and hath set the sapphire therein, and put it
upon his finger. *Refrain*

(v. VI.) Open wide your gates, O City of God, for I bring No-one with
me. Sink your swords and your spears in salutation, for the Mother and
the Babe are my companions. Let the banquet be prepared in the palace of
the King's daughter. Let the lights be kindled; Are not we the children
of the light? *Refrain*

(v. VII.) For this is the key-stone of the palace of the King's
daughter. This is the Stone of the Philosophers. This is the Stone that
is hidden in the walls of the ramparts. Peace, Peace, Peace unto Him
that is throned therein! *Refrain*

Now then we are passed within the lines of the army, and we are come
unto a palace of which every stone is a separate jewel, and is set with
millions of moons.

And this palace is nothing but the body of a woman, proud and delicate,
and beyond imagination fair. She is like a child of twelve years old.
She has very deep eye-lids, and long lashes. Her eyes are closed, or
nearly closed. It is impossible to say anything about her. She is naked;
her whole body is covered with fine gold hairs, that are the electric
flames that are the spears of mighty and terrible Angels who
breast-plates are the scales of her skin. And the hair of her head, that
flows down to her feet, is the very light of God himself. Of all the
glories beheld by the seer in the Aethyrs, there is not one which is
worthy to be compared with her littlest finger-nail. For although he may
not partake of the Aethyr, without the ceremonial preparations, even the
beholding of this Aethyr from afar is like the partaking of all the
former Aethyrs.

The Seer is lost in wonder, which is peace.

And the ring of the horizon above her is a company of glorious
Archangels with joined hands, that stand and sing: This is the daughter
of BABALON the Beautiful, that she hath borne unto the Father of All.
And unto all hath she borne her.

This is the Daughter of the King. This is the Virgin of Eternity. This
is she that the Holy One hath wrested from the Giant Time, and the prize
of them that have overcome Space. This is she that is set upon the
Throne of Understanding. Holy, Holy, Holy is her name, not to be spoken
among men. For Kor they have called her, and Malkuth, and Betulah, and
Persephone.

And the poets have feigned songs about her, and the prophets have spoken
vain things, and the young men have dreamed vain dreams; but this is
she, that immaculate, the name of whose name may not be spoken. Thought
cannot pierce the glory that defendeth her, for thought is smitten dead
before her presence. Memory is blank, and in the most ancient books of
Magick are neither words to conjure her, nor adorations to praise her.
Will bends like a reed in the temptests that sweep the borders of her
kingdom, and imagination cannot figure so much as one petal of the
lilies whereon she standeth in the lake of crystal, in the sea of glass.

This is she that hath bedecked her hair with seven stars, the seven
breaths of God that move and thrill its excellence. And she hath tired
her hair with seven combs, whereupon are written the seven secret names
of God that are not known even of the Angels, or of the Archangels, or
of the Leader of the armies of the Lord.

Holy, Holy, Holy art thou, and blessed be Thy name for ever, unto whom
the Aeons are but the pulsings of thy blood.

I am blind and deaf. My sight and hearing are exhausted.

I know only by the sense of touch. And there is a trembling from within
me.

Images keep arising like clouds, or veils, exquisite Chinese ivories,
and porcelains, and many other things of great and delicate beauty; for
such things are informed by Her spirit, for they are cast off from her
into the world of the Qliphoth, or shells of the dead, that is earth.
For every world is the shell or excrement of the world above it.

I cannot bear the Vision.

A voice comes, I know not whence: Blessed art thou, who hast seen, and
yet hast not believed. For therefore is it given unto thee to taste, and
smell, and feel, and hear, and know by the inner sense, and by the
inmost sense, so that sevenfold is thy rapture.

(My brain is so exhausted that fatigue-images appear, by pure physical
reflex action; they are not astral things at all.

And now I have conquered the fatigue by will. And by placing the shew-
stone upon my forehead, it sends cool electric thrills through my brain,
so as to refresh it, and make it capable of more rapture.

And now again I behold Her.)

And the Angel cometh forth, and behind him whirls a black swastika, made
of fine filaments of light that has been "interfered" with, and he
taketh me aside into a little chamber in one of the nine towers. This
chamber is furnished with maps of many mystical cities. There is a
table, and a strange lamp, that gives light by jetting four columns of
vortex rings of luminous smoke[**4**](#4). And he points to the map of
the Aethyrs, that are arranged as a flaming Sword, so that the thirty
Aethyrs go into the ten Sephiroth[**5**](#5). And the first nine are
infinitely holy. And he says, It is written in *The Book of the Law*,
"If thou drink, drink by the eight and ninety rules of art:" And this
shall signify unto thee that thou must undergo great discipline; else
the Vision were lost or perverted. For these mysteries pertain not unto
thy grade. Therefore must thou invoke the Highest before thou unveil the
shrines thereof.

And this shall be thy rule: A thousand and one times shalt thou affirm
the unity[**6**](#6), and bow thyself a thousand and one times. And thou
shalt recite thrice the call of the Aethyr. And all day and all night,
awake or asleep, shall thy heart be turned as a lotus-flower unto the
light. And thy body shall be the temple of the Rosy Cross. Thus shall
thy mind be open unto the higher; and then shalt thou be able to conquer
the exhaustion, and it may be find the words -- for who shall look upon
His face and live?

Yea, thou tremblest, but from within; because of the holy spirit that is
descended into thy heart, and shaketh thee as an aspen in the wind.

They also tremble that are without, and they are shaken from without by
the earthquakes of his judgement. They have set their affections upon
the earth, and they have stamped with their feet upon the earth, and
cried: It moveth not.

Therefore hath earth opened with strong motion, like the sea, and
swallowed them. Yea, she hath opened her womb to them that lusted after
her, and she hath closed herself upon them. There lie they in torment,
until by her quaking the earth is shattered like brittle glass, and
dissolved like salt in the waters of his mercy, so that they are cast
upon the air to be blown about therein, like seeds that shall take root
in the earth; yet turn they their affections upward to the sun.

But thou, be thou eager and vigilant, performing punctually the rule. Is
it not written, "Change not so much as the style of a letter"?

Depart therefore, for the Vision of the Voice of the ninth Aethyr that
is called ZIP is passed.

Then I threw back myself into my body by my will

Bou-Sada.  
December 7th, 1909. 9:30-11:10 p.m.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <span id="1"></span>ZIP = {Leo}{Sagittarius}{Leo} =
    {HEB:Tet}{HEB:Samekh}{HEB:Tet} = 78, the influence from the Most
    High. It is the Virgin Artemis in the midst of the House of the Sun,
    in his Northern and Southern declinations both. For her girdle is
    the Girdle of the World. She is the Woman clothed with the Sun in
    Atu XIV.
2.  <span id="2"></span>BABALON = 156 = 12 x 13, which is the formula of
    the four watchtowers of the universe. These watchtowers are composed
    of truncated pyramids, each one concealing a sphinx. They contain
    the symbols of the energies of the four elements. We may thus say
    that as each watchtower contains 12 x 13 pyramids, Babalon is
    indicated as Shakti. For the elements are the manifested powers of
    the All-Father. Again we may consider the watchtowers as the "City
    of the Pyramids" though in a sense less exalted than that usually
    implied in these visions.
3.  <span id="3"></span>Cf. 15th Aire. Note this triangle for 2. It
    seems very important to note that d(1 + 2) = 3, and so on.
4.  <span id="4"></span>This sort of chamber is to be found in many of
    the Secret Houses of the Brotherhood. Here are arranged the
    destinies of this Planet.
5.  <span id="5"></span>This map may not be given to uninitiates.
6.  <span id="6"></span>The chapter is this: *Qol: Hua Allahu achad;
    Allahu assamad; lam yalid wa lam yulad; wa lam yakin lahu kufwan
    achad*. Between each recitation, the Seer halted and bowed. This
    practice was performed during the day's march, the 1001 recitals
    being divived into 13 sections (a further affirmation of the unity,
    for 13 = AChD = 1) with short rests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
