<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](int000)  [Next](gen001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Scofield Bible Commentary*, by Cyrus Ingerson Scofield, \[1917\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 0:0</span></span>

Note: For Index to Scofield Materials

(See Scofield) - ([Hos 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#009)) - ([Hos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)).

A Panoramic View of the Bible

The Bible, incomparably the most widely circulated of books, at once
provokes and baffles study. Even the non-believer in its authority
rightly feels that it is unintelligent to remain in almost total
ignorance of the most famous and ancient of books. And yet most, even of
sincere believers, soon retire from any serious effort to master the
content of the sacred writings. The reason is not far to seek. It is
found in the fact that no particular portion of Scripture is to be
intelligently comprehended apart from some conception of its place in
the whole. For the Bible story and message is like a picture wrought out
in mosaics: each book, chapter, verse, and even word forms a necessary
part, and has its own appointed place. It is, therefore, indispensable
to any interesting and fruitful study of the Bible that a general
knowledge of it be gained.

First.

The Bible is one book. Seven great marks attest this unity.

1\) From Genesis the Bible bears witness to one God. Wherever he speaks
or acts he is consistent with himself, and with the total revelation
concerning him.

2\) The Bible forms one continuous story-the story of humanity in
relation to God.

3\) The Bible hazards the most unlikely predictions concerning the
future, and, when the centuries have brought round the appointed time,
records their fulfilment.

4\) The Bible is a progressive unfolding of truth. Nothing is told all
at once, and once for all. The law is, "first the blade, then the ear,
after that the full corn." Without the possibility of collusion, often
with centuries between, one writer of Scripture takes up an earlier
revelation, adds to it, lays down the pen, and in due time another man
moved by the Holy Spirit, and another, and another, add new details till
the whole is complete.

5\) From beginning to end the Bible testifies to one redemption.

6\) From beginning to end the Bible has one great theme-the person and
work of the Christ.

7\) And, finally, these writers, some forty-four in number, writing
through twenty centuries, have produced a perfect harmony of doctrine in
progressive unfolding. This is, to every candid mind, the unanswerable
proof of the divine inspiration of the Bible.

Second.

The Bible is a book of books. Sixty-six books make up the one Book.
Considered with reference to the unity of the one book the separate
books may be regarded as chapters. But that is but one side of the
truth, for each of the sixty-six books is complete in itself, and has
its own theme and analysis. In the present edition of the Bible these
are fully shown in the introductions and divisions. It is therefore of
the utmost moment that the books be studied in the light of their
distinctive themes. Genesis, for instance, is the book of beginnings-the
seed-plot of the whole Bible. Matthew is the book of the King, & etc.

Third.

The books of the Bible fall into groups. Speaking broadly there are five
great divisions in the Scriptures, and these may be conveniently fixed
in the memory by five key-words, Christ being the one theme ([Luk
24:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025)).

PREPARATION: The OT

MANIFESTATION: The Gospels

PROPAGATION: The Acts

EXPLANATION: The Epistles

CONSUMMATION: The Apocalypse

In other words, the Old Testament is the preparation for Christ; in the
Gospels he is manifested to the world; in the Acts he is preached and
his Gospel is propagated in the world; in the Epistles his Gospel is
explained; and in the Revelation all the purposes of God in and through
Christ are consummated. And these groups of books in turn fall into
groups. This is especially true of the Old Testament, which is in four
well defined groups. Over these may be written as memory aids:

REDEMPTION

Genesis

Exodus

Leviticus

Numbers

Deuteronomy

ORGANIZATION

Joshua

Judges

Ruth

I, II Samuel

I, II Kings

I, II Chronicles

Ezra

Nehemiah

Esther

POETRY

Job

Psalms

Proverbs

Ecclesiastes

Song of Solomon

Lamentations

SERMONS

Isaiah

Jeremiah

Ezekiel

Daniel

Hosea

Joel

Amos

Obadiah

Jonah

Micah

Nahum

Habakkuk

Zephaniah

Haggai

Zechariah

Malachi

Again care should be taken not to overlook, in these general groupings,
the distinctive messages of the several books composing them. Thus,
while redemption is the general theme of the Pentateuch, telling as it
does the story of the redemption of Israel out of bondage and into "a
good land and large," each of the five books has its own distinctive
part in the whole. Genesis is the book of beginnings, and explains the
origin of Israel. Exodus tells the story of the deliverance of Israel;
Leviticus of the worship of Israel as delivered people; Numbers the
wanderings and failures of the delivered people, and Deuteronomy warns
and instructs that people in view of their approaching entrance upon
their inheritance. The Poetical books record the spiritual experiences
of the redeemed people in the varied scenes and events through which the
providence of God led them. The prophets were inspired preachers, and
the prophetical books consist of sermons with brief connecting and
explanatory passages. Two prophetical books, Ezekiel and Daniel, have a
different character and are apocalyptic, largely.

Fourth.

The Bible tells the Human Story. Beginning, logically, with the creation
of the earth and man, the story of the race sprung from the first human
pair continues through the first eleven chapters of Genesis. With the
twelfth chapter begins the history of Abraham and of the nation of which
Abraham was the ancestor. It is that nation, Israel, with which the
Bible narrative is thereafter chiefly concerned from the eleventh
chapter of Genesis to the second chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.
The Gentiles are mentioned, but only in connection with Israel. But it
is made increasingly clear that Israel so fills the scene only because
entrusted with the accomplishment of great world-wide purposes ([Deu
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007)). The appointed mission of Israel
was,

1\. to be a witness to the unity of God in the midst of idolatry ([Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005); [Isa
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010));

2\. to illustrate to the nations the greater blessedness of serving the
one true God ([Deu 33:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026); [Ch1
17:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#020); [Psa
102:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#015));

3\. to receive and preserve the Divine revelation ([Rom
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)); and

4\. to produce the Messiah, earth's Saviour and Lord ([Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)). The prophets foretell a glorious
future for Israel under the reign of Christ. The biblical story of
Israel, past, present, and future, falls into seven distinct periods:

1\) From the call of Abram (Genesis 12) to the Exodus (Exodus 1 - 20);

2\) From the Exodus to the death of Joshua (Exodus 21 to Joshua 24);

3\) from the death of Joshua to the establishment of the Hebrew monarchy
under Saul;

4\) the period of the kings from Saul to the Captivities;

5\) the period of the Captivities;

6\) the restored commonwealth from the end of the Babylonian captivity
of Judah, to the destruction of Jerusalem, A.D. 70;

7\) the present dispersion. The Gospels record the appearance in human
history and within the Hebrew nation of the promised Messiah, Jesus
Christ, and tell the wonderful story of his manifestation to Israel, his
rejection by that people, his crucifixion, resurrection, and ascension.
The Acts of the Apostles record the descent of the Holy Spirit, and the
beginning of a new thing in human history, the Church. The division of
the race now becomes threefold-the Jew, the Gentile, and the Church of
God. Just as Israel is in the foreground from the call of Abram to the
resurrection of Christ, so now the Church fills the scene from the
second chapter of the Acts to the fourth chapter of the Revelation. The
remaining chapters of that book complete the story of humanity and the
final triumph of Christ.

Fifth.

The Central Theme of the Bible is Christ. It is this manifestation of
Jesus Christ, his Person as "God manifest in the flesh" ([Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)), his sacrificial death, and his
resurrection, which constitute the Gospel. Unto this all preceding
Scripture leads, from this all following Scripture proceeds. The Gospel
is preached in the Acts and explained in the Epistles. Christ, Son of
God, Son of man, Son of Abraham, Son of David, thus binds the many books
into one Book. Seed of the woman ([Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)) he is the ultimate destroyer of
Satan and his works; Seed of Abraham he is the world blesser; Seed of
David he is Israel's King. "Desire of all Nations." Exalted to the right
hand of God he is "head over all to the Church, which is his body,"
while to Israel and the nations the promise of his return forms the one
and only rational expectation that humanity will yet fulfil itself.
Meanwhile the Church looks momentarily for the fulfilment of his special
promise: "I will come again and receive you unto myself" ([Joh
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)). To him the Holy Spirit
throughout this Gospel age bears testimony. The last book of all, the
Consummation book, is "The Revelation of Jesus Christ" ([Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)).

Scofield Reference Notes (THE PENTATEUCH)

The five books ascribed to Moses have a peculiar place in the structure
of the Bible, and an order which is undeniably the order of the
experience of the people of God in all ages. Genesis is the book of
origins-of the beginning of life, and of ruin through sin. Its first
word, "In the beginning God," is in striking contrast with the end, "In
a coffin in Egypt." Exodus is the book of redemption, the first need of
a ruined race. Leviticus is the book of worship and communion, the
proper exercise of the redeemed. Numbers speaks of the experiences of a
pilgrim people, the redeemed passing through a hostile scene to a
promised inheritance. Deuteronomy, retrospective and prospective, is a
book of instruction for the redeemed about to enter that inheritance.
That Babylonian and Assyrian monuments contain records bearing a
grotesque resemblance to the majestic account of the creation and of the
Flood is true, as also that these antedate Moses. But this confirms
rather than invalidates inspiration of the Mosaic account. Some
tradition of creation and the Flood would inevitably be handed down in
the ancient cradle of the race. Such a tradition, following the order of
all tradition, would take on grotesque and mythological features, and
these abound in the Babylonian records. Of necessity, therefore, the
first task of inspiration would be to supplant the often absurd and
childish traditions with a revelation of the true history, and such a
history we find in words of matchless grandeur, and in a order which,
rightly understood, is absolutely scientific. In the Pentateuch,
therefore, we have a true and logical introduction to the entire Bible;
and, in type, an epitome of the divine revelation.

Book Introduction - Genesis

Genesis is the book of beginnings. It records not only the beginning of
the heavens and the earth, and of plant, animal, and human life, but
also of all human institutions and relationships. Typically, it speaks
of the new birth, the new creation, where all was chaos and ruin. With
Genesis begins also that progressive self-revelation of God which
culminates in Christ. The three primary names of Deity, Elohim, Jehovah,
and Adonai, and the five most important of the compound names, occur in
Genesis; and that in an ordered progression which could not be changed
without confusion. The problem of sin as affecting man's condition in
the earth and his relation to God, and the divine solution of that
problem are here in essence. Of the eight great covenants which
condition human life and the divine redemption, four, the Edenic,
Adamic, Noahic, and Abrahamic Covenants are in this book; and these are
the fundamental covenants to which the other four, the Mosaic,
Palestinian, Davidic, and New Covenants, are related chiefly as adding
detail or development. Genesis enters into the very structure of the New
Testament, in which it is quoted above sixty times in seventeen books.
In a profound sense, therefore, the roots of all subsequent revelation
are planted deep in Genesis, and whoever would truly comprehend that
revelation must begin here. The inspiration of Genesis and it character
as a divine revelation are authenticated by the testimony of Christ
([Mat 19:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004); [Mat
24:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037); [Mar
10:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#004); [Luk
11:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#049); [Luk
17:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026); [Luk
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#032); [Joh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005); [Joh
7:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#021); [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044); [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)).

Genesis is in five chief divisions:

1\. Creation (Genesis 1:1 - 2:25)

2\. The fall and redemption (Genesis 3:1-4; 3:7).

3\. The Diverse Seeds, Cain and Seth, to the Flood (Genesis 4:8 - 7:24).

4\. The Flood to Babel (Genesis 8:1 - 11:9).

5\. From the call of Abram to the death of Joseph (Genesis 11:10 -
50:26).

The events recorded in Genesis cover a period of 2,315 years (Ussher).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 1](gen001)

</div>
