[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lrb03)  [Next](lrb05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# CHAPTER I: THE LAND, THE PEOPLE AND THEIR STORY

THE romantic region which we are about to traverse in search of the
treasures of legend was in ancient times known as Armorica, a Latinized
form of the Celtic name, Armor ('On the Sea'). The Brittany of to-day
corresponds to the departments of Finistère, Côtes-du-Nord, Morbihan,
Ille-et-Vilaine, and Loire-Inférieure. A popular division of the country
is that which partitions it into Upper, or Eastern, and Lower, or
Western, Brittany, and these tracts together have an area of some 13,130
square miles.

Such parts of Brittany as are near to the sea-coast present marked
differences to the inland regions, where raised plateaux are covered
with dreary and unproductive moorland. These plateaux, again, rise into
small ranges of hills, not of any great height, but, from their wild and
rugged appearance, giving the impression of an altitude much loftier
than they possess. The coast-line is ragged, indented, and inhospitable,
lined with deep reefs and broken by the estuaries of brawling rivers. In
the southern portion the district known as 'the Emerald Coast' presents
an almost subtropical appearance; the air is mild and the whole region
pleasant and fruitful. But with this exception Brittany is a country of
bleak shores and grey seas, barren moorland and dreary horizons, such a
land as legend loves, such a region, cut off and isolated from the
highways of humanity, as the discarded genii of ancient faiths might
seek as a last stronghold.

Regarding the origin of the race which peoples this

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

secluded peninsula there are no wide differences of opinion. If we take
the word 'Celt' as describing any branch of the many divergent races
which came under the influence of one particular type of culture, the
true originators of which were absorbed among the folk they governed and
instructed before the historic era, then the Bretons are 'Celts' indeed,
speaking the tongue known as 'Celtic' for want of a more specific name,
exhibiting marked signs of the possession of 'Celtic' customs, and
having those racial characteristics which the science of anthropology
until recently laid down as certain indications of 'Celtic'
relationship--the short, round skull, swarthy complexion, and blue or
grey eyes. It is to be borne in mind, however, that the title 'Celtic'
is shared by the Bretons with the fair or rufous Highlander of Scotland,
the dark Welshman, and the long-headed Irishman. But the Bretons exhibit
such special characteristics as would warrant the new anthropology in
labelling them the descendants of that 'Alpine' race which existed in
Central Europe in Neolithic times, and which, perhaps, possessed distant
Mongoloid affinities. This people spread into nearly all parts of
Europe, and later in some regions acquired Celtic speech and custom from
a Celtic aristocracy.

It is remarkable how completely this Celtic leaven--the true history of
which is lost in the depths of prehistoric darkness--succeeded in
impressing not only its language but its culture and spirit upon the
various peoples with whom it came into contact. To impose a special type
of civilization upon another race must always prove a task of almost
superhuman proportions. To compel the use of an alien tongue by a
conquered folk necessitates racial tact as well as

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

strength of purpose. But to secure the adoption of the racial *spirit*
by the conquered, and adherence to it for centuries, so that men of
widely divergent origins shall all have the same point of view, the same
mode of thought, manner of address, aye, even the same *facies* or
general racial appearance, as have Bretons, some Frenchmen, Cornishmen,
Welshmen, and Highlanders--that surely would argue an indwelling racial
strength such as not even the Roman or any other world-empire might
pretend to.

But this Celtic civilization was not one and undivided. In late
prehistoric times it evolved from one mother tongue two dialects which
afterward displayed all the differences of separate languages springing
from a common stock. These are the Goidelic, the tongue spoken by the
Celts of Scotland, Ireland, and the Isle of Man, and the Brythonic, the
language of the Welsh, the Cornish, and the people of Brittany.

### The Breton Tongue

The Brezonek, the Brythonic tongue of Brittany, is undoubtedly the
language of those Celtic immigrants who fled from Britain the Greater to
Britain the Less to escape the rule of the Saxon invaders, and who gave
the name of the country which they had left to that Armorica in which
they settled. In the earliest stages of development it is difficult to
distinguish Breton from Welsh. From the ninth to the eleventh centuries
the Breton language is described as 'Old Breton.' 'Middle Breton'
flourished from the eleventh to the seventeenth centuries, since when
'Modern Breton' has been in use. These stages indicate changes in the
language more or less profound, due chiefly to admixture with

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

\[paragraph continues\] French. Various distinct dialects are indicated
by writers on the subject, but the most marked difference in Breton
speech seems to be that between the dialect of Vannes and that of the
rest of Brittany. Such differences do not appear to be older than the
sixteenth century. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

### The Ancient Armoricans

The written history of Brittany opens with the account of Julius Cæsar.
At that period (57 B.C.) Armorica was inhabited by five principal
tribes: the Namnetes, the Veneti, the Osismii, the Curiosolitæ, and the
Redones. These offered a desperate resistance to Roman encroachment, but
were subdued, and in some cases their people were sold wholesale into
slavery. In 56 B.C. the Veneti threw off the yoke and retained two of
Cæsar's officers as hostages. Cæsar advanced upon Brittany in person,
but found that he could make no headway while he was opposed by the
powerful fleet of flat-bottomed boats, like floating castles, which the
Veneti were so skilful in manœuvring. Ships were hastily constructed
upon the waters of the Loire, and a desperate naval engagement ensued,
probably in the Gulf of Morbihan, which resulted in the decisive defeat
of the Veneti, the Romans resorting to the stratagem of cutting down the
enemy's rigging with sickles bound upon long poles. The members of the
Senate of the conquered people were put to death as a punishment for
their defection, and thousands of the tribesmen went to swell the
slave-markets of Europe.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Between A.D. 450 and 500, when the Roman power and population were
dwindling, many vessels brought fugitives from Britain to Armorica.
These people, fleeing from the conquering barbarians, Saxons, Picts, and
Scots, sought as asylum a land where a kindred race had not yet been
disturbed by invasion. Says Thierry, in his *Norman Conquest*: "With the
consent of the ancient inhabitants, who acknowledged them as brethren of
the same origin, the new settlers distributed themselves over the whole
northern coast, as far as the little river Coesoron, and southward as
far as the territory of the city of the Veneti, now called Vannes. In
this extent of country they founded a sort of separate state, comprising
all the small places near the coast, but not including within its limits
the great towns of Vannes, Nantes, and Rennes. The increase of the
population of this western corner of the country, and the great number
of people of the Celtic race and language thus assembled within a narrow
space, preserved it from the irruption of the Roman tongue, which, under
forms more or less corrupted, was gradually becoming prevalent in every
other part. of Gaul. The name of *Brittany* was attached to these
coasts, and the names of the various indigenous tribes disappeared;
while the island which had borne this name for so many ages now lost it,
and, taking the name of its conquerors, began to be called the land of
the Saxons and Angles, or, in one word, *England*."

### Samson

One of these British immigrants was the holy Samson, who laboured to
convert pagan Brittany to Christianity. He hailed from Pembrokeshire,
and the legend relates

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

that his parents, being childless, constructed a menhir <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) of pure silver and gave it to the poor in
the hope that a son might be born to them. Their desire was fulfilled,
and Samson, the son in question, became a great missionary of the
Church. Accompanied by forty monks, he crossed the Channel and landed on
the shores of the Bay of Saint-Brieuc, a savage and deserted district.

As the keel of his galley grated on the beach the Saint beheld a man on
the shore seated at the door of a miserable hut, who endeavoured to
attract his attention by signs. Samson approached the shore-dweller, who
took him by the hand and, leading him into the wretched dwelling, showed
him his wife and daughter, stricken with sickness. Samson relieved their
pain, and the husband and father, who, despite his humble appearance,
was chief of the neighbouring territory, gave him a grant of land hard
by. Here, close to the celebrated menhir of Dol, he and his monks built
their cells. Soon a chapel rose near the ancient seat of pagan
worship--in later days the site of a great cathedral.

Telio, a British monk, with the assistance of St Samson, planted near
Dol an orchard three miles in length, and to him is attributed the
introduction of the apple-tree into Brittany. Wherever the monks went
they cultivated the soil; all had in their mouths the words of the
Apostle: "If any would not work, neither should he eat." The people
admired the industry of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the new-comers, and from admiration they passed to imitation. The
peasants joined the monks in tilling the ground, and even the brigands
from the hills and forests became agriculturists. "The Cross and the
plough, labour and prayer," was the motto of these early missionaries.

### Wax for Wine

The monks of Dol were renowned bee-farmers, as we learn from an anecdote
told by Count Montalembert in his *Moines d'Occident*. One day when St
Samson of Dol, and St Germain, Bishop of Paris, were conversing on the
respective merits of their monasteries, St Samson said that his monks
were such good and careful preservers of their bees that, besides the:
honey which the bees yielded in abundance, they furnished more wax than
was used in the churches for candles during the year, but that the
climate not being suitable for the growth of vines, there was great
scarcity of wine. Upon hearing this St Germain replied: "We, on the
contrary, produce more wine than we can consume, but we have to buy wax;
so, if you will furnish us with wax, we will give you a tenth of our
wine." Samson accepted this offer, and the mutual arrangement was
continued during the lives of the two saints.

Two British kingdoms were formed in Armorica--Domnonia and Cornubia. The
first embraced the Côtes-du-Nord and Finistère north of the river Élorn,
Cornubia, or Cornouaille, as it is now known, being situated below that
river, as far south as the river Ellé. At first these states paid a
nominal homage to their native kings in Britain, but on the final fall
of the British power they proclaimed a complete independence.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### The Vision of Jud-Hael

A striking story relating to the migration period is told concerning a
Cambrian chieftain of Brittany, one Jud-Hael, and the famous British
bard Taliesin. Shortly after the arrival of Taliesin in Brittany
Jud-Hael had a remarkable vision. He dreamt that he saw a high mountain,
on the summit of which was placed a lofty column fixed deeply in the
earth, with a base of ivory, and branches which reached to the heavens.
The lower part was iron, brilliantly polished, and to it were attached
rings of the same metal, from which were suspended cuirasses, casques,
lances, javelins, bucklers, trumpets, and many other warlike trophies.
The upper portion was of gold, and upon it hung candelabra, censers,
stoles, chalices, and ecclesiastical symbols of every description. As
the Prince stood admiring the spectacle the heavens opened and a maiden
of marvellous beauty descended and approached him.

"I salute you, O Jud-Hael," she said, "and I confide to your keeping for
a season this column and all that it supports"; and with these words she
vanished.

On the following day Jud-Hael made public his dream, but, like
Nebuchadnezzar of old, he could find no one to interpret it, so he
turned to the bard Taliesin as to another Daniel. Taliesin, says the
legend, then an exile from his native land of Britain, dwelt on the
seashore. To him came the messenger of Jud-Hael and said: "O thou who so
truly dost interpret all things ambiguous, hear and make clear the
strange vision which my lord hath seen." He then recounted Jud-Hael's
dream to the venerable bard.

For a time the sage sat pondering deeply, and then

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

replied: "Thy master reigneth well and wisely, O messenger, but he has a
son who will reign still more happily even than himself, and who will
become one of the greatest men in the Breton land. The sons of his loins
will be the fathers of powerful counts and pious Churchmen, but he
himself, the greatest man of that race, shall be first a valiant warrior
and later a mighty champion of heaven. The earlier part of his life
shall be given to the world; the latter portion shall be devoted to
God."

The prophecy of Taliesin was duly fulfilled. For Judik-Hael, the son of
Jud-Hael, realized the bard's prediction, and entered the cloister after
a glorious reign.

### Taliesin

Taliesin ('Shining Forehead') was in the highest repute in the middle of
the twelfth century, and he was then and afterward, unless we except
Merlin, the bardic hero of the greatest number of romantic legends. He
is said to have been the son of Henwg the bard, or St Henwg, of
Caerleon-upon-Usk, and to have been educated in the school of Cattwg, at
Llanvithin, in Glamorgan, where the historian Gildas was his
fellow-pupil. Seized when a youth by Irish pirates, he is said, probably
by rational interpretation of a later fable of his history, to have
escaped by using a wooden buckler for a boat. Thus he came into the
fishing weir of Elphin, one of the sons of Urien. Urien made him
Elphin's instructor, and gave him an estate of land, But, once
introduced into the Court of that great warrior-chief, Taliesin became
his foremost bard, followed him in his wars, and sang his victories. He
celebrates triumphs over Ida, the Anglian King of Bernicia (*d.* 559)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

at Argoed about the year 547, at Gwenn-Estrad between that year and 559,
at Menao about the year 559. After the death of Urien, Taliesin was the
bard of his son Owain, by whose hand Ida fell. After the death of all
Urien's sons Taliesin retired to mourn the downfall of his race in
Wales, dying, it is said, at Bangor Teivi, in Cardiganshire. He was
buried under a cairn near Aberystwyth.

### Hervé the Blind

There is nothing improbable in the statement that Taliesin dwelt in
Brittany in the sixth century. Many other British bards found a refuge
on the shores of Britain the Less. Among these was Kyvarnion, a
Christian, who married a Breton Druidess and who had a son, Hervé. Hervé
was blind from birth, and was led from place to place by a wolf which he
had converted (!) and pressed into the service of Mother Church. One
day, when a lad, Hervé had been left in charge of his uncle's farm, when
a ploughman passed him in full flight, crying out that a savage wolf had
appeared and had killed the ass with which he had been ploughing. The
man entreated Hervé to fly, as the wolf was hard upon his heels; but the
blind youth, undaunted, ordered the terrified labourer to seize the
animal and harness it to the plough with the harness of the dead ass.
From that time the wolf dwelt among the sheep and goats on the farm, and
subsisted upon hay and grass.

### Nomenoë

Swarms of Irish from Ossory and Wexford began to arrive about the close
of the fifth century, settling along the west and north coasts. The
immigrants from

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Britain the Greater formed by degrees the
counties of Vannes, Cornouaille, Léon, and Domnonée, constituted a
powerful aristocracy, and initiated a long and arduous struggle against
the Frankish monarchs, who exercised a nominal suzerainty over Brittany.
Louis the Pious placed a native chief, Nomenoë, at the head of the
province, and a long period of peace ensued. But in A.D. 845 Nomenoë
revolted against Charles the Bald, defeated him, and forced him to
recognize the independence of Brittany, and to forgo the annual tribute
which he had exacted. A ballad by Villemarqué describes the incident.
Like Macpherson, who in his enthusiasm for the fragments of Ossianic
lore 'reconstructed' them only too well, Villemarqué unfortunately
tampered very freely with such matter as he collected, and it may even
be that the poem on Nomenoë, for which he claims authority, is
altogether spurious, as some critics consider. But as it affords a
spirited picture of the old Breton chief the story is at least worth
relating. The poem describes how an aged chieftain waits on the hills of
Retz for his son, who has gone over to Rennes to pay the Breton tribute
to the Franks. Many chariots drawn by horses has he taken with him, but
although a considerable time has elapsed there is no indication of his
return. The chieftain climbs to an eminence in the hope of discerning
his son in the far distance, but no sign of his appearance is to be seen
on the long white road or on the bleak moors which fringe it.

The anxious father espies a merchant wending slowly along the highway
and hails him.

"Ha, good merchant, you who travel the land from end to end, have you
seen aught of my son Karo, who has gone to conduct the tribute chariots
to Rennes?"

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

"Alas! chieftain, if your son has gone with the tribute it is in vain
you wait for him, for the Franks found it not enough, and have weighed
his head against it in the balance."

The father gazes wildly at the speaker, sways, and falls heavily with a
doleful cry.

"Karo, my son! My lost Karo!"

The scene changes to the fortress of Nomenoë, and we see its master
returning from the chase, accompanied by his great hounds and laden with
trophies. His bow is in his hand, and he carries the carcass of a boar
upon his shoulder. The red blood drops from the dead beast's mouth and
stains his hand. The aged chief, well-nigh demented, awaits his coming,
and Nomenoë greets him courteously.

"Hail, honest mountaineer!" he cries. "What is your news? What would you
with Nomenoë?"

"I come for justice, Lord Nomenoë," replies the aged man. "Is there a
God in heaven and a chief in Brittany? There is a God above us, I know,
and I believe there is a just Duke in the Breton land. Mighty ruler,
make war upon the Frank, defend our country, and give us
vengeance-vengeance for Karo my son, Karo, slain, decapitated by the
Frankish barbarians, his beauteous head made into a balance-weight for
their brutal sport."

The old man weeps, and the tears flow down his grizzled beard.

Then Nomenoë rises in anger and swears a great oath. "By the head of
this boar, and by the arrow which slew him," cries he, "I will not wash
this blood from off my hand until I free the country from mine enemies,"
Nomenoë has gone to the sea-shore and gathered

 

<span id="img_02400"></span>

[![Nomenoë](tn/02400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02400.jpg.md)  
Nomenoë  

 

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

pebbles, for these are the tribute he intends to offer the bald
King. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) Arrived at the gates of Rennes,
he asks that they shall be opened to him so that he may pay the tribute
of silver. He is asked to descend, to enter the castle, and to leave his
chariot in the courtyard. He is requested to wash his hands to the sound
of a horn before eating (an ancient custom), but he replies that he
prefers to deliver the tribute-money there and then. The sacks are
weighed, and the third is found light by several pounds.

"Ha, what is this?" cries the Frankish castellan. "This sack is under
weight, Sir Nomenoë."

Out leaps Nomenoë's sword from the scabbard, and the Frank's head is
smitten from his shoulders. Then, seizing it by its gory locks, the
Breton chief with a laugh of triumph casts it into the balance. His
warriors throng the courtyard, the town is taken; young Karo is avenged!

### Alain Barbe-torte

The end of the ninth century and the beginning of the tenth were
remarkable for the invasions of the Northmen. On several occasions they
were driven back by Salomon (*d.* 874), by Alain, Count of Vannes (*d.*
907)--but it was Alain Barbe-torte, 'Alain of the Twisted Beard,' or
'Alain the Fox' (*d*. 952), who gained the decisive victory over them,
and concerning him an ancient ballad has much to say. It was taken down
by Villemarqué from the lips of a peasant, an old soldier of the Chouan
leader Georges Cadoudal.

In his youth Alain was a mighty hunter of the bear and the boar in the
forests of his native Brittany, and

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the courage gained in this manly sport stood, him in good stead when he
came to employ it against the enemies of his country, the hated
Northmen. Rallying the Bretons who lurked in the forests or hid in the
mountain fastnesses, he led them against the enemy, whom he surprised
near Dol in the middle of the night, making a great carnage among them.
After this battle the Scandinavian invaders were finally expelled from
the Breton land and Alain was crowned King or Arch-chief in 937.

A free translation of this ballad might run as follows

Lurks the Fox within the wood,  
His teeth and claws are red with blood.

Within his leafy, dark retreat  
He chews the cud of vengeance sweet.

Oh, trenchant his avenging sword!  
It falls not on the rock or sward,

But on the mail of Saxon foe:  
Swift as the lightning falls the blow.

I've seen the Bretons wield the flail,  
Scattering the bearded chaff like hail:

But iron is the flail they wield  
Against the churlish Saxon's shield.

I heard the call of victory  
From Michael's Mount to Élorn fly,

And Alain's glory flies as fast  
From Gildas' church to every coast.

Ah, may his splendour never die,  
May it live on eternally!

But woe that I may nevermore  
Declaim this lay on Armor's shore, <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

For the base Saxon hand has torn  
My tongue from out my mouth forlorn.

But if my lips no longer frame  
The glories of our Alain's name,

My heart shall ever sing his praise,  
Who won the fight and wears the bays! <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

The Saxons of this lay are, of course, the Norsemen, who, speaking a
Teutonic tongue, would seem to the Celtic-speaking Bretons to be allied
to the Teuton Franks.

### Bretons and Normans

During the latter half of the tenth and most of the eleventh century the
Counts of Rennes gained an almost complete ascendancy in Brittany, which
began to be broken up into counties and seigneuries in the French
manner. In 992 Geoffrey, son of Conan, Count of Rennes, adopted the
title of Duke of Brittany. He married a Norman lady of noble family, by
whom he had two sons, Alain and Eudo, the younger of whom demanded a
share of the duchy as his inheritance. His brother made over to him the
counties of Penthièvre and Tréguier, part of the old kingdom of Domnonia
in the north. It was a fatal transference, for he and his line became
remorseless enemies of the ducal house, with whom they carried on a
series of disastrous conflicts for centuries. Conan II, son of Alain,
came under the regency of Eudo, his uncle, in infancy, but later turned
his sword against him and his abettor, William of Normandy, the
Conqueror.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Notwithstanding the national enmity of the Normans and Bretons, there
existed between the Dukes of Normandy and the Dukes of Brittany ties of
affinity that rendered the relations between the two states somewhat
complicated. At the time when Duke Robert, the father of William of
Normandy, set out upon his pilgrimage, he had no nearer relative than
Alain, Duke of Brittany, the father of Conan II descended in the female
line from Rollo, the great Norse leader, and to him he committed on his
departure the care of his duchy and the guardianship of his son. Duke
Alain declared the paternity of his ward doubtful and favoured that
party which desired to set him aside from the succession; but after the
defeat of his faction at Val-ès-Dunes he died, apparently of poison,
doubtless administered by the contrivance of the friends of William. His
son, Conan II, succeeded, and reigned, at the period when William was
making his preparations for the conquest of England. He was a prince of
ability, dreaded by his neighbours, and animated by a fierce, desire to
injure the Duke of Normandy, whom he regarded as a usurper and the
murderer of his father, Alain. Seeing William engaged in a hazardous
enterprise, Conan thought it a favourable moment to declare war against
him, and dispatched one of his chamberlains. to him with the following
message: "I hear that you are ready to pass the sea to make conquest of
the kingdom of England. Now, Duke Robert, whose son you feign to
consider yourself, on his departure for Jerusalem left all his
inheritance to Duke Alain, my father, who was his cousin; but you and
your abettors have poisoned my father, you have appropriated to yourself
the domain of Normandy, and have kept

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

possession of it until this day, contrary to all right, since you are
not the legitimate heir. Restore to me, therefore, the duchy of
Normandy, which belongs to me, or I shall levy war upon you, and shall
wage it to extremity with all my forces."

### The Poisoned Hunting-Horn

The Norman historians state that William was much startled by so hostile
a message; for even a feeble diversion might render futile his ambitious
hopes of conquest. But without hesitation he resolved to remove the
Breton Duke. Immediately upon his return to Conan, the envoy, gained
over, doubtless, by a bribe of gold, rubbed poison into the inside of
the horn which his master sounded when hunting, and, to make his evil
measures doubly sure, he poisoned in like manner the Duke's gloves and
his horse's bridle. Conan died a few days after his envoy's return, and
his successor, Eudo, took especial care not to imitate his relative in
giving offence to William with regard to the validity of his right; on
the contrary, he formed an alliance with him, a thing unheard of betwixt
Breton and Norman, and sent his two sons to William's camp to serve
against the English. These two youths, Brian and Alain, repaired to the
rendezvous of the Norman forces, accompanied by a body of Breton
knights, who styled them Mac-tierns. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)
Certain other wealthy Bretons, who were not of the pure Celtic race, and
who bore French names, as Robert de Vitry, Bertrand de Dinan, and Raoul
de Gael, resorted likewise to the Court of the Duke of Normandy with
offers of service.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

Later Brittany became a bone of contention between France and Normandy.
Hoel, the native Duke, claimed the protection of France against the
Norman duchy. A long period of peace followed under Alain Fergant and
Conan III, but on the death of the latter a fierce war of succession was
waged (1148-56). Conan IV secured the ducal crown by Norman-English aid,
and gave his daughter Constance in marriage to Geoffrey Plantagenet, son
of Henry II of England. Geoffrey was crowned Duke of Brittany in 1171,
but after his death his son Arthur met with a dreadful fate at the,
hands of his uncle, John of England. Constance, his mother, the real
heiress to the duchy, married again, her choice falling upon Guy de
Thouars, and their daughter was wed to Pierre de Dreux, who became Duke,
and who defeated John Lackland, the slayer of his wife's half-brother,
under the walls of Nantes in 1214.

### French Influence

The country now began to flourish apace because of the many innovations
introduced into it by the wisdom of its French rulers. A new way of life
was adopted by the governing classes, among whom French manners and
fashions became the rule. But the people at large retained their ancient
customs, language, and dress; nor have they ever abandoned them, at
least in Lower Brittany. On the death of John III (1341) the peace of
the duchy was once more broken by a war of succession. John had no love
for his half-brother, John of Montfort, and bequeathed the ducal coronet
to his niece, Joan of Penthièvre, wife of Charles of Blois, nephew of
Philip VI of France. This precipitated a conflict between the rival
parties which led to years of bitter strife.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### The War of the Two Joans

Just as two women, Fredegonda and Brunhilda, swayed the fortunes of
Neustria and Austrasia in Merovingian times, and Mary and Elizabeth
those of England and Scotland at a later day, so did two heroines arise
to uphold the banners of either party in the civil strife which now
convulsed the Breton land. England took the side of Montfort and the
French that of Charles. Almost at the outset (1342) John of Montfort was
taken prisoner, but his heroic wife, Joan of Flanders, grasped the
leadership of affairs, and carried on a relentless war against her
husband's enemies. After five years of fighting, in 1347, and two years
subsequent to the death of her lord, whose health had given way after
his imprisonment, she captured her arch-foe, Charles of Blois himself,
at the, battle of La Roche-Derrien, on the Jaudy. In this encounter she
had the assistance of a certain Sir Thomas Dagworth and an English
force. Three times was Charles rescued, and thrice was he retaken,
until, bleeding from eighteen wounds, he was compelled to surrender. He
was sent to London, where he was confined in the Tower for nine years.
Meanwhile his wife, Joan, imitating her rival and namesake, in turn
threw her energies into the strife. But another victory for the Montfort
party was gained at Mauron in 1352. On the release of Charles of Blois
in 1356 he renewed hostilities with the help of the famous Bertrand Du
Guesclin.

### Bertrand Du Guesclin

Bertrand Du Guesclin (*c*. 1320-80), Constable of France, divides with
Bayard the Fearless the crown of medieval

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] French chivalry as a mighty leader of men, a
great soldier, and a blameless knight. He was born of an ancient family
who were in somewhat straitened circumstances, and in childhood was an
object of aversion to his parents because of his ugliness.

One night his mother dreamt that she was in possession of a casket
containing portraits of herself and her lord, on one side of which were
set nine precious stones of great beauty encircling a rough, unpolished
pebble. In her dream she carried the casket to a lapidary, and asked him
to take out the rough stone as unworthy of such goodly company; but he
advised her to allow it to remain, and afterward it shone forth more
brilliantly than the lustrous gems. The later superiority of Bertrand
over her nine other children fulfilled the mother's dream.

At the tournament which was held at Rennes in 1338 to celebrate the
marriage of Charles of Blois with Joan of Penthièvre, young Bertrand, at
that time only some eighteen years old, unhorsed the most famous
competitors. During the war between Blois and Montfort he gathered round
him a band of adventurers and fought on the side of Charles V, doing
much despite to the forces of Montfort and his ally of England.

Du Guesclin's name lives in Breton legend as Gwezklen, perhaps the
original form, and approximating to that on his tomb at Saint-Denis,
where he lies at the feet of Charles V of France. In this inscription it
is spelt "Missire Bertram du Gueaquien," perhaps a French rendering of
the Breton pronunciation. Not a few legendary ballads which recount the
exploits of this manly and romantic figure remain in the Breton
language, and I have made a free translation of the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

following, as it is perhaps the most interesting of the number:

THE WARD OF DU GUESCLIN

TROGOFF'S strong tower in English hands  
Has been this many a year,  
Rising above its subject-lands  
And held in hate and fear.  
That rosy gleam upon the sward  
Is not the sun's last kiss;  
It is the blood of an English lord  
Who ruled the land amiss.

"O sweetest daughter of my heart,  
My little Marguerite,  
Come, carry me the midday milk  
To those who bind the wheat."  
"O gentle mother, spare me this!  
The castle I must pass  
Where wicked Roger takes a kiss  
From every country lass."

"Oh! fie, my daughter, fie on thee!  
The Seigneur would not glance  
On such a chit of low degree  
When all the dames in France  
Are for his choosing." "Mother mine,  
I bow unto your word.  
Mine eyes will ne'er behold you more.  
God keep you in His guard."

Young Roger stood upon the tower  
Of Trogoff's grey château;  
Beneath his bent brows did he lower  
Upon the scene below.  
"Come hither quickly, little page,  
Come hither to my knee.  
Canst spy a maid of tender age?  
Ha! she must pay my fee." <span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Fair Marguerite trips swiftly by  
Beneath the castle shade,  
When villain Roger, drawing nigh,  
Steals softly on the maid.  
He seizes on the milking-pail  
She bears upon her head;  
The snow-white flood she must bewail,  
For all the milk is shed.

"Ah, cry not, pretty sister mine,  
There's plenty and to spare  
Of milk and eke of good red wine  
Within my castle fair.  
Ah, feast with me, or pluck a rose  
Within my pleasant garth,  
Or stroll beside yon brook which flows  
In brawling, sylvan mirth."

"Nor feast nor flowers nor evening air  
I wish; I do entreat,  
Fair Seigneur, let me now repair  
To those who bind the wheat."  
"Nay, damsel, fill thy milking-pail  
The dairy stands but here.  
Ah, foolish sweeting, wherefore quail,  
For thou hast naught to fear?"

The castle gates behind her close,  
And all is fair within;  
Above her head the apple glows,  
The symbol of our sin.  
"O Seigneur, lend thy dagger keen,  
That I may cut this fruit."  
He smiles and with a courteous mien  
He draws the bright blade out.

 

<span id="img_03400"></span>

[![THE DEATH OF MARGUERITE IN THE CASTLE OF TROGOFF](tn/03400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03400.jpg.md)  
THE DEATH OF MARGUERITE IN THE CASTLE OF TROGOFF  

 

She takes it, and in earnest prayer  
Her childish accents rise:  
"O mother, Virgin, ever fair,  
Pray, pray, for her who dies <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>  
For honour!" Then the blade is drenched  
With blood most innocent.  
Vile Roger, now, thine ardour quenched,  
Say, art thou then content?

"Ha, I will wash my dagger keen  
In the clear-running brook.  
No human eye hath ever seen,  
No human eye shall look  
Upon this gore." He takes the blade  
From out that gentle heart,  
And hurries to the river's shade.  
False Roger, why dost start?

Beside the bank Du Guesclin stands,  
Clad in his sombre mail.  
"Ha, Roger, why so red thy hands,  
And why art thou so pale?"  
"A beast I've slain." "Thou liest, hound!  
But I a beast will slay."  
The woodland's leafy ways resound  
To echoings of fray.

Roger is slain. Trogoff's château  
Is level with the rock.  
Who can withstand Du Guesclin's blow,  
What towers can brave his shock ?  
The combat is his only joy,  
The tournament his play.  
Woe unto those who would destroy  
The peace of Brittany!

 

In the decisive battle of Auray (1364) Charles was killed and Du
Guesclin taken prisoner. John of Montfort, son of the John who had died,
became Duke of Brittany. But he had to face Oliver de Clisson, round
whom the adherents of Blois rallied. From a war the strife degenerated
into a vendetta. Oliver de Clisson seized the person of John V and
imprisoned

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

him. But in the end John was liberated and the line of Blois was finally
crushed.

### Anne of Brittany

The next event of importance in Breton history is the enforced marriage
of Anne of Brittany, Duchess of that country in her own right, to
Charles VIII of France, son of Louis XI, which event took place in 1491.
Anne, whose father, Duke Francis II, had but recently died, had no
option but to espouse Charles, and on his death she married Louis XII,
his successor. Francis I, who succeeded Louis XII on the throne of
France, and who married Claude, daughter of Louis XII and Anne, annexed
the duchy in 1532, providing for its privileges. But beneath the
cramping hand of French power the privileges of the province were
greatly reduced. From this time the history of Brittany is merged in
that of France, of which country it becomes one of the component parts
in a political if not a racial sense.

We shall not in this place deal with the people of modern Brittany,
their manners and customs, reserving the subject for a later chapter,
but shall ask the reader to accompany us while we traverse the enchanted
ground of Breton story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[16:1](lrb04.htm#fr_0.md) Consult E. Ernault,
*Petite Grammaire bretonne* (Saint-Brieuc, 1897); L. Le Clerc,
*Grammaire bretonne* (Saint-Brieuc, 1908); J. P. Treasure, *An
Introduction to Breton Grammar* (Carmarthen, 1903). For the dialect of
Vannes see A. Guillevic and P. Le Goff, *Grammaire bretonne du Dialect
de Vannes* (Vannes, 1902).

<span id="fn_1"></span>[18:1](lrb04.htm#fr_1.md) Lit. 'long stone,' a
megalithic monument. See Chapter II, "Menhirs and Dolmens." Students of
folk-lore will recognize the symbolic significance of the offering. We
seem to have here some connexion with pillar-Worship, as found in
ancient Crete, and the adoration of the Irminsul among the ancient
Saxons.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[25:1](lrb04.htm#fr_2.md) Charles the Bald.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[27:1](lrb04.htm#fr_3.md) For the Breton original
and the French translation from which the above is adapted see
Villemarqué, *Barzaz-Breiz*, p. 112.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[29:1](lrb04.htm#fr_4.md) 'Sons of the Chief.'
MacTier is a fairly common name in Scotland to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Menhirs and Dolmens](lrb05.md)
