[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tee16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL744/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Evil Eye*, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### APPENDIX III

THE Australian aborigines, who seem to have considerable notions of
astronomy, have a name for the Pleiades, which signifies a flock of
cockatoos--an object most familiar to them. Their tradition is <span
id="fr_722"></span>[687](#fn_722) that once upon a time they were a
certain queen called Gneeanggar, and her six attendants, and that the
star *crow* fell in love with the queen, but was so unsuccessful in
gaining her affections that he determined to get possession of her by
stratagem. He knew they

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

were very fond of white grubs, and finding out when they were going in
search of them, he determined to change himself into a grub. In this
form he bored into the stem of a tree, where he was sure to be observed
by the queen and her attendants. He was soon discovered, and one of the
servants thrust in her bone-hook, which the women use for extracting
grubs. Of this he broke the point, and did the same to the hooks of all
the other five attendants. The queen then put her beautiful hook into
the hole: he knew that it was hers, and allowed himself to be drawn out,
when he immediately changed himself into a giant, and ran off with her
from her maids. Ever since the loss of the queen there have been only
six stars in the Pleiades representing her six servants. This story is
well known in Western Australia, and with some variations in South
Australia also.

These people have their own names for most of the heavenly bodies.

Like the German sun, theirs also is feminine and the moon masculine. The
larger stars are sisters of the sun and moon. The Milky Way is the big
river. The dark space of the Milky Way is *bunyip*, <span
id="fr_723"></span>[688](#fn_723) an animal something like a horse. When
the natives first saw a horse they thought it was *bunyip*, and would
not go near it.

Jupiter they call "Strike the Sun," a feminine name. Venus is the
"Mother of the Sun."

Canopus they call *crow*, Sirius *eagle*, Antares *big-stomach*, and say
the glow-worm took its light from this star.

The three stars in Orion's belt are the sisters of the eagle (Sirius),
and always follow him.

These people believe in a good spirit as a gigantic man living above the
clouds. "His voice, the thunder, <span id="fr_724"></span>[689](#fn_724)
is listened to with pleasure," as that of a friend. The bad spirit, who
is evidently much more considered--for fear is ever stronger than love
in the savage breast--is called "the

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

maker of bad-smelling smoke"; he is the author of every ill. "At times
he assumes the form of a large, ugly man, and though not provided with
wings like the white man's devil, he flits and darts from place to place
with the rapidity of lightning, is very mischievous, and hungers for the
flesh of children." He is believed to live deep underground, and
commands a number of inferior spirits. No human being has ever returned
from the place called *Ummekulleen*, where he, *Muuruup*, lives. There
is nothing but fire there, and the souls of bad people get neither meat
nor drink, and are terribly knocked about by the evil spirits. Every
adult has a wraith, or likeness of himself, which is visible only to
himself, and to him only before his own premature death. Good people go
off to a beautiful country above the clouds, where life will be enjoyed
for ever. Friends will meet and recognise each other, but there will be
no marrying, as the bodies will be left upon earth. The shades of the
wicked wander miserably about the earth for one year after death,
frightening people, and then descend to Ummekulleen, never to
return. <span id="fr_725"></span>[690](#fn_725)

These really very remarkable notions are so much like our own that one
would have expected to find these savages had lived long in contact with
Europeans; but we know that this cannot be so, and that their beliefs in
a future state must be the relics of some unknown previous condition of
civilisation, or they must be the innate ideas of primitive man. The
*Wuulon* and the shadow referred to (P. 72) would seem to point to their
descent from a higher Oriental stock-a contention further borne out by
Dawson (p. 54), who describes a conveyance of land regularly signed and
sealed. He says "the reader will be interested in these traces of
civilisation among a people who have hitherto been considered the least
civilised of all nations."

Closely connected with astrology is the poetical notion

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

called the "Music of the Spheres," a term very often used without the
slightest knowledge of its true meaning. It was an ancient belief that
each of the vowels of the alphabet represented the sound uttered in its
revolution by one particular planet; these all combined form one eternal
harmony to the glory of the great Creator of the Universe. This is the
meaning of the lines in Addison's well-known hymn:--

For ever singing, as they shine,  
"The hand that made us is divine."

India, again, seems to have been the birthplace of this beautiful idea,
which even in Plato's day was quite familiar, for he makes the seven
notes proceed from a siren seated upon the several spheres, set in
motion by the Fates. <span id="fr_726"></span>[691](#fn_726)

Another interpretation of the seven vowels is that they represent the
ineffable name of the Creator, the mystic Jehovah, the great "I Am."
This explanation is supported by the fact that "these combinations of
the vowels often appear purposely to include and veil from the profane
sense the sacred triliteral ΙΑΩ."

The same author tells us <span id="fr_727"></span>[692](#fn_727) that
"talisman is but the corruption in the Arabian mouth of Ἀποτέλεσμα, the
influence of a planet upon the native; hence astrology is called ἡ
Ἀποτελεσματική."

From astrology we are naturally led on to other practices, by which men
in all ages have sought to solve the insoluble and to know the
unknowable.

Magical arts, by which we mean all the various forms of divination and
enchantment practised by the ancients, were said by the Greeks to have
been invented in Persia, or, as we have it, Chaldea. The Μάγοι
originally were wise men, philosophers, given to the study of nature and
the contemplation of the stars and heavenly bodies. From these higher
pursuits they gradually declined, and following the bent of their
natural humanity, which makes fear the

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

strongest of motives, they began to propitiate the spirits of the evils
they dreaded, rather than to render thanks to the good spirits from whom
they at least admitted all good things to proceed. Hence they took to
the invocation of demons, leading on to what we now call black arts.

These practices are said to have been introduced among the Greeks by a
certain Œthanes, who came over with the invading army of Xerxes, and who
propagated the rudiments of magic. They were afterwards extended and
developed by Democritus, through contact with the Phœnicians. It is
clear however that the seed fell into suitable soil, which moreover had,
long before Œthanes, been well prepared by the primæval belief in the
evil eye--a belief which had become so confident, that we find, as
already related, the wise Pisistratus had caused a great amulet in the
shape of a grillo, a locust or cricket, to be set up on a column in the
Agora at Athens, as a protector against the dread influence.

The greater arts practised by the ancient Greeks were:-- <span
id="fr_728"></span>[693](#fn_728)

1\. Necromancy (Νεκρομαντεία) the commonest of all the magic arts, by
which answers to matters relating to this life 'were obtained from the
dead. Closely allied, and belonging to this, was Psychomancy
(Ψυχομαντεία), by which the dead were called up or made to appear in
airy forms like shades or ghosts. This was the art, however it may have
been practised, of the Witch of Endor.

Among the old Greeks there were particular places set apart as specially
appropriate to this art, called Νεκρομαντεία. Of these, two were the
most remarkable--first Threspotia, where Orpheus restored to life his
wife Eurydice, and where Periander, tyrant of Corinth, was affrighted by
the appearance of his wife Melissa, whom he had murdered; secondly, the
next most noted spot

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

was at the famous cave of the Sibyl, on the Lacus Avernus, between
Pozzuoli and Baiæ in Campania, about ten miles from Naples. This latter
is celebrated by Horner and Virgil in their stories of Æneas and
Ulysses. The writer can testify that it can still be entered and
explored, though somewhat flooded by water, consequent on recent
volcanic disturbance.

2\. Hydromancy (Ἡδρομαντεία), divination by the images or other
appearances caused to appear in water, as of a fountain. Often this was
performed with a basin and then called Λεκανομαντεία.

Frequently the same art with a like result was practised with a mirror
or looking-glass, and hence called Κατοπτρομαντεία. Sometimes it was
performed in vessels of water, the centre of which was called Γαστήρ,
and hence this divination was called Γαστρομαντεία. The latter was
performed thus: Round vessels were filled with clear water, about which
were placed lighted torches; they then invoked the demon, in a low,
murmuring voice, and proposed the question to be solved. A chaste boy or
a pregnant woman was appointed to observe with the greatest care and
exactness all the alterations in the glasses, at the same time desiring,
beseeching, and also commanding an answer, which at length the demon
used to return by images in the glasses, which by reflection from the
water represented what should come to pass. <span
id="fr_729"></span>[694](#fn_729)

There can be no doubt that Joseph had learnt this art of divination from
the Egyptians. It was his divining cup or bowl which was found in
Benjamin's sack. "Is not this it (the bowl) in which my lord drinketh,
and whereby indeed he divineth?" (Gen. xliv. 5). Again, when brought
back, Joseph himself said to his brethren: "What deed is this that ye
have done? wot ye not that such a man as I

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

can certainly divine?" (Gen. xliv. 15). He evidently took it for granted
that his brethren would believe he could ascertain by magic who had
stolen the money and the cup.

3\. Crystalomancy (Κρυσταλλομαντεία) was performed with polished and
enchanted crystals, wherein future events were discerned by certain
marks and figures which were caused to appear.

4\. Dactylomancy (Δακτυλομαντεία), or divination by enchanted rings.

5\. Onychomancy (Ὀνυχομαντεία) was performed by the finger-nails of an
unpolluted boy. These were covered with soot and oil, and when turned to
the sun they reflected the desired image.

6\. Aeromancy (Ἀερομαντεία), divination by appearances in the air.

7\. Lithomancy (Λιθομαντεία), divination with a precious stone called
*siderites*. By a stone of this kind, Helenus is reported to have
foretold the destruction of Troy. Precious stones were not only used for
the purpose of divination, but were in themselves held in the highest
esteem as amulets or charms against the evil eye chiefly, but also
against diseases.

Of all relics of the occult arts perhaps the beliefs attaching to famous
stones, from the Scone stone under the Coronation Chair, to the
moonstones and toadstones of fable, are in these days as conspicuous as
any. How many stories we find nowadays turning upon the safe keeping of
some mystic stone, or precious gem, whose loss is fatal to its possessor
or his family.

Another subsidiary divination was by the well-known crackling sound made
by laurel leaves in burning. The word Daphne (δάφνη), the Greek for
laurel, is said to be δα-φωνή (from the sound), *i.e.* the noise made by
the leaves in burning.

8\. Coscinomancy (Κοσκινομαντεία), divination by a sieve, which,
according to Theocritus, was used by an old woman <span
id="fr_730"></span>[695](#fn_730) in telling silly people their
fortunes.

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

9\. Axinomancy (Ἀξινομαντεία) from Ἀξίνη an *axe* or *hatchet*, which
was posted on a stake and was supposed to turn at the name of the guilty
person. Perhaps here we have a clue to the origin of our vernacular
"bury the hatchet," although Longfellow (*Hiawatha* xiii.) makes the
custom North American.

10\. Cephalonomancy (Κεφαλονομαντεία), divination by broiling an ass's
head on coals. The jaws were said to move at the name of the guilty
person.

11\. Alectromancy (Ἀλεκτρυομαντεία), by a cock. Twenty-four letters were
laid on the ground with a grain of corn on each; the cock magically
prepared was then let loose, and the letters from which he picked the
corns in order were joined and produced the required name.

12\. Sideromancy (Σιδηρομαντεία), conjuring with a hot iron, on which
they laid an odd number of straws. The result required was obtained by
observing the contortions made by the straws in burning.

13\. Molybdomancy (Μολυβδομαντεία), by noting motions and figures in
molten lead.

14\. Tephromancy (Τεφρομαντεία), divination by ashes after exposure to
the wind.

15\. Botanomancy (Βοτανομαντεία), conjuring with herbs, especially
Ἐλελίσφακος or salvia.

Sometimes fig-leaves were used, and then it was called Sycomancy
(Συκομαντεία). The diviners wrote names and questions on leaves, which
were then exposed to the winds. Those remaining furnished the answers
sought.

16\. Ceromancy (Κηρομαντεία), divination by the forms assumed by melted
wax dropped into water.

17\. Pharmacy (Φαρμακεία). This was perhaps the most commonly practised
as well as the most powerful of all the black arts, and has doubtless
left its mark upon the poisoner's craft of later ages. It consisted in
divination by means of medicated drugs, both vegetable and mineral,
called Φάρμακα. Some of these were believed to be of great efficacy, and
capable of imparting their venom

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

to persons at a considerable distance. So widespread was the belief in
the potency of these poisons, that special charms or amulets, called
Φάρμακα σωτήρια, were provided to counteract them. These were: *herb
moly*, which preserved Ulysses from the enchantments of Circe, laurel
(daphne), sallow-tree, rhamn or Christ thorn, fleabane, the jasper
stone, and many others mentioned by the mediæval writer Albertus Magnus
and by Orpheus in his book *De Lapillis*.

Certain rings also were used as countercharms, which were called by
Aristophanes, in his Plutus, Δακτυλίουσ Φαρμακίτας.

Both Democritus and Pythagoras were reputed to be skilful in pharmacy.
The Thessalians, particularly the women, were most celebrated among the
Greeks as practisers of it. Besides all these, a great many other forms
and modes of enchantment were devoutly used by the ancients. The more
powerful incantations were firmly believed to be capable of even drawing
the moon from her path. <span id="fr_731"></span>[696](#fn_731)

The *moon*, indeed, was thought to preside over the art of pharmacy,
while *Hecate*, who, as we have seen, was but one of the persons or
attributes of Artemis or Diana Triformis, was supposed to have been the
inventor of it. Hence both these goddesses, really the same, were
invoked by its adepts. Whenever the moon was eclipsed it was thought to
be the effect of magicians; and at such times it was usual to beat drums
and kettles, to sound hautboys, trumpets, or any instruments making a
great noise, to drown the voices of the sorcerers or evil workers, so
that their charms might be impotent.

To this great art of pharmacy, on the other hand, belong all the charms,
amulets, and enchantments against poison, venom of serpents, with all
diseases; and hence of course our modern use of the word.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

The faith in the power of magic arts was simply unbounded, as is
testified by nearly all the classic writers. Tibullus (*Eleg*. II. i.
43) says that a certain famous enchantress could not only draw down the
stars from the sky, but could change the course of a river. Further, she
could make snow to fall in summer.

Horace, Lucan, Ovid, all bear similar witness: how that not only could
they cause earthquakes and lightnings, but even could make the dead come
out of their tombs. Hence we see that what was held to be a protector
against the witch, or the witchcraft capable of producing such
calamities, soon got to be considered a specific against the evil
itself. Thus our joke about pills good against an earthquake was once a
serious fact devoutly believed.

We find that certain of these incantations had to be performed during
the increase of the moon; and similarly we read in the old herbals of
Gerard, Turner, and Culpepper, how greatly the influence of the moon is
to be considered in taking the remedies they prescribe.

Even Plato speaks of the Thessalian enchantresses as able to remove the
moon from the sky, and he is followed by many other writers. This
account is moreover confirmed by both Tibullus and Virgil. All stories
are, however, capped by Pliny, who gravely states that an entire olive
orchard, belonging to one Vectius Marcellus, was drawn by enchantment
across the public road, while the land on which it was placed was made
to go back and take the place previously occupied by the olive
orchard. <span id="fr_732"></span>[697](#fn_732)

Ovid, too, gives some very strange stories of how, by incantation, the
stars distilled blood and the moon became of a bloody purple.

His mother was a witch, and one so strong  
That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,  
And deal in her command without her power.  
                                   *The Tempest*, Act v. Sc. i.

Magicians were also believed to be able to raise the gods of the upper
and lower world, and compel them to answer

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

questions. Pliny, again, even gives the names of the herbs they used for
this purpose. It appears, however, that the raising of the gods was not
the same as the commoner necromancy, but must have belonged to the
highest powers of the adepts in pharmacy, seeing that herbs were
employed for the purpose.

It is, of course, futile to speculate as to the means, the extent to
which these things were done, or, indeed, as to the truth of any of
these wonderful stories. All we can say is, that in the Bible are
abundant references to the wizards and magicians who "did so with their
enchantments." We cannot believe them implicitly in the light of our
present knowledge, neither can we explain them away, least of all can we
venture to scoff at so many, so various, and in other respects so
truthful witnesses.

A magical operation, almost precisely similar to the ancient Greek
Γαστρομαντεία, is recorded as witnessed by himself in Mr. Lane's *Modern
Egyptians* (vol. ii. ch. xii.), except that the mirror was of ink
instead of clear water. This performance is now called *darb-el-mendel*.
The chaste boy was the medium as of old; and the magician informed him
that formerly those who alone could see the images, were the boy and a
pregnant woman, to whom, however, modern experience seems to have added
a virgin and a black female slave. The whole business is minutely
described, and the form of invocation, written, as translated by Mr.
Lane, was readily given to him. The main influence is said to be
achieved by the first two words. We give the invocation, and refer the
inquirer for full information to Mr. Lane's book.

Magic Invocation and Charm

Tarshun! Taryoashun! come down!  
Come down! be present! Whither are gone  
The prince and his troops? Where are El Ahmar  
The prince and his troops? Be present,  
Ye servants of these names!  
And this is the removal, and we have removed from thee  
Thy veil; and thy sight to-day  
Is piercing! Correct: correct.

 

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

Besides this invocation there was the very common magic square with
Arabic numerals making 15, as shown on [p. 402](tee15.htm#page_402). The
only difference is in the position of the figures, which of course makes
no change in the result so long as 5 is kept in the centre. The same
applies to the squared words--*tenet* must be in the centre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_722"></span>[438:687](tee17.htm#fr_722) James Dawson,
Australian Aborigines, Melbourne, 1881, p. 100.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[439:688](tee17.htm#fr_723) Lumholtz, *Among
Cannibals*, 1889, p. 202.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[439:689](tee17.htm#fr_724) Dawson, *op. cit.*
p. 49.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[440:690](tee17.htm#fr_725) Dawson, *op. cit.*
p. 51. See also on this subject Tylor, *Prim. Cult.* i. 274 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[441:691](tee17.htm#fr_726) King, *Gnostics*,
p. 93.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[441:692](tee17.htm#fr_727) *Ibid*. p.115.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[442:693](tee17.htm#fr_728) Fuller accounts of
all these, together with the details of a large number of subsidiary
enchantments, will be found in Potter's *Archæologia Græca*, vol. i.,
and in Pliny's *Letters* and *Natural History*.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[443:694](tee17.htm#fr_729) Potter, *Archæol.
Græca*, i. 408, Copied verbatim in Robinson's *Grecian Antiquities*, p.
271 from whom Mr. Goodwin repeats it in *Fragment of a Græco-Egyptian
work upon Magic* Cambridge, 1852, p. 22. The modern Persians apply the
word Jain, signifying a cup, mirror, or even globe, to magical vessels
of this kind. See R. S. Poole in Smith's *Dict. of the Bible*, S, v.
"Magic," p. 197.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[444:695](tee17.htm#fr_730) Archbishop Potter
makes Theocritus call the old woman a *gypsy*!

<span id="fn_731"></span>[446:696](tee17.htm#fr_731) See Ovid,
*Metamorph*. vii. 207:--

"Te quoque, Luna, traho";

Virgil, *Eclog*. viii. 70:--

"Carmina vel cælo possunt deducere lunam.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[447:697](tee17.htm#fr_732) Pliny, *Nat. Hist.*
xvii. 38 (vol. iii. p. 527, Bohn).

We are then told minutely what the boy said he saw; but from "holding
the boy's hand all the while" he was looking intently into the ink, it
appears rather like a case of hypnotism, plus a good deal of apparatus
in the way of a chafing dish, frankincense, and coriander seed, so that
"the fumes became painful to the eyes." The boy, however, was evidently
not an educated medium, as he was taken from a crowd, and was Mr. Lane's
own selection. The description of the objects seen by the boy, as
elicited by leading questions, shows that these questions are evidently
ancient and traditional forms, while the general resemblance of the
objects said to be seen in the ink, to the appearances mentioned in the
papyrus, No. XLVI., described in Mr, Goodwin's paper (see [p.
395](tee15.htm#page_395)), is quite obvious. We are thus brought to
perceive that this art as now practised in Egypt has changed but little
in two thousand years.
