[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tee15)  [Next](tee17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL744/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Evil Eye*, by Frederick Thomas Elworthy, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

## CHAPTER XII

### SPITTING, INCANTATION, AND OTHER PROTECTIVE ACTS. PIXIES

IN the story told by Jorio of the Neapolitan woman ([p.
261](tee11.htm#page_261)), another side of the question, so far only
hinted at, is opened out. It is the effect believed to exist in certain
actions, performed openly, secretly, or in the way of incantation. When,
in talking with a stranger, a Neapolitan keeps his hands behind his back
in the position described as *mano cornuta*, he does precisely what is
meant: he performs an act unknown to the person against whom it is
intended, but which the actor believes will shield him from the possible
harm coming to him from the other party. Acts of this kind are performed
with a twofold object: in the one case to keep off injury; in the other
to bring about what is desired, such as secretly touching a hunchback at
Monte Carlo. Among the latter are all such acts as are done or said "for
luck." How common it is at cards when a player has had a run of ill
fortune, to get up and turn his chair three times "to change the luck."
On Christmas Eve 1889 the moon was two days old. Two keepers and two
beaters were just about to go home after a day's shooting. "There's the
new moon," said one. "Ees, and

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

over the right shoulder, too," said another. "Turn your money vor luck,"
said number three. "I han't a-got nort but a penny," replied number one.
"Oh! thick idn no good, must be zilver," said number three. This kind of
dialogue is to be heard every day; and is only given here because it is
specific, and was spoken in the writer's own hearing. Almost the same
thing comes from South Africa.

Mr. G. S. Foot writes to the *Spectator* of October 29, 1892, respecting
the doings of some native boys.

On looking out, I saw them one after another take lighted brands from
the fire, and throw them towards some object in the sky. They then stood
in a praying attitude, and loudly shouted, "Give plenty money!" They
replied to inquiries: that all boys thus greeted the new moon; and it
was found to be a universal custom among the Mashonas.

The marriage of the Czar Nicholas Il. furnishes a curious fact in this
connection, and like the rite of the passport for the dead (see [p.
399](tee15.htm#page_399)) shows that in Russia practices are solemnised
which in more western countries would be classed as magic.

By orthodox theologians the symbolical meaning of the golden and silver
rings is, explained thus: The gold ring bestowed on the man signifies
that he is to be as the sun to his future wife, irradiating her with his
light. She is given the silver ring, inasmuch as, like the moon, she
receives her brilliancy from her husband. The changing of rings, which
ends by leaving to both their own, symbolises union and concord of
husband and wife. <span id="fr_676"></span>[641a](#fn_676)

Very nearly allied to this is the custom at fairs or markets for the
seller, on being paid for cattle, to give back a silver coin "for luck."
So much is this a recognised custom, that in close bargains a very
frequent stipulation is made for so much "to luck." Luck money, too,
should always be silver.

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Further, it is
common among the regular market-dealers, when the "luck money" is handed
back to the buyer, for the receiver to spit on it "for luck." The same
habit of spitting on a coin is very common also by the receiver when won
in a bet, or when it is the first money received for the day. <span
id="fr_677"></span>[642](#fn_677)

This custom of spitting opens up quite a wide subject, for not only is
it practised in the hope of obtaining good fortune, but in all ages, and
almost among all peoples, it has ever been considered as an act to
safeguard the spitter, whether against fascination or other evils. Among
the ancient Greeks and Romans "the most common remedy against an
invidious look was spitting; it was hence called *despuere
malum*." <span id="fr_678"></span>[643](#fn_678) According to Theocritus
"it is necessary to spit three times into the breast of the person who
fears fascination."

Old women were accustomed to avert the evil eye from children by
spitting into their bosoms: this was done three times--three being a
sacred number. "Hence Damœtas . . . having praised himself, adds that by
the advice of old Cotyttaris he had spit thrice into, his bosom to
prevent fascination." <span id="fr_679"></span>[644](#fn_679)

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

It was usual to reprove arrogant persons by bidding them spit into their
bosoms. <span id="fr_680"></span>[645](#fn_680) Among the ancient Greeks
it was customary to spit three times into their bosoms at the sight of a
madman, or one troubled with epilepsy. <span
id="fr_681"></span>[646](#fn_681) This was done in defiance of the omen,
spitting being a sign of contempt and aversion. <span
id="fr_682"></span>[647](#fn_682)

Another method of averting fascination from infants was this: they tied
a thread of divers colours about the neck of the infant (compare the
coloured ribbons on horses, and the coloured worsted on the *fattura
della morte*), then spat on the ground, and taking up the spittle mixed
with dirt upon their finger, put it upon the infant's forehead and lips.
Moreover, this had to be done with the *digitus infamis*. As to the
latter, there is no doubt as to which is the finger of disgrace. <span
id="fr_683"></span>[648](#fn_683)

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

Pagan lustration was performed with the middle finger.

Th' obscure old grandam, or the next of kin,  
The new-born infant from the cradle takes,  
And first of spittle a lustration makes:  
Then in the spawl her middle finger dips,  
Anoints the temples, forehead, and the lips.

Thus Dryden translates that part of the second satire of Persius in
which occurs the line--

"Infami digito, et lustralibus ante salivis."

The improper and indecorous placing of the hand and fingers is also to
be classed among derisive grimaces. Formerly the middle finger expressed
the utmost contempt and ignominy when thrust out, with the other fingers
closed. On that account it is called *infamis* and *imbudicus*. <span
id="fr_684"></span>[649](#fn_684) Isidorus Hispalensis says: "When any
one wished formerly to mock contumeliously, or to signify the utmost
derision, he used to thrust out the middle finger." It is said <span
id="fr_685"></span>[650](#fn_685) that when certain visitors came to
Demosthenes, who did not salute him with the

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

index, he recognised them with his stretched-out middle finger.

There was much discussion among old writers upon this gesture. Suetonius
calls it "the hand formed in an obscene manner"; others declare it
*impudicitiam ostendere*.

Besides this thrusting out of the middle finger, there was another sign
of contemptuous mocking grimace, made by the interposition or insertion
of the thumb between the index and middle finger, so that the thumb
projects beyond, while the rest of the fingers are contracted into a
fist. This is the greatest indignity of all mocking gestures, "dicitur
ab Italis Far le fiche." <span id="fr_686"></span>[651](#fn_686) In the
theatres they had three ways of expressing disapproval or derision of
the actors by the hands, besides the well-known hissing, shouting,
thrusting out the tongue, and other facial contortions. These were:
First, by making with the hands what was called a crane's bill,
"Pinsente etiam rostro ciconiam manibus quandoque exprimebant";
secondly, by imitating asses' ears, "Et imitabantur aliquando asini
auriculas"; thirdly, by the thumb gesture (*mano in fica*), "Tertium,
cum manus in obscœnum modum formata." The latter was evidently the most
forcible: indeed it seems to have become so common as to be signified by
the mere word *favere*, *i.e.* properly to applaud, but practically to
recognise the actor in either way, by applauding or disapproval. This
was precisely analogous to other cases where it was customary to say
*præfiscini* or *defigere*. In fact these were slang words of the
Empire. It was evidently considered an extremely vulgar sort of
disapprobation,

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

for we read, "Turpissime contra aliquem favere," *i.e.* "It is most
disgraceful to express disapproval of any one by thrusting out the *mano
fica*."

What was the nature of the crane's-bill gesture is not very clear.
Persius says (*Sat*. i.):--

"O Iane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit."

We are told that jokers make the stork (crane) by joining all the
fingers; they then place them to the lower part in the likeness of a
crane's bill. <span id="fr_687"></span>[652](#fn_687) There is much
discussion of this performance, but in the absence of any drawing it is
difficult to explain; the *a tergo* will perhaps suggest something. So
also we are told with much detail how the asses' ears were imitated. The
two hands were applied to the temples and the fingers moved backwards
and forwards. This attitude survives in No. 7 (Stupido) of the
Neapolitan gestures on Fig. [120](tee11.htm#img_27500).

Passing from manual gestures, already dealt with, we find spilling upon
many occasions to be a widespread practice, nor need we turn to ancient
times for plenty of examples of belief in its efficacy as a protective
act, besides those performed for luck.

To spit on cut hair before throwing it away is thought in some parts of
Europe sufficient to prevent its being used by witches. <span
id="fr_688"></span>[653](#fn_688) This is of course analogous to the
various precautions taken to prevent hostile persons getting possession
of any part of or belonging to another. <span
id="fr_689"></span>[654](#fn_689)

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

It is quite commonly said here in Somerset: "Nif you do meet wi' anybody
wi' a north eye, spat dree times." <span
id="fr_690"></span>[655](#fn_690) Why always three times? why three
times by the nurses of old days, except that there is some virtue added
by the number three?

Those afflicted with obliquity of vision have ever been accounted as
dangerous by hard-headed as well as superstitious people. Even in London
the enlightened, these beliefs are not extinct. The *Morning, Herald* of
August 16, 1839, records that two women were fellow-lodgers, but
unfortunately one of them squinted, and the other, to avert the supposed
consequences from the defect in the first, considered she could only
protect herself by spitting in her face three times a day. <span
id="fr_691"></span>[656](#fn_691)

In many parts of England, certainly here in the west, it is a common
saying: "Always spat dree times 'nif ee do zee a piebald 'oss." Piebald
horses are thought uncanny nearly everywhere.

Country people generally have well-known occasions when to spit; indeed
the act is almost as naturally performed as to breathe.

Not long ago, in shooting, the writer with others came upon a dead dog
which was most offensive. One keeper said "Here's a pretty breath"; the
other said: "Mus' bring a showl an' bury un"; but both accompanied their
words with deliberately spitting

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

on the ground. This is almost invariable, and has been noted by the
writer hundreds of times. Whenever an offensive smell is perceived there
is often a coarse joke; but if ten or a dozen are working together all
spit, though probably few of them have actually smelt it. Moreover, it
has been noticed that the action is not the violent ejection of saliva,
but the deliberate voidance of all the moisture in the mouth, often
accompanied by the usual "hawking" to clear the windpipe. All this is
done with evident unconsciousness; it seems an involuntary action, the
result of pure animal instinct. No one is ever told to spit in such
cases, but it is the most sanitary act which can be performed under the
circumstances. Germs of disease present in fœtid matter can only pass
into the body through the breathed air, and hence to void the saliva
which may have been impregnated by the foul odour is as natural an act,
and as involuntary, as the closing of an eye at a threatened blow. This
is surely one of Nature's own lessons. Those who are too polite to
expectorate, will find upon careful scrutiny that a bad smell causes a
flow of saliva to the mouth. Who knows whether "good manners" may not
have had some bad effect, and that many a case of diphtheria might have
been avoided if it had never been considered vulgar to spit?

Great virtue is and was always believed to belong to fasting spittle,
both as curative and protective. <span id="fr_692"></span>[657](#fn_692)
To lick a wart first thing in the morning is one of the well-recognised
cures; the same is held

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

respecting disorders of the eyes, a slight wound, or any irritation of
the skin. Pliny says <span id="fr_693"></span>[658](#fn_693) fasting
spittle is a sovereign preservative against the poison of serpents, and
that "we are in the habit of spitting as a preservative against
epilepsy, or, in other words, we repel contagion thereby; in a similar
manner we repel fascinations, and the evil presages attendant upon
meeting a person who is lame in the right leg." He also refers to
spitting three times on the breast, and says it is the practice in all
cases where medicine is employed to spit three times on the ground; also
to mark a boil, when it first appears, three times with fasting spittle.
His remark that pugilists and other persons, before making an effort,
spit in the hand in order to make the blow more heavy, shows that
familiar modern practices of the like kind are not quite of yesterday.

Pliny shows how lichens and leprous spots may be removed by constant
application of fasting spittle; that crick in the neck may be cured by
carrying fasting spittle to the right knee with the right hand, and to
the left knee with the left.

As charms against the evil eye, he mentions spitting into the urine the
moment it is voided, of spitting into the right shoe before putting it
on, <span id="fr_694"></span>[659](#fn_694) and of spitting while
passing any place where danger has been incurred. Pliny continues: "When
a person

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

looks upon an infant asleep <span id="fr_695"></span>[660](#fn_695) it
is usual for the nurse to spit three times upon the ground; and this,
although infants are under the especial guardianship of the god
Fascinus, the protector not of infants only but of generals as well, and
a divinity whose worship is entrusted to the Vestal Virgins. The image
of this god is attached beneath the triumphal car, to protect the
victorious general against the effects of envy. Hence the expression
*præfiscini*." <span id="fr_696"></span>[661](#fn_696)

Quite recently a friend of the writer was travelling in Greece in the
neighbourhood of Sparta. A country woman had a baby on her back, carried
in the usual skin employed for that purpose. The traveller being a lady
naturally wished to look at the baby, and was in the act of uncovering
its face, when the mother turned round in the greatest anger, and of
course snatched away the child. The dragoman explained that the mother
dreaded the evil eye, and that if the lady wished to see the child, she
must first spit on it three times. This she did, and was at once
permitted to look on the baby's face, having provided the recognised
antidote against the stranger's glance. <span
id="fr_697"></span>[662](#fn_697)

The act of restoring sight to a blind man with fasting spittle is
attributed to Vespasian by two authors. <span
id="fr_698"></span>[663](#fn_698) The man is said to have besought him
"ut genas et orbes oculorum dignaretur respergere oris excremento." A
singular and very remarkable comment

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

upon the means which our Lord Himself took to open the eyes of the man
born blind, is seen in the fact that He did not despise as "mere
superstition" the acts which in His day were held to be effectual, but
that "He spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and He
anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay." He knew the medicinal
value which was set upon saliva by the people, but instead of spurning
such means, He thought right to make them the conductors of His
miraculous power. <span id="fr_699"></span>[664](#fn_699) We find the
same course followed in the case of the deaf and dumb man (St. Mark vii.
33).

A modern traveller <span id="fr_700"></span>[665](#fn_700) relates that
in Corfu he unwittingly expressed his admiration for two children of his
host. The grandmother on his repeating the praise became agonized, and
nothing would suffice to appease the parents and others present but that
he should spit in their faces. This he did, and the children submitted
as if well accustomed to have their beauty first lauded and then
protected. This, however, was not enough: the mother then made a paste
of dust and oil from the lamp burning before the Virgin and anointed
their foreheads. We are not told which finger the Corfiote woman used to
apply her paste, but it was probably the middle finger--the same as was
undoubtedly used for the purpose at the time of our Lord's miracles; for
Petronius, who was an actual contemporary (died A.D. 66), mentions the
putting of dust combined with saliva upon the forehead with the middle
finger. <span id="fr_701"></span>[666](#fn_701)

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

Mungo Park relates that among the Mandingoes the ceremony of naming a
child takes place at eight years old. First his head is shaved, then the
priest utters a prayer, while all the company whisper in the child's
ear, and spit three times in his face, after which they name the child,
etc.

This is but the gross performance of a ritual which is still practised
in civilised countries. In ordinary Roman baptism, before the water used
"In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti," the priest exorcises
with spittle the ears and nostrils of the infant, <span
id="fr_702"></span>[667](#fn_702) besides anointing with the chrism or
holy oil. <span id="fr_703"></span>[668](#fn_703)

Dr. Gregory, in his lecture to the British Association at Oxford, 1894,
said that after a quarrel with the chief of the Masai in East Africa,
the renewal of friendship was signified thus--"we spat upon each other,"
the Masai equivalent for shaking hands.

The application of the lustrant spittle with the middle or *infamis
digitus* may be the reason why the more important rite of anointing with
the chrism or holy oil should be so specially and distinctly

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

ordered in the several Rubrics <span id="fr_704"></span>[669](#fn_704)
to be performed with the thumb, the symbol of power. Such is however the
fact, and the custom is retained in our own Church of using the thumb in
that part of the baptismal service where the priest says "(We) do sign
him with the sign of the cross."

Of all the arts practised by magicians, ancient and modern, but
especially the latter, in cases of witchcraft, "ruling the planets" is
one of the commonest. Astrology has ever held a leading place in all the
occult sciences, and it will not be possible to overlook the evident
connection between many of the objects which are well-known amulets and
the names by which all men have agreed to call very many of the heavenly
bodies. We have seen how the sun and moon are represented by many gods
and goddesses in every mythology. The phases of the moon regulate the
times for many operations, while each of the planets bears a name
denoting to the most civilised people in the world one of the days of
the week, and also a pagan divinity. Moreover, our Saxon-English
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, very strikingly illustrate
that which has been so often dwelt on--the assimilation of ideas by
which the personification of any idea by one race migrates and takes up
its place in another with similar attributes or symbolic signs, but with
names expressing the modified notions of the imbibing race.

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

It is strange that animals should have become so connected in thought
with the various constellations and Zodiacal signs; but so it is, and
the connection is evidently of the utmost antiquity, because since
history began, civilised races have all adopted the same ideas, and in
their several languages denote the same animals. <span
id="fr_705"></span>[670](#fn_705) We are told <span
id="fr_706"></span>[671](#fn_706) that the star stories of Greeks and
Egyptians (which we inherit) are in direct correspondence with the like
legends among modern savages, yet many of them call stars and
constellations by names representing animals different from those we
call them. Nearly all savage

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

nations, such as the Australian aborigines, even those without picture
writing, call the stars by names of men and animals, and have all sorts
of legends to match.

Reference has been made to the practices anciently employed at weddings:
how songs of a lewd character called *Fescennina* were commonly a part
of the performance; but even in the present day elaborate acts are
common whose object is still the same--that of averting the evil eye
from the newly married pair. At a marriage among the Jews of Tunis,
after the religious ceremony, the bride is taken into an upper room,
accompanied by all her friends, who remain with her. The bridegroom
having retired with his friends, without taking the slightest notice of
the bride or any one else, she is seated on a chair placed upon the
usual divan. Her mother-in-law now comes forward, unveils her, and with
a pair of scissors cuts off the tips of her hair. This last ceremony is
supposed to be of great importance in driving away all evil influences
that might do harm to or enter between the newly married pair. <span
id="fr_707"></span>[672](#fn_707) We are not told what is done to the
hair cut off, nor of any ceremony in the cutting to countervail the
touch of iron. Both matters are doubtless carefully looked to, though
unnoted by a stranger. The birth of a daughter is a cause of grief,
etc., while a son is so greatly prized that they not unfrequently
compass his death by the very means taken to secure his life. Their one
great anxiety is to keep him from the influence of the evil eye, and
with this object in view they keep him carefully concealed within thick
curtains for some time after his birth, while a

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

smoking light is kept burning within those curtains day and night; in
this way poisoning the air for the poor little victim. Not only this,
but large squares of paper with flaming hands and outspread fingers,
pieces of bone, and shells (of course cowries), are everywhere hung
about and exposed both within and without to avert the evil eye. <span
id="fr_708"></span>[673](#fn_708)

In Africa, and also in the Eastern Archipelago, where the belief is
universal, it is thought to be most dangerous to be looked at while
eating. Possibly this arises from the notion among savage and therefore
hungry people, that to see another eat excites envy, the mainspring of
the malignant glance. The kings of Kacongo (West Africa), of the Battas
(Sumatra) or of Loango may not be seen eating. It is a capital offence
to see the King of Dahomey at his meals. "No Warua allows others to
witness their eating or drinking, being doubly particular with regard to
members of the opposite sex; and on *pombé* being offered, I have
frequently seen them request that a cloth might be held up to hide them
while drinking." <span id="fr_709"></span>[674](#fn_709) When the King
of Tonga eats, all turn their backs. Any who saw Muato Jamwo, a great
potentate of the Congo country, eating, would certainly be put to death.
In these cases it is thought that if the king is looked at while eating,
he will shortly die. This dislike to be seen eating is

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

by no means confined to savages. Turks of all classes object to be
looked at while eating, and, stranger still, the Pope himself always
takes his meals alone.

Hiding the face too, by way of protection, is a recognised mark of
sovereignty in certain parts of Central Africa, where the king's face
must be veiled. In Wadai the Sultan always speaks from behind a curtain;
no one sees his face except his intimates and a few favoured
persons. <span id="fr_710"></span>[675](#fn_710) Here we see of course
the dread of a stranger's eye. Among the Touaregs of the Sahara all the
men keep the lower part of the face, especially the mouth, veiled
constantly. In West Timor a speaker holds his right hand before his
mouth in speaking, lest a demon should enter his body, and lest the
person with whom he is conversing should harm his soul by magic. <span
id="fr_711"></span>[676](#fn_711)

A young New South Wales man must always cover his mouth with a rug in
the presence of a woman, after his initiation into the mysteries of his
tribe. So strongly is the danger felt, that many kings are not suffered
to leave their houses, lest evil should befall them through being seen.
The King of Loango is confined to his palace, and may not leave it after
his coronation. <span id="fr_712"></span>[677](#fn_712) The King of Ibo
also may not leave his house even to go into his town unless a human
sacrifice is made to propitiate the gods. Consequently he never goes
beyond his own premises. <span id="fr_713"></span>[678](#fn_713) In
Mandalay a strong paling, six feet high,

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

lined every street through which the king was likely at any time to
pass, and the people had to remain behind this fence when the king or
any of the queens went out. No one might attempt to look through or over
this blind, <span id="fr_714"></span>[679](#fn_714) of course from the
fear lest his eye should work mischief.

To this day the kings of Corea are shut up in their palace; so also was
the King of Tonquin, who was allowed out two or three times a year, for
the performance of religious ceremonies. The day before his coming
forth, notice was given to the inhabitants to keep out of the way the
king had to go, for the people were not allowed to look upon him. The
women were compelled to remain in their houses, and durst not show
themselves under pain of death--a penalty which was carried out on the
spot, even if disobedience occurred through ignorance. Thus the king was
kept invisible to all but a chosen few. <span
id="fr_715"></span>[680](#fn_715)

Although in all these cases we are not told distinctly why these
precautions were taken, yet, knowing what the belief was, there can be
little hesitation in assigning them to it, and to their dread of
permitting so precious a life as their king's to be subjected to the
blighting influence.

Our own customs regarding children may be distinctly referred to the
same primæval belief in the liability of infants to the blighting effect
of the stranger's eye. It cannot be pretended that it is necessary to
its health that a baby's face should be always carefully covered up
whenever it is taken out of the house, or even in the house, into the
presence

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

of strangers. Moreover some nurses would not think of exhibiting baby
without fastening "the coral and bells" upon its neck. Both mamma and
nurse would indignantly repel any suggestion of superstition,
nevertheless the coral is in the material itself a powerful amulet. Its
shape keeps the remembrance of the old classic *fascinum*, the Priapic
symbol, while the silver and the bells recognise the power of Diana, the
type of all the motherly protectresses of infants, which have already
been dealt with at such length.

The practice of veiling a woman's face throughout the East cannot be
wholly referred to male jealousy: such may be the declared reason, but
the women's own reluctance to show their faces to a stranger eloquently
proclaims the real one. Besides the various means taken by many people,
and specially by Neapolitans of to-day, to keep out of the way of the
*jettatore* known or unknown, there are very many precautions taken to
baffle his maleficence besides those openly or secretly worn amulets,
already sufficiently discussed. Even here among ourselves we have
well-known rites, so to speak, which must be classed as preventive
medicine. One such performance by a woman who believes herself to be
overlooked is to take the shift off over her head, turn it three times
withershins (*i.e.* from right to left--*wiederschein*--against the
course of the sun), then hold it open, and drop a burning coal through
it three times; then put it on again.

We cannot fail to see that several old ideas are here preserved. The
going against the way of the sun is a sort of defiance, like repeating
"the Lord's Prayer backwards." It is in the same category as

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

the defiant act depicted in Fig. [24](tee06.htm#img_13700). The burning
coal may be a relic of ancient fire-worship, and so on the other hand a
propitiatory act of sun-worship; while the three times accords with the
spitting three times, and with the value set upon the mystic three.

One of the most widespread customs connected with fire, certainly found
in Yorkshire, in Devon, Somerset, and throughout East Anglia--and
probably in every county between those limits--is that of standing up
the poker against the bars of the grate to make the fire burn. Everybody
knows it, everybody does it, and believes it to be effectual. Superior
persons consider that it causes or divides the draught; but those who
know, say that the making of a cross with the poker and the bars, drives
the devil out of the chimney, and so enables the fire to burn-this at
least is the firm belief in the west country. Further, it is held that
the devil cannot endure that any fire shall be hotter than his own, and
"so makes it his business to try and put others' out." Of course the
iron with which the cross is formed adds power to the charm.

The importance of progressing in all matters from left to right, or in
the path of the sun, is made evident by our having a word specially to
denote the deviation from this course. Here in Somerset quite recently,
and within the writer's own knowledge, a number of children were brought
to be baptized, and of course were ranged in a group around the font.
The officiating minister not being accustomed to such a number, or not
knowing the custom, began with the child on his right hand, of course
following on in order and going round to the child on his left. This
action caused great indignation:

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

some parents who had never before seen the importance of having their
children baptized at all, were quite sure that now they had not been
done properly, and must be taken to another church "to be done over
again." Thus it was held of far greater moment that the parson should
proceed from left to right, than it was that the children should be
baptized or not. Some of these children were growing into adults. In the
same direction is the belief that in Confirmation it is most unlucky to
be on the left side of the bishop, and so to receive his left hand:
people are constantly warned to be careful to avoid this when their
children are about to be confirmed. This objection is now becoming
obsolete, from the fact that Confirmation is performed less
perfunctorily, and candidates are, at least in this diocese, confirmed
singly and not in pairs.

Not long ago a farmer lost two cows, for whose illness he could only
account by the certainty that they had been "overlooked." He rode a long
way to consult a wise woman, who decided that be was right in his
diagnosis. She told him to find a horse with three nails in the near
hind shoe (three again); he was then to pull out the middle nail and
scratch the witch with it, otherwise all the rest of his cows would die.

The witch was not scratched, because the farmer, after much search, was
unable to find the right horse with the right nail, but for all that he
does not appear to have lost any more cows. Perhaps his will to scratch
the witch was as good as if the deed had been accomplished.

Through the kindness of the Editors of *Somerset and Dorset Notes and
Queries* I am enabled to

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

print the following interesting quotation from that Magazine previous to
its publication in vol. iv. part xxviii. (December 1894).

WITCHCRAFT IN SOMERSET.--It is hardly credible, but there exists, even
in our day, a belief in witchcraft in some parts of Somerset.

The following incidents happened during this year. A poor woman, the
mother of a large family, had for a period of two years a series of
misfortunes: her husband was ill, two children were injured
accidentally, they were all laid up by a prevailing epidemic. The woman
herself, no doubt tired and worn out, came to the conclusion that in
this long and bitter trial, which she considered was undeserved, there
must be an evil agency at work, and she pronounced herself "overlooked."
Once the idea took possession of her, it seemed to spread through the
family, her husband and children testifying that they saw
strange-looking little black objects sitting on the boxes at night:
these little things used to try to pull them by the feet out of bed.

She became so thoroughly convinced that she was bewitched that she went
to interview a wise man who lives at Wells. He took the same view of the
case, and said that he would have to pray for her, the point at interest
being, who had bewitched her? She had to go through a list of
names--names of women; after mentioning many, and not the right one
amongst them, as she was turning away, remembering one more she
mentioned her, and that one the wise man pronounced the woman who had
bewitched her. He told her that he could break the charm and take away
the power of the witch, but it would take a lot of prayer and work. He
then gave certain directions which the woman and her husband were to
follow, in order to break the spell. About the hour of midnight she and
her husband were directed to sit in front of their fire and burn salt,
and for the space of one hour no conversation had to pass between them,
only they had to repeat the following words:--

This is not the thing I wish to burn  
But Mrs. -------'s heart of ------ Somerset to turn,  
Wishing thee neither to eat, drink, sleep nor rest  
Until thou dost come to me and do my request  
Or else the wrath of God may fall on thee  
And cause thee to be consumed in a moment. Amen.

This accomplished, they were to retire backwards to the foot of the
stairs, climb the stairs still backwards, repeating at the same

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

time the Lord's Prayer also backwards, and then not speak a word to one
another till they were in bed; in this way they would break the spell.

The man and his wife tried this, with implicit faith that the
enchantment would be broken, or the evil eye averted.

\[Our correspondent wishes to remain anonymous, but I can

vouch for the truth of the story; in fact, I know the locality and some
of the characters quite well. EDITOR FOR SOMERSET.\]  <span
id="fr_716"></span>[681](#fn_716)

Nearly akin to being overlooked, people are often said to be Pixy-led,
when in the dark they lose their way. The writer has heard of many cases
of this kind, for which probably the "jack-o'-lantern" is responsible.
In one case well remembered, an old farmer was coming home from market
across a well-known common in West Somerset. By some means his poor old
mare was made to leave the track; probably her rider would not have seen
very straight if it had been light; but finding his steed getting into a
"soft place," his full wits returned, and at the same time an owl began
to hoot. He at once began to cry out: "Man a-lost! man a-lost! Here's
half a crown and a leg o' mutton! Man a-lost." It appears that after all
he was not far from help; but he firmly believed he had been pixy-led,
and the story clung to him till his death. Many such cases might be
recounted, but the safeguard against such is to "turn your coat in an'
out," when the evil sprites are confounded. <span
id="fr_717"></span>[682](#fn_717)

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

In 1890 some men were ripping bark in a wood near Torrington. One of
them declared that on stooping down to pick up a tool a strange feeling
came over him, and while totally unable to raise himself he heard peals
of discordant laughter all around. It flashed upon him that he was
*pixy-led*, but his presence of mind forsook him, and he was unable to
turn his coat inside out, a sure talisman (*sic*) against the spells of
pixies. As the man did not return at the usual time, his wife, hearing
from the others that he left work when they did, at ten o'clock went to
look for him. Arriving at the place where they had been working, she met
her husband dripping wet. "Where have you been?" she said. "I've a-bin
pixy-led," says he, and then he told her how the pixies had held him
fast for five hours, and that at last he crawled away, not knowing where
he was going, and tumbling head over heels into the stream. As soon as
he could get up he knew where he was and made his way homewards. "You
girt fule, why didden 'ee turn your pockets inside out?" was all the
comfort he got from his better half; "then you would have been able to
come away tu wance." The man firmly believes in pixies, because a tailor
named Short was *pixy-led* in the same wood some years ago. It is known
that he was sober. No intoxicants had been tasted for the day by either
of the party (abridged from Western Daily. *Mercury*, June 6, 1890).

May Eve seems the time when these sprites--

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

called by way of propitiation the "Good People "are most to be feared.
This name is, of course, a reflection of the same notion conveyed in the
old saying about taking off your hat to the devil, *i.e.* be polite and
deferential to your greatest enemy. It is on May Eve the pixies are
supposed to be most inclined for mischief. In Ireland it is thought that
then the evil eye has more than its usual vigilance and malignity. "The
nurse who would then walk in the open with a child in her arms would be
reprobated as a monster." <span id="fr_718"></span>[683](#fn_718) Youth
and loveliness are thought to be especially exposed to peril, therefore
not one woman in a thousand will then show herself abroad. Nor must it
be supposed that conscious ugliness is any protection; on the contrary,
neither grizzled locks nor the brawny hand of the roughest ploughman
exempt from the blast.

The *blast* is a large round tumour which is thought to rise suddenly on
the part affected by the baneful breath cast on it by one of the "good
people" at the time of their vindictive malice. Here in Somerset the
belief in Pixies, Brownies, Little Folks, "good people," is still very
prevalent.

Many a quaint practice is silently performed from mere habit, while the
person so acting has no sort of knowledge why he does so and so, nor
would he admit that he had any superstitious intention.

Many of the acts performed by country folk are so common that they
escape the notice of all but close observers, and like many dialectal
forms of speech entirely escape record, because they have not happened
to come in the way of one looking out for such things. Any one who sits
and gazes steadfastly

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

into the fire is usually suspected of the evil eye. The countercharm
against such is called "Turning the Coal," and is worked by the
suspecter's quietly taking the tongs and then turning the largest coal
in the fire right upside down, saying at the same time, either aloud or
softly, "The Lord be wi' us." This is believed to throw the evil gazer
into confusion, so that his vision is dispelled, and for the time his
evil intentions are thwarted. It is said that in the case of a true
possessor of the evil eye, if the coal be turned upon him, he feels as
if the fire were upon his heart; that he has often been seen to put his
hand to his breast with "Oh!" and that he is unable to move so long as
the live coal is held with the tongs. After this performance he is
considered to have no more power over that house. Many curious stories
are to be found in Scott's *Discovery of Witches*, and in Ady's *Candle
in the Dark*, by which we see that "eye-biting witches," who caused
disease among cattle, and other evils, were in former days commonly
executed. Indeed executions for witchcraft or working evil with the eye
are recorded so late as the last century.

In Ireland fire is believed to be a great protection against fairies and
witches. "Whenever churning is going on, a small bit of burning turf is
put under the churn to prevent the abstraction of butter by the 'good
people.'" Another custom is that any one coming into a house where
churning is going on must take the churn-dash, and churn for a few
seconds. His doing this prevents a person with the evil eye, should any
such come in, charming away the butter, or otherwise spoiling the
churning." <span id="fr_719"></span>[684](#fn_719)

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

Diseases of all kinds being the direct result of fascination, charms of
various sorts have been thought effective against them. The carrying of
the knuckle-bone of a sheep, called commonly a "cramp-bone," as a
preventive against that ailment, is still a daily practice. I have known
persons, well to do, and by no means generally ignorant, who always had
one about them. It must never have touched the ground or its virtue is
lost; consequently I have known it placed in a little bag and tied to
the pocket or the dress, lest it should fall. This has been done within
my own knowledge by both a lady and a gentleman.

The carrying of a lump of camphor in the pocket may scarcely fall into
this class, still it seems a little like the pills good against an
earthquake. Crooked sixpences, especially with holes in them, are
becoming somewhat obsolete, but well within the writer's memory they
were much prized as protective amulets.

At Westleigh, in this neighbourhood, it was up to a recent time the
custom carefully to preserve all teeth extracted; women used to hide
them in their back hair. This was done to prevent enemies or dogs
getting hold of them, and betrays the same caution that is displayed in
the more usual burning of teeth, lest injury to a part may affect the
whole, dealt with in the chapter on Sympathetic Magic, [p.
74](tee04.htm#page_74), regarding other rejections of the body. That
which prevents injury may well be called protective. These persons were
afraid both to burn their teeth and also to incur danger through their
falling into malignant hands, so they hid them.

The personality of disease, or perhaps its direct

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

cause by personal evil influence, is shown by some Jewish customs.

A few days ago in the Polish town of Dzialoszice, the population of
which has lately been decimated by cholera, the Jewish inhabitants, of
the Chassidim sect, put on curiously-formed helmets and cuirasses made
of pasteboard, and armed themselves with wooden javelins. Thus equipped,
they formed a procession, and with clashing cymbals and the chanting of
some kind of dissonant dirge, proceeded to a given rendezvous. <span
id="fr_720"></span>[685](#fn_720)

Of course this was a defiant challenge to the demon of cholera.

The Chinese also exhibit much the same idea--that the spirit of the
disease is the chief factor, and not the condition of their own bodies.

During a cholera outbreak two years ago in Chin Kung, on the
Yangtsze-Kiang, placards were posted up, urging on the people the
necessity of cleansing their hearts, saying nothing about cleansing
their houses. The priests also sold charms against the disease, which,
being put on board paper boats, were set adrift down the river, and were
supposed to carry the disease away to sea. <span
id="fr_721"></span>[686](#fn_721)

In all these cases where devils, or diseases, or misfortunes had to be
dealt with, the underlying belief was ever present that all were
emanations from an evil eye.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_676"></span>[411:641a](tee16.htm#fr_676) *Daily Telegraph*,
Nov. 24, 1894.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[412:642](tee16.htm#fr_677) Jahn (p. 84, n.
234) says: "I have often as a boy seen the fishwives of Ellerbeck, when
they had got handsel (first money, *Handgeld*) from my mother, how they
spat upon it. They say that brings them specially good luck (*besonderes
Glück*). They will not tell the reason; certainly it is done to keep off
witchcraft." Here in the west a very common way of begging a cup of
cider is: "Maister, I be that dry, I could'n spat a zixpence." This
surely means that the speaker is so dry that if a sixpence were given
him he could not spit on it for luck, as well as the other and more
obvious one as to the amount of his possible expectoration.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[412:643](tee16.htm#fr_678) Dodwell, vol. ii.
p. 32, gives the following authors, who all mention the same thing.
Theocritus, *Idyl*. vi. 39; Tibullus, *Eleg*. i. 2, 54 Petronius, *Sat*.
131; Persius, *Sat*. ii. 32; Pliny, *Nat. Hist.* xxviii. 3, 4 Seneca,
*Consol. ad Marc.* 9; Plautus, *Captivi*, III. iv. 23.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[412:644](tee16.htm#fr_679) Potter, *Archæol.
Græc.*, vol. i. 417. Potter also quotes the same authors as Dodwell.

And lest enchantment should my limbs infest,  
I three times dropt my spittle on my breast;  
This charm I learnt from an old sorceress' tongue,  
Who harvest-home at Hypocoon's sung.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[413:645](tee16.htm#fr_680) Spitting was in the
Middle Ages not only a protective, but also an injurious act, for we
read:--

I can worke wyles in battell,  
If I but ones do spattle  
I can make corne and cattle  
    That they shall never thryve.  
         Bale's *Interlude--Idolatry*, 1562, sig. C. 2.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[413:646](tee16.htm#fr_681) Theocritus, *Idyl*.
xx. i 1.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[413:647](tee16.htm#fr_682) *Ibid.* v. 66.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[413:648](tee16.htm#fr_683) In an old treatise
on the hand we read that the names of the fingers are derived from their
use, their position, and their size. The ancients had another name for
the index, which they called *salutaris* "quod eo salutarent deos suos
inter adorandum quippe non Romani solum, sed et aliæ gentes solebant
dextrae manus priore digito in erectum pollicem residente." The obvious
pun in this well accords with the spirit of the older writers. The
salutation of the god with the forefinger was followed by the kiss,
hence we readily perceive how our word salute includes to kiss. Those
who are familiar with St. Peter's statue in Rome will readily understand
this, and thereby will not fail to perceive another practice of
Christian times handed down from pagan ancestors. Prætorius writes:
"Even nowadays we teach our boys that the right index is to be kissed
(as a salutation) to persons worthy of honour, and to offer the index of
honour and reverence" (Prætorius, *De Pollice*, Lipsiæ, 1677, p. 14).

In the Greek Church kissing is still more practised than even in the
<span id="page_414">p. 414</span> Roman. There were several names for
the middle finger, such as *medius*, *longus*, *remus* (oar), *medius
navis*; also it was called *impudicus*, *infamis*, and *medicus*. It is
still known as the medical finger. "Why it is called *medicus* I am
unable to learn, unless it is because we are thereby most strongly bound
to the wrist and vital arteries" (*Ib*. p. 15).

It is also called *magnus* from its size, as compared with *parvus*,
denoting the two extremes in size. "The third finger is called *medio
proximus* (next the middle) or *anularis* (ring finger) by the later
Greeks."

On the thumb (*pollex*) we have another pun: "Nam pollex unus tantum
pollet, quantum vix cæteri" ("For one thumb is worth all the rest").
With us moderns in the West, however, the thumb is the type of
clumsiness: our vernacular for a person who is very awkward with his
hands is, "He's all thumbs."

<span id="fn_684"></span>[414:649](tee16.htm#fr_684) *De Pollice*, p.
41. "Quo loco Cornutus, infami digito (*i.e.* of Persius *Sat*. ii.)
ait, id est medio, qui obsccenitatis est et subjicit." Martial (ix. 70)
also says:--

Impudicus etiam Priapi cantor eodem modo,  
Derides quoque fur, et impudicum  
Ostendis digitum mihi minanti."

<span id="fn_685"></span>[414:650](tee16.htm#fr_685) Laertius, *De vitis
Philosophorum*, lib. vi.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[415:651](tee16.htm#fr_686) *De Pollice*, p.
42; already sufficiently dealt with.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[416:652](tee16.htm#fr_687) *De Pollice*, p.
43.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[416:653](tee16.htm#fr_688) Zingerle, *Sitten,
Braüche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes*, Nos, 176, 580; *Melusine*,
1878, c. 79. Frazer, *Golden Bough*, vol. i. p. 204.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[416:654](tee16.htm#fr_689) Spitting on the
hair is of course regularly practised in Naples.

"Nell' uscir dal vostro tetto  
La mattina su del petto  
Ben tre volte vi sputate;  
Quando poi vi pettinate  
I capei, che son condutti  
Li sputate tutti tutti."--Marugi, *Capricci*, p. 103.

The Editor remarks in a note to the above that Thiers says one spits
three times on the hair pulled out by the comb before throwing it away;
and further he says, Tibullus enjoins spitting on the breast, giving his
precise words: "Despuit in molles et sibi quisque sinus." He adds I do
not fail to do this always, and I have found the benefit of it."

<span id="fn_690"></span>[417:655](tee16.htm#fr_690) The same thing is
recorded in Hone's *Year-Book*, 1831, p. 253.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[417:656](tee16.htm#fr_691) Brand, vol. iii. p.
50.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[418:657](tee16.htm#fr_692)

Their beads of nits, bels, books and wax,  
Candles, forsooth, and other knacks:  
Their holy oyle, their fasting spittle;  
Their sacred salt here, not a little,  
Dry chips, old shooes, rags, grease, and bones.  
                        Herrick, Hesperides, "The Temple."

<span id="fn_693"></span>[419:658](tee16.htm#fr_693) Pliny, *Nat. Hist.*
xxviii, 7; Vol. V. p. 288, Bohn.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[419:659](tee16.htm#fr_694) This is still
practised in Italy.

D' una cosa traggo al gioco  
Io vantaggio poco poco,  
Ed è questa, l' appaleso  
Di sputar quand 'ò del peso  
Sulla scarpa del piè dritto,  
E poi starmi zitto zitto.--Marugi, *Capricci*, p. 108.

The Editor remarks on this, that he has practised it with *qualche sorta
di profitto*.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[420:660](tee16.htm#fr_695)

Bring the holy crust of bread,  
Lay it underneath the, head;  
'Tis a certain charm to keep  
Hags away, while children sleep.  
     Herrick, *Hesperides*, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 304.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[420:661](tee16.htm#fr_696) Ellis, Note to
Pliny, *Nat. Hist.* v. p. 290, Bohn.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[420:662](tee16.htm#fr_697) Alexander
Alexandrinus also wrote: "Fascinationes saliva jejuna repelli, veteri
superstitioni creditum est" (Ellis, Note to Brand, vol. iii. p. 260).

<span id="fn_698"></span>[420:663](tee16.htm#fr_698) Suetonius,
*Vespas*. 7; Tacitus, *Hist*. iv. 8.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[421:664](tee16.htm#fr_699) See Trench, *Notes
on the Miracles*, p. 294.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[421:665](tee16.htm#fr_700) Dodwell, vol. ii.
p. 36.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[421:666](tee16.htm#fr_701) "Mox turbatum sputo
pulverem medio sustulit digito frontem repugnantis <span
id="page_422">p. 422</span> signat . . . hoc peracto carmine ter me
jussit expuere, terque lapillos conjicere in sinum."--Petronius, *Sat*.
131.

This, too, confirms Persius (*Sat*. ii. 32):--

            "Frontemque atque uda labella  
Infami digito, et lustralibus ante salivis  
Expiat."

And the two quotations prove clearly not only which finger was to be
used, but that the middle was the *digitus infamis*.

Sacred spittle bring ye hither;  
Meale and it now mix together,  
And a little oil with either.--Herrick, *Hesperides*.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[422:667](tee16.htm#fr_702) F. Chance, *Notes
and Queries*, 8th ser. v. 137.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[422:668](tee16.htm#fr_703) It has even been
discussed as to whether, in the absence of water, spittle might be used
for the baptism itself, but this latter is denied (G. Angus, *Notes and
Queries*, 8th ser. v. 192). With further regard to spitting, we must not
forget that salt is put into the child's mouth during the baptismal rite
in order to make him *despuere malum*, or as it is called vernacularly
"spit out the devil."

<span id="fn_704"></span>[423:669](tee16.htm#fr_704) *Rituale Romanum*,
Romæ, MDCCL. (Baptism of Infants). "Deinde intingit pollicem in sacro
chrismate, et ungit infantem in summitate capitis in modum crucis,
dicens Deus Omnipotens, etc. . . . Postea pollice faciat signum crucis
in fronte et in pectore infantis," etc. . . .

The same direction as to the use of the thumb is given in the Rubrics
for Extreme Unction, Confirmation, Ordination of Priests, Coronation,
Consecration of an Altar, etc. . . .

<span id="fn_705"></span>[424:670](tee16.htm#fr_705) The Greeks had two
names for the great northern constellation, which remain to this
day--the Great Bear and the Wain. Our modern name of "King Charles's
Wain" is but a very ancient one, revived with a prefix commemorating
some modern event. No amount of imagination can see any real resemblance
between the grouping of the points of light we call stars, and the
animals or things whose names have been given to them, yet the idea took
such root in primæval minds that it has survived unchanged to this day;
like the belief in the evil eye, it is quite unaccountable, and only to
be set down among the facts that are. See Appendix III.

Very many are the beliefs here in England and all over the world
relating to falling stars. The most widespread is probably that which
connects them with death or birth. Among the shepherds of the Apennines,
a falling star is a death portent ("Ecco un altro avviso di morte; chi
sa mai a chi toccherà?" (Bellucci, *Le Stelle Cadente e le loro
leggende*, Perugia, 1893, p. 10.) This author recounts various other
fantastic fancies. The same is held in the Val Anzasca concerning events
to happen to some one living in the house on which it appears to fall.
In Russia a falling star signifies an actual death--in Lapland that of
an infant. If so common a sight in some places presages death, we
naturally should expect to find the complementary notion in others. In
Somerset every falling star denotes a birth, while in Norfolk it
proclaims a child begotten.

In New Zealand a falling star is a kick which one god gives to another
weaker than himself. The universal belief in the living, animal
character of heavenly bodies is shown in the belief of the people of
Guiana, who say that falling stars are *l' orina* of the other stars,
while the Loochoo Indians say that they are excrementi delle stelle
(Bellucci, *op. cit.* p. 29).

After having written so much upon the existing belief in animal
portents, it is amusing to read in the *Spectator* of Nov. 24, 1894, p.
725, that "the belief in animal portents . . . no longer survives in our
century" (1) Two days after this (Nov. 26) a Somerset friend writes:
"Does not the death of a lion still give anxiety to many a woman
expecting childbirth?" This latter is a curious and unsought
confirmation of the remarks on [p. 76](tee04.htm#page_76) ante.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[424:671](tee16.htm#fr_706) A. Lang, *Myth and
Custom*, p. 124. See also Goguet, *L'Origine des Lois*, on this subject.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[425:672](tee16.htm#fr_707) Mrs. Reichardt,
*Good Words*, Jan. 1893, p. 47.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[426:673](tee16.htm#fr_708) This making of
smoke is aptly matched in the Apocryphal account following. "Then the
angel said: 'Open the fish and take the heart and the liver and the gall
and put them up safely.' So the young man did as the angel commanded
him; and when they had roasted the fish, they did eat it. Then the young
man said to the angel: 'Brother Azarias, to what use is the heart and
the liver and the gall of the fish?' And he said to him: 'Touching the
heart and the liver, if a devil or evil spirit trouble any, we must make
a smoke thereof before the man or woman, and the party shall be no more
vexed. As for the gall, it is good to anoint a man that hath whiteness
in his eyes, and he shall be healed'" (*Tobit*, vi. 3-8).

<span id="fn_709"></span>[426:674](tee16.htm#fr_709) Cameron, *Across
Africa*, vol. ii. p. 71.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[427:675](tee16.htm#fr_710) Mohammed Ibn-Omar
el Tounsy, *Voyage au Darfour*, 1845, p. 203. *Travels of an Arab
Merchant*, abridged by Bayle St. John, p. 91.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[427:676](tee16.htm#fr_711) Riedel, "Die
Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor," in *Deutsche Geog. Blat.* x. 230,
quoted by Frazer.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[427:677](tee16.htm#fr_712) Bastian, *Die
Loango-Küste*, i. 263.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[427:678](tee16.htm#fr_713) Crowther and
Taylor, *Gospel on the Banks of the Niger*, p. 433

<span id="fn_714"></span>[428:679](tee16.htm#fr_714) Shway Yoe, The
Burman, i. 308.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[428:680](tee16.htm#fr_715) Richard, *History
of Tonquin*, in Pinkerton, ix. p. 746.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[433:681](tee16.htm#fr_716)

To house the hag you must doe this:  
Commix with meale a little pisse  
Of him bewitcht; then forthwith make  
A little wafer or a cake;  
And this rawly baked will bring  
The old hag in.    No surer thing.  
         Herrick, *Hesperides*, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 305

<span id="fn_717"></span>[433:682](tee16.htm#fr_717)

If ye feare to be affrighted  
When ye are by chance benighted, <span id="page_433">p. 433</span>  
In your pocket for a trust  
Carrie nothing but a crust.  
For that holy piece of bread  
Charmes the danger and the dread.  
     Herrick, *Hesperides*, ed. Hazlitt, 1869, p. 346.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[435:683](tee16.htm#fr_718) Hone, *Everyday
Book*, vol. i. p. 594

<span id="fn_719"></span>[436:684](tee16.htm#fr_719) Le Fanu, *op. cit.*
p. 104.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[438:685](tee16.htm#fr_720) Daily News, Sept.
18, 1894.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[438:686](tee16.htm#fr_721) Public Health, Aug.
1894, p. 376.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix III](tee17)
