[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](poe03)  [Next](poe05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# III. The Manner of Imitation.

There is still a third difference--the manner in which each of these
objects may be imitated. For the medium being the same, and the objects
the same, the poet may imitate by narration--in which case he can either
take another personality as Homer does, or speak in his own person,
unchanged--or he may present all his characters as living and moving
before us.

These, then, as we said at the beginning, are the three differences
which distinguish artistic imitation,--the medium, the objects, and the
manner. So that from one point of view, Sophocles is an imitator of the
same kind as Homer--for both imitate higher types of character; from
another point of view, of the same kind as Aristophanes--for both
imitate persons acting and doing. Hence, some say, the name of 'drama'
is given to such poems, as representing action. For the same reason the
Dorians claim the invention both of Tragedy and Comedy. The claim to
Comedy is put forward by the Megarians,--not only by those of Greece
proper, who allege that it originated under their democracy, but also by
the Megarians of Sicily, for the poet Epicharmus, who is much earlier
than Chionides and Magnes, belonged to that country. Tragedy too is
claimed by certain Dorians of the Peloponnese. In each case they appeal
to the evidence of language. The outlying villages, they say, are by
them called κωμαι, by the Athenians δημι: and they assume that Comedians
were so named not from κωμἀζειν, 'to revel,' but because they wandered
from village to village κατα κωμασ, being excluded contemptuously from
the city. They add also that the Dorian word for 'doing' is δραν, and
the Athenian, πραττειν.

This may suffice as to the number and nature of the various modes of
imitation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Origin and Development of Poetry](poe05)
