[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](poe21)  [Next](poe23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXI Poetic Diction.

Words are of two kinds, simple and double. By simple I mean those
composed of non-significant elements, such as γη. By double or compound,
those composed either of a significant and non-significant element
(though within the whole word no element is significant), or of elements
that are both significant. A word may likewise be triple, quadruple, or
multiple in form, like so many Massilian expressions, e.g.
'Hermo-caico-xanthus who prayed to Father Zeus&gt;.'

Every word is either current, or strange, or metaphorical, or
ornamental, or newly-coined, or lengthened, or contracted, or altered.

By a current or proper word I mean one which is in general use among a
people; by a strange word, one which is in use in another country.
Plainly, therefore, the same word may be at once strange and current,
but not in relation to the same people. The word σιγυνον, 'lance,' is to
the Cyprians a current term but to us a strange one.

Metaphor is the application of an alien name by transference either from
genus to species, or from species to genus, or from species to species,
or by analogy, that is, proportion. Thus from genus to species, as:
'There lies my ship'; for lying at anchor is a species of lying. From
species to genus, as: 'Verily ten thousand noble deeds hath Odysseus
wrought'; for ten thousand is a species of large number, and is here
used for a large number generally. From species to species, as: 'With
blade of bronze drew away the life,' and 'Cleft the water with the
vessel of unyielding bronze.' Here αρυραι, 'to draw away,' is used for
ταμειν, 'to cleave,' and ταμειν again for αρυαι,--each being a species
of taking away. Analogy or proportion is when the second term is to the
first as the fourth to the third. We may then use the fourth for the
second, or the second for the fourth. Sometimes too we qualify the
metaphor by adding the term to which the proper word is relative. Thus
the cup is to Dionysus as the shield to Ares. The cup may, therefore, be
called 'the shield of Dionysus,' and the shield 'the cup of Ares.' Or,
again, as old age is to life, so is evening to day. Evening may
therefore be called 'the old age of the day,' and old age, 'the evening
of life,' or, in the phrase of Empedocles, 'life's setting sun.' For
some of the terms of the proportion there is at times no word in
existence; still the metaphor may be used. For instance, to scatter seed
is called sowing: but the action of the sun in scattering his rays is
nameless. Still this process bears to the sun the same relation as
sowing to the seed. Hence the expression of the poet 'sowing the
god-created light.' There is another way in which this kind of metaphor
may be employed. We may apply an alien term, and then deny of that term
one of its proper attributes; as if we were to call the shield, not 'the
cup of Ares,' but 'the wineless cup.'

A newly-coined word is one which has never been even in local use, but
is adopted by the poet himself. Some such words there appear to be: as
ερνυγεσ, 'sprouters,' for κερατα, 'horns,' and αρητηρ, 'supplicator,'
for ιερευσ, 'priest.'

A word is lengthened when its own vowel is exchanged for a longer one,
or when a syllable is inserted. A word is contracted when some part of
it is removed. Instances of lengthening are,--ποληοσ for πολεωσ, and
Πηληιαδεω for Πηλειδου: of contraction,--κρι, δω, and οψ, as in μια
γινεται αμφοτερων οψ.

An altered word is one in which part of the ordinary form is left
unchanged, and part is re-cast; as in δεξι-τερον κατα μαζον, δεξιτερον
is for δεξιον.

\[Nouns in themselves are either masculine, feminine, or neuter.
Masculine are such as end in ν, ρ, σ, or in some letter compounded with
σ,--these being two, and ξ. Feminine, such as end in vowels that are
always long, namely η and ω, and--of vowels that admit of
lengthening--those in α. Thus the number of letters in which nouns
masculine and feminine end is the same; for ψ and ξ are equivalent to
endings in σ. No noun ends in a mute or a vowel short by nature. Three
only end in ι,--μηλι, κομμι, πεπερι: five end in υ. Neuter nouns end in
these two latter vowels; also in ν and σ.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. (Poetic Diction continued.) How Poetry combines elevation
of language with perspicuity](poe23)
