[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](poe22)  [Next](poe24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXII. (Poetic Diction continued.) How Poetry combines elevation of language with perspicuity.

The perfection of style is to be clear without being mean. The clearest
style is that which uses only current or proper words; at the same time
it is mean:--witness the poetry of Cleophon and of Sthenelus. That
diction, on the other hand, is lofty and raised above the commonplace
which employs unusual words. By unusual, I mean strange (or rare) words,
metaphorical, lengthened,--anything, in short, that differs from the
normal idiom. Yet a style wholly composed of such words is either a
riddle or a jargon; a riddle, if it consists of metaphors; a jargon, if
it consists of strange (or rare) words. For the essence of a riddle is
to express true facts under impossible combinations. Now this cannot be
done by any arrangement of ordinary words, but by the use of metaphor it
can. Such is the riddle:--'A man I saw who on another man had glued the
bronze by aid of fire,' and others of the same kind. A diction that is
made up of strange (or rare) terms is a jargon. A certain infusion,
therefore, of these elements is necessary to style; for the strange (or
rare) word, the metaphorical, the ornamental, and the other kinds above
mentioned, will raise it above the commonplace and mean, while the use
of proper words will make it perspicuous. But nothing contributes more
to produce a clearness of diction that is remote from commonness than
the lengthening, contraction, and alteration of words. For by deviating
in exceptional cases from the normal idiom, the language will gain
distinction; while, at the same time, the partial conformity with usage
will give perspicuity. The critics, therefore, are in error who censure
these licenses of speech, and hold the author up to ridicule. Thus
Eucleides, the elder, declared that it would be an easy matter to be a
poet if you might lengthen syllables at will. He caricatured the
practice in the very form of his diction, as in the verse: 'Επιχαρην
ειδον Μαραθωναδε Βαδιζοντα, or, ουκ αν γ εραμενοσ τον εκεινου ελλεβορον.
To employ such license at all obtrusively is, no doubt, grotesque; but
in any mode of poetic diction there must be moderation. Even metaphors,
strange (or rare) words, or any similar forms of speech, would produce
the like effect if used without propriety and with the express purpose
of being ludicrous. How great a difference is made by the appropriate
use of lengthening, may be seen in Epic poetry by the insertion of
ordinary forms in the verse. So, again, if we take a strange (or rare)
word, a metaphor, or any similar mode of expression, and replace it by
the current or proper term, the truth of our observation will be
manifest. For example Aeschylus and Euripides each composed the same
iambic line. But the alteration of a single word by Euripides, who
employed the rarer term instead of the ordinary one, makes one verse
appear beautiful and the other trivial. Aeschylus in his Philoctetes
says: Φαγεδαινα &lt;δ&gt; η μου σαρκασ ερθιει ποδοσ.

Euripides substitutes Θοιναται 'feasts on' for εσθιει 'feeds on.' Again,
in the line, νυν δε μ εων ολιγιγυσ τε και ουτιδανοσ και αεικησ, the
difference will be felt if we substitute the common words, νυν δε μ εων
μικροσ τε και αρθενικοσ και αειδγσ. Or, if for the line, διφρον
αεικελιον καταθεισ ολιγην τε τραπεισ ολιγην τε τραπεζαν, we read, διφρον
μοχθηρον καταθεισ μικραν τε τραπεζαν.

Or, for ηιονεσ βοοωριν, ηιονεσκραζουριν

Again, Ariphrades ridiculed the tragedians for using phrases which no
one would employ in ordinary speech: for example, δωματων απο instead of
απο δωματων, ρεθεν, εγω δε νιν, Αχιλλεωσ περι instead of περι Ἀχιλλεωσ,
and the like. It is precisely because such phrases are not part of the
current idiom that they give distinction to the style. This, however, he
failed to see.

It is a great matter to observe propriety in these several modes of
expression, as also in compound words, strange (or rare) words, and so
forth. But the greatest thing by far is to have a command of metaphor.
This alone cannot be imparted by another; it is the mark of genius, for
to make good metaphors implies an eye for resemblances.

Of the various kinds of words, the compound are best adapted to
Dithyrambs, rare words to heroic poetry, metaphors to iambic. In heroic
poetry, indeed, all these varieties are serviceable. But in iambic
verse, which reproduces, as far as may be, familiar speech, the most
appropriate words are those which are found even in prose. These
are,--the current or proper, the metaphorical, the ornamental.

Concerning Tragedy and imitation by means of action this may suffice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Epic Poetry](poe24.md)
