[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw07)  [Next](hw09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Sandip's Story

#### I

The impotent man says: "That which has come to my share is mine." And
the weak man assents. But the lesson of the whole world is: "That is
really mine which I can snatch away." My country does not become mine
simply because it is the country of my birth. It becomes mine on the day
when I am able to win it by force.

Every man has a natural right to possess, and therefore greed is
natural. It is not in the wisdom of nature that we should be content to
be deprived. What my mind covets, my surroundings must supply. This is
the only true understanding between our inner and outer nature in this
world. Let moral ideals remain merely for those poor anaemic creatures
of starved desire whose grasp is weak. Those who can desire with all
their soul and enjoy with all their heart, those who have no hesitation
or scruple, it is they who are the anointed of Providence. Nature
spreads out her riches and loveliest treasures for their benefit. They
swim across streams, leap over walls, kick open doors, to help
themselves to whatever is worth taking. In such a getting one can
rejoice; such wresting as this gives value to the thing taken.

Nature surrenders herself, but only to the robber. For she delights in
this forceful desire, this forceful abduction. And so she does not put
the garland of her acceptance round the lean, scraggy neck of the
ascetic. The music of the wedding march is struck. The time of the
wedding I must not let pass. My heart therefore is eager. For, who is
the bridegroom? It is I. The bridegroom's place belongs to him who,
torch in hand, can come in time. The bridegroom in Nature's wedding hall
comes unexpected and uninvited.

Ashamed? No, I am never ashamed! I ask for whatever I want, and I do not
always wait to ask before I take it. Those who are deprived by their own
diffidence dignify their privation by the name of modesty. The world
into which we are born is the world of reality. When a man goes away
from the market of real things with empty hands and empty stomach,
merely filling his bag with big sounding words, I wonder why he ever
came into this hard world at all. Did these men get their appointment
from the epicures of the religious world, to play set tunes on sweet,
pious texts in that pleasure garden where blossom airy nothings? I
neither affect those tunes nor do I find any sustenance in those
blossoms.

What I desire, I desire positively, superlatively. I want to knead it
with both my hands and both my feet; I want to smear it all over my
body; I want to gorge myself with it to the full. The scrannel pipes of
those who have worn themselves out by their moral fastings, till they
have become flat and pale like starved vermin infesting a long-deserted
bed, will never reach my ear.

I would conceal nothing, because that would be cowardly. But if I cannot
bring myself to conceal when concealment is needful, that also is
cowardly. Because you have your greed, you build your walls. Because I
have my greed, I break through them. You use your power: I use my craft.
These are the realities of life. On these depend kingdoms and empires
and all the great enterprises of men.

As for those *avatars* who come down from their paradise to talk to us
in some holy jargon--their words are not real. Therefore, in spite of
all the applause they get, these sayings of theirs only find a place in
the hiding corners of the weak. They are despised by those who are
strong, the rulers of the world. Those who have had the courage to see
this have won success, while those poor wretches who are dragged one way
by nature and the other way by these avatars, they set one foot in the
boat of the real and the other in the boat of the unreal, and thus are
in a pitiable plight, able neither to advance nor to keep their place.

There are many men who seem to have been born only with an obsession to
die. Possibly there is a beauty, like that of a sunset, in this
lingering death in life which seems to fascinate them. Nikhil lives this
kind of life, if life it may be called. Years ago, I had a great
argument with him on this point.

"It is true," he said, "that you cannot get anything except by force.
But then what is this force? And then also, what is this getting? The
strength I believe in is the strength of renouncing."

"So you," I exclaimed, "are infatuated with the glory of bankruptcy."

"Just as desperately as the chick is infatuated about the bankruptcy of
its shell," he replied. "The shell is real enough, yet it is given up in
exchange for intangible light and air. A sorry exchange, I suppose you
would call it?"

When once Nikhil gets on to metaphor, there is no hope of making him see
that he is merely dealing with words, not with realities. Well, well,
let him be happy with his metaphors. We are the flesh-eaters of the
world; we have teeth and nails; we pursue and grab and tear. We are not
satisfied with chewing in the evening the cud of the grass we have eaten
in the morning. Anyhow, we cannot allow your metaphor-mongers to bar the
door to our sustenance. In that case we shall simply steal or rob, for
we must live.

People will say that I am starting some novel theory just because those
who are moving in this world are in the habit of talking differently
though they are really acting up to it all the time. Therefore they fail
to understand, as I do, that this is the only working moral principle.
In point of fact, I know that my idea is not an empty theory at all, for
it has been proved in practical life. I have found that my way always
wins over the hearts of women, who are creatures of this world of
reality and do not roam about in cloud-land, as men do, in idea-filled
balloons.

Women find in my features, my manner, my gait, my speech, a masterful
passion--not a passion dried thin with the heat of asceticism, not a
passion with its face turned back at every step in doubt and debate, but
a full-blooded passion. It roars and rolls on, like a flood, with the
cry: "I want, I want, I want." Women feel, in their own heart of hearts,
that this indomitable passion is the lifeblood of the world,
acknowledging no law but itself, and therefore victorious. For this
reason they have so often abandoned themselves to be swept away on the
flood-tide of my passion, recking naught as to whether it takes them to
life or to death. This power which wins these women is the power of
mighty men, the power which wins the world of reality.

Those who imagine the greater desirability of another world merely shift
their desires from the earth to the skies. It remains to be seen how
high their gushing fountain will play, and for how long. But this much
is certain: women were not created for these pale creatures--these
lotus-eaters of idealism.

"Affinity!" When it suited my need, I have often said that God has
created special pairs of men and women, and that the union of such is
the only legitimate union, higher than all unions made by law. The
reason of it is, that though man wants to follow nature, he can find no
pleasure in it unless he screens himself with some phrase--and that is
why this world is so overflowing with lies.

"Affinity!" Why should there be only one? There may be affinity with
thousands. It was never in my agreement with nature that I should
overlook all my innumerable affinities for the sake of only one. I have
discovered many in my own life up to now, yet that has not closed the
door to one more--and that one is clearly visible to my eyes. She has
also discovered her own affinity to me.

And then?

Then, if I do not win I am a coward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI](hw09)
