[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw18)  [Next](hw20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### VI

Then again there is Nikhil. Crank though he be, laugh at him as I may, I
cannot get rid of the idea that he is my friend. At first I gave no
thought to his point of view, but of late it has begun to shame and hurt
me. Therefore I have been trying to talk and argue with him in the same
enthusiastic way as of old, but it does not ring true. It is even
leading me at times into such a length of unnaturalness as to pretend to
agree with him. But such hypocrisy is not in my nature, nor in that of
Nikhil either. This, at least, is something we have in common. That is
why, nowadays, I would rather not come across him, and have taken to
fighting shy of his presence.

All these are signs of weakness. No sooner is the possibility of a wrong
admitted than it becomes actual, and clutches you by the throat, however
you may then try to shake off all belief in it. What I should like to be
able to tell Nikhil frankly is, that happenings such as these must be
looked in the face--as great Realities--and that which is the Truth
should not be allowed to stand between true friends.

There is no denying that I have really weakened. It was not this
weakness which won over Bimala; she burnt her wings in the blaze of the
full strength of my unhesitating manliness. Whenever smoke obscures its
lustre she also becomes confused, and draws back. Then comes a thorough
revulsion of feeling, and she fain would take back the garland she has
put round my neck, but cannot; and so she only closes her eyes, to shut
it out of sight.

But all the same I must not swerve from the path I have chalked out. It
would never do to abandon the cause of the country, especially at the
present time. I shall simply make Bimala one with my country. The
turbulent west wind which has swept away the country's veil of
conscience, will sweep away the veil of the wife from Bimala's face, and
in that uncovering there will be no shame. The ship will rock as it
bears the crowd across the ocean, flying the pennant of *Bande Mataram*,
and it will serve as the cradle to my power, as well as to my love.

Bimala will see such a majestic vision of deliverance, that her bonds
will slip from about her, without shame, without her even being aware of
it. Fascinated by the beauty of this terrible wrecking power, she will
not hesitate a moment to be cruel. I have seen in Bimala's nature the
cruelty which is the inherent force of existence--the cruelty which with
its unrelenting might keeps the world beautiful.

If only women could be set free from the artificial fetters put round
them by men, we could see on earth the living image of Kali, the
shameless, pitiless goddess. I am a worshipper of Kali, and one day I
shall truly worship her, setting Bimala on her altar of Destruction. For
this let me get ready.

The way of retreat is absolutely closed for both of us. We shall despoil
each other: get to hate each other: but never more be free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV](hw20)
