[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw21)  [Next](hw23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Bimala's Story

#### XI

The change which had, in a moment, come over the mind of Bengal was
tremendous. It was as if the Ganges had touched the ashes of the sixty
thousand sons of Sagar  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) which no
fire could enkindle, no other water knead again into living clay. The
ashes of lifeless Bengal suddenly spoke up: "Here am I."

I have read somewhere that in ancient Greece a sculptor had the good
fortune to impart life to the image made by his own hand. Even in that
miracle, however, there was the process of form preceding life. But
where was the unity in this heap of barren ashes? Had they been hard
like stone, we might have had hopes of some form emerging, even as
Ahalya, though turned to stone, at last won back her humanity. But these
scattered ashes must have dropped to the dust through gaps in the
Creator's fingers, to be blown hither and thither by the wind. They had
become heaped up, but were never before united. Yet in this day which
had come to Bengal, even this collection of looseness had taken shape,
and proclaimed in a thundering voice, at our very door: "Here I am."

How could we help thinking that it was all supernatural? This moment of
our history seemed to have dropped into our hand like a jewel from the
crown of some drunken god. It had no resemblance to our past; and so we
were led to hope that all our wants and miseries would disappear by the
spell of some magic charm, that for us there was no longer any boundary
line between the possible and the impossible. Everything seemed to be
saying to us: "It is coming; it has come!"

Thus we came to cherish the belief that our history needed no steed, but
that like heaven's chariot it would move with its own inherent power--At
least no wages would have to be paid to the charioteer; only his wine
cup would have to be filled again and again. And then in some impossible
paradise the goal of our hopes would be reached.

My husband was not altogether unmoved, but through all our excitement it
was the strain of sadness in him which deepened and deepened. He seemed
to have a vision of something beyond the surging present.

I remember one day, in the course of the arguments he continually had
with Sandip, he said: "Good fortune comes to our gate and announces
itself, only to prove that we have not the power to receive it--that we
have not kept things ready to be able to invite it into our house."

"No," was Sandip's answer. "You talk like an atheist because you do not
believe in our gods. To us it has been made quite visible that the
Goddess has come with her boon, yet you distrust the obvious signs of
her presence."

"It is because I strongly believe in my God," said my husband, "that I
feel so certain that our preparations for his worship are lacking. God
has power to give the boon, but we must have power to accept it."

This kind of talk from my husband would only annoy me. I could not keep
from joining in: "You think this excitement is only a fire of
drunkenness, but does not drunkenness, up to a point, give strength?"

"Yes," my husband replied. "It may give strength, but not weapons."

"But strength is the gift of God," I went on. "Weapons can be supplied
by mere mechanics."

My husband smiled. "The mechanics will claim their wages before they
deliver their supplies," he said.

Sandip swelled his chest as he retorted: "Don't you trouble about that.
Their wages shall be paid."

"I shall bespeak the festive music when the payment has been made, not
before," my husband answered.

"You needn't imagine that we are depending on your bounty for the
music," said Sandip scornfully. "Our festival is above all money
payments."

And in his thick voice he began to sing:

"My lover of the unpriced love, spurning payments,  
Plays upon the simple pipe, bought for nothing,  
Drawing my heart away."

Then with a smile he turned to me and said: "If I sing, Queen Bee, it is
only to prove that when music comes into one's life, the lack of a good
voice is no matter. When we sing merely on the strength of our
tunefulness, the song is belittled. Now that a full flood of music has
swept over our country, let Nikhil practise his scales, while we rouse
the land with our cracked voices:

"My house cries to me: Why go out to lose your all?  
My life says: All that you have, fling to the winds!  
If we must lose our all, let us lose it: what is it worth after all?  
If I must court ruin, let me do it smilingly;  
For my quest is the death-draught of immortality.

"The truth is, Nikhil, that we have all lost our hearts. None can hold
us any longer within the bounds of the easily possible, in our forward
rush to the hopelessly impossible.

"Those who would draw us back,  
They know not the fearful joy of recklessness.  
They know not that we have had our call  
From the end of the crooked path.  
All that is good and straight and trim--  
Let it topple over in the dust."

I thought that my husband was going to continue the discussion, but he
rose silently from his seat and left us.

The thing that was agitating me within was merely a variation of the
stormy passion outside, which swept the country from one end to the
other. The car of the wielder of my destiny was fast approaching, and
the sound of its wheels reverberated in my being. I had a constant
feeling that something extraordinary might happen any moment, for which,
however, the responsibility would not be mine. Was I not removed from
the plane in which right and wrong, and the feelings of others, have to
be considered? Had I ever wanted this--had I ever been waiting or hoping
for any such thing? Look at my whole life and tell me then, if I was in
any way accountable.

Through all my past I had been consistent in my devotion--but when at
length it came to receiving the boon, a different god appeared! And just
as the awakened country, with its *Bande Mataram*, thrills in salutation
to the unrealized future before it, so do all my veins and nerves send
forth shocks of welcome to the unthought-of, the unknown, the
importunate Stranger.

One night I left my bed and slipped out of my room on to the open
terrace. Beyond our garden wall are fields of ripening rice. Through the
gaps in the village groves to the North, glimpses of the river are seen.
The whole scene slept in the darkness like the vague embryo of some
future creation.

In that future I saw my country, a woman like myself, standing
expectant. She has been drawn forth from her home corner by the sudden
call of some Unknown. She has had no time to pause or ponder, or to
light herself a torch, as she rushes forward into the darkness ahead. I
know well how her very soul responds to the distant flute-strains which
call her; how her breast rises and falls; how she feels she nears it,
nay it is already hers, so that it matters not even if she run
blindfold. She is no mother. There is no call to her of children in
their hunger, no home to be lighted of an evening, no household work to
be done. So; she flies to her tryst, for this is the land of the
Vaishnava Poets. She has left home, forgotten domestic duties; she has
nothing but an unfathomable yearning which hurries her on--by what road,
to what goal, she recks not.

I, also, am possessed of just such a yearning. I likewise have lost my
home and also lost my way. Both the end and the means have become
equally shadowy to me. There remain only the yearning and the hurrying
on. Ah! wretched wanderer through the night, when the dawn reddens you
will see no trace of a way to return. But why return? Death will serve
as well. If the Dark which sounded the flute should lead to destruction,
why trouble about the hereafter? When I am merged in its blackness,
neither I, nor good and bad, nor laughter, nor tears, shall be any more!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](hw22.htm#fr_17) The condition of the curse
which had reduced them to ashes was such that they could only be
restored to life if the stream of the Ganges was brought down to them.
\[Trans.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII](hw23)
