[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw23)  [Next](hw25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XIII

Suksar, within our estates, is one of the biggest trade centres in the
district. On one side of a stretch of water there is held a daily bazar;
on the other, a weekly market. During the rains when this piece of water
gets connected with the river, and boats can come through, great
quantities of cotton yarns, and woollen stuffs for the coming winter,
are brought in for sale.

At the height of our enthusiasm, Sandip laid it down that all foreign
articles, together with the demon of foreign influence, must be driven
out of our territory.

"Of course!" said I, girding myself up for a fight.

"I have had words with Nikhil about it," said Sandip. "He tells me, he
does not mind speechifying, but he will not have coercion."

"I will see to that," I said, with a proud sense of power. I knew how
deep was my husband's love for me. Had I been in my senses I should have
allowed myself to be torn to pieces rather than assert my claim to that,
at such a time. But Sandip had to be impressed with the full strength of
my *Shakti*.

Sandip had brought home to me, in his irresistible way, how the cosmic
Energy was revealed for each individual in the shape of some special
affinity. Vaishnava Philosophy, he said, speaks of the *Shakti* of
Delight that dwells in the heart of creation, ever attracting the heart
of her Eternal Lover. Men have a perpetual longing to bring out this
*Shakti* from the hidden depths of their own nature, and those of us who
succeed in doing so at once clearly understand the meaning of the music
coming to us from the Dark. He broke out singing:

"My flute, that was busy with its song,  
Is silent now when we stand face to face.  
My call went seeking you from sky to sky  
   When you lay hidden;  
But now all my cry finds its smile  
   In the face of my beloved."

Listening to his allegories, I had forgotten that I was plain and simple
Bimala. I was *Shakti*; also an embodiment of Universal joy. Nothing
could fetter me, nothing was impossible for me; whatever I touched would
gain new life. The world around me was a fresh creation of mine; for
behold, before my heart's response had touched it, there had not been
this wealth of gold in the Autumn sky! And this hero, this true servant
of the country, this devotee of mine--this flaming intelligence, this
burning energy, this shining genius--him also was I creating from moment
to moment. Have I not seen how my presence pours fresh life into him
time after time?

The other day Sandip begged me to receive a young lad, Amulya, an ardent
disciple of his. In a moment I could see a new light flash out from the
boy's eyes, and knew that he, too, had a vision of *Shakti* manifest,
that my creative force had begun its work in his blood. "What sorcery is
this of yours!" exclaimed Sandip next day. "Amulya is a boy no longer,
the wick of his life is all ablaze. Who can hide your fire under your
home-roof? Every one of them must be touched up by it, sooner or later,
and when every lamp is alight what a grand carnival of a *Dewali* we
shall have in the country!"

Blinded with the brilliance of my own glory I had decided to grant my
devotee this boon. I was overweeningly confident that none could baulk
me of what I really wanted. When I returned to my room after my talk
with Sandip, I loosed my hair and tied it up over again. Miss Gilby had
taught me a way of brushing it up from the neck and piling it in a knot
over my head. This style was a favourite one with my husband. "It is a
pity," he once said, "that Providence should have chosen poor me,
instead of poet Kalidas, for revealing all the wonders of a woman's
neck. The poet would probably have likened it to a flower-stem; but I
feel it to be a torch, holding aloft the black flame of your hair." With
which he ... but why, oh why, do I go back to all that?

I sent for my husband. In the old days I could contrive a hundred and
one excuses, good or bad, to get him to come to me. Now that all this
had stopped for days I had lost the art of contriving.

### Nikhil's Story

#### VI

Panchu's wife has just died of a lingering consumption. Panchu must
undergo a purification ceremony to cleanse himself of sin and to
propitiate his community. The community has calculated and informed him
that it will cost one hundred and twenty-three rupees.

"How absurd!" I cried, highly indignant. "Don't submit to this, Panchu.
What can they do to you?"

Raising to me his patient eyes like those of a tired-out beast of
burden, he said: "There is my eldest girl, sir, she will have to be
married. And my poor wife's last rites have to be put through."

"Even if the sin were yours, Panchu," I mused aloud, "you have surely
suffered enough for it already."

"That is so, sir," he naïvely assented. "I had to sell part of my land
and mortgage the rest to meet the doctor's bills. But there is no escape
from the offerings I have to make the Brahmins." What was the use of
arguing? When will come the time, I wondered, for the purification of
the Brahmins themselves who can accept such offerings?

After his wife's illness and funeral, Panchu, who had been tottering on
the brink of starvation, went altogether beyond his depth. In a
desperate attempt to gain consolation of some sort he took to sitting at
the feet of a wandering ascetic, and succeeded in acquiring philosophy
enough to forget that his children went hungry. He kept himself steeped
for a time in the idea that the world is vanity, and if of pleasure it
has none, pain also is a delusion. Then, at last, one night he left his
little ones in their tumble-down hovel, and started off wandering on his
own account.

I knew nothing of this at the time, for just then a veritable
ocean-churning by gods and demons was going on in my mind. Nor did my
master tell me that he had taken Panchu's deserted children under his
own roof and was caring for them, though alone in the house, with his
school to attend to the whole day.

After a month Panchu came back, his ascetic fervour considerably worn
off. His eldest boy and girl nestled up to him, crying: "Where have you
been all this time, father?" His youngest boy filled his lap; his second
girl leant over his back with her arms around his neck; and they all
wept together. "O sir!" sobbed Panchu, at length, to my master. "I have
not the power to give these little ones enough to eat--I am not free to
run away from them. What has been my sin that I should be scourged so,
bound hand and foot?"

In the meantime the thread of Panchu's little trade connections had
snapped and he found he could not resume them. He clung on to the
shelter of my master's roof, which had first received him on his return,
and said not a word of going back home. "Look here, Panchu," my master
was at last driven to say. "If you don't take care of your cottage, it
will tumble down altogether. I will lend you some money with which you
can do a bit of peddling and return it me little by little."

Panchu was not excessively pleased--was there then no such thing as
charity on earth? And when my master asked him to write out a receipt
for the money, he felt that this favour, demanding a return, was hardly
worth having. My master, however, did not care to make an outward gift
which would leave an inward obligation. To destroy self-respect is to
destroy caste, was his idea.

After signing the note, Panchu's obeisance to my master fell off
considerably in its reverence--the dust-taking was left out. It made my
master smile; he asked nothing better than that courtesy should stoop
less low. "Respect given and taken truly balances the account between
man and man," was the way he put it, "but veneration is overpayment."

Panchu began to buy cloth at the market and peddle it about the village.
He did not get much of cash payment, it is true, but what he could
realize in kind, in the way of rice, jute, and other field produce, went
towards settlement of his account. In two months" time he was able to
pay back an instalment of my master's debt, and with it there was a
corresponding reduction in the depth of his bow. He must have begun to
feel that he had been revering as a saint a mere man, who had not even
risen superior to the lure of lucre.

While Panchu was thus engaged, the full shock of the *Swadeshi* flood
fell on him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII](hw25)
