[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw28)  [Next](hw30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter Seven

### Sandip's Story

#### VIII

We are men, we are kings, we must have our tribute. Ever since we have
come upon the Earth we have been plundering her; and the more we
claimed, the more she submitted. From primeval days have we men been
plucking fruits, cutting down trees, digging up the soil, killing beast,
bird and fish. From the bottom of the sea, from underneath the ground,
from the very jaws of death, it has all been grabbing and grabbing and
grabbing--no strong-box in Nature's store-room has been respected or
left unrifled. The one delight of this Earth is to fulfil the claims of
those who are men. She has been made fertile and beautiful and complete
through her endless sacrifices to them. But for this, she would be lost
in the wilderness, not knowing herself, the doors of her heart shut, her
diamonds and pearls never seeing the light.

Likewise, by sheer force of our claims, we men have opened up all the
latent possibilities of women. In the process of surrendering themselves
to us, they have ever gained their true greatness. Because they had to
bring all the diamonds of their happiness and the pearls of their sorrow
into our royal treasury, they have found their true wealth. So for men
to accept is truly to give: for women to give is truly to gain.

The demand I have just made from Bimala, however, is indeed a large one!
At first I felt scruples; for is it not the habit of man's mind to be in
purposeless conflict with itself? I thought I had imposed too hard a
task. My first impulse was to call her back, and tell her I would rather
not make her life wretched by dragging her into all these troubles. I
forgot, for the moment, that it was the mission of man to be aggressive,
to make woman's existence fruitful by stirring up disquiet in the depth
of her passivity, to make the whole world blessed by churning up the
immeasurable abyss of suffering! This is why man's hands are so strong,
his grip so firm. Bimala had been longing with all her heart that I,
Sandip, should demand of her some great sacrifice-- should call her to
her death. How else could she be happy? Had she not waited all these
weary years only for an opportunity to weep out her heart--so satiated
was she with the monotony of her placid happiness? And therefore, at the
very sight of me, her heart's horizon darkened with the rain clouds of
her impending days of anguish. If I pity her and save her from her
sorrows, what then was the purpose of my being born a man?

The real reason of my qualms is that my demand happens to be for money.
That savours of beggary, for money is man's, not woman's. That is why I
had to make it a big figure. A thousand or two would have the air of
petty theft. Fifty thousand has all the expanse of romantic brigandage.
Ah, but riches should really have been mine! So many of my desires have
had to halt, again and again, on the road to accomplishment simply for
want of money. This does not become me! Had my fate been merely unjust,
it could be forgiven--but its bad taste is unpardonable. It is not
simply a hardship that a man like me should be at his wit's end to pay
his house rent, or should have to carefully count out the coins for an
Intermediate Class railway ticket--it is vulgar!

It is equally clear that Nikhil's paternal estates are a superfluity to
him. For him it would not have been at all unbecoming to be poor. He
would have cheerfully pulled in the double harness of indigent
mediocrity with that precious master of his. I should love to have, just
for once, the chance to fling about fifty thousand rupees in the service
of my country and to the satisfaction of myself. I am a nabob born, and
it is a great dream of mine to get rid of this disguise of poverty,
though it be for a day only, and to see myself in my true character. I
have grave misgivings, however, as to Bimala ever getting that fifty
thousand rupees within her reach, and it will probably be only a
thousand or two which will actually come to hand. Be it so. The wise man
is content with half a loaf, or any fraction for that matter, rather
than no bread. I must return to these personal reflections of mine
later. News comes that I am wanted at once. Something has gone wrong ...

It seems that the police have got a clue to the man who sank Mirjan's
boat for us. He was an old offender. They are on his trail, but he
should be too practised a hand to be caught blabbing. However, one never
knows. Nikhil's back is up, and his manager may not be able to have
things his own way.

"If I get into trouble, sir," said the manager when I saw him, "I shall
have to drag you in!"

"Where is the noose with which you can catch me?" I asked.

"I have a letter of yours, and several of Amulya Babu's." I could not
see that the letter marked "urgent" to which I had been hurried into
writing a reply was wanted urgently for this purpose only! I am getting
to learn quite a number of things.

The point now is, that the police must be bribed and hush-money paid to
Mirjan for his boat. It is also becoming evident that much of the cost
of this patriotic venture of ours will find its way as profit into the
pockets of Nikhil's manager. However, I must shut my eyes to that for
the present, for is he not shouting *Bande Mataram* as lustily as I am?

This kind of work has always to be carried on with leaky vessels which
let as much through as they fetch in. We all have a hidden fund of moral
judgement stored away within us, and so I was about to wax indignant
with the manager, and enter in my diary a tirade against the
unreliability of our countrymen. But, if there be a god, I must
acknowledge with gratitude to him that he has given me a clear-seeing
mind, which allows nothing inside or outside it to remain vague. I may
delude others, but never myself. So I was unable to continue angry.

Whatever is true is neither good nor bad, but simply true, and that is
Science. A lake is only the remnant of water which has not been sucked
into the ground. Underneath the cult of *Bande Mataram*, as indeed at
the bottom of all mundane affairs, there is a region of slime, whose
absorbing power must be reckoned with. The manager will take what he
wants; I also have my own wants. These lesser wants form a part of the
wants of the great Cause--the horse must be fed and the wheels must be
oiled if the best progress is to be made.

The long and short of it is that money we must have, and that soon. We
must take whatever comes the readiest, for we cannot afford to wait. I
know that the immediate often swallows up the ultimate; that the five
thousand rupees of today may nip in the bud the fifty thousand rupees of
tomorrow. But I must accept the penalty. Have I not often twitted Nikhil
that they who walk in the paths of restraint have never known what
sacrifice is? It is we greedy folk who have to sacrifice our greed at
every step!

Of the cardinal sins of man, Desire is for men who are men--but
Delusion, which is only for cowards, hampers them. Because delusion
keeps them wrapped up in past and future, but is the very deuce for
confounding their footsteps in the present. Those who are always
straining their ears for the call of the remote, to the neglect of the
call of the imminent, are like Sakuntala  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) absorbed in the memories of her lover.
The guest comes unheeded, and the curse descends, depriving them of the
very object of their desire.

The other day I pressed Bimala's hand, and that touch still stirs her
mind, as it vibrates in mine. Its thrill must not be deadened by
repetition, for then what is now music will descend to mere argument.
There is at present no room in her mind for the question "why?" So I
must not deprive Bimala, who is one of those creatures for whom illusion
is necessary, of her full supply of it.

As for me, I have so much else to do that I shall have to be content for
the present with the foam of the wine cup of passion. O man of desire!
Curb your greed, and practise your hand on the harp of illusion till you
can bring out all the delicate nuances of suggestion. This is not the
time to drain the cup to the dregs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](hw29.htm#fr_18) Sakuntala, after the king,
her lover, went back to his kingdom, promising to send for her, was so
lost in thoughts of him, that she failed to hear the call of her hermit
guest. who thereupon cursed her, saying that the object of her love
would forget all about her. \[Trans.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX](hw30)
