[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hw29)  [Next](hw31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IX

Our work proceeds apace. But though we have shouted ourselves hoarse,
proclaiming the Mussulmans to be our brethren, we have come to realize
that we shall never be able to bring them wholly round to our side. So
they must be suppressed altogether and made to understand that we are
the masters. They are now showing their teeth, but one day they shall
dance like tame bears to the tune we play.

"If the idea of a United India is a true one," objects Nikhil,
"Mussulmans are a necessary part of it."

"Quite so," said I, "but we must know their place and keep them there,
otherwise they will constantly be giving trouble."

"So you want to make trouble to prevent trouble?"

"What, then, is your plan?"

"There is only one well-known way of avoiding quarrels," said Nikhil
meaningly.

I know that, like tales written by good people, Nikhil's discourse
always ends in a moral. The strange part of it is that with all his
familiarity with moral precepts, he still believes in them! He is an
incorrigible schoolboy. His only merit is his sincerity. The mischief
with people like him is that they will not admit the finality even of
death, but keep their eyes always fixed on a hereafter.

I have long been nursing a plan which, if only I could carry it out,
would set fire to the whole country. True patriotism will never be
roused in our countrymen unless they can visualize the motherland. We
must make a goddess of her. My colleagues saw the point at once. "Let us
devise an appropriate image!" they exclaimed. "It will not do if you
devise-- it," I admonished them. "We must get one of the current images
accepted as representing the country--the worship of the people must
flow towards it along the deep-cut grooves of custom."

But Nikhil's needs must argue even about this. "We must not seek the
help of illusions," he said to me some time ago, "for what we believe to
be the true cause."

"Illusions are necessary for lesser minds," I said, "and to this class
the greater portion of the world belongs. That is why divinities are set
up in every country to keep up the illusions of the people, for men are
only too well aware of their weakness."

"No," he replied. "God is necessary to clear away our illusions. The
divinities which keep them alive are false gods."

"What of that? If need be, even false gods must be invoked, rather than
let the work suffer. Unfortunately for us, our illusions are alive
enough, but we do not know how to make them serve our purpose. Look at
the Brahmins. In spite of our treating them as demi-gods, and untiringly
taking the dust of their feet, they are a force going to waste.

"There will always be a large class of people, given to grovelling, who
can never be made to do anything unless they are bespattered with the
dust of somebody's feet, be it on their heads or on their backs! What a
pity if after keeping Brahmins saved up in our armoury for all these
ages--keen and serviceable- -they cannot be utilized to urge on this
rabble in the time of our need."

But it is impossible to drive all this into Nikhil's head. He has such a
prejudice in favour of truth--as though there exists such an objective
reality! How often have I tried to explain to him that where untruth
truly exists, there it is indeed the truth. This was understood in our
country in the old days, and so they had the courage to declare that for
those of little understanding untruth is the truth. For them, who can
truly believe their country to be a goddess, her image will do duty for
the truth. With our nature and our traditions we are unable to realize
our country as she is, but we can easily bring ourselves to believe in
her image. Those who want to do real work must not ignore this fact.

Nikhil only got excited. "Because you have lost the power of walking in
the path of truth's attainment," he cried, "you keep waiting for some
miraculous boon to drop from the skies! That is why when your service to
the country has fallen centuries into arrears all you can think of is,
to make of it an image and stretch out your hands in expectation of
gratuitous favours."

"We want to perform the impossible," I said. "So our country needs must
be made into a god."

"You mean you have no heart for possible tasks," replied Nikhil.
"Whatever is already there is to be left undisturbed; yet there must be
a supernatural result:"

"Look here, Nikhil," I said at length, thoroughly exasperated.

"The things you have been saying are good enough as moral lessons. These
ideas have served their purpose, as milk for babes, at one stage of
man's evolution, but will no longer do, now that man has cut his teeth.

"Do we not see before our very eyes how things, of which we never even
dreamt of sowing the seed, are sprouting up on every side? By what
power? That of the deity in our country who is becoming manifest. It is
for the genius of the age to give that deity its image. Genius does not
argue, it creates. I only give form to what the country imagines.

"I will spread it abroad that the goddess has vouchsafed me a dream. I
will tell the Brahmins that they have been appointed her priests, and
that their downfall has been due to their dereliction of duty in not
seeing to the proper performance of her worship. Do you say I shall be
uttering lies? No, say I, it is the truth--nay more, the truth which the
country has so long been waiting to learn from my lips. If only I could
get the opportunity to deliver my message, you would see the stupendous
result."

"What I am afraid of," said Nikhil, "is, that my lifetime is limited and
the result you speak of is not the final result. It will have
after-effects which may not be immediately apparent."

"I only seek the result," said I, "which belongs to today."

"The result I seek," answered Nikhil, "belongs to all time."

Nikhil may have had his share of Bengal's greatest gift-- imagination,
but he has allowed it to be overshadowed and nearly killed by an exotic
conscientiousness. Just look at the worship of Durga which Bengal has
carried to such heights. That is one of her greatest achievements. I can
swear that Durga is a political goddess and was conceived as the image
of the *Shakti* of patriotism in the days when Bengal was praying to be
delivered from Mussulman domination. What other province of India has
succeeded in giving such wonderful visual expression to the ideal of its
quest?

Nothing betrayed Nikhil's loss of the divine gift of imagination more
conclusively than his reply to me. "During the Mussulman domination," he
said, "the Maratha and the Sikh asked for fruit from the arms which they
themselves took up. The Bengali contented himself with placing weapons
in the hands of his goddess and muttering incantations to her; and as
his country did not really happen to be a goddess the only fruit he got
was the lopped-off heads of the goats and buffaloes of the sacrifice.
The day that we seek the good of the country along the path of
righteousness, He who is greater than our country will grant us true
fruition."

The unfortunate part of it is that Nikhil's words sound so fine when put
down on paper. My words, however, are not meant to be scribbled on
paper, but to be scored into the heart of the country. The Pandit
records his Treatise on Agriculture in printer's ink; but the cultivator
at the point of his plough impresses his endeavour deep in the soil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X](hw31)
