[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1909)  [Next](sbe1911) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 8. THE GENERAL GRIEF OF THE PALACE.

*K*andaka leading back the horse, opening the way for his heart's
sorrow, as he went on, lamented and wept: unable to disburthen his soul.
<span class="margnote">. 570</span>

First of all with the royal prince, passing along the road for one
night, but now dismissed and ordered

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

to return. As the darkness of night closed on him, <span
class="margnote">. 571</span>

Irresolute he wavered in mind. On the eighth day approaching the city,
the noble horse pressed onwards, exhibiting all his qualities of speed;
<span class="margnote">. 572</span>

But yet hesitating as he looked around and beheld not the form of the
royal prince; his four members bent down with toil, his head and neck
deprived of their glossy look, <span class="margnote">. 573</span>

Whinnying as he went on with grief, he refused night and day his grass
and water, because he had lost his lord, the deliverer of men. Returning
thus to Kapilavastu, <span class="margnote">. 574</span>

The whole country appeared withered and bare, as when one comes back to
a deserted village; or as when the sun hidden behind Sumeru causes
darkness to spread over the world. <span class="margnote">. 575</span>

The fountains of water sparkled no more, the flowers and fruits were
withered and dead, the men and women in the streets seemed lost in grief
and dismay. <span class="margnote">. 576</span>

Thus *K*andaka with the white horse went on sadly and with slow advance,
silent to those enquiring, wearily progressing as when accompanying a
funeral; <span class="margnote">. 577</span>

So they went on, whilst all the spectators seeing *K*andaka, but not
observing the royal *S*âkya prince, raised piteous cries of lamentation
and wept; as when the charioteer returned without Râma. <span
class="margnote">. 578</span>

Then one by the side of the road, with his body bent, called out to
*K*andaka: 'The prince, beloved of the world, the defender of his
people, <span class="margnote">. 579</span>

'The one you have taken away by stealth, where

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

dwells he now?' *K*andaka, then, with sorrowful heart, replied to the
people and said: <span class="margnote">. 580</span>

'I with loving purpose followed after him whom I loved; ’tis not I who
have deserted the prince, but by him have I been sent away; (by him) who
now has given up his ordinary adornments, <span class="margnote">.
581</span>

'And with shaven head and religious garb, has entered the sorrow-giving
grove.' Then the men hearing that he had become an ascetic, were
oppressed with thoughts of wondrous boding (unusual thoughts); <span
class="margnote">. 582</span>

They sighed with heaviness and wept, and as their tears coursed down
their cheeks, they spake thus one to the other: 'What then shall we do
(by way of expedient)?' <span class="margnote">. 583</span>

Then they all exclaimed at once, 'Let us haste after him in pursuit; for
as when a man's bodily functions fail, his frame dies and his spirit
flees, <span class="margnote">. 584</span>

'So is the prince our life, and he our life gone, how shall we survive?
This city, perfected with slopes and woods; those woods, that cover the
slopes of the city, <span class="margnote">. 585</span>

'All deprived of grace, ye lie as Bharata when killed!' Then the men and
women within the town, vainly supposing the prince had come back, <span
class="margnote">. 586</span>

In haste rushed out to the heads of the way, and seeing the horse
returning alone, not knowing whether he (the prince) was safe or lost,
began to weep and to raise every piteous sound; <span class="margnote">.
587</span>

(And said, 'Behold!) *K*andaka advancing slowly with the horse, comes
back with sighs and tears; surely he grieves because the prince is
lost.' And thus sorrow is added to sorrow! <span class="margnote">.
588</span>

Then like a captive warrior is drawn before the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

king his master, so did he enter the gates with tears, his eyes filled
so that he said nought. <span class="margnote">. 589</span>

Then looking up to heaven he loudly groaned; and the white horse too
whined piteously; then all the varied birds and beasts in the palace
court, and all the horses within the stables, <span class="margnote">.
590</span>

Hearing the sad whinnying of the royal steed, replied in answer to him,
thinking 'now the prince has come back.' But seeing him not, they ceased
their cries! <span class="margnote">. 591</span>

And now the women of the after-palace, (hearing the cries of the horses,
birds, and beasts,) their hair dishevelled, their faces wan and yellow,
their forms sickly to look at, their mouths and lips parched, <span
class="margnote">. 592</span>

Their garments torn and unwashed, the soil and heat not cleansed from
their bodies, their ornaments all thrown aside, disconsolate and sad,
cheerless in face, <span class="margnote">. 593</span>

Raised their bodies, without any grace, even as the feeble (little)
morning star (or stars of morning); their garments torn and knotted,
soiled like the appearance of a robber, <span class="margnote">.
594</span>

Seeing *K*andaka and the royal horse shedding tears instead of the
hoped-for return, they all, assembled thus, uttered their cry, even as
those who weep for one beloved just dead; <span class="margnote">.
595</span>

Confused and wildly they rushed about, as a herd of oxen that have lost
their way. Mahâpra*g*âpati Gôtamî, hearing that the prince had not
returned, <span class="margnote">. 596</span>

Fell fainting on the ground, her limbs entirely deprived of strength,
even as some mad tornado wind crushes the golden-colour’d plantain tree;
<span class="margnote">. 597</span>

And again, hearing that her son had become a recluse, deeply sighing and
with increased sadness

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

she thought, 'Alas! those glossy locks turning to the right, each hair
produced from each orifice, <span class="margnote">. 598</span>

'Dark and pure, gracefully shining, sweeping the earth when loose <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208), or when so determined, bound together
in a heavenly crown, and now shorn and lying in the grass! <span
class="margnote">. 599</span>

'Those rounded shoulders and that lion step! Those eyes broad as the
ox-king's, that body shining bright as yellow gold; that square breast
and Brahma voice; <span class="margnote">. 600</span>

'That you! possessing all these excellent qualities, should have entered
on the sorrow-giving forest; what fortune now remains for the world,
losing thus the holy king of earth? <span class="margnote">. 601</span>

'That those delicate and pliant feet, pure as the lily and of the same
colour, should now be torn by stones and thorns; O how can such feet
tread on such ground! <span class="margnote">. 602</span>

'Born and nourished in the guarded palace, clad with garments of the
finest texture, washed in richly-scented water, anointed with the
choicest perfumes, <span class="margnote">. 603</span>

'And now exposed to chilling blasts and dews of night, O! where during
the heat or the chilly morn can rest be found! Thou flower of all thy
race! Confessed by all the most renowned! <span class="margnote">.
604</span>

'Thy virtuous qualities everywhere talked of and exalted, ever
reverenced, without self-seeking! why hast thou unexpectedly brought
thyself upon some morn to beg thy food for life! <span
class="margnote">. 605</span>

'Thou who wert wont to repose upon a soft and

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

kingly couch, and indulge in every pleasure during thy waking hours, how
canst thou now endure the mountain and the forest wilds, on the bare
grass to make thyself a resting-place!' <span class="margnote">.
606</span>

Thus thinking of her son--her heart was full of sorrow, disconsolate she
lay upon the earth. The waiting women raised her up, and dried the tears
from off her face, <span class="margnote">. 607</span>

Whilst all the other courtly ladies, overpowered with grief, their limbs
relaxed, their minds bound fast with woe, unmoved they sat like
pictured-folk. <span class="margnote">. 608</span>

And now Ya*s*odharâ deeply chiding, spoke thus to *K*andaka: 'Where now
dwells he, who ever dwells within my mind? <span class="margnote">.
609</span>

'You two went forth, the horse a third, but now two only have returned!
My heart is utterly o’er-borne with grief, filled with anxious thoughts,
it cannot rest. <span class="margnote">. 610</span>

'And you deceitful man! Untrustworthy and false associate! evil
contriver! plainly revealed a traitor, a smile lurks underneath thy
tears! <span class="margnote">. 611</span>

'Escorting him in going; returning now with wails! Not one at heart--but
in league against him--openly constituted a friend and well-wisher,
concealing underneath a treacherous purpose; <span class="margnote">.
612</span>

'So thou hast caused the sacred prince to go forth once and not return
again! No questioning the joy you feel! Having done ill you now enjoy
the fruit; <span class="margnote">. 613</span>

'Better far to dwell with an enemy of wisdom, than work with one who,
while a fool, professes friendship. Openly professing sweetness and
light, inwardly a scheming and destructive enemy. <span
class="margnote">. 614</span>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

'And now this royal and kingly house, in one short morn is crushed and
ruined! All these fair and queen-like women, with grief o’erwhelmed,
their beauty marred, <span class="margnote">. 615</span>

'Their breathing choked with tears and sobs, their faces soiled with
crossing tracks of grief! Even the queen (Mâyâ) when in life, resting
herself on him, as the great snowy mountains <span class="margnote">.
616</span>

'Repose upon the widening earth, through grief in thought of What would
happen, died. How sad the lot of these--within these open
lattices--these weeping ones, these deeply wailing! <span
class="margnote">. 617</span>

'Born in another state than hers in heaven <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209), how can their grief be borne!' Then
speaking to the horse she said, 'Thou unjust! what dullness this--to
carry off a man, <span class="margnote">. 618</span>

'As in the darkness some wicked thief bears off a precious gem. When
riding thee in time of battle, swords, and javelins and arrows, <span
class="margnote">. 619</span>

'None of these alarmed or frighted thee! But now what fitfulness of
temper this <span id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_210), to carry off by
violence, to rob my soul of one, the choicest jewel of his tribe. <span
class="margnote">. 620</span>

'O! thou art but a vicious reptile, to do such wickedness as this!
to-day thy woeful lamentation sounds everywhere within these palace
walls, <span class="margnote">. 621</span>

'But when you stole away my cherished one, why wert thou dumb and silent
then! if then thy voice

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

had sounded loud, and roused the palace inmates from their sleep, <span
class="margnote">. 622</span>

'If then they had awoke and slumbered not, there would not have ensued
the present sorrow.' *K*andaka, hearing these sorrowful words, drawing
in his breath and composing himself, <span class="margnote">. 623</span>

Wiping away his tears, with hands clasped together, answered: 'Listen to
me, I pray, in self-justification--be not suspicious of, nor blame the
royal <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211) horse, nor be thou angry
with me either. <span class="margnote">. 624</span>

'For in truth, no fault has been committed (by us). It is the gods who
have effected this. For I, indeed, extremely reverenced the king's
command, it was the gods who drove him to the solitudes, <span
class="margnote">. 625</span>

'Urgently leading on the horse with him: thus they went together fleet
as with wings, his breathing hushed! suppressed was every sound <span
id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_212), his feet scarce touched the earth!
<span class="margnote">. 626</span>

'The city gates wide opening of themselves! all space self-lighted! this
was the work indeed of the gods; and what was I, or what my strength,
compared with theirs?' <span class="margnote">. 627</span>

Ya*s*odharâ hearing these words, her heart was lost in deep
consideration <span id="fr_213"></span>[3](#fn_213)! the deeds
accomplished by the gods could not be laid to others' charge <span
id="fr_214"></span>[4](#fn_214), as faults; <span class="margnote">.
628</span>

And so she ceased her angry chiding, and allowed her great, consuming
grief to smoulder. Thus prostrate on the ground she muttered out her sad
complaints,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'That the two
ringed-birds <span id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_215) (doves) should be
divided! <span class="margnote">. 629</span>

'Now,' she cried, 'my stay and my support is lost, between those once
agreed in life (religious life) <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_216),
separation has sprung up! those who were at one (as to religion) are now
divided, (let go their common action)! where shall I seek another mode
of (religious) life? <span class="margnote">. 630</span>

'In olden days the former conquerors (*G*inas?) greatly rejoiced to see
their kingly retinue; these with their wives in company, in search of
highest wisdom, roamed through groves and plains. <span
class="margnote">. 631</span>

'And now, that he should have deserted me! and what is the religious
state he seeks! the Brahman ritual respecting sacrifice, requires the
wife to take part in the offering <span id="fr_217"></span>[3](#fn_217),
<span class="margnote">. 632</span>

'And because they both share in the service they shall both receive a
common reward hereafter! but you (O prince!) art niggard in your
religious rites, driving me away, and wandering forth alone! <span
class="margnote">. 633</span>

'Is it that you saw me jealous, and so turned against me! that you now
seek some one free from

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

jealousy! or did you see some other cause to hate me, that you now seek
to find a heaven-born nymph <span id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218)! <span
class="margnote">. 634</span>

'But why should one excelling in every personal grace seek to practise
self-denying austerities! is it that you despise a common lot with me,
that variance rises in your breast against your wife! <span
class="margnote">. 635</span>

'Why does not Rahula fondly repose upon <span
id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_219) your knee. Alas! alas! unlucky master!
full of grace without, but hard (diamond) at heart! <span
class="margnote">. 636</span>

'The glory and the pride of all your tribe <span
id="fr_220"></span>[3](#fn_220), yet hating those who reverence you! O!
can it be, you have turned your back for good (upon) your little child,
scarce able yet to smile <span id="fr_221"></span>[4](#fn_221)! <span
class="margnote">. 637</span>

'My heart is gone! and all my strength! my lord has fled, to wander in
the mountains! he cannot surely thus forget me! he is then but a man of
wood or stone.' <span class="margnote">. 638</span>

Thus having spoken, her mind was dulled and darkened, she muttered on,
or spoke in wild mad words, or fancied that she saw strange sights, and
sobbing past the power of self-restraint, <span class="margnote">.
639</span>

Her breath grew less, and sinking thus, she fell asleep upon the dusty
ground! The palace ladies seeing this, were wrung with heartfelt sorrow,
<span class="margnote">. 640</span>

Just as the full-blown lily, struck by the wind and hail, is broken down
and withered. And now the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

king, his father, having lost the prince, was filled, both night and
day, with grief; <span class="margnote">. 641</span>

And fasting, sought the gods (for help). He prayed that they would soon
restore him, and having prayed and finished sacrifice, he went from out
the sacred <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_222) gates; <span
class="margnote">. 642</span>

Then hearing all the cries and sounds of mourning, his mind distressed
became confused, as when heaven's thundering and lightning put to
bewildering flight a herd of elephants. <span class="margnote">.
643</span>

Then seeing *K*andaka with the royal steed, after long questioning,
finding his son a hermit, fainting he fell upon the earth, as when the
flag of Indra falls and breaks. <span class="margnote">. 644</span>

Then all the ministers of state, upraising him, exhort him, as was
right <span id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_223), to calm himself. After a
while, his mind somewhat recovered, speaking to the royal steed, he
said: <span class="margnote">. 645</span>

'How often have I ridden thee to battle, and every time have thought
upon (commended) your excellence! but now I hate and loathe thee, more
than ever I have loved or praised thee! <span class="margnote">.
646</span>

'My son, renowned for noble qualities, thou hast carried off and taken
from me; and left him 'mid the mountain forests; and now you have come
back alone <span id="fr_224"></span>[3](#fn_224); <span
class="margnote">. 647</span>

'Take me, then, quickly hence and go! And going, never more come back
with me! For since you have not brought him back, my life is worth no
more preserving; <span class="margnote">. 648</span>

'No longer care I about governing! My son about

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

me was my only joy; as the Brahman *G*ayanta <span
id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225) met death for his son's sake, <span
class="margnote">. 649</span>

'So I, deprived of my religious son, will of myself deprive myself of
life. So Manu, lord of all that lives, ever lamented for his son; <span
class="margnote">. 650</span>

'How much more I, a mortal man (ever-man), deprived of mine, must lose
all rest! In old time the king A*g*a, loving his son <span
id="fr_226"></span>[2](#fn_226), wandering thro’ the mountains, <span
class="margnote">. 651</span>

'Lost in thought (or deeply affected), ended life, and forthwith was
born in heaven. And now I cannot die! Thro’ the long night fixed in this
sad state, <span class="margnote">. 652</span>

'With this great palace round me, thinking of my son, solitary and
athirst as any hungry spirit (Preta); as one who, thirsty, holding water
in his hand, but when he tries to drink lets all escape, <span
class="margnote">. 653</span>

'And so remains athirst till death ensues, and after death becomes a
wandering ghost <span id="fr_227"></span>[3](#fn_227);--so I, in the
extremity of thirst, through loss, possessed once of a son <span
id="fr_228"></span>[4](#fn_228), but now without a son, <span
class="margnote">. 654</span>

'Still live, and cannot end my days! But come! tell me at once where is
my son! let me not die athirst (for want of knowing this) and fall among
the Pretas. <span class="margnote">. 655</span>

'In former days, at least, my will was strong and firm, difficult to
move as the great earth; but now I've lost my son, my mind is dazed, as
in old time the king "ten chariots <span
id="fr_229"></span>[5](#fn_229)."' <span class="margnote">. 656</span>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

And now the royal teacher (Purohita), an illustrious sage <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_230), with the chief minister, famed for
wisdom, with earnest and considerate minds, both exhorted with
remonstrances, the king. <span class="margnote">. 657</span>

'Pray you (they said) arouse yourself to thought, and let not grief
cramp and hold your mind! in olden days there were mighty kings, who
left their country, as flowers are scattered <span
id="fr_231"></span>[2](#fn_231); <span class="margnote">. 658</span>

'Your son now practises the way of wisdom; why then nurse (increase)
your grief and misery; you should recall the prophecy of Asita, and
reasonably count on what was probable! <span class="margnote">.
659</span>

'(Think of) the heavenly joys which you, a universal king, have
inherited <span id="fr_232"></span>[3](#fn_232)! But now, so troubled
and constrained in mind, how will it not be said, "The Lord of earth can
change his golden-jewel-heart!" <span class="margnote">. 660</span>

'Now, therefore, send us forth, arid bid us seek the place he occupies,
then by some stratagem and strong remonstrances, and showing him our
earnestness of purpose, <span class="margnote">. 661</span>

'We will break down his resolution, and thus assuage your kingly
sorrow.' The king, with joy, replied and said: 'Would that you both
would go in haste, <span class="margnote">. 662</span>

'As swiftly as the Saketa <span id="fr_233"></span>[4](#fn_233) bird
flies through the void for her young's sake; thinking of nought but the
royal prince, and sad at heart--I shall await your search!' <span
class="margnote">. 663</span>

The two men having received their orders, the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

king retired among his kinsfolk, his heart somewhat more tranquillised,
and breathing freely through his throat, <span class="margnote">.
664</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[85:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_208) This description of
the prince's hair seems to contradict the head arrangement of the
figures of Buddha, unless the curls denote the shaven head of the
recluse.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[87:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_209) This line is
obscure; it may be paraphrased thus, 'If she in bearing her son brought
about her own death, but yet is now born in heaven, how shall these bear
their grief, or shall this grief (of losing him) be borne by these!'

<span id="fn_210"></span>[87:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_210) Or, 'how unendurable
then your present conduct!'

<span id="fn_211"></span>[88:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_211) The white horse.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[88:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_212) They caused no sound
(to be heard).

<span id="fn_213"></span>[88:3](sbe1910.htm#fr_213) See above, [p.
69](sbe1908.htm#page_69), n. 3.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[88:4](sbe1910.htm#fr_214) Or, to their charge,
i.e. to the charge of *K*andaka or the horse.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[89:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_215) Or, 'that two
birds;' it may be doves; or perhaps the symbol <span
id="img_08900"></span> ![](img/08900.jpg) is an error for <span
id="img_08901"></span> ![](img/08901.jpg), meaning the 'double-headed
bird.' This double-headed bird is often alluded to in Buddhist books, as
in the Fo-pen-hing-tsi-king (Romantic History of Buddha, p. 380). The
origin of the story may be perhaps found in the myth of Yama and Yamî.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[89:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_216) It may be 'religious
life,' but it can as well refer to the common aim of life; as, for
example, in the case of the double-headed bird, both heads having one
object, viz. the care of the body.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[89:3](sbe1910.htm#fr_217) Literally, 'the
sacrificial code of the Brahman requires husband and wife to act
together.'

<span id="fn_218"></span>[90:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_218) 'A Devî of the Pure
abode.' The idea seems to be that, finding Ya*s*odharâ less pure than a
Devî, he had gone to seek the company of one of these.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[90:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_219) Or, below your knee,
i.e. sitting or fondling around the knee.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[90:3](sbe1910.htm#fr_220) Or, the
full-brightness of your illustrious family.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[90:4](sbe1910.htm#fr_221) 'Your child not yet
a boy.'

<span id="fn_222"></span>[91:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_222) The
heaven-sacrificing-gate.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[91:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_223) In agreement with
religion.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[91:3](sbe1910.htm#fr_224) Or, 'now you return
from the desert (hung) alone.'

<span id="fn_225"></span>[92:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_225) The Sanskrit text
gives Sa*ñ*gaya as the Brahman's name.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[92:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_226) Or, the son he
loved.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[92:3](sbe1910.htm#fr_227) Or, is born in the
way (i.e. the class) of famishing ghosts.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[92:4](sbe1910.htm#fr_228) Obtaining a son, as
(a thirsty man obtains) water.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[92:5](sbe1910.htm#fr_229) That is,
Da*s*aratha.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[93:1](sbe1910.htm#fr_230) 'To-wan-sse,' a
celebrated master.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[93:2](sbe1910.htm#fr_231) 'As falling
flowers,' or 'scattered blossoms,' alluding, as it seems, to the
separation of the flower from the tree.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[93:3](sbe1910.htm#fr_232) Or it maybe
rendered, 'A heaven-blessed, universal (wheel) king!'

<span id="fn_233"></span>[93:4](sbe1910.htm#fr_233) She-ku-to bird.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 9. The Mission to Seek the Prince](sbe1911)
