[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1903)  [Next](sbe1905) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 2. LIVING IN THE PALACE.

And now in the household of *S*uddhodana râ*g*a, because of the birth of
the royal prince, his clansmen and younger brethren (namesakes), with
his ministers, were all generously disposed, <span class="margnote">.
127</span>

Whilst elephants, horses and chariots and the wealth of the country and
precious <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89) vessels, daily increased
and abounded, being produced wherever requisite <span
id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_90); <span class="margnote">. 128</span>

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

So too countless hidden treasures came of themselves from the earth.
From the midst of the pure snowy mountains, a wild herd of white
elephants, <span class="margnote">. 129</span>

Without noise, of themselves, came; not curbed by any, self-subdued,
every kind of colour’d <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) horse, in
shape and quality surpassingly excellent, <span class="margnote">.
130</span>

With sparkling jewelled manes and flowing tails, came prancing round, as
if with wings; these too, born in the desert, came at the right time, of
themselves. <span class="margnote">. 131</span>

A (herd of) pure-colour’d, well-proportioned cows, fat and fleshy, and
remarkable for beauty, giving fragrant and pure milk with equal flow,
came together in great number <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92) at
this propitious time: <span class="margnote">. 132</span>

Enmity and envy gave way to peace; content and rest prevailed on every
side, whilst there was closer union amongst the true of heart, discord
and variance were entirely appeased; <span class="margnote">. 133</span>

The gentle air distilled a seasonable rain, no crash of storm or tempest
was heard, the springing seeds, not waiting for their time, grew up
apace and yielded abundant increase; <span class="margnote">. 134</span>

The five cereals grew ripe with scented grain, soft and glutinous, easy
of digestion; all creatures big with young, possessed their bodies in
ease and their frames well-gathered; <span class="margnote">. 135</span>

All men, even those who had not received the seeds of instruction
derived from the four holy

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

ones <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93); all these, throughout the
world, born under the control of selfish appetite, without any thought
for others' goods, <span class="margnote">. 136</span>

Had no proud, envious longings; no angry, hateful thoughts. All men and
women <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94) were grave (profound) as the
first man of the age (kalpa). <span class="margnote">. 137</span>

All the temples of the gods and sacred shrines, the gardens, wells, and
fountains, all these like things in heaven, produced of themselves, at
the proper time, (their several adornments). <span class="margnote">.
138</span>

There was no famishing hunger, the soldiers' weapons were at rest, all
diseases disappeared; throughout the kingdom all the people were bound
close in family love and friendship; <span class="margnote">. 139</span>

Piously affectioned they indulged in mutual pleasures, there were no
impure or polluting desires, they sought their daily gain righteously,
no covetous money-loving spirit prevailed, <span class="margnote">.
140</span>

But with religious purpose they gave liberally; there was no thought of
any reward (return), but all practised the four rules of purity; and
every hateful thought was suppressed and destroyed. <span
class="margnote">. 141</span>

Even as in days gone by, Manu râ*g*a begat a child (called) 'Brilliancy
of the Sun,' on which there prevailed through the country great
prosperity, and all Wickedness came to an end; <span class="margnote">.
142</span>

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

So now the king having begotten a royal prince, these marks of
prosperity were seen; and because of such a concourse of propitious
signs, the child was named Siddhârtha <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95). <span class="margnote">. 143</span>

And now his royal mother, the queen Mâyâ, beholding her son born under
such circumstances, beautiful as a child of heaven, adorned with every
excellent distinction, <span class="margnote">. 144</span>

From excessive joy which could not be controlled died, and was born in
heaven <span id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96). Then Pra*g*âpatî Gautamî,
beholding the prince, like an angel, <span class="margnote">. 145</span>

With beauty seldom seen on earth, seeing him thus born and now his
mother dead, loved and nourished him as her own child; and the child
regarded her as his mother. <span class="margnote">. 146</span>

So as the light of the sun or the moon, little by little increases, the
royal child also increased each day in every mental excellency and
beauty of person; <span class="margnote">. 147</span>

(His body exhaled) the perfume of priceless sandal wood, (decorated
with) the famed *G*ambunada gold (gems); divine medicines (there were)
to preserve him in health, glittering necklaces upon his person; <span
class="margnote">. 148</span>

The members of tributary states, hearing that

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the king had an heir born to him, sent their presents and gifts of
various kinds, oxen, sheep, deer, horses, and chariots, <span
class="margnote">. 149</span>

Precious vessels and elegant ornaments, fit to delight the heart of the
prince; but though presented with such pleasing trifles, the necklaces
and other pretty ornaments, <span class="margnote">. 150</span>

The mind (nature) of the prince was unmoved, his bodily frame small
indeed, but his heart established; his mind at rest within its own high
purposes <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97), was not to be disturbed by
glittering baubles. <span class="margnote">. 151</span>

And now he was brought to learn the useful arts, when lo! once
instructed (at one hearing) he surpassed his teachers. His father, the
king, seeing his exceeding talent, and his deep purpose to have done
with the world and its allurements, <span class="margnote">. 152</span>

Began to enquire as to the names of those in his tribe who were renowned
for elegance and refinement. Elegant and graceful, and a lovely maiden,
was she whom they called Ya*s*odharâ; <span class="margnote">.
153</span>

In every way fitting to become a consort for the prince; and to allure
by pleasant wiles his heart. The prince with a mind so far removed (from
the world), with qualities so distinguished, and with so charming an
appearance, <span class="margnote">. 154</span>

Like the elder son of Brahmadeva, Sanatkumâra (She-na Kiu-ma-lo); the
virtuous damsel, lovely and refined, gentle and subdued in manner; <span
class="margnote">. 155</span>

Majestic like the queen of heaven, constant ever,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

cheerful night and day, establishing the palace in purity and quiet,
full of dignity and exceeding grace, <span class="margnote">. 156</span>

Like a lofty hill rising up in space <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98); or as a white autumn cloud; warm or cool
according to the season; choosing a proper dwelling according to the
year, <span class="margnote">. 157</span>

Surrounded by a return of singing women, who join (their voices) in
harmonious heavenly concord, without any jarring or unpleasant sound,
exciting (in the hearers) forgetfulness of worldly cares. <span
class="margnote">. 158</span>

As the heavenly Gandharvas <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99) of
themselves in their beauteous palaces (cause) the singing women to raise
heavenly strains, the sounds of which and their beauty ravish both eyes
and heart; <span class="margnote">. 159</span>

(So) Bodhisattva dwelt in his lofty palace, with music such as this. The
king his father, for the prince's sake, dwelt purely in his palace,
practising every virtue; <span class="margnote">. 160</span>

Delighting <span id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_100) in the teaching of the
true law, he <span id="fr_101"></span>[4](#fn_101) put away from him
every evil companion, (that) his heart might not be polluted by lust;
regarding inordinate desire as poison, <span class="margnote">.
161</span>

Keeping his passion and his body in due control, destroying and
repressing all trivial thoughts, desiring to enjoy virtuous
conversation, loving <span id="fr_102"></span>[5](#fn_102) instruction
(fit) to subdue the hearts of men, <span class="margnote">. 162</span>

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

Aiming to accomplish the conversion of unbelievers; removing all schemes
of opposition <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103) (from whatever
source they came), by the enlightening power of his doctrine, aiming to
save the entire world; (thus he desired) that the body of people should
obtain rest; <span class="margnote">. 163</span>

Even as we desire to give peace to our children, so did he long to give
rest to the world <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104). He also
attended to his religious duties (sacrificing by fire to all the
spirits), with clasped hands adoring the moon (drinking the moon's
brightness); <span class="margnote">. 164</span>

Bathing his body in the waters of the Ganges; cleansing his heart in the
waters of religion, performing his duties with no private aim, but
regarding his child and the people at large, <span class="margnote">.
165</span>

Loving righteous conversation <span id="fr_105"></span>[3](#fn_105),
righteous words with loving (aim), loving words with no mixture of
falsehood, true words imbued by love, <span class="margnote">.
166</span>

And yet withal so modest and self-distrustful, unable on that account to
speak as confident of truth; loving to all, and yet not loving the
world, with no thought of selfishness or covetous desire, <span
class="margnote">. 167</span>

Aiming to restrain the tongue and in quietness to find rest from wordy
contentions, not seeking in the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

multitude of religious duties to condone for a worldly principle in
action <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106); <span class="margnote">.
168</span>

But aiming to benefit the world, by a liberal and unostentatious
charity; the heart without any contentious thought, but resolved by
goodness to subdue the contentious, <span class="margnote">. 169</span>

Composing the one <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107), whilst
protecting the seven, removing the seven, guarding and adjusting the
five, reaching to the three, by having learned the three, knowing the
two, and removing the two; <span class="margnote">. 170</span>

Desiring to mortify the passions, and to destroy every enemy of virtue,
not multiplying coarse or unseemly words, but exhorting to virtue in the
use of courteous language, <span class="margnote">. 171</span>

Full of sympathy and ready charity, pointing out and practising the way
of mutual dependence, receiving and understanding the wisdom of spirits
and *Ri*shis, crushing and destroying every cruel and hateful thought;
<span class="margnote">. 172</span>

Thus his fame and virtue were widely renowned, (and yet himself) finally
(or, for ever) separate from the ties of the world, showing the ability
of a master builder, laying a good foundation of virtue, an example for
all the earth; <span class="margnote">. 173</span>

So a man's heart composed and at rest, his limbs and all his members
will also be at ease. And now

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the son of *S*uddhodana, and his virtuous wife Ya*s*odharâ, <span
class="margnote">. 174</span>

As time went on, growing to full estate, their child Râhula was born;
and then *S*uddhodana râ*g*a considered thus, 'My son, the prince,
having a son born to him, <span class="margnote">. 175</span>

'The affairs of the empire will be handed down in succession, and there
will be no end to its righteous government; the prince having begotten a
son, will love his son as I love him <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108), <span class="margnote">. 176</span>

'And no longer think about leaving his home as an ascetic, but devote
himself to the practice of virtue; I now have found complete rest of
heart, like one just born to heavenly joys.' <span class="margnote">.
177</span>

Like as in the first days of the kalpa, *Ri*shi-kings by the way in
which (they walked), practising pure and spotless deeds, offered up
religious offerings, without harm to living thing, <span
class="margnote">. 178</span>

And illustriously prepared an excellent karma, so the king excelling in
the excellence of purity <span id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109), in
family and excellency of wealth, excelling in strength and every
exhibition of prowess, <span class="margnote">. 179</span>

Reflected the glory of his name through the world, as the sun sheds
abroad his thousand rays. But now, being the king of men (or, a king
among men), he deemed it right to exhibit his son's (prowess), <span
class="margnote">. 180</span>

For the sake of his family and kin, to exhibit him; to increase his
family's renown, his glory spread so high as even to obtain the name of
'God begotten;' and having partaken of these heavenly joys, <span
class="margnote">. 181</span>

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Enjoying the happiness of increased wisdom; understanding the truth, by
his own righteousness derived from previous hearing of the truth; the
reward of previous acts, widely known <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110). <span class="margnote">. 182</span>

Would that this might lead my son (he prayed) to love his child and not
forsake his home; the kings of all countries, whose sons have not yet
grown up, <span class="margnote">. 183</span>

Have prevented them exercising authority in the empire, in order to give
their minds relaxation, and for this purpose have provided them with
worldly indulgences, so that they may perpetuate the royal seed; <span
class="margnote">. 184</span>

So now the king, having begotten a royal son, indulged him in every sort
of pleasure; desiring that he might enjoy these worldly delights, and
not wish to wander from his home in search of wisdom; <span
class="margnote">. 185</span>

In former times the Bodhisattva kings, although their way (life) has
been restrained (severe), have yet enjoyed the pleasures of the world,
and when they have begotten a son, then separating themselves from
family ties, <span class="margnote">. 186</span>

Have afterwards entered the solitude of the mountains, to prepare
themselves in the way of a silent recluse. <span class="margnote">.
187</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_89"></span>[20:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_89) Vessels of the seven
precious (substances).

<span id="fn_90"></span>[20:3](sbe1904.htm#fr_90) According to occasion
in abundance produced. The expression 'tsah' may either refer to variety
or number. Thus the <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> convocation of the
Arhats at Vai*s*âlî is called 'tsah;' a miscellaneous collection of
anecdotes or tales is called by the same name.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[21:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_91) Or, every kind of
party-colour’d horse.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[21:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_92) Like the clouds.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[22:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_93) This seems to mean
that those who had not received benefit from the teaching of the four
previous Buddhas, that even these were placable and well-disposed.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[22:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_94) This is a difficult
verse, it may be translated literally thus, 'All learned women (or, all
the wives of sages) were profoundly grave as the fist man of the kalpa.'
Whether it refers to the docility of the otherwise quarrelsome women, or
to their gravity and learning, it is not easy to say.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[23:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_95) The description here
given of the peace and content prevailing in the world on the birth of
Bodhisattva (and his name given to him in consequence) resembles the
account of the golden age in classic authors.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[23:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_96) Mâyâ is generally
stated to have died after seven days from the birth of her child. But
here the context seems to require a longer interval, as he was ten days
old when taken to the temple. Mâyâ was born in the Trayastri*m*sas
Heaven, or the Heaven of the Thirty-three Gods. The legend states that
Buddha after his enlightenment proceeded there to convert her.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[24:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_97) His mind resting on
its high and excellent purpose; so at least the expression K’ai, domain
or precinct, may sometimes be rendered. It means, 'within the limits of
its own high excellent (purpose).'

<span id="fn_98"></span>[25:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_98) That is, rising from
the earth above other hills.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[25:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_99) Gandharvas, heavenly
musicians; muses.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[25:3](sbe1904.htm#fr_100) With nobleness of
purpose (gin) loving the transforming power of the true law. That is,
leading a religious life.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[25:4](sbe1904.htm#fr_101) That is, as I
understand it, the king himself, for his son's sake, devoted himself to
piety.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[25:5](sbe1904.htm#fr_102) Or, by means of
loving instruction subduing men's hearts; or, by love, teaching to
subdue men's hearts.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[26:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_103) Or, every kind of
doctrine (magical art) that opposed religion.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[26:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_104) Or, (he said) like
as I desire rest for my child, so &c.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[26:3](sbe1904.htm#fr_105) This and the whole
of the context is obscure; the account evidently refers to *S*uddhodana;
the line which I have translated 'loving righteous conversation' may be
rendered 'loving conversation (or, converse), opposing a want of truth
or righteousness (i),' or, 'loving an absence of all unrighteousness in
conversation.' The next line, which is evidently in contrast with the
previous one, may be translated, 'Righteous words, opposed to an absence
of love.' The next line is, 'Loving words, opposed to that which is not
true.' And then follows, 'Truthful words, opposed to that which is not
love.'

<span id="fn_106"></span>[27:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_106) I would rather
translate these two lines thus, 'Not regarding so much the assemblies
convoked for sacrificing to the gods, as excelling in the merit
(happiness) of separation from worldly things;' or the word 'sse' may
mean 'sacrifice' itself (as ποιέω in Greek), and then it would be
'excelling in merit without sacrifice.'

<span id="fn_107"></span>[27:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_107) These four lines are
enigmatical. They perhaps have some reference to the teaching of the
seven *Ri*shis, or the number seven may refer to the 'seven passions.'

<span id="fn_108"></span>[28:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_108) Or, loving his son,
and loving me also.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[28:2](sbe1904.htm#fr_109) We have here a
succession of lines in which there is a play on the word 'excellency'
(shing), or 'victorious' (*g*ina).

<span id="fn_110"></span>[29:1](sbe1904.htm#fr_110) These verses are
very obscure, and can only be understood by comparison with the
Sanskrit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 3. Disgust at Sorrow](sbe1905)
