[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1926)  [Next](sbe1928) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 25. PARINIRVÂ*N*A.

When Buddha went towards the place of his Nirvâ*n*a, the city of
Vai*s*âlî was (as if) deserted, as when upon a dark and cloudy night the
moon and stars withdraw their shining. <span class="margnote">.
1900</span>

The land that heretofore had peace, was now afflicted and distressed; as
when a loving father dies, the orphan daughter yields to constant grief.
<span class="margnote">. 1901</span>

Her personal grace unheeded, her clever skill but lightly thought of,
with stammering lips she finds expression for her thoughts; how poor her
brilliant wit and wisdom now! <span class="margnote">. 1902</span>

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

Her spiritual powers (spirits <span id="fr_758"></span>[1](#fn_758)) ill
regulated (without attractiveness <span
id="fr_759"></span>[2](#fn_759)), her loving heart <span
id="fr_760"></span>[3](#fn_760) faint (poor) and fickle (false), exalted
high <span id="fr_761"></span>[4](#fn_761) but without strength, and all
her native grace neglected (without rule) <span
id="fr_762"></span>[5](#fn_762); <span class="margnote">. 1903</span>

Such was the case at Vai*s*âlî; all outward show <span
id="fr_763"></span>[6](#fn_763) now fallen (sorry-looking), like autumn
verdure in the fields bereft of water, withered up and dry; <span
class="margnote">. 1904</span>

Or like the smoke of a half-smouldering <span
id="fr_764"></span>[7](#fn_764) fire, or like those who having food
before them yet forget to eat, so these forgot their common
household <span id="fr_765"></span>[8](#fn_765) duties, and nought
prepared they for the day's emergencies. <span class="margnote">.
1905</span>

Thinking thus on Buddha, lost in deep reflection, silent they sat nor
spoke a word. And now the lion-Li*kkh*avis <span
id="fr_766"></span>[9](#fn_766), manfully enduring their great sorrow,
<span class="margnote">. 1906</span>

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

With flowing tears and doleful sighs, signifying thereby their love of
kindred, destroyed for ever all their books of heresy, to show their
firm adherence to the true law <span id="fr_767"></span>[1](#fn_767).
<span class="margnote">. 1907</span>

Having put down all heresy (or heretics), they left it once for
all <span id="fr_768"></span>[2](#fn_768) (never to return); severed
from the world and the world's doctrines, convinced that non-continuance
(impermanence) was the great disease (evil). <span class="margnote">.
1908</span>

(Moreover thus they thought): 'The lord of men now enters the great
quiet place (Nirvâ*n*a), (and we are left) without support and with no
saviour; the highest lord of "means" (means of saving men) is now about
to extinguish all his glory in the final <span
id="fr_769"></span>[3](#fn_769) place (of death). <span
class="margnote">. 1909</span>

'Now we indeed have lost our steadfast will, as fire deprived of fuel;
greatly to be pitied is the world, now that the lord gives up his
world-protecting (office), <span class="margnote">. 1910</span>

'Even as a man bereft of spiritual power (right reason) throughout the
world is greatly pitied. Oppressed by heat we seek the cooling lake,
nipped by the cold we use the fire; <span class="margnote">. 1911</span>

'But in a moment all is lost <span id="fr_770"></span>[4](#fn_770), the
world is left without resource <span id="fr_771"></span>[5](#fn_771);
the excellent law (superlative

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

law), indeed, is left, to frame the world anew, as a metal-caster frames
anew his work <span id="fr_772"></span>[1](#fn_772). <span
class="margnote">. 1912</span>

'The world has lost its master-guide, and, men bereaved of him, the way
is lost; old age, disease, and death, self-sufficient <span
id="fr_773"></span>[2](#fn_773), now that the road is missed, pervade
the world without a way. <span class="margnote">. 1913</span>

'What is there now throughout the world equal to overcome the springs of
these great sorrows? The great cloud's rain alone can make the raging
and excessive fire, that burns the world, go out. <span
class="margnote">. 1914</span>

'So only he can make the raging fire of covetous desire go out; and now
he, the skilful maker of comparisons <span
id="fr_774"></span>[3](#fn_774), has firmly fixed his mind to leave the
world! <span class="margnote">. 1915</span>

'And why, again, is the sword of wisdom, ever ready to be used for an
uninvited friend (i.e. on behalf of the friendless), only like the
draught of wine given to him about to undergo the torture and to
die <span id="fr_775"></span>[4](#fn_775)? <span class="margnote">.
1916</span>

'Deluded by false knowledge the mass of living things are only born to
die again; as the sharp knife divides the wood, so constant change
divides the world. <span class="margnote">. 1917</span>

'The gloom of ignorance like the deep water, lust like the rolling
billow, sorrow like the floating

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

bubbles, false views (heresy) like the Makara <span
id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_776)fish, <span class="margnote">.
1918</span>

'(Amidst all these) the ship of wisdom only can carry us across the
mighty sea. The mass of ills (diseases) are like the flowers of the
(sorrow) tree, old age and all its griefs, the tangled boughs; <span
class="margnote">. 1919</span>

'Death the tree's tap-root, deeds done in life the buds, the diamond
sword of wisdom only strong enough to cut down the mundane tree! <span
class="margnote">. 1920</span>

'Ignorance (is like) the burning fire-glass, covetous desire the
scorching rays, the objects of the five desires the (dry) grass, wisdom
alone the water to put out the fire. <span class="margnote">.
1921</span>

'The perfect law, surpassing every law, having destroyed the gloom of
ignorance, we see the straight road leading to quietness and rest, the
end of every grief and sorrow. <span class="margnote">. 1922</span>

'And now the loving (one), converting men, impartial in his thoughts to
friend or foe, the all-knowing,. perfectly instructed, even he is going
to leave the world! <span class="margnote">. 1923</span>

'He with his soft and finely modulated voice, his compact body and broad
shoulders, he, the great Rishi <span id="fr_777"></span>[2](#fn_777),
ends his life! Who then can claim exemption? <span class="margnote">.
1924</span>

'Enlightened, now he quickly passes hence! let

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

us therefore seek with earnestness the truth, even as a man meets with
the stream beside the road, then drinks and passes on. <span
class="margnote">. 1925</span>

'Inconstancy, this is the dreaded enemy--the universal
destroyer--sparing neither rich nor poor; rightly perceiving this and
keeping it in mind, this man, though sleeping, yet is the only
ever-wakeful.' <span class="margnote">. 1926</span>

Thus the Li*kkh*avi lions, ever mindful of the Buddha's wisdom,
disquieted with (the pain of) birth and death, sighed forth their fond
remembrance of the man-lion <span id="fr_778"></span>[1](#fn_778). <span
class="margnote">. 1927</span>

Retaining in their minds no love of worldly things, aiming to rise above
the power of every lustful quality <span
id="fr_779"></span>[2](#fn_779), subduing in their hearts the thought of
light or trivial matters, training their thoughts (hearts) (to seek) the
quiet, peaceful place; <span class="margnote">. 1928</span>

Diligently practising (the rules) of unselfish, charitable conduct;
putting away all listlessness, they found their joy in quietness and
seclusion, meditating only on religious truth. <span class="margnote">.
1929</span>

And now the all-wise (omniscient), turning his body round with a
lion-turn <span id="fr_780"></span>[3](#fn_780), once more gazed upon
Vai*s*âlî, and uttered this farewell verse: <span class="margnote">.
1930</span>

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

'Now this, the last time this, I leave (wander forth from)
Vai*s*âlî--the land where heroes <span id="fr_781"></span>[1](#fn_781)
live and flourish! Now am I going to die.' <span class="margnote">.
1931</span>

Then gradually advancing, stage by stage <span
id="fr_782"></span>[2](#fn_782) he came to Bhoga-nagara (Po-ki’a-shing),
and there he rested in the *S*âla <span id="fr_783"></span>[3](#fn_783)
grove, where he instructed all his followers (Bhikshus) in the precepts:
<span class="margnote">. 1932</span>

'Now having gone on high (ascended into heaven) <span
id="fr_784"></span>[4](#fn_784) I shall enter on Nirvâ*n*a: ye must rely
upon the law (religious truth)--this is your highest, strongest, vantage
ground <span id="fr_785"></span>[5](#fn_785). <span class="margnote">.
1933</span>

'What is not found (what enters not) in Sara, or what disagrees with
rules of Vinaya, opposing the one true system (of my doctrine), this
must not be held by you <span id="fr_786"></span>[6](#fn_786). <span
class="margnote">. 1934</span>

'What opposes Dharma, what opposes Vinaya, or

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

what is contrary to my words, this is the result (speech) of ignorance,
ye must not hold such doctrine, but with haste reject it. <span
class="margnote">. 1935</span>

'Receiving that which has been said aright (in the light) <span
id="fr_787"></span>[1](#fn_787), this is not subversive of true
doctrine, this is what I have said <span
id="fr_788"></span>[2](#fn_788), as the Dharma and Vinaya say. <span
class="margnote">. 1936</span>

'Accepting that which I, the law, and the Vinaya declare, this is (the
truth) to be believed. But words which neither I, the law, nor the
Vinaya declare, these are not to be believed. <span class="margnote">.
1937</span>

'Not gathering (explaining) the true and hidden meaning, but closely
holding to the letter <span id="fr_789"></span>[3](#fn_789), this is the
way of foolish teachers, but contrary to my doctrine (religion) and a
false way of teaching. <span class="margnote">. 1938</span>

'Not separating the true from false, accepting in the dark without
discrimination, is like a shop where gold and its alloys are sold
together, justly condemned by all the world. <span class="margnote">.
1939</span>

'The foolish masters, practising (the ways of) superficial wisdom, grasp
not the meaning of the truth; but to receive the law (religious
doctrine) as it explains itself, this is to accept the highest mode of
exposition (this is to accept the true law). <span class="margnote">.
1940</span>

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

'Ye ought therefore thus to investigate true principles, to consider
well the true law and the Vinaya, even as the goldsmith does who melts
and strikes and then selects the true (metal). <span class="margnote">.
1941</span>

'Not to know the Sûtras and the *S*âstras, this is to be devoid of
wisdom; not saying properly that which is proper, is like doing that
which is not fit to see. <span class="margnote">. 1942</span>

'Let all be done (accepted) in right and proper order, according as the
meaning of the sentence guides, for he who grasps a sword unskilfully,
does but inflict a wound upon his hand. <span class="margnote">.
1943</span>

'Not skilfully to handle words and sentences, the meaning then is hard
to know; as in the night time travelling and seeking for a house, if all
be dark within, how difficult to find. <span class="margnote">.
1944</span>

'Losing the meaning, then the law (dharma) is disregarded, disregarding
the law the mind becomes confused; therefore every wise and prudent
master neglects not to discover the true and faithful meaning.' <span
class="margnote">. 1945</span>

Having spoken these words respecting the precepts of religion, he
advanced to the town of Pâvâ <span id="fr_790"></span>[1](#fn_790),
where all the Mallas (lih sse) prepared for him religious offerings of
every kind. <span class="margnote">. 1946</span>

At this time a certain householder's son <span
id="fr_791"></span>[2](#fn_791), whose

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

name was *K*unda, invited Buddha to his house, and there he gave him, as
an offering, his very last repast. <span class="margnote">. 1947</span>

Having partaken of it and declared the law (preached), he onward went to
the town of Kusi (Ku*s*inagara), crossing the river Tsae-kieuh (Tsaku)
and the Hira*n*yavatî (Hi-lan) <span id="fr_792"></span>[1](#fn_792).
<span class="margnote">. 1948</span>

Then in that *S*âla grove, a place of quiet and seclusion (hermit-rest),
he took his seat: entering the golden river (Hira*n*yavatî) he bathed
his body, in appearance like a golden mountain. <span class="margnote">.
1949</span>

Then he spake his bidding thus to Ânanda: 'Between those twin *S*âla
trees, sweeping and watering, make a clean space, and then arrange my
sitting-mat (couch), <span class="margnote">. 1950</span>

'At midnight coming, I shall die' (enter Nirvâ*n*a). Ânanda hearing the
bidding of his master (Buddha), his breath was choked with
heart-sadness; <span class="margnote">. 1951</span>

But going and weeping he obeyed the instruction, and spreading out the
mat he came forthwith back to his master and acquainted him. Tathâgata
having lain down with his head towards the north and on his right side,
slept thus. <span class="margnote">. 1952</span>

Resting upon his hand as on a pillow with his feet crossed <span
id="fr_793"></span>[2](#fn_793), even as a lion-king; all grief is
passed, his last-born body from this one sleep shall never rise. <span
class="margnote">. 1953</span>

His followers (disciples) round him, in a circle

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

gathered, sigh dolefully: 'The eye of the (great) world is now put out!'
The wind is hushed, the forest streams are silent, no voice is heard of
bird or beast. <span class="margnote">. 1954</span>

The trees sweat out large flowing drops, flowers and leaves out of
season singly fall, whilst men and Devas, not yet free from desire, are
filled with overwhelming fear. <span class="margnote">. 1955</span>

(Thus were they) like men wandering through the arid desert, the road
full dangerous, who fail to reach the longed-for hamlet; full of fear
they go on still, dreading they may not find it, their heart borne down
with fear they faint and droop. <span class="margnote">. 1956</span>

And now Tathâgata, aroused from sleep, addressed Ânanda thus: 'Go! tell
the Mallas, the time of my decease (Nirvâ*n*a) is come; <span
class="margnote">. 1957</span>

'They, if they see me not, will ever grieve and suffer deep regret.'
Ânanda listening to the bidding of his master (Buddha), weeping went
along the road. <span class="margnote">. 1958</span>

And then he told those Mallas all--'The lord is near to death.' The
Mallas hearing it, were filled with great, excessive grief (fear). <span
class="margnote">. 1959</span>

The men and women hurrying forth, bewailing as they went, came to the
spot where Buddha was; with garments torn and hair dishevelled, covered
with dust and sweat they came. <span class="margnote">. 1960</span>

With piteous cries they reached the grove, as when a Deva's day of merit
(heavenly merit or enjoyment) comes to an end <span
id="fr_794"></span>[1](#fn_794), so did they bow

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

weeping and adoring at the feet of Buddha, grieving (to behold) his
failing strength. <span class="margnote">. 1961</span>

Tathâgata, composed and quiet, spake: 'Grieve not! the time is one for
joy; no call for sorrow or for anguish here; <span class="margnote">.
1962</span>

'That which for ages I have aimed at, now am I just about to obtain;
delivered now from the narrow bounds of sense, I go to the place of
never-ending rest and peace (purity). <span class="margnote">.
1963</span>

'I leave these things, earth, water, fire, and air, to rest secure where
neither birth nor death can come. Eternally delivered there from grief,
oh! tell me! why should I be sorrowful? <span class="margnote">.
1964</span>

'Of yore on *S*îrsha's <span id="fr_795"></span>[1](#fn_795) mount, I
longed to rid me of this body, but to fulfil my destiny I have remained
till now with men (in the world); <span class="margnote">. 1965</span>

'I have kept (till now) this sickly, crumbling body, as dwelling with a
poisonous snake; but NOW (capitals sic--JBH) I am come to the great
resting-place, all springs of sorrow now for ever stopped. <span
class="margnote">. 1966</span>

'No more shall I receive a body, all future sorrow now for ever done
away; it is not meet for you, on my account, for evermore, to encourage
any anxious fear.' <span class="margnote">. 1967</span>

The Mallas hearing Buddha's words, that he was now about to die (enter
the great, peaceful, quiet state), their minds confused, their eyes
bedimmed, as if they saw before them nought but blackness, <span
class="margnote">. 1968</span>

With hands conjoined, spake thus to Buddha: 'Buddha is leaving now the
pain of birth and death, and entering on the eternal joy of rest
(peaceful extinction); doubtless we ought to rejoice thereat. <span
class="margnote">. 1969</span>

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

'Even as when a house is burnt a man rejoices if his friends are saved
from out the flames; the gods! perhaps they rejoice--then how much more
should men! <span class="margnote">. 1970</span>

'But--when Tathâgata has gone and living things no more may see him,
eternally cut off from safety and deliverance--in thought of this we
grieve and sorrow. 197 I

'Like as a band of merchants crossing with careful steps a desert, with
only a single guide, suddenly he dies! <span class="margnote">.
1972</span>

'Those merchants now without a protector, how can they but lament! The
present age, coming to know their true case <span
id="fr_796"></span>[1](#fn_796), has found the omniscient, and looked to
him, <span class="margnote">. 1973</span>

'But yet has not obtained the final conquest;--how will the world
deride! Even as it would laugh at one who, walking o’er a mountain full
of treasure, yet ignorant thereof, hugs still the pain of poverty.'
<span class="margnote">. 1974</span>

So spake the Mallas, and with tearful words excuse themselves to Buddha,
even as an only child pleads piteously before a loving father. <span
class="margnote">. 1975</span>

Buddha then, with speech most excellent, exhibited and declared the
highest principle (of truth), and thus addressed the Mallas: 'In truth,
’tis as you say; <span class="margnote">. 1976</span>

'Seeking the way, you must exert yourselves and strive with
diligence--it is not enough to have seen me! Walk, as I have commanded
you; get rid of all the tangled net of sorrow; <span class="margnote">.
1977</span>

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

'Walk in the way with steadfast aim; ’tis not from seeing me this
comes,--even as a sick man depending on the healing power of medicine,
<span class="margnote">. 1978</span>

'Gets rid of all his ailments easily without beholding the physician. He
who does not do what I command sees me in vain, this brings no profit;
<span class="margnote">. 1979</span>

'Whilst he who lives far off from where I am, and yet walks righteously,
is ever near me! A man may dwell beside me, and yet, being disobedient,
be far away from me. <span class="margnote">. 1980</span>

'Keep your heart carefully--give not place to listlessness! earnestly
practise every good work. Man born in this world is pressed by all the
sorrows of the long career (night) \[of suffering\], <span
class="margnote">. 1981</span>

'Ceaselessly troubled--without a moment's rest, as any lamp blown by the
wind!' The Mallas all, hearing Buddha's loving instruction, <span
class="margnote">. 1982</span>

Inwardly composed, restrained their tears, and, firmly self-possessed,
returned. <span class="margnote">. 1983</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_758"></span>[278:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_758) Shin-tung generally
means 'spiritual (miraculous) powers,' but here it refers to the
'spirits' or 'good spirits,' i.e. the bearing or cheerful tone of mind.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[278:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_759) Without dignity.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[278:3](sbe1927.htm#fr_760) That is, her heart
capable of love now poor and estranged, i.e. incapable of earnest
attachment.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[278:4](sbe1927.htm#fr_761) The symbol 'shing'
denotes not only 'power' generally, and hence used for the Sanskrit
'*g*ina,' but also 'a headdress worn by females.' It thus corresponds
with the Greek ἔξουσια (1 Cor. xi. 10). The phrase in the text may
therefore mean 'her horn (headdress) exalted, but bereft of power,'
where there is a play on the second word 'Eh' (power).

<span id="fn_762"></span>[278:5](sbe1927.htm#fr_762) 'Dignified and yet
no ruler.'

<span id="fn_763"></span>[278:6](sbe1927.htm#fr_763) Outward glory.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[278:7](sbe1927.htm#fr_764) Like the smoking
(ashes) of a fire put out.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[278:8](sbe1927.htm#fr_765) Kung sz’ may mean
'public and private,' or as in the text.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[278:9](sbe1927.htm#fr_766) The difficulty
here, as before, is to know whether one Li*kkh*avi is referred to, or
the whole clan. We may observe that there is an Accadian root 'lig' or
'lik,' meaning 'lion.' Sayce, Assyrian Grammar.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[279:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_767) *Kh*ing-fă =
saddharma.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[279:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_768) The passage may
possibly mean that they sent away all heretics from their city; but the
whole verse is obscure.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[279:3](sbe1927.htm#fr_769) The 'final' or
'highest' place.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[279:4](sbe1927.htm#fr_770) This is a doubtful
translation; the original is sih kwoh in, 'all openly or widely (gone).'

<span id="fn_771"></span>[279:5](sbe1927.htm#fr_771) Without a place of
refuge, or a lodging-place. The line literally translated is, 'All
things that live, what refuge have they?'

<span id="fn_772"></span>[280:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_772) This is the idea,
as it seems, of the original, implying that the law of Buddha alone was
left to take the place of the teacher.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[280:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_773) Tsz’-tsai,
independent, without control.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[280:3](sbe1927.htm#fr_774) 'Powerful in making
comparisons,' one of Buddha's characteristic names. The construction of
these lines is unlike Chinese, and is evidently adapted from the
Sanskrit original.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[280:4](sbe1927.htm#fr_775) The sense seems to
be that the sword of Buddha's wisdom, instead of rescuing the
friendless, has only been used, as the executioner's draught, to lull
the pain of death.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[281:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_776) A mythical sea
monster (see for a probable representation of it, Bharhut Stûpa, plate
xxxiv, fig. 2).

<span id="fn_777"></span>[281:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_777) The great *Ri*shi
(Mahesi), even he has come to die, who then can claim exemption? It
would seem, from this episode, that the Li*kkh*avis were now convinced
of the law of impermanence, and this was the lesson they most needed to
learn, being of a proud and haughty disposition.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[282:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_778) That is, of Buddha,
the lion of the *S*âkya tribe (*S*âkyasi*m*ha). There is here, of
course, reference to the Li*kkh*avi lion, as contrasted with the *S*âkya
lion. It will be well to bear in mind that the beautiful pillar
described by Stephenson, Cunningham, and others, found near the site of
Vai*s*âlî, was surmounted by a 'lion.'

<span id="fn_779"></span>[282:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_779) Tih, corresponding
to gu*n*a.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[282:3](sbe1927.htm#fr_780) In the text it is
yuen shin, 'his round or perfect body;' in Fă-hien the symbol is hwui,
turning' (cap. xxv). The passage in Fă-hien may be translated 'turning
his body with a right-turn-look.' Here the passage is 'turning (yuen for
hwui) his body with a lion-turn;' in the Pâli (Sacred Books of the East,
vol. xi, p. 64) it is 'he <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> gazed at
Vesâli with an elephant look' (nâgapalokita*m*), on which word Mr. Rhys
Davids has an interesting note. The lion appears to be the favourite
with Northern Buddhists, the elephant (nâga) with the Southern.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[283:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_781) Lih sse, generally
translated 'Mallas;' in Fa-hien 'Kin kang lih sse' has been translated
by Va*g*rapâ*n*i (cap. xxiv), but this is not correct; it is singular
that 'lih sse'--in old Chinese 'lik sse'--should be applied as another
term for Li*kkh*avis. As stated above, lik is an Accadian root for
'lion'--is the Chinese symbol 'lik,' strong, allied to this?

<span id="fn_782"></span>[283:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_782) The stages
according to the Pâli (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi, p. 66) were
from Vesâli to Bha*nd*a-gâma, from Bha*nd*a-gâma to Hatthi-gâma, from
Hatthi-gâma to Amba-gâma, from Amba-gâma to *G*ambu-gâma, and thence to
Bhoga-nagara.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[283:3](sbe1927.htm#fr_783) At the Ânanda
Ketiya (in the Pâli, as above).

<span id="fn_784"></span>[283:4](sbe1927.htm#fr_784) This is a singular
phrase, 'having ascended into heaven I shall enter Nirvâ*n*a'--it may
refer to the process hereafter named through which the mind of Buddha
passed (entering the dhyânas &c.) ere he died; but anyhow, it is a
curious phrase.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[283:5](sbe1927.htm#fr_785) This then is the
noble, conquering place.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[283:6](sbe1927.htm#fr_786) It will be well to
compare this sermon with that in the Pâli (op. cit. pp. 67, 68).

<span id="fn_787"></span>[284:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_787) This dictum has
been often quoted as illustrating the breadth of Buddha's teaching,
'keep and receive the right (vidyâ) spoken (words),' or 'whatever is
according to right reason' (see Wassiljew, Buddhismus, pp. 18, 68).

<span id="fn_788"></span>[284:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_788) The distinction
between Dharma Vinaya and 'what I have said,' seems to point to the
numerous discourses which are called 'Fo shwo' (in Chinese, i.e. spoken
by Buddha. Compare with this phrase the Pâli 'Tathâgatena vutto,' see
Leon Féer, Études, p. 192; Childers, Pâli Dict. sub vutti).

<span id="fn_789"></span>[284:3](sbe1927.htm#fr_789) This 'holding to
the letter' is also alluded to in the Pâli (see Childers, sub voce
vya*ñg*anam).

<span id="fn_790"></span>[285:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_790) Sacred Books of the
East, vol. xi, p. 70. It would seem from the people of Pâvâ being called
Mallas that they were allied with the Li*kkh*avis.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[285:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_791) There is nothing
said in the text about *K*unda being a worker in metals, or about the
character of his offering, or its consequences on Buddha's health. The
expression 'householder's son' may be also translated a 'householder,'
the symbol 'tseu' (son) being often used, as Wassiljew (Buddhismus, p.
168) has observed, as an honorific expletive.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[286:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_792) Ku*s*inagara is the
present Kasia. I do not find any reference in General Cunningham's
account of this city (Archæological Survey of India, I, 76 seq.) to the
river Tsaku, but the Hira*n*yavatî is still known as the Hirana.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[286:2](sbe1927.htm#fr_793) 'With one leg
resting on the other,' Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi, p. 86.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[287:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_794) The time when a
Deva's sojourn in heaven is approaching its end is indicated by certain
signs (fading of the head-garland, restlessness on. his couch, &c.), on
observing which there is general grief among the Devîs and others, his
companions.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[288:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_795) Near Gayâ.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[289:1](sbe1927.htm#fr_796) Men now living
having learned their case, or condition, from the teaching of Buddha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 26. Mahâparinirvâ*n*a](sbe1928)
