[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1906)  [Next](sbe1908) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### VARGA 5. LEAVING THE CITY.

And so the king increased the means for gratifying the appetite for
pleasure; both night and day the joys of music wore out the prince,
opposed to pleasure; <span class="margnote">. 323</span>

Disgusted with them, he desired their absence, his mind was weaned from
all such thoughts, he only thought of age, disease, and death; as the
lion wounded by an arrow. <span class="margnote">. 324</span>

The king then sent his chief ministers, and the most distinguished of
his family, young in years and eminent for beauty, as well as for wisdom
and dignity of manners, <span class="margnote">. 325</span>

To accompany, and rest with him, both night and day, in order to
influence the prince's mind. And now within a little interval, the
prince again requested the king that he might go abroad. <span
class="margnote">. 326</span>

Once more the chariot and the well-paced horses were prepared, adorned
with precious substances and every gem; and then with all the nobles,
his associates, surrounding him, he left the city gates: <span
class="margnote">. 327</span>

Just as the four kinds of flower <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137),
when the sun shines, open out their leaves, so was the prince in all his
spiritual splendour; effulgent in the beauty of his youth time; <span
class="margnote">. 328</span>

As he proceeded to the gardens from the city, the road was well
prepared, smooth, and wide, the trees were bright with flowers and
fruit, his heart was joyous, and forgetful of its care. <span
class="margnote">. 329</span>

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

Now by the roadside as he beheld the ploughmen, plodding along the
furrows, and the writhing worms, his heart again was moved with piteous
feeling, and anguish pierced his soul afresh; <span class="margnote">.
330</span>

To see those labourers at their toil, struggling with painful work,
their bodies bent, their hair dishevelled, the dripping sweat upon their
faces, their persons fouled with mud and dust; <span class="margnote">.
331</span>

The ploughing oxen, too, bent by the yokes, their lolling tongues and
gaping mouths; the nature of the prince, loving, compassionate, his mind
conceived most poignant sorrow, <span class="margnote">. 332</span>

And nobly moved to sympathy, he groaned with pain; then stooping down he
sat upon the ground, and watched this painful scene of suffering;
reflecting on the ways of birth and death! <span class="margnote">.
333</span>

'Alas! he cried, for all the world! how dark and ignorant, void of
understanding!' And then to give his followers chance of rest, he bade
them each repose where’er they list; <span class="margnote">. 334</span>

Whilst he beneath the shadow of a *G*ambu tree, gracefully seated, gave
himself to thought. He pondered on the fact of life and death,
inconstancy, and endless progress to decay. <span class="margnote">.
335</span>

His heart thus fixed without confusion, the five desires (senses)
covered and clouded over, lost in possession of enlightenment and
insight, he entered on the first pure state of ecstacy. <span
class="margnote">. 336</span>

All low desire removed, most perfect peace ensued; and fully now in
Samâdhi (he saw) the misery and utter sorrow of the world; the ruin
wrought by age; disease, and death; <span class="margnote">. 337</span>

The great misery following on the body's death and yet men not awakened
to the truth! oppressed

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

with others' suffering (age, disease, and death), this load of sorrow
weigh’d his mind; <span class="margnote">. 338</span>

'I now will seek (he said) a noble law, unlike the worldly methods known
to men, I will oppose disease and age and death, and strive against the
mischief wrought by these on men.' <span class="margnote">. 339</span>

Thus lost in tranquil contemplation, (he considered that) youth, vigour,
and strength of life, constantly renewing themselves, without long stay,
in the end fulfil the rule of ultimate destruction; <span
class="margnote">. 340</span>

(Thus he pondered) without excessive joy or grief, without hesitation or
confusion of thought, without dreaminess or extreme longing, without
aversion or discontent, <span class="margnote">. 341</span>

But perfectly at peace, with no hindrance, radiant with the beams of
increased illumination. At this time a Deva of the Pure abode,
transforming himself into the shape of a Bhikshu, <span
class="margnote">. 342</span>

Came to the place where the prince was seated; the prince with due
consideration rose to meet him, and asked him who he was. In reply he
said, 'I am a Shâman, <span class="margnote">. 343</span>

'Depressed and sad at thought of age, disease, and death, I have left my
home to seek some way of rescue, but everywhere I find old age, disease,
and death, all (things) hasten to decay and there is no permanency;
<span class="margnote">. 344</span>

'Therefore I search for the happiness of something that decays not, that
never perishes, that never knows beginning, that looks with equal mind
on enemy and friend, that heeds not wealth nor beauty, <span
class="margnote">. 345</span>

'The happiness of one who finds repose alone in

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

solitude, in some unfrequented dell, free from molestation, all thoughts
about the world destroyed, dwelling in some lonely hermitage, <span
class="margnote">. 346</span>

'Untouched by any worldly source of pollution, begging for food
sufficient for the body.' And forthwith as he stood before the prince,
gradually rising up he disappeared in space. <span class="margnote">.
347</span>

The prince with joyful mind, considering, recollected former Buddhas,
established thus in perfect dignity of manner; with noble mien and
presence, as this visitor. <span class="margnote">. 348</span>

Thus calling things to mind with perfect self-possession, he reached the
thought of righteousness, and by what means it can be gained. Indulging
thus for length of time in thoughts of religious solitude, <span
class="margnote">. 349</span>

He now suppressed his feelings and controlled his members, and rising
turned again towards the city. His followers all flocked after him,
calling him to stop and not go far from them, <span class="margnote">.
350</span>

But in his mind these secret thoughts so held him, devising means by
which to escape from the world, that tho’ his body moved along the road,
his heart was far away among the mountains; <span class="margnote">.
351</span>

Even as the bound and captive elephant, ever thinks about his desert
wilds. The prince now entering the city, there met him men and women,
earnest for their several ends; <span class="margnote">. 352</span>

The old besought him for their children, the young sought something for
the wife, others sought something for their brethren; all those allied
by kinship or by family, <span class="margnote">. 353</span>

Aimed to obtain their several suits, all of them joined in relationship
dreading the pain (expectation)

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

of separation. And now the prince's heart was filled with joy, as he
suddenly heard those words 'separation and association.' <span
class="margnote">. 354</span>

'These are joyful sounds to me,' he said, 'they assure me that my vow
shall be accomplished.' Then deeply pondering the joy of 'snapped
relationship,' the idea of Nirvâ*n*a, deepened and widened in him <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138), <span class="margnote">. 355</span>

His body as a peak of the Golden Mount, his shoulder like the
elephant's, his voice like the spring-thunder, his deep-blue eye like
that of the king of oxen, <span class="margnote">. 356</span>

His mind full of religious thoughts (aims), his face bright as the full
moon, his step like that of the lion king, thus he entered his palace,
<span class="margnote">. 357</span>

Even as the son of Lord *S*akra (or, *S*akra-putra) his mind
reverential, his person dignified, he went straight to his father's
presence, and with head inclined, enquired, 'Is the king well?' <span
class="margnote">. 358</span>

Then he explained his dread of age, disease, and death, and sought
respectfully permission to become a hermit. 'For all things in the
world' (he said), 'though now united, tend to separation;' <span
class="margnote">. 359</span>

Therefore he prayed to leave the world; desiring to find 'true
deliverance.' His royal father hearing the words 'leave the world,' was
forthwith seized with great heart-trembling, <span class="margnote">.
360</span>

Even as the strong wild elephant shakes with his weight the boughs of
some young sapling; going forward, seizing the prince's hands, with
falling tears, he spake as follows: <span class="margnote">. 361</span>

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

'Stop! nor speak such words, the time is not yet come for "a religious
life," you are young and strong, your heart beats full, to lead a
religious life frequently involves trouble, <span class="margnote">.
362</span>

'It is rarely possible to hold the desires in check, the heart not yet
estranged from their enjoyment; to leave your home and lead a painful
ascetic life, your heart can hardly yet resolve on such a course; <span
class="margnote">. 363</span>

'To dwell amidst the desert wilds or lonely dells, this heart of yours
would not be perfectly at rest, for though you love religious matters,
you are not yet like me in years; <span class="margnote">. 364</span>

'You should undertake the kingdom's government, and let me first adopt
ascetic life; but to give up your father and your sacred duties, this is
not to act religiously; <span class="margnote">. 365</span>

'You should suppress this thought of "leaving home," and undertake your
worldly duties, find your delight in getting an illustrious name, and
after this give up your home and family.' <span class="margnote">.
366</span>

The prince, with proper reverence and respectful feelings, again
besought his royal father; but promised if he could be saved from four
calamities, that he would give up the thought of 'leaving home;' <span
class="margnote">. 367</span>

If he would grant him life without end, no disease, nor undesirable old
age, and no decay of earthly possessions; then he would obey and give up
the thought of 'leaving home.' <span class="margnote">. 368</span>

The royal father then addressed the prince, 'Speak not such words as
these, for with respect to these four things, who is there able to
prevent them, or say nay to their approach; <span class="margnote">.
369</span>

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

'Asking such things as these (four things), you would provoke men's
laughter! But put away this thought of "leaving home," and once more
take yourself to pleasure.' <span class="margnote">. 370</span>

The prince again besought his father, 'If you may not grant me these
four prayers, then let me go I pray, and leave my home. O! place no
difficulties in my path; <span class="margnote">. 371</span>

'Your son is dwelling in a burning house, would you indeed prevent his
leaving it! To solve a doubt is only reasonable, who could forbid a man
to seek its explanation? <span class="margnote">. 372</span>

'Or if he were forbidden, then by self-destruction he might solve the
difficulty, in an unrighteous way: and if he were to do so, who could
restrain him after death?' <span class="margnote">. 373</span>

The royal father, seeing his son's mind so firmly fixed that it could
not be turned, and that it would be waste of strength to bandy further
words or arguments, <span class="margnote">. 374</span>

Forthwith commanded more attendant women, to provoke still more his mind
to pleasure; day and night (he ordered them) to keep the roads and ways,
to the end that he might not leave his palace; <span class="margnote">.
375</span>

(He moreover ordered) all the ministers of the country to come to the
place where dwelt the prince, to quote and illustrate the rules of
filial piety, hoping to cause him to obey the wishes of the king. <span
class="margnote">. 376</span>

The prince, beholding his royal father bathed with tears and o’erwhelmed
with grief, forthwith returned to his abode, and sat himself in silence
to consider; <span class="margnote">. 377</span>

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

All the women of the palace, coming towards him, waited as they circled
him, and gazed in silence on his beauteous form. They gazed upon him not
with furtive glance, <span class="margnote">. 378</span>

But like the deer in autumn brake looks wistfully at the hunter; around
the prince's straight and handsome form, (bright) as the mountain of
true gold (Sumeru), <span class="margnote">. 379</span>

The dancing women gathered doubtingly, waiting to hear him bid them
sound their music; repressing every feeling of the heart through fear,
even as the deer within the brake; <span class="margnote">. 380</span>

Now gradually the day began to wane, the prince still sitting in the
evening light, his glory streaming forth in splendour, as the sun lights
up Mount Sumeru; <span class="margnote">. 381</span>

Thus seated on his jewelled couch, surrounded by the fumes of
sandal-wood, the dancing women took their places round; then sounded
forth their heavenly (Gandharva) music, <span class="margnote">.
382</span>

Even as Vai*s*aman (Vai*s*rava*n*a) produces every kind of rare and
heavenly sounds. The thoughts which dwelt within the prince's mind
entirely drove from him desire for music, <span class="margnote">.
383</span>

And tho’ the sounds filled all the place, they fell upon his ear
unnoticed. At this time the Deva of the Pure abode, knowing the prince's
time was come, <span class="margnote">. 384</span>

The destined time for quitting home, suddenly assumed a form and came to
earth, to make the shapes of all the women unattractive, so that they
might create disgust, <span class="margnote">. 385</span>

And no desire arise from thought of beauty. Their half-clad forms bent
in ungainly attitudes,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

forgetful in their sleep, their bodies crooked or supine, the
instruments of music lying scattered in disorder; <span
class="margnote">. 386</span>

Leaning and facing one another, or with back to back, or like those
beings thrown into the abyss, their jewelled necklets bound about like
chains, their clothes and undergarments swathed around their persons;
<span class="margnote">. 387</span>

Grasping their instruments, stretched along the earth, even as those
undergoing punishment at the hands of keepers (eunuchs), their garments
in confusion, or like the broken kani flower (poppy?); <span
class="margnote">. 388</span>

Or some with bodies leaning in sleep against the wall, in fashion like a
hanging bow or horn, or with their hands holding to the window-frames,
and looking like an outstretched corpse; <span class="margnote">.
389</span>

Their mouths half opened or else gaping wide, the loathsome dribble
trickling forth, their heads uncovered and in wild disorder, like some
unreasoning madman's; <span class="margnote">. 390</span>

The flower wreaths torn and hanging across their face, or slipping off
the face upon the ground; others with body raised as if in fearful
dread, just like the lonely desert(?) bird; <span class="margnote">.
391</span>

Or others pillowed on their neighbour's lap, their hands and feet
entwined together, whilst others smiled or knit their brows in turn,
some with eyes closed and open mouth, <span class="margnote">.
392</span>

Their bodies lying in wild disorder, stretched here and there, like
corpses thrown together. And now the prince seated, in his beauty,
looked with thought on all the waiting women; <span class="margnote">.
393</span>

Before, they had appeared exceeding lovely, their laughing words, their
hearts so light and gay, their

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

forms so plump and young, their looks so bright; but now, how changed!
so uninviting and repulsive. <span class="margnote">. 394</span>

And such is woman's disposition! how can they, then, be ever dear, or
closely trusted; such false appearances! and unreal pretences; they only
madden and delude the minds of men. <span class="margnote">. 395</span>

And now (he said), 'I have awakened to the truth! Resolved am I to leave
such false society.' At this time the Deva of the Pure abode descended
and approached, unfastening the doors. <span class="margnote">.
396</span>

The prince, too, at this time rose and walked along, amid the prostrate
forms of all the women; with difficulty reaching to the inner hall, he
called to *K*andaka, in these words, <span class="margnote">. 397</span>

'My mind is now athirst and longing for the draught of the fountain of
sweet dew, saddle then my horse, and quickly bring it here. I wish to
reach the deathless city; <span class="margnote">. 398</span>

'My heart is fixed beyond all change, resolved I am and bound by sacred
oath; these women, once so charming and enticing, now behold I
altogether loathsome; <span class="margnote">. 399</span>

'The gates, which were before fast-barred and locked, now stand free and
open! these evidences of something supernatural, point to a climax of my
life.' <span class="margnote">. 400</span>

Then *K*andaka stood reflecting inwardly, whether to obey or not the
prince's order, without informing his royal father of it, and so incur
the heaviest punishment. <span class="margnote">. 401</span>

The Devas then gave spiritual strength; and unperceived the horse
equipped came round, with even pace; a gallant steed, with all his
jewelled trappings for a rider; <span class="margnote">. 402</span>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

High-maned, with flowing tail, broad-backed, short-haired and ear’d,
with belly like the deer's, head like the king of parrots, wide
forehead, round and claw-shaped nostrils, <span class="margnote">.
403</span>

Breath like the dragon's, with breast and shoulders square, true and
sufficient marks of his high breed. The royal prince, stroking the
horse's neck, and rubbing down his body, said, <span class="margnote">.
404</span>

'My royal father ever rode on thee, and found thee brave in fight slid
fearless of the foe; now I desire to rely on thee alike! to carry me far
off to the stream (ford) of endless life, <span class="margnote">.
405</span>

'To fight against and overcome the opposing force of men, the men who
associate in search of pleasure, the men who engage in the search after
wealth, the crowds who follow and flatter such persons; <span
class="margnote">. 406</span>

'In opposing sorrow, friendly help is difficult (to find), in seeking
religious truth there must be rare enlightenment, let us then be knit
together thus as friends; then, at last, there will be rest from sorrow.
<span class="margnote">. 407</span>

'But now I wish to go abroad, to give deliverance from pain; now then,
for your own sake it is, and for the sake of all your kind, <span
class="margnote">. 408</span>

'That you should exert your strength, with noble pace, without lagging
or weariness.' Having thus exhorted him, he bestrode his horse, and
grasping the reins, proceeded forth; <span class="margnote">. 409</span>

The man like the sun shining forth from his tabernacle (sun-palace
streams), the horse like the white floating cloud (the white
cloud-pile), exerting himself but without exciting haste, his breath
concealed and without snorting; <span class="margnote">. 410</span>

Four spirits (Devas) accompanying him, held up

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

his feet, heedfully concealing (his advance), silently and without
noise; the heavy gates fastened and barred (locked), the heavenly
spirits of themselves caused to open; <span class="margnote">.
411</span>

Reverencing deeply the virtuous (sinless) father, loving deeply the
unequalled son, equally affected with love towards all the members of
his family (these. Devas took their place). <span class="margnote">.
412</span>

Suppressing his feelings, but not extinguishing his memory, lightly he
advanced and proceeded beyond the city, pure and spotless as the lily
flowers which spring from the mud; <span class="margnote">. 413</span>

Looking up with earnestness at his father's palace, he announced his
purpose--unwitnessed and unwritten--'If I escape not birth, old age, and
death, for evermore I pass not thus along;' <span class="margnote">.
414</span>

All the concourse of Devas, the space-filling Nâgas and spirits followed
joyfully and exclaimed Well! well! (sâdhu), in confirmation of the true
words (he spoke); <span class="margnote">. 415</span>

The Nâgas and the company of Devas acquired a condition of heart
difficult to obtain, and each with his own inherent light led on the way
shedding forth their brightness. <span class="margnote">. 416</span>

Thus man and horse both strong of heart went onwards, lost to sight,
like streaming stars, but ere the eastern quarter flashed with light,
they had advanced three yo*g*anas. <span class="margnote">. 417</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[47:1](sbe1907.htm#fr_137) It may be a
description of some particular flower, 'four-seed (kind)-flower.'

<span id="fn_138"></span>[51:1](sbe1907.htm#fr_138) Literally, 'deeply
widened the mind of Nirvâ*n*a (Nî-pan).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 6. The Return of *K*andaka](sbe1908)
