[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1922)  [Next](sbe1924) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 21. ESCAPING THE DRUNKEN ELEPHANT AND DEVADATTA.

Having instructed his mother in heaven with all the angel host, and once
more returned to men, he went about converting those capable of it.
<span class="margnote">. 1676</span>

*G*utika, *G*îva(ka) <span id="fr_652"></span>[3](#fn_652), Sula, and
*K*ûr*n*a, the noble's son Aṅga and the son of the fearless king
(Abhaya) <span class="margnote">. 1677</span>

Nyagrodha <span id="fr_653"></span>[4](#fn_653) and the rest;
*S*rîkutaka (or, *S*rîguptaka),

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Upâli the
Nirgrantha <span id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_654), (all these) were
thoroughly converted. <span class="margnote">. 1678</span>

So also the king of Gandhâra, whose name was Fo-kia-lo (Pudgala?); he,
having heard the profound and excellent law, left his country and became
a recluse. <span class="margnote">. 1679</span>

So also the demons Himapati and Vâtagiri, on the mountain Vibhâra, were
subdued and converted; <span class="margnote">. 1680</span>

The Brahma*k*ârin Prayan(tika), on the mountain Va*g*ana (Po-sha-na), by
the subtle meaning of half a gâtha, he convinced and caused to rejoice
in faith; <span class="margnote">. 1681</span>

The village of Dânamati (Khânumat) <span id="fr_655"></span>[2](#fn_655)
had one Kûtadanta, the head of the twice-born (Brahmans); at this time
he was sacrificing countless victims; <span class="margnote">.
1682</span>

Tathâgata by means (upâya, expedients) converted him, and caused him to
enter the true path. On Mount Bhatika <span
id="fr_656"></span>[3](#fn_656) (?) a heavenly being of eminent
distinction, <span class="margnote">. 1683</span>

Whose name was Pa*ñk*a*s*ikha <span id="fr_657"></span>[4](#fn_657),
receiving the law, attained Dhyâna <span
id="fr_658"></span>[5](#fn_658); in the village of Vainush*t*a,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

he converted the mother of the celebrated Nanda <span
id="fr_659"></span>[1](#fn_659); <span class="margnote">. 1684</span>

In the town of A*ñk*avari (Agrâ*t*avî), he subdued the powerful
(mahâbâla) spirit; Bhanabhadra (patala), *S*ronadanta; <span
class="margnote">. 1685</span>

The malevolent and powerful Nâgas, the king of the country and his
harem, received together the true law, as he opened to them the gate of
immortality (sweet dew). <span class="margnote">. 1686</span>

In the celebrated Vi*gg*i village (or in the village Pavi*gg*i) Kina and
Sila, earnestly seeking to be born in heaven, he converted and made to
enter the right path; <span class="margnote">. 1687</span>

The Aṅgulimâla <span id="fr_660"></span>[2](#fn_660), in that village of
Sumu, through the exhibition of his divine power, he converted and
subdued; <span class="margnote">. 1688</span>

There was that noble's son, Puri*g*îvana, rich in wealth and stores as
Punavatî (punyavatî?), <span class="margnote">. 1689</span>

Directly he was brought to Buddha (Tathâgata) accepting the doctrine, he
became vastly liberal. So in that village of Padatti he converted the
celebrated Patali (or, Potali), <span class="margnote">. 1690</span>

And also Patala, brothers, and both demons. In Bhidhavali
(Pi-ti-ho-fu-li) there were two Brahmans, <span class="margnote">.
1691</span>

One called Great-age (Mahâyus?), the other Brahma-age (Brahmâyus?).
These by the power of a discourse he subdued, and caused them to attain
knowledge of the true law; <span class="margnote">. 1692</span>

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

When he came to Vai*s*âlî, he converted all the Raksha demons, and the
lion (Si*m*ha) of the Li*kkh*avis, and all the Li*kkh*avis, <span
class="margnote">. 1693</span>

Sa*k*a <span id="fr_661"></span>[1](#fn_661) the Nirgrantha, all these
he caused to attain the true law. Hama kinkhava had a demon Potala,
<span class="margnote">. 1694</span>

And another Potalaka (in) Potalagâma \[these he converted\]. Again he
came to Mount Ala, to convert the demon Alava, <span class="margnote">.
1695</span>

And a second called Kumâra, and a third Asidaka; then going back to
Mount Ga*g*a (Gayâsîrsha) he converted the demon Ka*ñg*ana, <span
class="margnote">. 1696</span>

And Kamo (kin-mau) the Yaksha, with the sister and son. Then coming to
Benares, he converted the celebrated Katyâyana <span
id="fr_662"></span>[2](#fn_662); <span class="margnote">. 1697</span>

Then afterwards going, by his miraculous power, to Sruvala
(Sou-lu-po-lo), he converted the merchants Davakin and Nikin (?), <span
class="margnote">. 1698</span>

And received their sandal-wood hall, exhaling its fragrant odours till
now. Going then to Mahîvatî, he converted the *Ri*shi Kapila, <span
class="margnote">. 1699</span>

And the Muni remained with him; his foot stepping on the stone, the
thousand-spoked twin-wheels appeared, which never could be erased. <span
class="margnote">. 1700</span>

Then he came to the place Po-lo-na (Prâ*n*a), where he converted the
demon Po-lo-na; coming to the country of Mathurâ, he converted the demon
Godama (Khadama?); <span class="margnote">. 1701</span>

In the Thurakusati (? neighbourhood of Mathurâ)

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

he also converted Pi*nd*apâla (or, vara); coming to the village of
Vaira*ñg*a, he converted the Brahman; <span class="margnote">.
1702</span>

In the village of Kalamasa (or Kramasa), he converted Savasasin, and
also that celebrated A*g*irivasa. <span class="margnote">. 1703</span>

Once more returning to the *S*râvastî country, he converted the Gautamas
*G*âtisruna and Dakâtili; <span class="margnote">. 1704</span>

Returning to the Ko*s*ala country, he converted the leaders of the
heretics Vakrapali (or, Vikravari) and all the Brahma*k*ârins. <span
class="margnote">. 1705</span>

Corning to Satavaka, in the forest retreat, he converted the heretical
*Ri*shis, and constrained them to enter the path of the Buddha *Ri*shi.
<span class="margnote">. 1706</span>

Coming to the country of Ayodhyâ, he converted the Demon Nâgas; coming
to the country of Kimbila, he converted the two Nâgarâ*g*as; <span
class="margnote">. 1707</span>

One called Kimbila, the other called Kâlaka. Again coming to the Va*gg*i
country, he converted the Yaksha demon, <span class="margnote">.
1708</span>

Whose name was Pisha <span id="fr_663"></span>[1](#fn_663), the father
and mother of Nâgara, and the great noble also, he caused to believe
gladly in the true law. <span class="margnote">. 1709</span>

Corning to the Kausâmbî country, he converted Goshira <span
id="fr_664"></span>[2](#fn_664), and the two Upasîkâs, Va*g*uttarâ <span
class="margnote">. 1710</span>

And her companion Uvarî; and besides these, many others, one after the
other. Coming to the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

country of Gandhâra he converted the Nâga Apalâla <span
id="fr_665"></span>[1](#fn_665); <span class="margnote">. 1711</span>

Thus in due order all these air-going, water-loving natures he
completely converted and saved, as the sun when he shines upon some dark
and sombre cave. <span class="margnote">. 1712</span>

At this time Devadatta, <span id="fr_666"></span>[2](#fn_666), seeing
the remarkable excellences of Buddha, conceived in his heart a jealous
hatred; losing all power of thoughtful abstraction, <span
class="margnote">. 1713</span>

He ever plotted wicked schemes, to put a stop to the spread of the true
law; ascending the G*ri*dhrakû*t*a (Ghi*gg*akû*t*a) mount he rolled down
a stone to hit Buddha <span id="fr_667"></span>[3](#fn_667); <span
class="margnote">. 1714</span>

The stone divided into two parts, each part passing on either side of
him. Again, on the royal highway he loosed a drunken, vicious
elephant <span id="fr_668"></span>[4](#fn_668); <span class="margnote">.
1715</span>

With his raised trunk trumpeting as thunder (he ran), his maddened
breath raising a cloud around him, his wild pace like the rushing wind
to be avoided more than the fierce tempest; <span class="margnote">.
1716</span>

His trunk and tusks and tail and feet, when touched only, brought
instant death. (Thus he ran) through the streets and ways of
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, madly wounding and killing men; <span class="margnote">.
1717</span>

Their corpses lay across the road, their brains

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

and blood scattered afar. Then all the men and women filled with fear,
remained indoors; <span class="margnote">. 1718</span>

Throughout the city there was universal terror, only piteous shrieks and
cries were heard; beyond the city men were running fast, hiding
themselves in holes and dens. <span class="margnote">. 1719</span>

Tathâgata, with five hundred followers, at this time came towards the
city; from tops of gates and every window, men, fearing for Buddha,
begged him not to advance; <span class="margnote">. 1720</span>

Tathâgata, his heart composed and quiet, with perfect self-possession,
thinking only on the sorrow caused by hate, his loving heart desiring to
appease it, <span class="margnote">. 1721</span>

Followed by guardian angel-nâgas, slowly approached the maddened
elephant. The Bhikshus all deserted him <span
id="fr_669"></span>[1](#fn_669), Ânanda only remained by his side; <span
class="margnote">. 1722</span>

Joined by every tie of duty, his steadfast nature did not shake or
quail. The drunken elephant, savage and spiteful, beholding Buddha, came
to himself at once, <span class="margnote">. 1723</span>

And bending, worshipped at his feet <span
id="fr_670"></span>[2](#fn_670) just as a mighty mountain falls to
earth. With lotus hand the master pats his head, even as the moon lights
up a flying cloud. <span class="margnote">. 1724</span>

And now, as he lay crouched before the master's feet, on his account he
speaks some sacred words: 'The elephant cannot hurt the mighty
dragon <span id="fr_671"></span>[3](#fn_671), hard it is to fight with
such a one; <span class="margnote">. 1725</span>

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

'The elephant desiring so to do will in the end obtain no happy state of
birth; deceived by lust, anger, and delusion, which are hard to conquer,
but which Buddha has conquered. <span class="margnote">. 1726</span>

'Now, then, this very day, give up this lust, this anger and delusion!
You! swallowed up in sorrow's mud! if not now given up, they will
increase yet more and grow.' <span class="margnote">. 1727</span>

The elephant, hearing Buddha's words, escaped from drunkenness, rejoiced
in heart; his mind and body both found rest, as one athirst (finds joy)
who drinks of heavenly dew. <span class="margnote">. 1628</span>

The elephant being thus converted, the people around were filled with
joy; they all raised a cry of wonder at the miracle, and brought their
offerings of every kind. <span class="margnote">. 1729</span>

The scarcely-good arrived at middle-virtue, the middling-good passed to
a higher grade, the unbelieving now became believers, those who believed
were strengthened in their faith. <span class="margnote">. 1730</span>

Agâta*s*atru, mighty king, seeing how Buddha conquered the drunken
elephant, was moved at heart by thoughts profound; then, filled with
joy, he found a twofold growth of piety. <span class="margnote">.
1731</span>

Tathâgata, by exercise of virtue, exhibited all kinds of spiritual
powers; thus he subdued and harmonised the minds of all, and caused them
in due order to attain religious truth; <span class="margnote">.
1732</span>

And through the kingdom virtuous seeds were sown, as at the first when
men began to live (i.e. were first created). But Devadatta, mad with
rage, because he was ensnared by his own wickedness, <span
class="margnote">. 1733</span>

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

At first by power miraculous able to fly, now fallen, dwells in lowest
hell <span id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_672). <span class="margnote">.
1734</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_652"></span>[241:3](sbe1923.htm#fr_652) This I suppose is
the physician *G*îvaka. The names of many of the persons in the context
may be found in Spence Hardy, M. B., passim.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[241:4](sbe1923.htm#fr_653) For Nyagrodha, see
M. B., p. 39.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[242:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_654) For Upâli the
Nirgrantha, see M. B., p. 267.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[242:2](sbe1923.htm#fr_655) The village
Dânamati must be the same as that called Khânumat by Spence Hardy, M.
B., p. 271.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[242:3](sbe1923.htm#fr_656) For this event, see
Spence Hardy's M. B., p. 288. He calls the mountain or rock by the name
of Wédi.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[242:4](sbe1923.htm#fr_657) For Pa*ñk*a*s*ikha
and his conversion, see M. B., p. 289; also Fă-hien, cap. xxviii. \[I
may here correct my translation of the passage in my 'Buddhist Pilgrims'
(p. r z o), instead of 'each one possessing a five-stringed lute,' it
should be 'attended by the divine musician Pa*ñk*a*s*ikha.'\] For
Pa*ñk*a*s*ikha, see Childers' Pâli Dict., sub voce Pa*ñ*casikho; also
Eitel's Handbook.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[242:5](sbe1923.htm#fr_658) Or attained rest,
or a fixed mind.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[243:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_659) The mother of Nanda
was Pra*g*âpatî; for her conversion, see M. B., p. 307. She was the
foster-mother of Buddha.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[243:2](sbe1923.htm#fr_660) For the history of
the conversion of the Aṅgulimâla, see M. B., p. 249.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[244:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_661) For *S*aka the
Nirgrantha, see M. B., p. 255; also Dhammapada from the Chinese, p. 126.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[244:2](sbe1923.htm#fr_662) That is,
Mahâkâtyâyana. There was another Kâtyâyana, mentioned by Hiouen Thsang,
who lived 300 years after the Nirvâ*n*a.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[245:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_663) Pi-sha, i.e.
Vai*s*rava*n*a, the Regent of the North: converted by Buddha.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[245:2](sbe1923.htm#fr_664) For Goshira, see
Jul. II, 285; Fă-hien cap. xxxiv.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[246:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_665) For the conversion
of Apalâla, see Jul. II, 13 5.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[246:2](sbe1923.htm#fr_666) Devadatta, the
envious; he was the son of Suprabuddha, the father-in-law of Buddha, M.
B., p. 61.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[246:3](sbe1923.htm#fr_667) This event is
related by Fă-hien, cap. xxix, p. 1155 (Buddhist Pilgrims). Fă-hien
says, 'The stone is still there,' but he does not say that it was
divided. See also M. B., p. 383, where the account somewhat differs.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[246:4](sbe1923.htm#fr_668) This story of the
drunken elephant is related in nearly all the 'lives of Buddha.' The
sculptures at Amarâvati and Barahut also include this episode. See also
Fă-hien, p. 113.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[247:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_669) It is said, in the
later accounts, that 'they rose into the air.'

<span id="fn_670"></span>[247:2](sbe1923.htm#fr_670) See Tree and
Serpent Worship, plate lviii; also Burgess' Western Caves, plate xvii.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[247:3](sbe1923.htm#fr_671) Buddha was also
called the great Nâga or dragon.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[249:1](sbe1923.htm#fr_672) For a full account
of the deeds and punishment of Devadatta, see M. B., pp. 328, 329. We
are told that Suprabuddha, the father of Devadatta, also went to hell,
M. B., p. 339 seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 22. The Lady Âmrâ (Âmrapâlî) Sees Buddha](sbe1924)
