[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Euripides](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eaha04) 
[Next](eaha06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Euripides and His Age*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### BEGINNING OF THE WAR: THE PLAYS OF MATURITY, "MEDEA" TO "HERACLES"

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> next play of which we have full
knowledge must have staggered its audience. The *Medea* was promptly put
by the official judges at the bottom of the list of competing plays, and
thereafter took its place, we do not know how soon, as one of the
consummate achievements of the Greek tragic genius. Its stamp is fixed
on all the imagination of antiquity.

The plot of the *Medea* begins where that of the *Daughters of Pelias*
([p. 68](eaha04.htm#page_68)) ended. Jason had fled with Medea and her
two children to Corinth, which is ruled by Creon, an old king with a
daughter but no son to succeed him. The famous warrior-prince will just
suit Creon as a son-in-law, if only he will dismiss his discreditable
barbarian mistress. Jason has never been able to tell the truth to Medea
yet; who could? He secretly accepts Creon's terms; he marries the
princess;

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

and Creon descends on Medea with soldiers to remove her instantly from
the territory of Corinth. Medea begs for one day in which to make ready
for exile, for the children's sake. One day will be enough. By desperate
flattery and pleading she gets it. There follows a first scene with
Jason, in which man and woman empty their hearts on one another—at least
they try to; but even yet some fragments of old habit and conventional
courtesy prevent Jason from telling the full truth. Still it is a
wonderful scene, Jason reasonable and cold, ready to recognize all her
claims and provide her with everything she needs except his own heart's
blood; Medea desolate and half mad, asking for nothing but the one thing
he will not give. Love to her is the whole world, to him it is a stale
memory. This scene ends in defiance, but there is another in which Medea
feigns repentance and submission, and sends Jason with the two children
to bear a costly gift to the new bride. It may, she suggests, induce
Creon to spare the children and let her go to exile alone. The gift is
really a robe of burning poison, which has come to Medea from her divine
ancestor, the Sun. The bride dies in agony together with her father who
tries to save her. Jason

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

rushes to save his two children from the vengeance which is sure to come
upon them from the kinsmen of the murdered bride; but Medea has already
slain them with her own hand and stands laughing at him over their
bodies. She too suffers, but she loves the pain, since it means that he
shall have happiness no more. The Daughter of the Sun sails away on her
dragon chariot and an ecstasy of hate seems to blind the sky.

The *Medea* shows a new mastery of tragic technique, especially in the
extraordinary value it gets out of the chorus ([p.
238](eaha10.htm#page_238)). But as illustrating the life of Euripides
there are one or two special points in it that claim notice. In the
first place it states the cause of a barbarian woman against a Greek man
who has wronged her. Civilized men have loved and deserted savage women
since the world began, and I doubt if ever the deserted one has found
such words of fire as Medea speaks. The marvel is that in such white-hot
passion there is room for satire. But there is; and even a reader can
scarcely withhold a bitter laugh when Jason explains the advantage he
has conferred on Medea by bringing her to a civilized country. But Medea
is not only a barbarian; she is also

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

a woman, and fights the horrible war that lies, an eternally latent
possibility, between woman and man. Some of the most profound and
wounding things said both by Medea and by Jason might almost be labelled
in a book of extracts "Any wife to any husband," or "Any husband to any
wife." And Medea is also a witch; she is also at heart a maniac. It is
the madness produced by love rejected and justice denied, by the sense
of helpless, intolerable wrong. A lesser poet might easily have made
Medea a sympathetic character, and have pretended that long oppression
makes angels of the oppressed. In the great chorus which hymns the rise
of Woman to be a power in the world it would have been easy to make the
Woman's day a day of peace and blessing. But Euripides, tragic to the
heart and no dealer in pleasant make-believe, saw things otherwise; when
these oppressed women strike back, he seems to say, when these despised
and enslaved barbarians can endure no longer, it will not be justice
that comes but the revenge of madmen.

This kind of theme was not in itself likely to please an audience; but
what always galls the average theatre-goer most in a new work of genius
is not the subject but the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

treatment. Euripides’ treatment of his subject was calculated to
irritate the plain man in two ways. First it was enigmatic. He did not
label half his characters bad and half good; he let both sides state
their case and seemed to enjoy leaving the hearer bewildered. And
further, he made a point of studying closely and sympathetically many
regions of thought and character which the plain man preferred not to
think of at all. When Jason had to defend an obviously shabby case, no
gentleman cared to hear him; but Euripides insisted on his speaking. He
enjoyed tracking out the lines of thought and feeling which really
actuate men, even fine men like Jason, in Jason's position. When Medea
was revealed as obviously a wicked woman the plain man thought that such
women should simply be thrashed, not listened to. But Euripides loved to
trace all her complicated sense of injustice to its origins, and was
determined to understand and to explain rather than to condemn. The
plain man had a kind of justification for saying that Euripides actually
seemed to like these traitors and wicked women; for such thorough
understanding as this involves always a good deal of sympathy.

This charge could with even more reason

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

be brought against another masterpiece of drama, which followed three
years after the *Medea*. The *Hippolytus* (428 B.C.) did indeed win the
first prize from the official judges, besides establishing itself in the
admiration of after ages and inspiring Seneca and Racine to their finest
work. But it profoundly shocked public opinion at the same time. The
plot is a variant of a very old theme found in ancient Egypt and in the
Pentateuch. Theseus, not here the ideal democrat on the Athenian throne,
but the stormy and adventurous hero of the poets, had early in life
conquered the Amazons and ravished their virgin Queen. She died, leaving
a son like herself, Hippolytus. Theseus some twenty years after married
Phaedra, the young daughter of Minos, king of Crete, and she by the evil
will of Aphrodite fell in love with Hippolytus. She told no one her
love, and was trying to starve herself to death, when her old nurse
contrived to worm the secret from her and treacherously, under an oath
of secrecy, told it to Hippolytus. Phaedra, furious with the Nurse and
with Hippolytus, in a blind rage of self-defence, writes a false
accusation against Hippolytus and hangs herself. Hippolytus, charged by
Theseus with the crime, will not break his

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

oath and goes out to exile under his father's curse. The gods, in
fulfilment of the curse, send death to him, but before he actually dies
reveal his innocence. The story which might so easily be made ugly or
sensual is treated by Euripides with a delicate and austere purity. In
construction, too, and general beauty of workmanship, though not in
greatness of idea or depth of passion, the *Hippolytus* is perhaps the
finest of all his plays, and has still a great appeal on the stage. But
the philistine was vaguely hurt and angered by the treatment, so tender
and yet so inexorable, accorded to a guilty love, and doubtless the more
conventional Athenian ladies shocked themselves over the bare idea of
such a heroine being mentioned. It gives us some measure of the
stupidity of public criticism at the time, that we find special attacks
made upon one phrase of Hippolytus. In his first rage with the Nurse he
vows he will tell Theseus of her proposal. She reminds him of his oath,
and he cries:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"’T was but my tongue, ’t was not my heart that
swore."</span>

</div>

It is a passing flash of indignation at the trap in which he has been
caught. When the time comes he keeps his oath at the cost of

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

his life. Yet the line is repeatedly cited as showing the dreadful
doctrines of Euripides and the sophists; doctrines that would justify
any perjury!

The *Hippolytus*, as we have it, is a rewritten play. In his first
version Euripides had a scene in which Phaedra actually declared her
love. This more obvious treatment was preferred by Seneca and Racine;
but Euripides in his second thoughts reached a far more austere and
beautiful effect. His Phaedra goes to her death without having spoken
one word to Hippolytus: she has heard him but has not answered. The
*Hippolytus* has more serene beauty than any of Euripides’ plays since
the Alcestis, and is specially remarkable as the first great drama on
the subject of tragic or unhappy love, a theme which has been so
extraordinarily fruitful on the modern stage. To contemporaries it was
also interesting as one of the earliest treatments of a purely local
Attic story, which had not quite found its way into the great sagas of
epic tradition.

The note of the *Medea* was struck again some two years later (426?) in
a play almost equally powerful and more horrible, the *Hecuba*. The
heroine is the famous Queen of Troy, a barbarian woman like Medea,
majestic

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and beautiful at the beginning of the action and afterwards transformed
by intolerable wrongs into a kind of devil. Her "evils" are partly the
ordinary evils that come to the conquered in war, but they are made
worse by the callousness of her Greek conquerors. The play strikes many
notes of special bitterness. For instance, the one champion whom Hecuba
finds among her conquerors is the general, Agamemnon. He pleads her
cause in the camp, because, God help him! he has taken her daughter
Cassandra, the mad prophetess vowed to eternal virginity, to be his
concubine, and consequently feels good-natured. There is another note,
remarkable in an Athenian. The mob of the Greek army, in a frenzy of
superstition, clamour to have a Trojan princess sacrificed at Achilles'
tomb. In the debate on this subject we are told that several princes
spoke; among them the two sons of Theseus, the legendary kings of
Athens. They would surely, as enlightened Athenians, prevent such
atrocities? On the contrary, all we hear is that they spoke against one
another, but both were for the murder! At the end of the *Hecuba*, as at
the end of the *Medea*, we are wrought to a pitch of excitement at which
incredible legends begin to seem possible.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> History related
that the Queen of Troy, maddened by her wrongs, had been transformed
into a kind of Hell-hound with fiery eyes, whom sailors saw at night
prowling round the hill where she was stoned. In her bloody revenge on
the only enemy she can trap into her power, she seems already to have
become this sort of being in her heart, and when her blind and dying
victim prophesies the coming transformation, it seems natural. One only
feels that perhaps the old miraculous stories are true after all. The
one light that shines through the dark fury of the *Hecuba* is the
lovely and gentle courage, almost the joy, with which the virgin martyr,
Polyxena, goes to her death.

I have taken the *Hecuba* slightly before its due date, because of its
return with increased bitterness to the tone and subject of the *Medea*.
We will now go back. There had been in the interim a change in the
poet's mind, or, at the least, a strong clash of conflicting emotions.
The *Medea* was produced in 431, the first year of the Peloponnesian
War. This war, between the Athenian empire, representing the democratic
and progressive forces of Greece, and the Peloponnesian confederacy with
Sparta at its head, lasted with one interruption for twenty-seven years

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

and ended in the capture of Athens and the destruction of her power.
When war was first declared it represented the policy of Pericles, the
great statesman of the Enlightenment, the friend of Anaxagoras, and of
those whom Euripides honoured most. It seemed at first like a final
struggle between the forces of progress and those of resolute darkness.
Pericles in a famous speech, which is recorded for us by Thucydides, had
explained to his adherents the great causes for which Athens stood; had
proclaimed her as the Princess of Cities for whom it was a privilege to
die; and urged them, using a word more vivid in Greek than it is in
English, to stand about her like a band of Lovers round an Immortal
Mistress. Euripides was as a matter of fact still going through his
military service and must have seen much hard fighting in these first
years of the war.

He responded to Pericles’ call by a burst of patriotic plays. Even in
the *Medea* there is one chorus, a little out of place perhaps, but
famous in after days, describing the glories of Athens. They are not at
all the conventional glories attributed by all patriots to their
respective countries. "It is an old and happy land which no conqueror
has ever subdued; its children walk delicately through air that

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

shines with sunlight; and Wisdom is the very bread that they eat." (The
word is "sophia," embracing Wisdom, Knowledge, Art, Culture; there is no
one word for it in English, and the names for the various parts of it
have lost their poetry.) "A river," he continues, "flows through the
land; and legend tells that Cypris, the Goddess of Love, has sailed upon
it and dipped her hand in the water; and now when the river-wind at
evening blows it comes laden with a spirit of longing; but it is not
ordinary love, it is a Passion and a great Desire for all kinds of
godlike endeavour, a Love that sits with Wisdom upon her throne." … "A
pity the man should be so priggish." We may imagine the comment of the
average Athenian paterfamilias.

Towards the beginning of the war we may safely date the *Children of
Heracles*, a mutilated but beautiful piece, which rings with this
particular spirit of patriotism (cf. [p. 41](eaha03.htm#page_41) above).
Heracles is dead; his children and mother are persecuted and threatened
with death by his enemy, Eurystheus, king of Argos. Under the guidance
of their father's old comrade, Iolaus, they have fled from Argos, and
tried in vain to find protectors in every part of Greece. No city dares
protect

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

them against the power of Argos. At the opening of the play we find the
children and Iolaus clinging as suppliants to an altar in Athens. The
herald of Argos breaks in upon them, flings down the old man and
prepares to drag the children off. "What hope can Iolaus possibly
cherish?" Iolaus trusts in two things, in Zeus who will protect the
innocent, and in Athens which is a free city and not afraid. The king of
Athens, a son of Theseus, appears and rebukes the herald. The herald's
argument is clear: "These children are Argive subjects and are no
business of yours; further, they are utterly helpless and will be no
possible good to you as allies. And if you do not give them up
peacefully, Argos declares instant war." The king "wishes for peace with
all men; but he will not offend God, nor betray the innocent; also he
rules a free city and will take no orders from any outside power. As to
the fate of these children not being his business, it is always the
business of Athens to save the oppressed." One remembers the old claim,
emphatically approved by the historian of the Persian Wars, that Athens
was the saviour of Hellas. One remembers also the ultimatum of the
Peloponnesian confederacy which Pericles rejected on the eve of the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

present war; and the repeated complaints of the Corinthians that Athens
"will neither rest herself nor let others rest." These supply the clue
to a large part of the patriotism of the *Children of Heracles*. There
is another element also, and perhaps one that will better stand the test
of impartial criticism, in Euripides’ ideal of Athens. She will be true
to Hellas and all that Hellas stands for: for law, for the gods of
mercy, for the belief in right rather than force. Also, as the king of
Athens is careful to observe, for democracy and constitutional
government. He is no despot ruling barbarians.

The same motives recur with greater fulness and thoughtfulness in
another play of the early war time—the exact year is not certain—the
*Suppliant Women*. Scholars reading the play now, in cool blood, with
the issues at stake forgotten, are inclined to smile at a sort of
pedantry in the poet's enthusiasm. It reminds one of the punctiliousness
with which Shelley sometimes gives one the sincere milk of the word
according to Godwin. This play opens, like the last, with a scene of
supplication. A band of women—Argive mothers they are this time, whose
sons have been slain in war against Thebes—have come to Athens as
suppliants. They are led by Adrastus, the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

great and conquered lord of Argos, and finding Aethra, the king's
mother, at her prayers beside the altar, have surrounded her with a
chain of suppliant branches which she dares not break. They only ask
that Theseus, her son, shall get back for them the bodies of their dead
sons, whom the Thebans, contrary to all Hellenic law, have flung out
unburied for dogs to tear. Theseus at first refuses, on grounds of
policy, and the broken-hearted women take up their branches and begin to
go, when Aethra, who has been weeping silently, breaks out: "Is this
kind of wrong to be allowed to exist?"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thou shalt not suffer it, thou being my child!  
 Thou hast seen men scorn thy City, call her wild  
 Of counsel, mad; thou hast seen the fire of morn  
 Flash from her eyes in answer to their scorn.  
 Come toil on toil; ’t is this that makes her grand;  
 Peril on peril! And common states, that stand  
 In caution, twilight cities, dimly wise—  
 Ye know them, for no light is in their eyes.  
 Go forth, my son, and help. My fears are fled.  
 Women in sorrow call thee, and men dead."  
                                             (*Suppl*. 320 ff.)</span>

</div>

Theseus accepts his mother's charge. It has been his old habit to strike
wherever he saw oppression without counting the risk; and it shall never
be said of him that an ancient Law of God was set at naught when

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

he and Athens had power to enforce it. It is Athens as the "saviour of
Hellas" that we have here. It is Athens the champion of Hellenism and
true piety, but it is also the Athens of free thought and the
Enlightenment. For later on, when the dead bodies are recovered from the
battle-field, they are a ghastly sight. The old unreflecting Greece
would in the first place have thought them a pollution, a thing which
only slaves must be sent to handle. In the second place, since the
mothers were making lamentation, the bodies must be brought to their
eyes, so as to improve the lamentation. But Theseus feels differently on
both points. Why should the mothers' grief be made more bitter? Let the
bodies be burned in peace and the decent ashes given to the mothers. And
as to the defilement, the king himself, we hear, has taken up the
disfigured bodies in his arms and washed their wounds and "shown them
love." No slave touched them. "How dreadful! Was he not ashamed?" asks a
bystander—the Greek word means something between "ashamed" and
"disgusted." "No," is the answer: "Why should men be repelled by one
another's sufferings?" (768). It is a far-reaching answer, with great
consequences. It is the antique counterpart of St.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Francis kissing
the leper's sores. The man of the herd is revolted by the sight of great
misery and inclines to despise and even hate the sufferer; the man of
the enlightenment sees deeper, and the feeling of revulsion passes away
in the wish to help.

We spoke of a slight pedantry in the enthusiasms of the *Suppliant
Women*. It is illustrated even by points like this, and by a tendency in
Theseus to lecture on good manners and the Athenian constitution. The
rude Theban herald enters asking, "Who is monarch of this land?" using
the word "tyrannos" for "monarch." Theseus corrects him at once. "There
is no 'tyrannos' here. This is a free city; and when I say a free city,
I mean one in which the whole people by turns takes part in the
sovereignty, and the rich have no privilege as against the poor"
(399–408). These dissertations on democratic government could stir men's
passions and force their way into scenes of high poetry legitimately
enough at a time when men were fighting and dying for their democracy.
To those who are not "Lovers" of the beautiful city they will seem cold
and irrelevant.

Other plays of this period show marks of the same great wave of love for
Athens. The

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

lost plays *Aigeus*, *Theseus*, *Erechtheus*, all on Attic subjects, can
be dated in the first years of the war; the *Hippolytus* is built on an
old legend of the Acropolis and a poetic love of Athens shines through
the story. The Andromache especially is a curious document, the meaning
of which is discussed later on ([p. 110](eaha06.htm#page_110)). But the
two plays we have described at length, The *Children of Heracles* and
the *Suppliant Women*, give the best idea of what patriotism meant to
our poet. With most men patriotism is a matter of association and
custom. They stick to their country because it is theirs; to their own
habits and prejudices and even neighbours for the same reason. But with
Euripides his ideals came before his actual surroundings. He loved
Athens because Athens meant certain things, and if the real Athens
should cease to mean those things he would cast her out of his heart. At
least he would try to do so; in point of fact that is always a very
difficult thing to do. But if ever Athens should be false, it was pretty
certain that Euripides would find hatred mingling with his betrayed
love. There were signs of this even in the *Medea* and the *Hecuba*.

But before dealing with that subject we must dwell for a few moments
upon another

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

fine play, which marks in more than one sense the end of a period. The
*Heracles*, written about the year 423, shows Theseus in the same rôle
of Athenian hero. In the *Suppliant Women* he had helped Adrastus and
the Argive mothers and shown them the path of true Hellenism; in the
*Heracles* he comes to the rescue of Heracles in his fall. That hero has
been mad and slain his own children; he has recovered and awakes to find
himself bound to a pillar, with dead bodies that he cannot recognize
round about him. He rages to be set free. He compels those who know to
tell him the whole truth. Frantic with shame and horror, he wishes to
curse God and die, when he sees Theseus approaching. Theseus has been
his friend in many hard days and Heracles dares not face him nor speak
to him. The touch of one so blood-guilty, the sound of his voice, the
sight of his face, would bring pollution. He shrouds himself in his
mantle and silently waves Theseus away. In a moment his friend's arms
are round him, and the shrouding mantle is drawn off. There is no such
thing as pollution; no deed of man can stain the immortal sunlight, and
a friend's love does not fear the infection of blood. Heracles is
touched: he thanks Theseus and is now

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

ready to die. God has tempted him too far, and he will defy God. Theseus
reminds him of what he is: the helper of man, the powerful friend of the
oppressed; the Heracles who dared all and endured all; and now, like a
common, weak-hearted man, he speaks of suicide! "Hellas will not suffer
you to die in your blindness!" (1254). The great adventurer is softened
and won over by the "wisdom" of Theseus, and goes to Athens to fulfil,
in spite of suffering, whatever further tasks life may have in store for
him.

This condemnation of suicide was unusual in antiquity; and the
*Heracles* also contains one remarkable denial of the current myths, the
more remarkable because, as Dr. Verrall has pointed out, it seems almost
to upset the plot of the play. Heracles’ madness is sent upon him by the
malignity of Hera; we see her supernatural emissary entering the room
where Heracles lies. And the hero himself speaks of his supernatural
adventures. Yet he also utters the lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">     "Say not there be adulterers in Heaven  
      Nor prisoner gods and gaoler. Long ago  
      My heart has known it false and will not alter.  
      God, if he be God, lacketh naught.  
      All these Are dead unhappy tales of minstrelsy."  
(*Her*. 1341; cf. *Iph. Taur.* 380–395; *Bellerophon* fr. 292.)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

But in another way, too, the *Heracles* marks an epoch in the poet's
life. It seems to have been written in or about the year 423, and it was
in 424 that Euripides had reached the age of sixty and was set free from
military service. He had had forty years of it, steady work for the most
part; fighting against Boeotians, Spartans, Corinthians, against
Thracian barbarians, in all probability also against other people
further overseas. We have no record of the campaigns in which Euripides
served; but we have by chance an inscription of the year 458, when he
was twenty-six, giving the names of the members of one particular tribe,
the Sons of Erechtheus, who fell in war in that one year. They had
fallen "in Cyprus, in Egypt, in Phoenicia, at Halieis, in Aegina and at
Megara." There were ten such tribes in Athens. And this record gives
some notion of the extraordinary energy and ubiquity of the Athenian
armies.

It is strange to reflect on the gulf that lies between the life of an
ancient poet and his modern descendants. Our poets and men of letters
mostly live either by writing or by investments eked out by writing.
They are professional writers and readers and, as a rule, nothing else.
It is comparatively rare

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

for any one of them to face daily dangers, to stand against men who mean
to kill him and beside men for whom he is ready to die, to be kept a
couple of days fasting, or even to work in the sweat of his body for the
food he eats. If such things happen by accident to one of us we cherish
them as priceless "copy," or we even go out of our way to compass the
experience artificially.

But an ancient poet was living hard, working, thinking, fighting,
suffering, through most of the years that we are writing about life. He
took part in the political assembly, in the Council, in the jury-courts;
he worked at his own farm or business; and every year he was liable to
be sent on long military expeditions abroad or to be summoned at a day's
notice to defend the frontier at home. It is out of a life like this, a
life of crowded reality and work, that Aeschylus and Sophocles and
Euripides found leisure to write their tragedies; one writing 90, one
127, and the third 92! Euripides was considered in antiquity a bookish
poet. He had a library—in numbers probably not one book for every
hundred that Tennyson or George Meredith had: he was a philosopher, he
read to himself. But on what a background of personal experience his
philosophy was

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

builded! It is probably this immersion in the hard realities of life
that gives ancient Greek literature some of its special characteristic.
Its firm hold on sanity and common sense, for instance; its avoidance of
sentimentality and paradox and various seductive kinds of folly; perhaps
also its steady devotion to ideal forms and high conventions, and its
aversion from anything that we should call "realism." A man
everlastingly wrapped round in good books and safe living cries out for
something harsh and real—for blood and swear-words and crude jagged
sentences. A man who escapes with eagerness from a life of war and dirt
and brutality and hardship to dwell just a short time among the Muses,
naturally likes the Muses to be their very selves and not remind him of
the mud he has just washed off. Euripides has two long descriptions of a
battle, one in the *Children of Heracles* and one in the *Suppliant
Women;* both are rhetorical Messenger's Speeches, conventionally
well-written and without one touch that suggests personal experience. It
is curious to compare these, the writings of the poet who had fought in
scores of hand-to-hand battles, with the far more vivid rhapsodies of
modern writers who have never so

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

much as seen a man pointing a gun at them. Aeschylus indeed has written
one splendid battle piece in the *Persians*. But even there there is no
realism; it is the spirit of the war of liberation that thrills in us as
we read, it is not the particular incidents of the battle.

Forty years of military service finished: as the men of sixty stepped
out of the ranks they must have had a feeling of mixed relief and
misgiving. They are now officially "Gerontes," Old Men: they are off
hard work, and to be at the end of hard work is perilously near being at
the end of life. There is in the *Heracles* a wistful chorus, put in the
mouths of certain Theban elders (637 ff.), "Youth is what I love for
ever; Old Age is a burden upon the head, a dimness of light in the eyes,
heavier than the crags of Etna. Fame and the crown of the East and
chambers piled with gold, what are they all compared with Youth?" A
second life is what one longs for. To have it all again and live it
fully; if a man has any *aretê* in him, any real life left in his heart,
that is what ought to be possible. … For Euripides himself it seems
there is still a life to be lived. The words are important and almost
untranslatable. "I will never cease mingling

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

together the Graces and the Muses"—such words are nearly nonsense, like
most literal translations. The "Graces" or Charities are the spirits of
fulfilled desire, the Muses are all the spirits of "Music" or of
"Wisdom"—of History and Mathematics, by the way, just as much as Singing
and Poetry. "I will not rest. I will make the spirits of Fulfilled
Desire one with the spirits of Music, a marriage of blessedness. I care
not to live if the Muses leave me; their garlands shall be about me for
ever. Even yet the age-worn minstrel can turn Memory into song."

Memory, according to Greek legend, was the mother of the Muses; and the
"memory" of which Euripides is thinking is that of the race, the saga of
history and tradition, more than his own. The Muses taught him long ago
their mystic dance, and he will be theirs for ever; he will never from
weariness or faint heart ask them to rest. He was thinking doubtless of
the lines of the old poet Alcman to his dancing maidens, lines almost
the most beautiful ever sung by Greek lips: "No more, ye maidens
honey-throated, voices of longing; my limbs will bear me no more. Would
God I were a ceryl-bird, over the flower of the wave with the halcyons

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

flying, and never a care in his heart, the sea-blue bird of the spring!"
Euripides asks for no rest: cares and all, he accepts the service of the
Muses and prays that he may bear their harness to the end. It was a bold
prayer, and the Muses in granting it granted it at a heavy price.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](eaha06)
