[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Euripides](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eaha06.md) 
[Next](eaha08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Euripides and His Age*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### AFTER THE "TROJAN WOMEN": EURIPIDES’ LAST YEARS IN ATHENS: FROM THE "IPHIGENIA" TO THE "ORESTES"

<span class="smallcaps">Critics</span> have used various words to
describe the change of mood which followed the *Trojan Women*. They
speak of a period of despair, pessimism, progressive bitterness,
*Verzweiflung* and *Weltschmerz*. But such phrases seem to me
misleading. In the first place I do not think they describe quite truly
even the particular plays they are meant to describe; in the second,
they do not allow for the great variety which subsists in the plays of
this period. The mood of the *Trojan Women* is not exactly pessimism or
despair; and whatever it is, it does not colour all the subsequent
plays.

The plays after 415 fall into two main divisions. First the works of
pure fancy or romance, in which the poet seems to turn intentionally
away from reality. Such are the *Iphigenîa in Tauris*, the *Helena* and
the *Andromeda;* they move among far seas and

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

strange adventures and they have happy endings. Next there are the true
tragedies, close to life, ruthlessly probing the depths of human nature;
not more acutely bitter than such earlier works as the *Medea* and
*Hecuba*, but with a bitterness more profound because it is
comparatively free from indignation. The glory has fallen away and the
burning anger with it. The poor miserable heroes and heroines … what
else can you expect of them? Rage is no good; punishment worse than
useless. The road to healing lies elsewhere.

A good key to the first of these types of play is to be seen in
Aristophanes’ comedy, *The Birds*. The gayest, sweetest and most
irresponsible of all his plays, it was written just after the news of
the final disaster in Sicily, when ruin stared Athens in the face. And
the two heroes of it, disgusted with the ways of man, depart to live
among the birds and build, with their help, a splendid Cloud City. In
much the same spirit Euripides must have written his *Andromeda*. He
produced it in 412, the same year in which he was invited by the
anti-war government which came into power after the news of the great
disaster to write the national epitaph on the soldiers slain in Sicily.
He wrote the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

epitaph in the old severe untranslatable style of Simonides: "These men
won eight victories over the Syracusans when the hand of God lay even
between both." In English it seems cold; it seems hardly poetry. But in
Greek it is like carved marble. Then, one must imagine, he turned right
away from the present and spent his days with Andromeda. Only a few
fragments of the *Andromeda* remain, but they are curiously beautiful;
and the play as a whole seems to have been the one unclouded
love-romance that Euripides ever wrote. It was fantastic, remote from
life, with its heroine chained to a cliff over the blue sea awaiting the
approach of the sea-monster, and its hero, Perseus, on winged sandals,
appearing through the air to save her. Yet the fragments have a wistful
ring: "O holy Night, how long is the path of thy chariot!" "By the Mercy
that dwelleth in the sea caves, cease, O Echo; let me weep my fill in
peace." Or the strange lines (fr. 135):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Methinks it is the morrow, day by day,  
That cows us, and the coming thing alway  
Greater than things to-day or yesterday.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There was a story
told, in later times, of a tragedy-fever that fell on the folk of
Abdêra,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

in Thrace, through this play, till in every street you could see young
men walking as though in a dream, and murmuring to themselves the speech
beginning, "O Love, high monarch over gods and men. …" The *Andromeda*
was five hundred years old when people told that story.

The *Iphigenîa in Tauris* came one year earlier. It is one of the most
beautiful of the extant plays, not really a tragedy in our sense nor yet
merely a romance. It begins in gloom and rises to a sense of peril, to
swift and dangerous adventure, to joyful escape. So far it is like
romance. But it is tragic in the sincerity of the character-drawing.
Iphigenîa, especially, with her mixed longings for revenge and for
affection, her hatred of the Greece that wronged her and her love of the
Greece that is her only home, her possibilities of stony cruelty and her
realities of swift self-sacrifice, is a true child of her great and
accursed house. The plot is as follows:—Iphigenîa, daughter of
Agamemnon, who was supposed to have been sacrificed by her father at
Aulis, was really saved by Artemis and is now priestess to that goddess
in the land of the Taurians at the extremity of the Friendless Sea. The
Taurians are savages who kill all strangers,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

and if ever a Greek shall land in the wild place it will be her task to
prepare him for sacrifice. She lives with this terror hanging over her,
and the first Greek that comes is her unknown brother, Orestes. Their
recognition of one another is, perhaps, the finest recognition-scene in
all Tragedy; and with its sequels of stratagem and escape forms a
thrilling play, haunted not, like a tragedy, by the shadow of death but
rather by the shadow of homesickness. The characters are Greeks in a far
barbarian land, longing for home or even for the Greek sea. The lyrics
are particularly fine, and most of them full of sea-light and the clash
of waters.

In the same year as the *Andromeda* came another romantic play, the
*Helena*. It is a good deal like the *Iphigenîa* in structure, but it is
lighter, harder, and more artificial. The romance of Euripides is never
quite the easy dreaming of lighter-hearted writers. And the *Helena*, in
which he seems to have attempted a work of mere fancy, is, if we
understand it rightly, a rather brilliant failure. Some critics—quite
mistakenly in my judgment—have even argued that it is a parody. The plot
is based on a variant of the canonical legend about Helen, a variant
generally

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

associated with the ancient lyric poet, Stesichorus. Story tells that
Stesichorus at one time lost his eyesight and took it into his head that
this was a punishment laid on him by the goddess Helen, because he had
told the story of her flight with Paris from her husband's house. He
wrote a recantation, based on another form of the Helen-legend, in which
Helen was borne away by the God Hermes to Egypt and there lived like a
true wife till Menelaus came and found her. The being that went with
Paris to Troy was only a phantom image of Helen, contrived by the gods
in order to bring about the war, and so reduce the wickedness and
multitude of mankind. In Euripides’ play there is a wicked king of
Egypt, who seeks to marry Helen against her will and kills all Greeks
who land in his country. The war at Troy is over, and Menelaus, beaten
by storms out of his way, is shipwrecked on the coast of Egypt. He and
Helen meet, recognize one another, and by the help of the king's sister,
who has second sight, contrive to escape. It is hard to say what exactly
is wrong with the *Helena;* and it may only be that we moderns do not
know in what spirit to take it. But the illusion is difficult to keep up
and the work seems cold. Reality has gone out of it. For

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

one thing, Helen, in her thorough process of rehabilitation, has emerged
that most insipid of fancies, a perfectly beautiful and blameless
heroine with no character except love of her husband, whom, by the way,
she has not seen for seventeen years.

Another large experiment of this time is the *Phoenissae*, or *Tyrian
Women* (410?). It is the longest Greek tragedy in existence, and covers
the greatest stretch of story. Aeschylus, we remember, had the habit of
writing true "trilogies"—three continuous dramas, carrying on the same
history. The *Phoenissae* seems like an attempt to run the matter of a
whole trilogy into one play. It does not fall into either of the
divisions which I have sketched above: it is neither a play of fancy nor
yet a realistic tragedy. But even if we had no external tradition of its
date we could tell to what part of the author's life it belongs. It is
written, as it is conceived, in the large and heroic style; but it shows
in the regular manner of this period a general clash of hatreds and
frantic ambitions and revenges and cruel statesmanship standing out
against the light of a young man's heroism and a mother's and a sister's
love. It is like Euripides, too, that this beautiful mother should be
Jocasta,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

whose unknowing incest had made her an abomination in the eyes of
orthodox Greece.

The play tells the story of Thebes. The sin of Oedipus and Jocasta is a
thing of the past; Oedipus has blinded himself and cursed his children,
and they have in course of time imprisoned him in the vaults of the
palace. Jocasta still lives. The sons Polyneices and Eteocles have
agreed to reign by turns; Polyneices, the elder, has reigned his year
and gone abroad to Argos; Eteocles having once got the crown has refused
to yield it up. Polyneices comes with an Argive army to lay siege to
Thebes and win his rights by war. The drama is developed in a series of
great pictures. We have first the Princess Antigone with an old slave
looking from the wall out towards the enemy's camp, seeking for a
glimpse of her brother. Next comes a man with face hidden and sword
drawn stealing through the gates, seeking for Jocasta. It is Polyneices.
The mother has induced her sons to have one meeting before they fight.
The meeting reveals nothing but ambition and mutual hatred. They agree
to look for one another on the field, and Polyneices goes. There are
consultations in the beleaguered

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

city. Creon, who is Jocasta's brother and a sort of Prime Minister,
advises the rash Eteocles; but the prophets must be consulted too, that
the gods may be favorable. The prophet Tiresias—blind and old and
jealous, as so often in Greek tragedy—proclaims that the only medicine
to save the state is for Creon's son, Menoikeus, to be slain as a
sin-offering in the lair of the ancient Dragon whom Cadmus slew. Creon
quickly refuses; he dismisses the prophet and arranges for his son to
escape from Thebes and fly to the ends of Greece. The boy feigns consent
to the plan of escape, but, as soon as his father has left him, rushes
enthusiastically up to a tower of the city and flings himself over into
the Dragon's den. A messenger comes to Jocasta with news of the battle.
"Are her sons slain?" No; both are alive and unhurt. He tells his story
of the Argive attack and its repulse from every gate.—"But what of the
two brothers?"—He must go now and will bring more news later.—Jocasta
sees he is concealing something and compels him to speak. The truth
comes out; the brothers are preparing a single combat. With a shriek the
mother calls Antigone; and the two women, young and old, make their way
through the

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

army to try to separate the blood-mad men. We learn from a second
messenger how the brothers have slain each other "in a meadow of wild
lotus," and Jocasta has killed herself with one of their swords.
Antigone returns and to bring the news to her only friend, the blind
Oedipus. Creon by Eteocles’ charge takes over the government, he, too, a
broken-hearted man, but none the less ruthless; he proclaims that
Polyneices' body shall lie unburied and that Oedipus, the source of
pollution, shall be cast out of the land; Antigone meantime shall marry
Creon's son, Haemon. Antigone defies him. She will not wed Haemon nor
any of Creon's kin: her father shall not be cast out to die, for she
will go with him and protect him. Polyneices shall not lie unburied, for
she herself will return by stealth and bury him. There is still one
human love that Oedipus yearns for most; that of the sin-stained wife
and mother who is lying dead in the meadow of wild lotus. But meantime
he takes the hand of his daughter. Old man and young maiden they go
forth together, away from the brutalities of human kind, to the high
mountains, to the holy inviolate places on Kithairon where only the wild
White Women of Dionysus dance their mystic dances.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

The *Phoenissae* stands half way between the pure Romances and the
tragedies of the last period. Of these latter the clearest type is the
*Electra* (probably 413), a play which before it was understood used to
receive the unstinted abuse of Critics, as "the meanest of Greek
tragedies," "the very worst of all Euripides’ plays." It deals with the
moral problem of the Blood-Feud, stated in its sharpest terms.

Now the blood-feud, we must realize, in any society where there is no
public law and no police, is a high moral duty. A man commits an
abominable crime and revels in comfort on the proceeds; his victim is
dead, and there is no law which will act automatically. It becomes the
duty of some one—normally the heir or representative of the dead man—to
devote himself to the work of justice, to forsake all business and
pleasure in life till the wrong has been righted and the dead man
avenged. A man who would let his kinsman be murdered and then live on at
his ease rather than pursue the murderer, would obviously be a poor
false creature. Now comes the problem. The strongest possible claim is
that of a father murdered; the most horrible act a Greek could conceive
was for a man to slay his mother. Suppose a wife

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

murdered her husband, ought her son to slay her? The law of the
blood-feud, as traditionally preached from the Temple of Apollo at
Delphi, answered, in spite of all repugnances, Yes.

The story had been treated before Euripides by many poets, including
Homer, Stesichorus, Pindar, Aeschylus and possibly—though the dates are
not certain—Sophocles. Clytemnestra had with the help of her lover
Aegisthus murdered her husband Agamemnon; her son Orestes slays her in
obedience to Apollo's command, and his sister Electra aids him.
Aeschylus in his *Libation-Bearers* had dealt with this theme on broad
lines and with gorgeous intensity of imagination. His Orestes is carried
to the deed on a great wave of religious passion and goes mad as soon as
it is done. The deed as commanded by God is right, but it is too much
for human nature to endure. In an ensuing play Orestes, after long
sufferings, is tried for the matricide and, when the human judges are
evenly divided, acquitted by the divine voice of Athena. Sophocles
treats the subject very differently. He makes a most brilliant play with
extraordinary clashes of emotion and moments of tragic beauty. But,
evidently of set purpose, he makes the whole treatment

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

hard and archaic. There is no shrinking back, no question of conscience
at all. Clytemnestra is a furious tyrant; she beats Electra with her
fists, and Aegisthus does worse (1196, 517). The climax of the play is
not the mother-murder but the killing of Aegisthus, which was presumably
the harder and more exciting job. When Orestes and his friend Pylades
come out of the palace streaming with Clytemnestra's blood their nerves
are unshaken and the Chorus is careful to say that they are not to be in
any way blamed (1423).

The spirit of Euripides is exactly the opposite; so much so indeed that
most critics feel clear that the two *Electra* plays are closely
related, and related in opposition. The one is a deliberate protest
against the other; unfortunately the play of Sophocles cannot be dated
and it is not clear from internal evidence which play was written first.

In the *Electra* of Euripides we find two main qualities. First, there
is psychological realism of the subtlest kind. Secondly, there is a new
moral atmosphere. With a power of sympathy and analysis unrivalled in
ancient drama he has imagined just what kind of people these children
must have been, who would thus through long years nurse the seeds

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

of hatred and at the end kill their mother. He studies them all;
Electra, a mixture of heroism and broken nerves; a poisoned and haunted
woman, eating her heart in ceaseless broodings of hate and love, both
alike unsatisfied; for he suggests, somewhat cruelly, that she might
have lived contentedly enough, had she only had a normal married life.
The name in its original Doric form suggested the meaning, "*Unmated*."
Orestes is a youth bred in the unwholesome dreams of exile, and now
swept away by his sister's stronger will; subject also, as Orestes
always is in Greek tragedy, to delusions and melancholy madness. The
mother herself is not forgotten, and a most piteous figure she shows,
"this sad, middle-aged woman, whose first words are an apology;
controlling quickly her old fires, anxious to be as little hated as
possible; ready even to atone for her crime, if only there were some
safe way of atonement." Thus, in the first place, Euripides has stripped
the old bloody deed of the heroic glamour that surrounded it. His actors
are not clear-minded heroes moving straight to their purpose. They are
human creatures, erring, broken by passion, mastered by their own
inhibitions and doubts and regrets. In the second place he has no doubt
at all about the

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

ethics of the mother-murder. It was an abomination, and the god who
ordained it—if any did—was a power of darkness.

After the deed the two murderers come forth as in Sophocles. But this
time they are not triumphant and the Chorus does not hail them as having
done right. They reel from the door, "red-garmented and ghastly" and
break into a long agony of remorse. The Chorus share their horror.
Electra's guilt is the greater since she drove her brother to the deed
against his will; even while they love her, they can not quite forget
that, though they feel that now at last, by this anguish, her heart may
be "made clean within." The play ends with an appearance of the gods.
The Heavenly Horsemen, Castor and Polydeuces, who were kinsmen of the
dead, appear on a cloud, and speak in judgment and comfort. With a
definiteness rare in Euripides they pronounce the deed of vengeance to
be evil:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And Phoebus, Phoebus … Nay:  
 He is my lord, therefore I hold my peace.  
 But though in light he dwell, not light was this  
 He showed to thee, but darkness."</span>

</div>

Another note is also struck, that of pity for the suffering of humanity.
Orestes and

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Electra, condemned
to part, break, as they bid one another farewell, into a great cry, and
the gods, hearing it, are shaken:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Alas! what would ye? For that cry  
  Ourselves and all the sons of heaven  
  Have pity; yea, our peace is riven  
By the strange pain of these that die.  
      \*   \*   \*   \*   \*  
But hark! The far Sicilian sea  
  Calls, and a noise of men and ships  
  That labour sunken to the lips  
In bitter billows; forth go we  
With saving.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They speak such
words of comfort and groping wisdom as they can find—no one has ever
claimed that they are omniscient—and depart upon their own eternal task,
which is not to punish but to save.

The appearance of the gods in the *Electra* is so beautiful that no
critics have yet tried to explain it away as nonsense; and the lesson of
it so clear that its meaning is seldom denied. But I find just the same
lesson in the final scene of the *Orestes*, which is commonly taken as
the very worst instance of Euripides’ habit of closing with a "God from
the machine."

The *Orestes* (408 B.C.) deals with the fate of Orestes some days after
his mother's murder. He is mad and sick; his sister is nursing

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

him with devotion. The people have risen against them and they are held
prisoners in the palace till an assembly shall try them for murder and
pronounce their fate. Meantime Menelaus—Orestes’ uncle and king of
Sparta—has arrived at the harbour with his wife Helen and their daughter
Hermione. He has sent on his wife and daughter to the palace and is
expected hourly himself. He is Agamemnon's brother; he has with him an
army of Trojan veterans; he can surely be counted on to cow the Argive
populace and save his dead brother's son. All our hopes hang on
Menelaus, and when at last he comes he proves false. He would like to
help; but it would be wrong for him, a foreigner, to dictate to the
Argives; and he has only a very small force with him. However, he will
reason with Orestes’ enemies. One does not forget that, if Argos is left
without a king, Menelaus will normally inherit. The sick man blazes into
rage against him and Menelaus becomes an open enemy. Exasperation
follows on exasperation: Orestes’ friend Pylades breaks through the
guards and enters the palace to share the prisoners’ fate. The assembly
hears and at length condemns them. They are given a day in which to die
as they best please. Like scorpions surrounded by

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

fire, the three, Orestes, Electra and Pylades, begin to strike blindly.
A brilliant idea! They can kill Helen: that will punish Menelaus, and
Helen deserves many deaths. Better still, kill Helen and then capture
Hermione! Hold a dagger at her throat and then bargain with Menelaus for
help even at the last hour! Murder his wife and then force him to help!
Splendid! The madness of Orestes infects the whole play. Helen escapes,
being half-divine; but they catch Hermione, who, as a matter of fact,
has always been kind to them. Menelaus, who has heard news from an
escaping slave, rushes up to save Helen, but he finds no sign of her; he
finds only the palace barred and the madman on the roof, shrieking
derision and holding the knife at his daughter's throat. There is a
brief wild attempt at bargaining; then hate in Menelaus overcomes fear.
He rejects all terms. Orestes’ party sets fire to the palace; and
Menelaus at the head of his soldiers beats blindly at the barred gate.
"The fire of Hell," to use Dr. Verrall's phrase, has been let loose;
rage, hatred, revenge, all blazing to the point of madness; what more
can befall?

What does befall is strange and daring. An entry of a god not in
gentleness, not with

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

any preparation or [introduction](errata.htm#0.md), but sudden and
terrific, striking all beholders into a trance from which they awaken
changed men. The point has not been generally observed, though it is, I
think, clear.

At Apollo's first sudden cry "Menelaus, be still!" (line 1625) we know
that Orestes is supporting Hermione in one arm while with the other hand
he is holding the knife at her throat. He is in exactly the same
position at line 1653; he only moves from it at 1671. That is the
conduct of a man in a trance, suddenly, as it were, struck rigid. And we
shall find that the words spoken by both Menelaus and Orestes when
Apollo has finished his charge, are like nothing but the words of men
emerging from a trance; a trance, too, of some supernatural kind, like
that for instance which falls on the raging world in Mr. Wells's book,
*In the Days of the Comet*. Here, too, a raging world wakes to find
itself at peace and its past hatreds unintelligible. And the first
thought that comes to the surface is, in each case, the great guiding
preoccupation of each man's life; with Menelaus it is Helen; with
Orestes the oracle that made him sin. Nay more; when Orestes wakens,
half-conscious, to find Hermione lying in his arms, his natural
movement, as

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

experiments on hypnotized persons have shown, is to accept the
suggestion and draw her to him in love. Greek legend knew well that, as
a matter of history, Hermione became Orestes’ bride. There is daring,
perhaps excessive daring, in making it occur this way; but the
psychology of something like hypnotism had a fascination for both
Aeschylus and Euripides. For the rest, Apollo has spoken the word of
forgiveness and reconciliation. He concludes:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Depart now, each upon his destined way,  
Your hates dead and forgotten.

<span class="smallcaps">Men</span>.                            I obey.

<span class="smallcaps">Or</span>. I too; mine heart is as a wine of
peace  
Poured with the past and thy dark mysteries.

<span class="smallcaps">Apollo</span> Go now your ways: and without
cease  
  Give honour in your hearts to one,  
  Of spirits all beneath the sun  
Most beautiful; her name is Peace.

I rise with Helen Zeus-ward, past  
  The orb of many a shining star;  
  Where Heracles and Hebe are  
And Hera, she shall reign at last,

A goddess in men's prayers to be  
  For ever, with her Brethren twain  
  Enthronèd, a great help in pain  
And queen of the eternal sea.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Helen a goddess!"
say some critics; "the notion is impossible. We have seen her in

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

this same play, a heartless ordinary woman." Yet I think Euripides was
serious enough. I do not say he believed either this or any other
particular bit of the mythology. But he was writing seriously and aiming
at beauty, not at satire. All legend said that Helen was made a goddess;
and Euripides was always curiously haunted by the thought of Helen and
by the mysterious and deadly power of mere superlative beauty. As Apollo
had said to Menelaus (1638):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Thy bride shall be another: none may know  
Her. For the Gods, to work much death and woe,  
Devised this loveliness all dreams above,  
That men in Greece and Troy for thirst thereof  
Should strive and die, and so the old Earth win  
Peace from mankind's great multitude and sin.</span>

</div>

The superlative beauty may probably enough be found in company with
heartlessness and treachery; but cannot these things be purged away,
like the hates of Menelaus and Orestes, and the pure beauty remain a
thing to pray to and be helped by, much as the old sagas pretend? There
is here again the touch of mysticism.

But however it be about Helen, or even about the above explanation in
detail of the last scene of the *Orestes*, it is clear that both the
most characteristic plays of the so-called

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

period of gloom end with a strong, almost a mystically strong, note of
peace and reconciliation. This note occurs, though with less intensity,
at the end of other late plays, such as the *Iphigenîa in Tauris* and
the *Helena;* and, though without a god, in the *Phoenissae*. It does
not occur at all in the early plays. The *Medea* and *Hecuba* end in
pure hate; the *Hippolytus* ends in wonderful beauty and a
reconciliation between the hero and his father, who are natural friends,
but it keeps up the feud of Aphrodite and Artemis and contains a strange
threat of vengeance (v. 1420 ff.). The lovely Thetis of the *Andromache*
brings comfort and rest but preaches no forgiveness; on the contrary the
body of Pyrrhus is to be buried at Delphi as an eternal reproach.
Euripides all through his life was occupied with the study of revenge.
It was a time, as Thucydides tells us, when "men tried to surpass all
the record of previous times in the ingenuity of their enterprises and
the enormity of their revenges." Euripides seems first to have been
almost fascinated by the enormous revenges, at least when they were the
work of people who had suffered enormous wrong. He seems, in plays like
the *Medea*, to be saying: "If you goad

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

people beyond endurance, this is the sort of thing you must expect them
to do … and serve you right!" In the plays after 415 the emphasis has
rather changed: "You must expect to be wronged, and revenge will do good
to nobody. Seek peace and forgive one another."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](eaha08.md)
