[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Euripides](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eaha09) 
[Next](eaha11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Euripides and His Age*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### THE ART OF EURIPIDES CONTINUED: THE CHORUS: CONCLUSION

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> lastly there is the Chorus, at once
the strangest and the most beautiful of all these ancient and remote
conventions. If we can understand the Chorus we have got to the very
heart of Greek tragedy.

The objections to the Chorus are plain to any infant. These dozen
homogeneous persons, old men or young women, eternally present and
almost never doing anything, intruded on action that often demands the
utmost privacy: their absurdity, on any plane of realism, is manifest.
We need waste no more words upon it. Verisimilitude is simply thrown to
the winds. That is, no doubt, a great sacrifice, and fine artists do not
as a rule incur a sacrifice without making sure of some compensating
gain. Let us try to find out what that gain was, or at least what the
great Greek artists were aiming at. And let us

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

begin by forgetting the modern stage altogether and thinking ourselves
back to the very origins of drama.

The word "chorus" means "dance" or "dancing-ground." There were such
dancing floors on Greek soil before ever the Greeks came there. They
have been found in prehistoric Crete and in the islands. We hear in
Homer of the "houses and dancing-grounds" of the Morning Star. The dance
was as old as mankind; only it was a kind of dance that we have almost
forgotten. The ancient dance was not, like our ballets, rooted in sexual
emotion. It was religious: it was a form of prayer. It consisted in the
use of the whole body, every limb and every muscle, to express somehow
that overflow of emotion for which a man has no words. And primitive man
had less command of words than we have. When the men were away on the
warpath, the women prayed for them with all their bodies. They danced
for the men's safe return. When the tribe's land was parching for lack
of rain the tribesmen danced for the rain to come. The dance did not
necessarily imply movement. It might consist in simply maintaining the
same rigid attitude, as when Moses held out his arms during the battle
with the Amalekites or Ahure in the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egyptian story
waited kneeling and fasting for Nefrekepta's return.

Now if we consider what kind of emotion will specially call for this
form of expression it is easy to see that it will be the sort that tends
quickly to get beyond words: religious emotions of all kinds, helpless
desire, ineffectual regret and all feelings about the past. When we
think of the kind of ritual from which tragedy emerged, the lament for a
dead god, we can see how well a dance was fitted, in primitive times, to
express the emotions that we call tragic.

This dance gradually grew into drama; how it did so is an old story.
Into the inarticulate mass of emotion and dumb show which is the Dance
there comes some more articulate element. There comes some one who
relates, or definitely enacts, the actual death or "pathos" of the hero,
while the Chorus goes on as before expressing emotion about it. This
emotion, it is easy to see, may be quite different from that felt by the
Hero. There is implied in the contemplation of any great deed this
ultimate emotion, which is not as a rule felt by the actual doers of it,
and is not, at its highest power, to be expressed by the ordinary
language of dialogue. The dramatist may make his characters express

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

all that they can properly feel; he may put into articulate dialogue all
that it will bear. But there still remains some residue which no one on
the stage can personally feel and which can only express itself as music
or yearning of the body. This residue finds its one instrument in the
Chorus.

Imagine the death of some modern hero, of Lincoln or of Nelson, treated
in the Greek form. We should have first a Messenger bringing news of the
battle of Trafalgar or the pistol-shot in the Washington Theatre. The
hero would be borne in dying; his friends would weep over him; we should
hear his last words. But there would always remain some essential
emotion or reflection—sadness, triumph, pathos, thoughts of the future
from which this man will be lacking or of the meaning of this death in
human history: neither Lincoln nor Nelson can express this, nor without
falsity any of their human companions. In a novel the author can express
it; in a modern play or a severely realistic novel it is generally not
expressed except by a significant silence or some symbol. For realistic
work demands extreme quickness in its audience, and can only make its
effect on imaginations already trained by romance and idealism. On the
Greek stage the Chorus

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

will be there just for this purpose, to express in music and movement
this ultimate emotion and, as Mr. Haigh puts it, to "shed a lyrical
splendour over the whole." It will translate the particular act into
something universal. It will make a change in all that it touches,
increasing the elements of beauty and significance and leaving out or
reducing the element of crude pain. This is nothing extraordinary: it is
the normal business of poetry, at least of great tragic poetry. An
actual bereavement is an experience consisting of almost nothing but
crude pain; when it is translated into religion or poetry, into "Rachel
weeping for her children," or into "Break, break, break," it has somehow
become a thing of beauty and even of comfort.

The important thing to observe is what Mr. F. M. Cornford has explained
in his *Thucydides Mythistoricus* (pp. 144 ff.), that a Greek tragedy
normally proceeds in two planes or two worlds. When the actors are on
the stage we are following the deeds and fates of so many particular
individuals, lovers, plotters, enemies, or whatever they are, at a
particular point of time and space. When the stage is empty and the
Choral Odes begin, we have no longer the particular acts and places and
persons but something universal

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

and eternal. The body, as it were, is gone and the essence remains. We
have the greatness of love, the vanity of revenge, the law of eternal
retribution, or perhaps the eternal doubt whether in any sense the world
is governed by righteousness.

Thus the talk about improbability with which we started falls into its
proper insignificance. The Chorus in Euripides is frequently blamed by
modern scholars on the ground that "it does not further the action,"
that its presence is "improbable," or its odes "irrelevant." The answer
is that none of these things constitute the business of the Chorus; its
business is something considerably higher and more important.

Of action and relevancy we will speak later. They are both closely
connected with the question of verisimilitude. And as for
verisimilitude, we simply do not think of it. We are not imitating the
outside of life. We are expressing its soul, not depicting its body. And
if we did attempt verisimilitude we should find that in a Chorus it is
simply unattainable. In Nelson's case a Chorus of Sailors would be every
bit as improbable as a Chorus of Mermaids or Angels, and on the whole
rather more strikingly so. If we try to think of the most effective
Choruses in modern

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

tragedies, I do not think we shall hit on any bands of Strolling Players
or Flower Girls or Church Choirs or other Choruses that aim at
"naturalness"; we shall probably go straight to the Choruses of Spirits
in *Prometheus Unbound* or those of The Ages and The Pities in Mr.
Hardy's *Dynasts*. The Chorus belongs not to the plane of ordinary
experience, where people are real and act and make apposite remarks, but
to that higher world where in Mr. Cornford's words "metaphor, as we call
it, is the very stuff of life."

With very few exceptions, Greek Choruses are composed of beings who are
naturally the denizens or near neighbours of such a world. Sometimes
they are frankly supernatural, as in the *Eumenides*, or half
supernatural, as in the *Bacchae;* sometimes they are human beings seen
through the mist of a great emotion, like the weeping Rachels of the
*Suppliant Women;* the captives of the *Trojan Women* or the
*Iphigenîa;* the old men who dream dreams in the *Heracles*. Even if
they start as common men or women, sooner or later they become
transformed.

The problem of the Chorus to Euripides was not how to make it as little
objectionable as possible; it was how to get the greatest and highest
value out of it. And that resolves

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

itself largely into the problem of handling these two planes of action,
using now the lower and now the upper, now keeping them separate, now
mingling them, and at times letting one forcibly invade the other. I
cannot here go into details of the various effects obtained from the
Chorus by Euripides; but I will take a few typical ones, selecting in
each case scenes that have been loudly condemned by critics.

The first and most normal effect is to use the Chorus for "relief"; to
bring in, as it were, the ideal world to heal the wounds of the real. It
is not, of course, "comic relief," as indulged in so freely by the
Elizabethans. It is a transition from horror or pain to mere beauty or
music, with hardly any change of tension. I mean, that if the pain has
brought tears to your eyes, the beauty will be such as to keep them
there, while of course changing their character. It is this use of
lyrics that enables the Greek playwright to treat freely scenes of
horror and yet never lose the prevailing atmosphere of high beauty. Look
at the Salamis Chorus in the *Trojan Women* immediately following the
child's death; the lyrics between Oedipus and the Chorus when he has
just entered with his bleeding eyes; or, in particular, the song

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

sung by the Chorus in *Hippolytus* just after Phaedra has rushed off to
kill herself. We have had a scene of high tension and almost intolerable
pain, and the Chorus, left alone, make certainly no relevant remarks. I
can think of no relevant remark that would not be absurd bathos. They
simply break out (732 ff.):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Could I take me to some cavern for mine hiding,  
  In the hill-tops, where the sun scarce hath trod,  
Or a cloud make the home of mine abiding,  
  As a bird among the bird-droves of God. …</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is just the
emotion that was in our own hearts; the cry for escape to some place,
however sad, that is still beautiful: to the poplar grove by the
Adriatic where his sisters weep for Phaethon; or, at last, as the song
continues and grows bolder, to some place that has happiness as well as
beauty; to that "strand of the Daughters of the Sunset,"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Where a sound of living waters never ceaseth  
  In God's quiet garden by the sea,  
And Earth, the ancient Life-giver, increaseth  
  Joy among the meadows, like a tree.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the wish for
escape brings an actual escape, on some wind of beauty, as it were, from
the Chorus's own world. This is, on

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

the whole, the most normal use of the Choric odes, though occasionally
they may also be used for helping on the action. For instance, in the
ode immediately following that just quoted the Chorus gives a sort of
prophetic or clairvoyant description of Phaedra's suicide.

 

But the Greek Chorus does not only sing its great odes on an empty
stage; it also carries on, by the mouth of its Leader, a certain amount
of ordinary dialogue with the actors. Its work here is generally kept
unobtrusive, neutral and low-toned. When a traveller wants to ask his
way; when the hero or heroine announces some resolve, or gives some
direction, the Leader is there to make the necessary response. But only
within certain carefully guarded limits. The Leader must never become a
definite full-blooded character with strongly personal views. He must
never take really effective or violent action. He never, I think, gives
information which we do not already possess or expresses views which
could seem paradoxical or original. He is an echo, a sort of music in
the air. This comes out clearly in another fine scene of the
*Hippolytus*, where Phaedra is listening at the door and the Leader of
the Chorus listens with her, echoing

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

and making more vibrant Phaedra's own emotion (565–600).

At times, in these dialogue scenes, an effect is obtained by allowing
the Chorus to turn for a moment into ordinary flesh and blood. In the
*Iphigenîa in Tauris* (1055 ff.) the safe escape of Iphigenîa and
Orestes depends on the secrecy of the Chorus of Greek captives.
Iphigenîa implores them to be silent, and, after a moment of hesitation,
because of the danger, they consent. Iphigenîa, with one word of radiant
gratitude, forgets all about them and leaves the stage to arrange things
with her brother. And the captives left alone watch a sea-bird winging
its way towards Argos, whither Iphigenîa is now going and they shall
never go, and break into a beautiful home-sick song. Similarly in the
splendid finale of Aeschylus’ *Prometheus* the Daughters of the Ocean,
who have been mostly on unearthly plane throughout the play, are
suddenly warned to stand aside and leave Prometheus before his doom
falls: in a rush of human passion they refuse to desert him and are
hurled into Hell.

At other times the effect is reached by emphasizing just the other side,
the unearthliness of the Chorus. In the *Heracles*, for instance, when
the tyrant Lycus is about to

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

make some suppliants leave the protection of an altar by burning them—a
kind of atrocity which just avoided the technical religious offence of
violating sanctuary—the Chorus of old men tries for a moment to raise
its hand against the tyrant's soldiers. It is like the figures of a
dream trying to fight—"words and a hidden-featured thing seen in a dream
of the night," as the poet himself says, trying to battle against flesh
and blood; a helpless visionary transient struggle which is beautiful
for a moment but would be grotesque if it lasted. Again, in the lost
*Antiope* there is a scene where the tyrant is inveigled into a hut by
murderers; he manages to dash out and appeals to the Chorus of old men
for help. But they are not really old men; they are only ancient echoes
or voices of justice, who speak his doom upon him, standing moveless
while the slayers come.

These examples enable us to understand a still stronger effect of the
same kind which occurs in the *Medea* and has, until very lately, been
utterly condemned and misunderstood. It is an effect rather reminding
one of the Greek fable of a human wrong so terrible that it shook the
very Sun out of his course. It is like the human cry in the *Electra*
([p. 155](eaha07.htm#page_155)), which shook the eternal peace of the
gods in

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

heaven. There is something delirious about it, an impossible invasion of
the higher world by the lower, a shattering of unapproachable bars.

Medea has gone to murder her children inside the house. The Chorus is
left chanting its own, and our, anguish outside. "Why do they not rush
in and save the children?" asked the critics. In the first place,
because that is not the kind of action that a Chorus can ever perform.
That needs flesh and blood. "Well," the critic continues, "if they
cannot act effectively, why does Euripides put them in a position in
which we instinctively clamour for effective action and they are absurd
if they do not act?" The answer to that is given in the play itself.
They do not rush in; there is no question of their rushing in: because
the door is barred. When Jason in the next scene tries to enter the
house he has to use soldiers with crowbars. The only action they can
possibly perform is the sort that specially belongs to the Chorus, the
action of baffled desire.

Medea is in the house; the Chorus is chanting its sublimated impersonal
emotion about the love that has turned to Hate in Medea, and its dread
of things to come (1267 ff.):

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">For fierce are the smitings back of blood once
shed  
  Where Love hath been: God's wrath upon them that kill,  
And an anguished Earth, and the wonder of the dead  
            Haunting as music still. …</span>

</div>

when a sudden cry is heard within. The song breaks short, and one woman
speaks:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Hark! Did ye year! Heard ye the children's cry?  
          *Another*.  
O miserable woman! O abhorred!  
          *Voice of a Child within*.  
What shall I do? What is it? Keep me fast From Mother!  
               *The Other Child*.  
I know nothing. Brother! Oh, I think she means to kill us.  
              *One of the Chorus*.  
                        Let me go!  
I will!—Help, help! And save them at the last!  
                 *Child*.  
Yes, in God's name. Help quickly or we die!  
             *The Other Child*.  
She has almost caught me now: she has a sword.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One sees the Women
of the Chorus listening for the Children's words; then they break, as it
were, from the spell of their own supermortal atmosphere, and fling
themselves on the barred door. They beat in vain against the bars and
the Children's voices cry for help from the other side.

But the inrush of violent horror is only

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

tolerated for a moment. Even in the next words we are moving back to the
realm of formal poetry:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">          *Women Beating at the Door*.  
Thou stone, thou thing of iron! Wilt verily  
Spill with thine hand that life, the vintage stored  
  Of thine own agony!  
                   *Others*.  
A woman slew her babes in days of yore,  
One, only one, from dawn to eventide. …</span>

</div>

and in a moment we are away in a beautiful remote song about far-off
children who have been slain in legend. That death-cry is no longer a
shriek heard in the next room. It is the echo of many cries of children
from the beginning of the world, children who are now at peace and whose
ancient pain has become part mystery and part music. Memory—that Memory
who was mother of the Muses—has done her work upon it.

We see here the justification of the high formalism and convention of
Greek tragedy. It can touch without flinching any horror of tragic life,
without failing in sincerity and without marring its normal atmosphere
of beauty. It brings things under the great magic of something which is
hard to name, but which I have tried in these pages to indicate;
something that we can think of as eternity

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

or the universal or perhaps even as Memory. For Memory, used in this
way, has a magical power. As Mr. Bertrand Russell has finely put it in
one of his *Essays*, "The Past does not change or strive. Like Duncan in
*Macbeth* 'After life's fitful fever it sleeps well.' What was eager and
grasping, what was petty and transitory, has faded away. The things that
were beautiful and eternal shine out like stars in the night."

This power of transfiguration belongs in varying degrees to all poetry,
but it belongs in special force to Greek Tragedy; and Greek Tragedy
attains it in part by all its high religious traditions and severities
of form, but most fully by means of its strangest convention, the
Chorus; the band of half-embodied emotions and memories, the lyric song
and the dance expressing things beyond speech. It is through this power
that tragedy attains its peculiar quality of encouragement and triumph.
We must not forget that Aristotle, a judge whose dicta should seldom be
dismissed without careful reflection, distinguishes tragedy from other
forms of drama not as the form that represents human misery but as that
which represents human goodness or nobleness. If his MSS. are to be
trusted he

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

even goes so far as to say that tragedy is "the representation of
Eudaimonia," or the higher kind of happiness. Of course he fully
recognizes the place of death and disaster in it, and he prefers the
so-called "unhappy ending." The powers of evil and horror must be
granted their full scope; it is only thus that we can triumph over them.
Only when they have worked their uttermost will do we realize that there
remains something in man's soul which is forever beyond their grasp and
has power in its own right to make life beautiful. That is the great
revelation, or the great illusion, of tragedy.

It is achieved, apparently, by a combination of two extremes; in matter
a full facing of tragic facts, and in form a resolute transfiguration of
them by poetry. The weak artist shirks the truth by a feeble idealism;
the prosaic artist fails to transfigure it. Euripides seems to me to
have gone further than any other writer in the attempt to combine in one
unity these separate poles. In this lies, for good or evil, his unique
quality as a poet. To many readers it seems that his powers failed him;
his mixture of real life and supernatural atmosphere, of wakeful thought
and dreaming legend, remains a discord, a mere jar of over wrought
conventions

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

and violent realism. To others it is because of this very quality that
he has earned the tremendous rank accorded him by Goethe, and in a more
limited sense by Aristotle, and still stands out, as he stood over two
thousand years ago, "even if faulty in various ways, at any rate clearly
the most tragic of poets."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](eaha11)
