[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Euripides](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eaha03.md) 
[Next](eaha05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Euripides and His Age*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### LIFE CONTINUED: WHAT IS A GREEK TRAGEDY? EURIPIDES’ EARLY PLAYS: "ALCESTIS" AND "TELEPHUS"

<span class="smallcaps">To</span> the public of the present day a play
is merely an entertainment, and it was the same to the Elizabethans.
Shakespeare can say to his audience, "Our true intent is all for your
delight," and we feel no particular shock in reading the words. The
companies were just noblemen's servants; and it was natural enough that
if Lord Leicester's players did not amuse Lord Leicester's guests, they
should be sent away and others hired. If they too proved dull, the
patron could drop the play altogether and call for tumblers and dancing
dogs.

To a playwright of the twelfth century, who worked out in the church or
in front of it his presentation of the great drama of the Gospel, such
an attitude would have seemed debased and cynical. However poor the
monkish players or playwright might be,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

surely that which they were presenting was in itself enough to fill the
mind of a spectator. To them, as the great mediævalist, Gaston Paris,
puts it, "the universe was a vast stage, on which was played an eternal
drama, full of tears and joy, its actors divided between heaven, earth
and hell; a drama whose end is foreseen, whose changes of fortune are
directed by the hand of God, yet whose every scene is rich and
thrilling." The spectator was admitted to the councils of the Trinity;
he saw the legions of darkness mingling themselves with the lives of
humanity, tempting and troubling, and the saints and angels at their
work of protection or intercession; he saw with his own eyes the kiss of
Judas, the scourging and crucifixion, the descent into Hell, the
resurrection and ascension; and, lastly, the dragging down to red and
bloody torment of the infinite multitudes of the unorthodox or the
wicked. Imagine what passed in the minds of those who witnessed in full
faith such a spectacle! \[*Poésie du Moyen Age I*, Essay I.\]

Now, in spite of a thousand differences of social organization and
religious dogma, the atmosphere of primitive Greek tragedy must have
been most strangely similar to this. It is not only that, like the
mediæval plays,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek tragedy was
religious; that it was developed out of a definite ritual; not even that
the most marked links of historical continuity can be traced between the
death-and-resurrection ritual of certain Pagan "saviours" and those of
the mediæval drama. It is that the ritual on which tragedy was based
embodied the most fundamental Greek conceptions of life and fate, of law
and sin and punishment.

When we say that tragedy originated in a dance, ritual or magical,
intended to represent the death of the vegetation this year and its
coming return in triumph next year, the above remarks may seem hard to
justify. But we must remember several things. First a dance was in
ancient times essentially religious, not a mere capering with the feet
but an attempt to express with every limb and sinew of the body those
emotions for which words, especially the words of simple and unlettered
men, are inadequate (see [p. 227](eaha10.htm#page_227).md). Again,
vegetation is to us an abstract common noun; to the ancient it was a
personal being, not "it" but "He." His death was as our own deaths, and
his re-birth a thing to be anxiously sought with prayers and dances. For
if He were not re-born, what would happen? Famine, and wholesale death

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

by famine, was a familiar thought, a regularly returning terror, in
these primitive agricultural villages. Nay, more, why must the cycle of
summer and winter roll as it does? Why must "He" die and men die? Some
of the oldest Greek philosophers have no doubt about the answer: there
has been "Hubris" or "Adikia," Pride or Injustice, and the result
thereof must needs be death. Every year He waxes too strong and commits
"Hubris," and such sin has its proper punishment. "The sun shall not
transgress his measures," says Heraclitus; "if he does he shall be
pursued by Erinyes, till justice be re-fulfilled." It is the law of all
existing things. "They all pay retribution for injustice, one to
another, according to the Ordinance of Time" (*Heraclitus*, fr. 94,
*Anaximander*, fr. 9). And the history of each year's bloom was an
example of this refluent balance. The Year Daemon—Vegetation Spirit or
Corn God or whatever we call him—waxes proud and is slain by his enemy,
who becomes thereby a murderer and must in turn perish at the hands of
the expected avenger, who is at the same time the Wronged One re-risen.
The ritual of this Vegetation Spirit is extraordinarily widespread in
all quarters of the globe, and may best be

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

studied in Dr. Frazer's *Golden Bough*, especially in the part entitled,
"The Dying God." Dionysus, the daemon of tragedy, is one of these Dying
Gods, like Attis, Adonis, Osiris.

The Dionysiac ritual which lay at the back of tragedy, may be
conjectured in its full form to have had six regular stages: (1) an Agôn
or Contest, in which the Daemon fights against his enemy, who—since it
is really this year fighting last year—is apt to be almost identical
with himself; (2) a Pathos, or disaster, which very commonly takes the
shape of a "Sparagmos," or Tearing in pieces; the body of the Corn God
being scattered in innumerable seeds over the earth; sometimes of some
other sacrificial death; (3) a Messenger, who brings the news; (4) a
Lamentation, very often mixed with a Song of Rejoicing, since the death
of the Old King is also the accession of the new; (5) the Discovery or
Recognition of the hidden or dismembered god; and (6) his Epiphany or
Resurrection in glory. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

This ritual of Dionysus, being made into a drama and falling into the
hands of a remarkable set of creative artists, developed into what we
know as Greek tragedy. The creative passion of the artist gradually
conquered the emotion of the mere worshipper.

Exactly the same development took place in mediaeval drama, or rather it
was taking place when new secular influences broke in and destroyed it.
The liturgical plays first enacted the main story of the New Testament;
then they emphasized particular parts—there is a beautiful play, for
instance, on the Massacre of the Innocents; then they developed
imaginatively scenes that are implied but not mentioned in the Gospel,
such as the experiences of the Magdalen when she lived "in joy," her
dealings with cosmetic-sellers and the like; then, ranging right outside
the Gospel histories, they dealt with the lives of St. Nicholas, St.
Anthony or any person who provided a good legend and had some claim to
an atmosphere of sanctity.

In the same way Greek tragedy extended its range first to embrace the
histories of other Heroes or Daemons—the difference is slight—who were
essentially like Dionysus: Pentheus, Lycurgus, Hippolytus, Actaeon

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and especially, I should be inclined to add, Orestes. Then it took in
any heroes to whose memory some ritual was attached. For the play is,
with the rarest and most doubtful exceptions, essentially the enactment
of a ritual, or rather of what the Greeks called an "aition"—that is, a
supposed historical event which is the origin or "cause" of the ritual.
Thus the death of Hippolytus is the "aition" of the lamentation-rite
performed at the grave of Hippolytus; the death of Aias is the "aition"
of the festival called Aianteia; the death of Medea's children, the
"aition" of a certain ritual at Corinth; the story of Prometheus the
"aition" of a certain Fire-festival in Athens. The tragedy, as ritual,
enacts its own legendary origin.

There is then a further extension of the theme, to include a very few
events in recent history. But we must observe that only those events
were chosen which were felt to have about them some heroic grandeur or
mystery; I think we may even say, only those events which, like the
Battle of Salamis or the Fall of Miletus, had been made the subject of
some religious celebration.

However that may be, the general temper of tragedy moved strongly away
from the monotony of fixed ritual. The subjects thus

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

grew richer and more varied; the mode of representation loftier and more
artistic. What had begun as almost pure ritual ended by being almost
pure drama. By the time Euripides began to write the master-tragedian
Aeschylus had already lifted Greek drama to its highest level: whole
generations have read his plays without even suspecting the ritual form
that lies behind them. Aeschylus had also made the whole performance
much longer and more impressive: he composed three continuous tragedies
forming a single whole and followed by the strange performance called a
Satyr-play. The wild element of revelry which was proper to Dionysus
worship, with its bearded dancing half-animal satyrs, had been kept
severely away from the stage during the three tragedies and must burst
in to have its fling when they were finished. The other tragedians do
not seem to have written in trilogies, and Euripides at any rate moved
gradually away from satyr-plays. In their stead he put a curious sort of
pro-satyric tragedy, a play in the tragic convention and free from the
satyric courseness, but containing at least one half-comic figure and
preserving some fantastic quality of atmosphere.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

On the Great Festival of Dionysus each year—and sometimes on other
festivals—this ritual of tragedy was solemnly performed in the theatre
of the god. Like most Greek festivals the performance took the form of a
competition. The ground of this custom was, I suspect, religious. It was
desired to get a spirit of "Nikê," or victory, into the celebration, and
you could only get this by means of a contest. The Archon, or
magistrate, in charge of the festival selected three poets to compete,
and three rich men to be their "Chorêgoi," that is, to provide all the
expenses of the performance. The poet was then said to have "obtained a
chorus," and his work now was to "teach the chorus." At the end of the
festival a body of five judges, somewhat elaborately and curiously
chosen, awarded a first, second and third prize. Even the last
competitor must have a kind of "victory"; any mention of "failure" at
such a time would be ill-omened.

This, in rough outline, was the official mould in which our poet's
creative activity had to run. The record of his early work is, as we had
reason to expect, terribly defective. But we do happen to know the name
and subject of the first play for which he "was granted a chorus." It
was called the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Daughters of
Pelias*. Its story was based on the old ritual of the Year-god, who is
cut to pieces or scattered like the seed, and then restored to life and
youth. Medea, the enchantress maiden from the further shores of the
Friendless Sea, had fled from her home with the Greek adventurer Jason,
the winner of the Golden Fleece. She came with him to Thessaly, where
his uncle Pelias was king. Pelias had usurped Jason's ancestral crown
and therefore hated him. The daughters of Pelias doubtless sneered at
Medea and encouraged Jason's growing distaste for his barbarian prize.
The savage woman determined at one blow to be rid of Pelias, to punish
his daughters, and reconquer Jason's love. She had the power of
renovating the life of the old. She persuaded the daughters of Pelias to
try her method on their father, with the result that he died in agony,
and they stood guilty of a hideous murder. Medea, we may conjecture, was
triumphant, till she found she had made Jason a ruined man and taught
him really to hate her. The play is characteristic in two ways. It was
clearly based on the old ritual, and it treated one of Euripides’ great
subjects, the passions of a suffering and savage woman.

The *Daughters of Pelias* was produced in

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 455, when the poet
was twenty-nine, just a year after the death of Aeschylus and thirteen
years after the first victory of Sophocles. Euripides’ own first
victory—we do not know the name of the successful play—did not come till
442, a year before Sophocles’ masterpiece, the *Antigone*.

We have only two examples, and those not certain, of Euripides’ work
before that time. The *Cyclops* is a satyr-play pure and simple, and the
only complete specimen of its class. It is probably earlier than the
*Alcestis*, and is interesting because it shows Euripides writing for
once without any *arrière pensée*, or secondary intention. It is a gay
and grotesque piece, based on Homer's story of Odysseus in the Cyclops’
cave. The farcical and fantastic note is firmly held, so that the climax
of the story, in which the monster's eye is burnt out with a log of
burning wood, is kept unreal and not disgusting. The later Euripides
would probably have made it horrible and swung our sympathies violently
round to the side of the victim.

The *Rhesus* has come down to us in a very peculiar condition and is
often considered spurious. We know, however, that Euripides wrote a
*Rhesus*, and tradition says that he was "very young" when he wrote

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

it. My own view—explained in the preface to my translation—would make it
probably a very early pro-satyric play which was produced after the
poet's death and considerably rewritten. It is a young man's play, full
of war and adventure, of spies in wolf-skins and white chargers and
gallant chivalry. That is not much like the Euripides whom we know
elsewhere; but his mark is upon the last scene, in which the soldiers
stand embarrassed and silent while a solitary mother weeps over her dead
son. The poetry of the scene is exquisite; but what is most
characteristic is the sudden flavour of bitterness, the cold wind that
so suddenly takes the heart out of joyous war. Some touch of that bitter
flavour will be found hereafter in every play, however beautiful or
romantic, that comes from the pen of Euripides.

Up to the year 438, when the poet was forty-six, the records, as we have
said, almost fail us. But in that year he produced a set of four plays,
*The Cretan Women*, *Alcmaeon in Psôphis*, *Telephus*, and, in place of
a satyr-play, the *Alcestis*. The last is still extant and is very
characteristic of the master's mind. The saga told how Admetus, a king
in Thessaly, was fated to die on a certain day, but, in return for his
piety of old, was

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

allowed to find a substitute to die for him. His old father and mother
refused; his young wife, Alcestis, gladly consented to die. Amid
exquisite songs of mourning she is carried to her grave, when the wild
hero, Heracles, comes to the house seeking hospitality. Admetus, with
primitive courtesy, conceals what has happened and orders him to be
given entertainment. The burial is finished when Heracles, already
revelling and drunken and crowned with flowers, learns the truth.
Sobered at the touch he goes out into the night to wrestle with Death
amid the tombs and crush his ribs for him till he yields up his prey.
One sees the fantastic satyr note. The play is not truly tragic; it
touches its theme tenderly and with romance. But amid all the romance
Euripides cannot keep his hand from unveiling the weak spot in the
sacred legend. Alcestis, no doubt, is beautiful, and it was beautiful of
her to die. But what was it of Admetus to let her die? An ordinary
playwright would elude the awkward question. Admetus would refuse his
wife's sacrifice and she would perform it against his will or without
his knowledge. We should somehow save our hero's character. Not so
Euripides. His Admetus weeps tenderly over his wife,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

but he thinks it entirely suitable that she should die for him. The veil
is not removed from his eyes till his old father, Pheres, who has
bluntly refused to die for anybody, comes to bring offerings to
Alcestis’ funeral. A quarrel breaks out between the two selfish men,
brilliantly written, subtle and merciless, in which Admetus’ weakness is
laid bare. The scene is a great grief to the purely romantic reader, but
it just makes the play profound instead of superficial.

All the plays of 438 are, in different ways, typical of their author.
And we will spend a little time on each. The *Alcmaeon in Psôphis* was
what we should call a romance. Alcmaeon was the son of that Eriphyle who
betrayed her husband to death for the sake of a charmed necklace which
had once belonged to Harmonia, the daughter of Ares. Alcmaeon slew his
mother and became in consequence mad and accursed. Seeking purification
he fled to the land of Psôphis, where the king cleansed him and gave him
the hand of his daughter Arsinoë, who duly received the necklace.
However, Alcmaeon's sin was too great for any such cleansing. He
wandered away, all the earth being accursed to him, till he should find
some land that had not been in existence at the time of his sin

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and was consequently unpolluted. He discovered it in some alluvial
islands, just then making their appearance at the mouth of the River
Acheloüs. Here he at last found peace and married the daughter of
Acheloüs, Callirrhoë. She asks for the necklace and Alcmaeon goes back
to get it from Arsinoë. He professes to need it for his own purification
and she willingly gives it him; then she finds that he really wants it
for his new bride, and in fury has him murdered on his road home. A
romantic and varied story with one fine touch of tragic passion.

The *Telephus* also deserves special mention. It had apparently the
misfortune to be seen by Aristophanes, then a boy about sixteen. At any
rate the comedian was never able to forget it, and we know it chiefly
from his parodies. It struck out a new style in Attic drama, the style
of adventure and plot-interest, which threw to the winds the traditional
tragic dignities and pomps. The usual convention in tragedy was to
clothe the characters in elaborate priestly dress with ritual masks
carefully graduated according to the rank of the character. Such
trappings came to Tragedy as an inheritance from its old
magico-religious days, and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

it never quite succeeded in throwing them off, even in its most vital
period. It is very difficult for us to form a clear notion what the
ordinary Greek tragedy looked like in 438, and how much we should have
noticed any great change of dressing in the *Telephus*. But there was a
change which raised a storm of comment. Telephus was a King of Mysia,
not very far from the Troad. The Greeks in sailing for Troy had missed
their way and invaded Telephus’ country by mistake. He had fought them
with great effect but had been wounded by Achilles with his magic spear.
The wound would not close, and an oracle told Telephus "the wounder
shall heal." The Greeks were back in Greece by this time, planning a new
invasion of Troy. The king goes, lame and disguised as a beggar, into
the heart of the Greek army and into Agamemnon's palace. Euripides,
since the king had to be a beggar, dressed him as a beggar, with rags
and a wallet. It is hard to see how he could possibly have done
otherwise, but we may surmise that his beggar's dress was a little more
realistic and less merely symbolical than his audience expected. In any
case, though critics were shocked, the practice established itself.
Telephus and Philoctêtes were afterwards

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

regularly allowed to dress in "rags," even in the work of Sophocles.

There were great scenes owing to the boldness of the ragged and
intrusive stranger. The Greek chieftains proposed to kill him, but
granted him at last the right of making one speech to save his life. He
seems to have spoken beside, or over, the headsman's block. And the case
he had to plead was characteristic of Euripides. The Greeks considered
quite simply that Telephus was their enemy and must be destroyed on
their next expedition. The beggar explained that Telephus had found his
country ravaged and was bound to defend it. Every man among the Greeks
would have done the same; there is nothing to blame Telephus for. At the
end of this scene, apparently, the beggar was discovered. It is Telephus
himself speaking! They fly to their spears. But Telephus has snatched up
the baby prince, Orestes, from his cradle and stands at bay; if one of
his enemies moves the child shall die. Eventually they accept his terms
and make peace with him. A fine melodrama, one would guess, and a move
in the direction of realism—a direction which Euripides only followed
within certain strict limits. But we find two marks of Euripides

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the philosopher. The beggar who pleads for reasonable justice towards
the national enemy strikes a note which Euripides himself often had to
sound afterwards. It was not for nothing that Aristophanes in his
*Acharnians*, thirteen years later, used a parody of this scene in order
to plead the dangerous cause of reasonableness towards Sparta. The other
mark is a curious tang of sadness at the close. The Greeks demand that
Telephus, so brave and resourceful, shall be their ally against Troy.
But his wife is a Trojan princess and he refuses. He consents
reluctantly to show the army the road to his wife's fatherland and then
turns away.

The remaining play of the trilogy performed in 438 strikes a chord that
proved more dangerous to Euripides. The *Cretan Women* told the story of
Aëropê, a Cretan princess who secretly loved a squire or young soldier.
Her intrigue is discovered, and her father gives her to a Greek sailor
to throw into the sea. The sailor spares her life and takes her to
Greece. The story as it stands is a common ballad motive and not
calculated to disturb any one. But the disciple of the sophists did not
leave these romances where he found them. He liked to

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

think them out in terms of real life. The songs in which Aëropê poured
out her love were remembered against Euripides after his death. It was
all very well to sympathize in a remote artistic way with these erring
damsels; but Euripides seemed to come too near raising an actual doubt
whether the damsel had done anything so very wrong at all, that
respectable people should want to murder her. Euripides is, as a matter
of fact, not loose but highly austere in his moral tone. But next to
religion itself, the sphere of sexual conduct has always been the great
field for irrational taboos and savage punishments, and the sophists
naturally marked it as a battle-field. The kings of Egypt commonly
married their sisters, and did so on religious grounds: to a Greek such
marriage was an unspeakable sin. There is a problem here, and Euripides
raised it sharply in a play, *Aeolus*, based on the old fairy-tale of
the King of the winds who dwells as a patriarch on his floating island
with his twelve sons married to his twelve daughters. "Canst face mine
eyes, fresh from thy deed of shame?" says the angry father in this play;
and his son answers, "What *is* shame, when the doer feels no shame?"
Euripides also treated several

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

times legends where a god became the lover of a mortal maiden, and, as
we shall see in the Ion, he loved to rouse sympathy for the maiden and
contempt for the god ([p. 119](eaha06.htm#page_119).md). In one case he
even treats, through a mist of strange religious mysticism, the
impossible amour of Pasiphaë of Crete with the Cretan Bull-god. It is
interesting, however, to observe that there is in Euripides no trace of
sympathy for the one form of perverted indulgence on which the ancient
tone was markedly different from ours. It is reserved for the bestial
Cyclops and Laius the accursed.

Adventure, brilliance, invention, romance and scenic effect; these
together with delightful lyrics, a wonderful command over the Greek
language, and a somewhat daring admixture of sophistic wisdom which
sometimes took away a spectator's breath, were probably the qualities
which the ordinary public had felt in Euripides’ work up to the year
438. They perhaps felt also that these pleasant gifts were apt to be
needlessly marred by a certain unintelligible note of discord. It was a
pity; and, as the man was now forty-six, he ought surely to have learnt
how to smooth it out!

It was not smoothness that was coming.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[63:1](eaha04.htm#fr_0.md) The above is the present
writer's re-statement, published in Miss Harrison's *Themis*, pp. 341
ff., of the orthodox view of the origin of tragedy. See also Cornford,
*From Religion to Philosophy*, first few chapters. The chief
non-Dionysiac theory is Professor Ridgeway's, who derives tragedy
directly from the funeral cult of individual heroes: *Origin of
Tragedy*, Cambridge, 1910.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](eaha05.md)
