[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl18)  [Next](jftl20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

# The Sleep of One Hundred Years

It was at the time of the destruction of the First Temple. The cruel war
had laid Jerusalem desolate, and terrible was the suffering of the
people.

Rabbi Onias, mounted on a camel, was sorrow-fully making his way toward
the unhappy city. He had traveled many days and was weary from lack of
sleep and faint with hunger, yet he would not touch the basket of dates
he had with him, nor would he drink from the water in a leather bottle
attached to the saddle.

"Perchance," he said, "I shall meet some one who needs them more than
I."

But everywhere the land was deserted. One day, nearing the end of the
journey, he saw a man planting a carob tree at the foot of a hill.

"The Chaldeans," said the man, "have destroyed my beautiful vineyards
and all my crops, but I must sow and plant anew, so that the land may
live again."

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

 

<span id="img_18800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The sun was
shining on a noble city of pinnacles and minarets. (&lt;i&gt;P.
191&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/18800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18800.jpg.md)  
The sun was shining on a noble city of pinnacles and minarets. (*P.
191*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

Onias passed sorrowfully on and at the top of the hill he stopped.
Before him lay Jerusalem, not the once beautiful city with its hundreds
of domes and minarets that caught the first rays of the sun each
morning, but a vast heap of ruins and charred buildings. Onias threw
himself on the ground and wept bitterly. No human being could he see,
and the sun was setting over what looked like a city of the dead.

"Woe, woe," he cried. "Zion, my beautiful Zion, is no more. Can it ever
rise again? Not in a hundred years can its glory be renewed."

The sun sank lower as he continued to gaze upon the ruined city, and
darkness gathered over the scene. Utterly exhausted, Onias, laying his
head upon his camel on the ground, fell into a deep sleep.

The silver moon shone serenely through the night and paled with the
dawn, and the sun cast its bright rays on the sleeping rabbi. Darkness
spread its mantle of night once more, and again the sun rose, and still
Onias slept. Days passed into weeks, the weeks merged into months, and
the months rolled on until years went by; but Rabbi Onias did not waken.

Seeds, blown by the winds and brought by the birds, dropped around him,
took root and grew

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

into shrubs, and soon a thick hedge surrounded him and screened him from
all who passed. A date that had fallen from his basket, took root also,
and in time there rose a beautiful palm tree which cast a shade over the
sleeping figure.

And thus a hundred years rolled by.

Suddenly, Onias moved, stretched himself and yawned. He was awake again.
He looked around confused.

"Strange," he muttered. "Did I not fall asleep on a hill overlooking
Jerusalem last night? How comes it now that I am hemmed in by a thicket
and am lying in the shade of this noble date palm?"

With great difficulty he rose to his feet.

"Oh, how my bones do ache!" he cried. "I must have overslept myself. And
where is my camel?"

Puzzled, he put his hand to his beard. Then he gave a cry of anguish.

"What is this? My beard is snow-white and so long that it almost reaches
to the ground."

He sank down again, but the mound on which he sat was but a heap of
rubbish and collapsed under his weight. Beneath it were bones. Hastily
clearing away the rubbish, he saw the skeleton of a camel.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

"This surely must be my camel," he said. "Can I have slept so long? The
saddle-bags have rotted, too. But what is this?" and he picked up the
basket of dates and the water-bottle. The dates and the water were quite
fresh.

"This must be some miracle," he said. "This must be a sign for me to
continue my journey. But, alas, that Jerusalem should be destroyed!"

He looked around and was more puzzled than ever. When he had fallen
asleep the hill had been bare of vegetation. Now it was covered with
carob trees.

"I think I remember a man planting a carob tree yesterday," he said.
"But was it yesterday?"

He turned in the other direction and gave a cry of astonishment. The sun
was shining on a noble city of glittering pinnacles and minarets, and
around it were smiling fields and vineyards.

"Jerusalem still lives," he exclaimed. "Of a truth I have been
dreaming--dreaming that it was destroyed. Praise be to God that it was
but a dream."

With all speed he made his way across the plain to the city. People
looked at him strangely and pointed him out to one another, and the
children ran after him and called him names he did

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

not understand. But he took no notice. Near the outskirts of the city he
paused.

"Canst thou tell me, father," he said to an old man, "which is the house
of Onias, the rabbi?"

"’Tis thy wit, or thy lack of it, that makes thee call me father,"
replied the man. "I must be but a child compared with thee."

Others gathered around and stared hard at Onias.

"Didst thou speak of Rabbi Onias?" asked one. "I know of one who says
that was the name of his grandfather. I will bring him."

He hastened away and soon returned with an aged man of about eighty.

"Who art thou?" Onias asked.

"Onias is my name," was the reply. "I am called so in honor of my
sainted grandfather, Rabbi Onias, who disappeared mysteriously one
hundred years ago, after the destruction of the First Temple."

"A hundred years," murmured Onias. "Can I have slept so long?"

"By thy appearance, it would seem so," replied the other Onias. "The
Temple has been rebuilt since then."

"Then it was not a dream," said the old man.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

They led him gently indoors, but everything was strange to him. The
customs, the manners, the habits of the people, their dress, their talk,
was all different, and every time he spoke they laughed.

"Thou seemest like a creature from another world," they said. "Thou
speakest only of the things that have long passed away."

One day he called his grandson.

"Lead me," he said, "to the place of my long sleep. Perchance I will
sleep again. I am not of this world, my child. I am alone, a stranger
here, and would fain leave ye."

Taking the dates and the bottle of water which still remained fresh, he
made his way to where he had slept for a hundred years, and there his
prayer for peace was answered. He slept again, but not in this world
will he awaken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: King for Three Days](jftl20.md)
