[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl05)  [Next](jftl07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

# The Fairy Princess of Ergetz

### I

In a great and beautiful city that stood by the sea, an old man lay
dying. Mar Shalmon was his name, and he was the richest man in the land.
Propped up with pillows on a richly decorated bed in a luxurious
chamber, he gazed, with tears in his eyes, through the open window at
the setting sun. Like a ball of fire it sank lower and lower until it
almost seemed to rest on the tranquil waters beyond the harbor.
Suddenly, Mar Shalmon roused himself.

"Where is my son, Bar Shalmon?" he asked in a feeble voice, and his hand
crept tremblingly along the silken coverlet of the bed as if in search
of something.

"I am here, my father," replied his son who was standing by the side of
his bed. His eyes were moist with tears, but his voice was steady.

"My son," said the old man, slowly, and with some difficulty, "I am
about to leave this world.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

 

<span id="img_03600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A strange crowd of
demons of all shapes and sizes poured into the synagogue with
threatening gestures. (&lt;i&gt;Page 49&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/03600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03600.jpg.md)  
A strange crowd of demons of all shapes and sizes poured into the
synagogue with threatening gestures. (*Page 49*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

My soul will take flight from this frail body when the sun has sunk
behind the horizon. I have lived long and have amassed great wealth
which will soon be thine. Use it well, as I have taught thee, for thou,
my son, art a man of learning, as befits our noble Jewish faith. One
thing I must ask thee to promise me."

"I will, my father," returned Bar Shalmon, sobbing.

"Nay, weep not, my son," said the old man. "My day is ended; my life has
not been ill-spent. I would spare thee the pain that was mine in my
early days, when, as a merchant, I garnered my fortune. The sea out
there that will soon swallow up the sun is calm now. But beware of it,
my son, for it is treacherous. Promise me--nay, swear unto me--that
never wilt thou cross it to foreign lands."

Bar Shalmon placed his hands on those of his father.

"Solemnly I swear," he said, in a broken voice, "to do thy wish--never
to journey on the sea, but to remain here in this, my native land. ’Tis
a vow before thee, my father."

"’Tis an oath before heaven," said the old man. "Guard it, keep it, and
heaven will bless thee. Remember! See, the sun is sinking."

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

Mar Shalmon fell back upon his pillows and spoke no more. Bar Shalmon
stood gazing out of the window until the sun had disappeared, and then,
silently sobbing, he left the chamber of death.

The whole city wept when the sad news was made known, for Mar Shalmon
was a man of great charity, and almost all the inhabitants followed the
remains to the grave. Then Bar Shalmon, his son, took his father's place
of honor in the city, and in him, too, the poor and needy found a friend
whose purse was ever open and whose counsel was ever wisdom.

Thus years passed away.

One day there arrived in the harbor of the city a strange ship from a
distant land. Its captain spoke a tongue unknown, and Bar Shalmon, being
a man of profound knowledge, was sent for. He alone in the city could
under-stand the language of the captain. To his astonishment, he learned
that the cargo of the vessel was for Mar Shalmon, his father.

"I am the son of Mar Shalmon," he said. "My father is dead, and all his
possessions he left to me."

"Then, verily, art thou the most fortunate mortal, and the richest, on
earth," answered the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

captain. "My good ship is filled with a vast store of jewels, precious
stones and other treasures. And know you, O most favored son of Mar
Shalmon, this cargo is but a small portion of the wealth that is thine
in a land across the sea."

"’Tis strange," said Bar Shalmon, in surprise; "my father said nought of
this to me. I knew that in his younger days he had traded with distant
lands, but nothing did he ever say of possessions there. And, moreover,
he warned me never to leave this shore."

The captain looked perplexed.

"I understand it not," he said. "I am but performing my father's
bidding. He was thy father's servant, and long years did he wait for Mar
Shalmon's return to claim his riches. On his death-bed he bade me vow
that I would seek his master, or his son, and this have I done."

He produced documents, and there could be no doubt that the vast wealth
mentioned in them belonged now to Bar Shalmon.

"Thou art now my master," said the captain, "and must return with me to
the land across the sea to claim thine inheritance. In another year it
will be too late, for by the laws of the country it will be forfeit."

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

"I cannot return with thee," said Bar Shalmon. "I have a vow before
heaven never to voyage on the sea."

The captain laughed.

"In very truth, I understand thee not, as my father understood not
thine," he replied. "My father was wont to say that Mar Shalmon was
strange and peradventure not possessed of all his senses to neglect his
store of wealth and treasure."

With an angry gesture Bar Shalmon stopped the captain, but he was sorely
troubled. He re-called now that his father had often spoken mysteriously
of foreign lands, and he wondered, indeed, whether Mar Shalmon could
have been in his proper senses not to have breathed a word of his riches
abroad. For days he discussed the matter with the captain, who at last
persuaded him to make the journey.

"Fear not thy vow," said the captain. "Thy worthy father must, of a
truth, have been bereft of reason in failing to tell thee of his full
estate, and an oath to a man of mind unsound is not binding. That is the
law in our land."

"So it is here," returned Bar Shalmon, and with this remark his last
scruple vanished.

He bade a tender farewell to his wife, his

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

child, and his friends, and set sail on the strange ship to the land
beyond the sea.

For three days all went well, but on the fourth the ship was becalmed
and the sails flapped lazily against the masts. The sailors had nothing
to do but lie on deck and wait for a breeze, and Bar Shalmon took
advantage of the occasion to treat them to a feast.

Suddenly, in the midst of the feasting, they felt the ship begin to
move. There was no wind, but the vessel sped along very swiftly. The
captain himself rushed to the helm. To his alarm he found the vessel
beyond control.

"The ship is bewitched," he exclaimed. "There is no wind, and no
current, and yet we are being borne along as if driven before a storm.
We shall be lost."

Panic seized the sailors, and Bar Shalmon was unable to pacify them.

"Someone on board has brought us ill-luck," said the boatswain, looking
pointedly at Bar Shalmon; "we shall have to heave him over-board."

His comrades assented and rushed toward Bar Shalmon.

Just at that moment, however, the look-out in the bow cried excitedly,
"Land ahead!"

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

The ship still refused to answer the helm and grounded on a sandbank.
She shivered from stem to stern but did not break up. No rocks were
visible, only a desolate tract of desert land was to be seen, with here
and there a solitary tree.

"We seem to have sustained no damage," said the captain, when he had
recovered from his first astonishment, "but how we are going to get
afloat again I do not know. This land is quite strange to me."

He could not find it marked on any of his charts or maps, and the
sailors stood looking gloomily at the mysterious shore.

"Had we not better explore the land?" said Bar Shalmon.

"No, no," exclaimed the boatswain, excitedly. "See, no breakers strike
on the shore. This is not a human land. This is a domain of demons. We
are lost unless we cast overboard the one who has brought on us this
ill-luck."

Said Bar Shalmon, "I will land, and I will give fifty silver crowns to
all who land with me."

Not one of the sailors moved, however, even when he offered fifty golden
crowns, and at last Bar Shalmon said he would land alone, although the
captain strongly urged him not to do so.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Bar Shalmon sprang lightly to the shore, and as he did so the ship shook
violently.

"What did I tell you?" shouted the boat-swain. "Bar Shalmon is the one
who has brought us this misfortune. Now we shall re-float the ship."

But it still remained firmly fixed on the sand. Bar Shalmon walked
towards a tree and climbed it. In a few moments he returned, holding a
twig in his hand.

"The land stretches away for miles just as you see it here," he called
to the captain. "There is no sign of man or habitation."

He prepared to board the vessel again, but the sailors would not allow
him. The boatswain stood in the bow and threatened him with a sword. Bar
Shalmon raised the twig to ward off the blow and struck the ship which
shivered from stem to stern again.

"Is not this proof that the vessel is bewitched?" cried the sailors, and
when the captain sternly bade them remember that Bar Shalmon was their
master, they threatened him too.

Bar Shalmon, amused at the fears of the men, again struck the vessel
with the twig. Once more it trembled. A third time he raised the twig.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

"If the ship is bewitched," he said, "something will happen after the
third blow."

"Swish" sounded the branch through the air, and the third blow fell on
the vessel's bow. Something did happen. The ship almost leaped from the
sand, and before Bar Shalmon could realize what had happened it was
speeding swiftly away.

"Come back, come back," he screamed, and he could see the captain
struggling with the helm. But the vessel refused to answer, and Bar
Shalmon saw it grow smaller and smaller and finally disappear. He was
alone on an uninhabited desert land.

"What a wretched plight for the richest man in the world," he said to
himself, and the next moment he realized that he was in danger indeed.

A terrible roar made him look around. To his horror he saw a lion making
toward him. As quick as a flash Bar Shalmon ran to the tree and hastily
scrambled into the branches. The lion dashed itself furiously against
the trunk of the tree, but, for the present, Bar Shalmon was safe.
Night, however, was coming on, and the lion squatted at the foot of the
tree, evidently intending to wait for him. All night the lion

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

remained, roaring at intervals, and Bar Shalmon clung to one of the
upper branches afraid to sleep lest he should fall off and be devoured.
When morning broke, a new danger threatened him. A huge eagle flew round
the tree and darted at him with its cruel beak. Then the great bird
settled on the thickest branch, and Bar Shalmon moved stealthily forward
with a knife which he drew from his belt. He crept behind the bird, but
as he approached it spread its big wings, and Bar Shalmon, to prevent
himself being swept from the tree, dropped the knife and clutched at the
bird's feathers. Immediately, to his dismay, the bird rose from the
tree. Bar Shalmon clung to its back with all his might.

Higher and higher soared the eagle until the trees below looked like
mere dots on the land. [Swiftly](errata.htm#0.md) flew the eagle over miles
and miles of desert until Bar Shalmon began to feel giddy. He was faint
with hunger and feared that he would not be able to retain his hold. All
day the bird flew without resting, across island and sea. No houses, no
ships, no human beings could be seen. Toward night, however, Bar
Shalmon, to his great joy, beheld the lights of a city surrounded by
trees, and as the eagle

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

came near, he made a bold dive to the earth. Headlong he plunged
downward. He seemed to be hours in falling. At last he struck a tree.
The branches broke beneath the weight and force of his falling body, and
he continued to plunge downward. The branches tore his clothes to shreds
and bruised his body, but they broke his terrible fall, and when at last
he reached the ground he was not much hurt.

### II

Bar Shalmon found himself on the outskirts of the city, and cautiously
he crept forward. To his intense relief, he saw that the first building
was a synagogue. The door, however, was locked. Weary, sore, and weak
with long fasting, Bar Shalmon sank down on the steps and sobbed like a
child.

Something touched him on the arm. He looked up. By the light of the moon
he saw a boy standing before him. Such a queer boy he was, too. He had
cloven feet, and his coat, if it was a coat, seemed to be made in the
shape of wings.

"*Ivri Onochi*," said Bar Shalmon, "I am a Hebrew."

"So am I," said the boy. "Follow me."

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

He walked in front with a strange hobble, and when they reached a house
at the back of the synagogue, he leaped from the ground, spreading his
coat wings as he did so, to a window about twenty feet from the ground.
The next moment a door opened, and Bar Shalmon, to his surprise, saw
that the boy had jumped straight through the window down to the door
which he had unfastened from the inside. The boy motioned him to enter a
room. He did so. An aged man, who he saw was a rabbi, rose to greet him.

"Peace be with you," said the rabbi, and pointed to a seat. He clapped
his hand and immediately a table with food appeared before Bar Shalmon.
The latter was far too hungry to ask any questions just then, and the
rabbi was silent, too, while he ate. When he had finished, the rabbi
clapped his hands and the table vanished.

"Now tell me your story," said the rabbi. Bar Shalmon did so.

"Alas! I am an unhappy man," he concluded. "I have been punished for
breaking my vow. Help me to return to my home. I will reward thee well,
and will atone for my sin."

"Thy story is indeed sad," said the rabbi,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

gravely, "but thou knowest not the full extent of thy unfortunate
plight. Art thou aware what land it is into which thou hast been cast?"

"No," said Bar Shalmon, becoming afraid again.

"Know then," said the rabbi, "thou art not in a land of human beings.
Thou hast fallen into Ergetz, the land of demons, of djinns, and of
fairies."

"But art thou not a Jew?" asked Bar Shalmon, in astonishment.

"Truly," replied the rabbi. "Even in this realm we have all manner of
religions just as you mortals have."

"What will happen to me?" asked Bar Shalmon, in a whisper.

"I know not," replied the rabbi. "Few mortals come here, and mostly, I
fear they are put to death. The demons love them not."

"Woe, woe is me," cried Bar Shalmon, "I am undone."

"Weep not," said the rabbi. "I, as a Jew, love not death by violence and
torture, and will endeavor to save thee."

"I thank thee," cried Bar Shalmon.

"Let thy thanks wait," said the rabbi, kindly. "There is human blood in
my veins. My great-grandfather

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

was a mortal who fell into this land and was not put to death. Being of
mortal descent, I have been made rabbi. Perhaps thou wilt find favor
here and be permitted to live and settle in this land."

"But I desire to return home," said Bar Shalmon.

The rabbi shook his head.

"Thou must sleep now," he said.

He passed his hands over Bar Shalmon's eyes and he fell into a profound
slumber. When he awoke it was daylight, and the boy stood by his couch.
He made a sign to Bar Shalmon to follow, and through an underground
passage he conducted him into the synagogue and placed him near the
rabbi.

"Thy presence has become known," whispered the rabbi, and even as he
spoke a great noise was heard. It was like the wild chattering of many
high-pitched voices. Through all the windows and the doors a strange
crowd poured into the synagogue. There were demons of all shapes and
sizes. Some had big bodies with tiny heads, others huge heads and quaint
little bodies. Some had great staring eyes, others had long wide mouths,
and many had only one leg each. They surrounded Bar Shalmon with

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

threatening gestures and noises. The rabbi ascended the pulpit.

"Silence!" he commanded, and immediately the noise ceased. "Ye who
thirst for mortal blood, desecrate not this holy building wherein I am
master. What ye have to say must wait until after the morning service."

Silently and patiently they waited, sitting in all manner of queer
places. Some of them perched on the backs of the seats, a few clung like
great big flies to the pillars, others sat on the window-sills, and
several of the tiniest hung from the rafters in the ceiling. As soon as
the service was over, the clamor broke out anew.

"Give to us the perjurer," screamed the demons. "He is not fit to live."

With some difficulty, the rabbi stilled the tumult, and said:

"Listen unto me, ye demons and sprites of the land of Ergetz. This man
has fallen into my hands, and I am responsible for him. Our king,
Ashmedai, must know of his arrival. We must not condemn a man unheard.
Let us petition the king to grant him a fair trial."

After some demur, the demons agreed to this proposal, and they trooped
out of the synagogue in the same peculiar manner in which they came.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

Each was compelled to leave by the same door or window at which he
entered.

Bar Shalmon was carried off to the palace of King Ashmedai, preceded and
followed by a noisy crowd of demons and fairies. There seemed to be
millions of them, all clattering and pointing at him. They hobbled and
hopped over the ground, jumped into the air, sprang from housetop to
housetop, made sudden appearances from holes in the ground and vanished
through solid walls.

The palace was a vast building of white marble that seemed as delicate
as lace work. It stood in a magnificent square where many beautiful
fountains spouted jets of crystal water. King Ashmedai came forth on the
balcony, and at his appearance all the demons and fairies became silent
and went down on their knees.

"What will ye with me?" he cried, in a voice of thunder, and the rabbi
approached and bowed before his majesty.

"A mortal, a Jew, has fallen into my hands," he said, "and thy subjects
crave for his blood. He is a perjurer, they say. Gracious majesty, I
would petition for a trial."

"What manner of mortal is he?" asked Ashmedai.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Bar Shalmon stepped forward.

"Jump up here so I may see thee," commanded the king.

"Jump, jump," cried the crowd.

"I cannot," said Bar Shalmon, as he looked up at the balcony thirty feet
above the ground. "Try," said the rabbi.

Bar Shalmon did try, and found, the moment he lifted his feet from the
ground, that he was standing on the balcony.

"Neatly done," said the king. "I see thou art quick at learning."

"So my teachers always said," replied Bar Shalmon.

"A proper answer," said the king. "Thou art, then, a scholar."

"In my own land," returned Bar Shalmon, "men said I was great among the
learned."

"So," said the king. "And canst thou impart the wisdom of man and of the
human world to others?"

"I can," said Bar Shalmon.

"We shall see," said the king. "I have a son with a desire for such
knowledge. If thou canst make him acquainted with thy store of learning,
thy life shall be spared. The petition for a trial is granted."

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

The king waved his scepter and two slaves seized Bar Shalmon by the
arms. He felt himself lifted from the balcony and carried swiftly
through the air. Across the vast square the slaves flew with him, and
when over the largest of the fountains they loosened their hold. Bar
Shalmon thought he would fall into the fountain, but to his amazement he
found himself standing on the roof of a building. By his side was the
rabbi.

"Where are we?" asked Bar Shalmon. "I feel bewildered."

"We are at the Court of Justice, one hundred miles from the palace,"
replied the rabbi.

A door appeared before them. They stepped through, and found themselves
in a beautiful hall. Three judges in red robes and purple wigs were
seated on a platform, and an immense crowd filled the galleries in the
same queer way as in the synagogue. Bar Shalmon was placed on a small
platform in front of the judges. A tiny sprite, only about six inches
high, stood on another small platform at his right hand and commenced to
read from a scroll that seemed to have no ending. He read the whole
account of Bar Shalmon's life. Not one little event was missing.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

"The charge against Bar Shalmon, the mortal," the sprite concluded, "is
that he has violated the solemn oath sworn at his father's death-bed."

Then the rabbi pleaded for him and declared that the oath was not
binding because Bar Shalmon's father had not informed him of his
treasures abroad and could not therefore have been in his right senses.
Further, he added, Bar Shalmon was a scholar and the king desired him to
teach his wisdom to the crown prince.

The chief justice rose to pronounce sentence.

"Bar Shalmon," he said, "rightly thou shouldst die for thy broken oath.
It is a grievous sin. But there is the doubt that thy father may not
have been in his right mind. Therefore, thy life shall be spared."

Bar Shalmon expressed his thanks.

"When may I return to my home?" he asked. "Never," replied the chief
justice.

Bar Shalmon left the court, feeling very downhearted. He was safe now.
The demons dared not molest him, but he longed to return to his home.

"How am I to get back to the palace?" he asked the rabbi. "Perhaps after
I have imparted my learning to the crown prince, the king will allow me
to return to my native land."

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

"That I cannot say. Come, fly with me," said the rabbi.

"Fly!"

"Yes; see thou hast wings."

Bar Shalmon noticed that he was now wearing a garment just like all the
demons. When he spread his arms, he found he could fly, and he sailed
swiftly through the air to the palace. With these wings, he thought, he
would be able to fly home.

"Think not that," said the rabbi, who seemed to be able to read his
thoughts, "for thy wings are useless beyond this land."

Bar Shalmon found that it would be best for him to carry out his
instructions for the present, and he set himself diligently to teach the
crown prince. The prince was an apt pupil, and the two became great
friends. King Ashmedai was delighted and made Bar Shalmon one of his
favorites.

One day the king said to him: "I am about to leave the city for a while
to undertake a campaign against a rebellious tribe of demons thousands
of miles away. I must take the crown prince with me. I leave thee in
charge of the palace."

The king gave him a huge bunch of keys.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

"These," he said, "will admit into all but one of the thousand rooms in
the palace. For that one there is no key, and thou must not enter it.
Beware."

For several days Bar Shalmon amused himself by examining the hundreds of
rooms in the vast palace until one day he came to the door for which he
had no key. He forgot the king's warning and his promise to obey.

"Open this door for me," he said to his attendants, but they replied
that they could not.

"You must," he said angrily, "burst it open."

"We do not know how to burst open a door," they said. "We are not
mortal. If we were permitted to enter the room we should just walk
through the walls."

Bar Shalmon could not do this, so he put his shoulder to the door and it
yielded quite easily.

A strange sight met his gaze. A beautiful woman, the most beautiful he
had ever seen, was seated on a throne of gold, surrounded by fairy
attendants who vanished the moment he entered.

"Who art thou?" asked Bar Shalmon, in great astonishment.

"The daughter of the king," replied the princess, "and thy future wife."

"Indeed! How know you that?" he asked.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

"Thou hast broken thy promise to my father, the king, not to enter this
room," she replied. "Therefore, thou must die, unless--"

"Tell me quickly," interrupted Bar Shalmon, turning pale, "how my life
can be saved."

"Thou must ask my father for my hand," replied the princess. "Only by
becoming my husband canst thou be saved."

"But I have a wife and child in my native land," said Bar Shalmon,
sorely troubled.

"Thou hast now forfeited thy hopes of return," said the princess,
slowly. "Once more hast thou broken a promise. It seems to come easy to
thee now."

Bar Shalmon had no wish to die, and he waited, in fear and trembling for
the king's re-turn. Immediately he heard of King Ashmedai's approach, he
hastened to meet him and flung himself on the ground at his majesty's
feet.

"O King," he cried, "I have seen thy daughter, the princess, and I
desire to make her my wife."

"I cannot refuse," returned the king. "Such is our law--that he who
first sees the princess must become her husband, or die. But, have a
care, Bar Shalmon. Thou must swear to love and be faithful ever."

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

"I swear," said Bar Shalmon.

The wedding took place with much ceremony. The princess was attended by
a thousand fairy bridesmaids, and the whole city was brilliantly
decorated and illuminated until Bar Shalmon was almost blinded by the
dazzling spectacle.

The rabbi performed the marriage ceremony, and Bar Shalmon had to swear
an oath by word of mouth and in writing that he loved the princess and
would never desert her. He was given a beautiful palace full of jewels
as a dowry, and the wedding festivities lasted six months. All the
fairies and demons invited them in turn; they had to attend banquets and
parties and dances in grottoes and caves and in the depths of the fairy
fountains in the square. Never before in Ergetz had there been such
elaborate rejoicings.

### III

Some years rolled by and still Bar Shalmon thought of his native land.
One day the princess found him weeping quietly.

"Why art thou sad, husband mine?" she asked. "Dost thou no longer love
me, and am I not beautiful now?"

"No, it is not that," he said, but for a long

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

time he refused to say more. At last he confessed that he had an intense
longing to see his home again.

"But thou art bound to me by an oath," said the princess.

"I know," replied Bar Shalmon, "and I shall not break it. Permit me to
visit my home for a brief while, and I will return and prove myself more
devoted to thee than ever."

On these conditions, the princess agreed that he should take leave for a
whole year. A big, black demon flew swiftly with him to his native city.

No sooner had Bar Shalmon placed his feet on the ground than he
determined not to return to the land of Ergetz.

"Tell thy royal mistress," he said to the demon, "that I shall never
return to her."

He tore his clothes to make himself look poor, but his wife was
overjoyed to see him. She had mourned him as dead. He did not tell of
his adventures, but merely said he had been ship-wrecked and had worked
his way back as a poor sailor. He was delighted to be among human beings
again, to hear his own language and to see solid buildings that did not
appear and disappear just when they pleased, and as the days

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

passed he began to think his adventures in fairyland were but a dream.

Meanwhile, the princess waited patiently until the year was ended.

Then she sent the big, black demon to bring Bar Shalmon back.

Bar Shalmon met the messenger one night when walking alone in his
garden.

"I have come to take thee back," said the demon.

Bar Shalmon was startled. He had forgotten that the year was up. He felt
that he was lost, but as the demon did not seize him by force, he saw
that there was a possibility of escape.

"Return and tell thy mistress I refuse," he said.

"I will take thee by force," said the demon. "Thou canst not," Bar
Shalmon said, "for I am the son-in-law of the king."

The demon was helpless and returned to Ergetz alone.

King Ashmedai was very angry, but the princess counseled patience.

"I will devise means to bring my husband back," she said. "I will send
other messengers."

Thus it was that Bar Shalmon found a troupe of beautiful fairies in the
garden the next evening.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They tried their
utmost to induce him to return with them, but he would not listen. Every
day different messengers came--big, ugly demons who threatened, pretty
fairies who tried to coax him, and troublesome sprites and goblins who
only annoyed him. Bar Shalmon could not move without encountering
messengers from the princess in all manner of queer places. Nobody else
could see them, and often he was heard talking to invisible people. His
friends began to regard him as strange in his behavior.

King Ashmedai grew angrier every day, and he threatened to go for Bar
Shalmon himself.

"Nay, I will go," said the princess; "it will be impossible for my
husband to resist me."

She selected a large number of attendants, and the swift flight of the
princess and her retinue through the air caused a violent storm to rage
over the lands they crossed. Like a thick black cloud they swooped down
on the land where Bar Shalmon dwelt, and their weird cries seemed like
the wild shrieking of a mighty hurricane. Down they swept in a
tremendous storm such as the city had never known. Then, as quickly as
it came, the storm ceased, and the people who had fled into their
houses, ventured forth again.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

The little son of Bar Shalmon went out into the garden, but quickly
rushed back into the house.

"Father, come forth and see," he cried. "The garden is full of strange
creatures brought by the storm. All manner of creeping, crawling things
have invaded the garden--lizards, toads, and myriads of insects. The
trees, the shrubs, the paths are covered, and some shine in the twilight
like tiny lanterns."

Bar Shalmon went out into the garden, but he did not see toads and
lizards. What he beheld was a vast array of demons and goblins and
sprites, and in a rose-bush the princess, his wife, shining like a star,
surrounded by her attendant fairies. She stretched forth her arms to
him.

"Husband mine," she pleaded, "I have come to implore thee to return to
the land of Ergetz with me. Sadly have I missed thee; long have I waited
for thy coming, and difficult has it been to appease my father's anger.
Come, husband mine, return with me; a great welcome awaits thee."

"I will not return," said Bar Shalmon.

"Kill him, kill him," shrieked the demons, and they surrounded him,
gesticulating fiercely. "Nay, harm him not," commanded the princess.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Think well, Bar
Shalmon, ere you answer again. The sun has set and night is upon us.
Think well, until sunrise. Come to me, return, and all shall be well.
Refuse, and thou shalt be dealt with as thou hast merited. Think well
before the sunrise."

"And what will happen at sunrise, if I refuse?" asked Bar Shalmon.

"Thou shalt see," returned the princess. "Bethink thee well, and
remember, I await thee here until the sunrise."

"I have answered; I defy thee," said Bar Shalmon, and he went indoors.

Night passed with strange, mournful music in the garden, and the sun
rose in its glory and spread its golden beams over the city. And with
the coming of the light, more strange sounds woke the people of the
city. A wondrous sight met their gaze in the market place. It was filled
with hundreds upon hundreds of the queerest creatures they had ever
seen, goblins and brownies, demons and fairies. Dainty little elves ran
about the square to the delight of the children, and quaint sprites
clambered up the [lampposts](errata.htm#1.md) and squatted on the gables of
the council house. On the steps of that building was a glittering array
of fairies and attendant genii,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

and in their midst stood the princess, a dazzling vision, radiant as the
dawn.

The mayor of the city knew not what to do. He put on his chain of office
and made a long speech of welcome to the princess.

"Thank you for your cordial welcome," said the princess, in reply, "and
you the mayor,. and ye the good people of this city of mortals, hearken
unto me. I am the princess of the Fairyland of Ergetz where my father,
Ashmedai, rules as king. There is one among ye who is my husband."

"Who is he?" the crowd asked in astonishment.

"Bar Shalmon is his name," replied the princess, "and to him am I bound
by vows that may not be broken."

"’Tis false," cried Bar Shalmon from the crowd.

"’Tis true. Behold our son," answered the princess, and there stepped
forward a dainty elfin boy whose face was the image of Bar Shalmon.

"I ask of you mortals of the city," the princess continued, "but one
thing, justice--that same justice which we in the land of Ergetz did
give unto Bar Shalmon when, after breaking his

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

oath unto his father, he set sail for a foreign land and was delivered
into our hands. We spared his life; we granted his petition for a new
trial. I but ask that ye should grant me the same petition. Hear me in
your Court of Justice."

"Thy request is but reasonable, princess," said the mayor. "It shall not
be said that strangers here are refused justice. Bar Shalmon, follow
me."

He led the way into the Chamber of Justice, and the magistrates of the
city heard all that the princess and her witnesses, among whom was the
rabbi, and also all that Bar Shalmon, had to say.

"’Tis plain," said the mayor, delivering judgment, "that her royal
highness, the princess of the Fairyland of Ergetz, has spoken that which
is true. But Bar Shalmon has in this city wife and child to whom he is
bound by ties that may not be broken. Bar Shalmon must divorce the
princess and return unto her the dowry received by him on their
marriage."

"If such be your law, I am content," said the princess.

"What sayest thou, Bar Shalmon?" asked the mayor.

"Oh! I'm content," he answered gruffly. "I

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

agree to anything that will rid me of the demon princess."

The princess flushed crimson with shame and rage at these cruel words.

"These words I have not deserved," she exclaimed, proudly. "I have loved
thee, and have been faithful unto thee, Bar Shalmon. I accept the decree
of your laws and shall return to the land of Ergetz a widow. I ask not
for your pity. I ask but for that which is my right, one last kiss."

"Very well," said Bar Shalmon, still more gruffly, "anything to have
done with thee."

The princess stepped proudly forward to him and kissed him on the lips.

Bar Shalmon turned deadly pale and would have fallen had not his friends
caught him.

"Take thy punishment for all thy sins," cried the princess, haughtily,
"for thy broken vows and thy false promises--thy perjury to thy God, to
thy father, to my father and to me."

As she spoke Bar Shalmon fell dead at her feet. At a sign from the
princess, her retinue of fairies and demons flew out of the building and
up into the air with their royal mistress in their midst and vanished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Higgledy-Piggledy Palace](jftl07.md)
