[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl24)  [Next](jftl26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

# The Rabbi's Bogey-Man <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

Rabbi Lion, of the ancient city of Prague, sat in his study in the
Ghetto looking very troubled. Through the window he could see the River
Moldau with the narrow streets of the Jewish quarter clustered around
the cemetery, which still stands to-day, and where is to be seen this
famous plan's tomb. Beyond the Ghetto rose the towers and spires of the
city, but just at that moment it was not the cruelty of the people to
the Jews that occupied the rabbi's thoughts. He was unable to find a
servant, even one to attend the fire on the Sabbath for him.

The truth was that the people were a little afraid of the rabbi. He was
a very learned man, wise and studious, and a scientist; and because he
did wonderful things people called him a magician. His experiments in
chemistry frightened them. Late at nights they saw little spurts of blue
and red flame shine from his window, and they said that demons and
witches

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

 

<span id="img_24400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The monster was
battering down the door of the synagogue. (Page 249)](tn/24400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24400.jpg.md)  
The monster was battering down the door of the synagogue. (Page 249)  
</span>

 

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

came at his beck and call. So nobody would enter his service.

"If, as they declare, I am truly a magician," he said to himself, "why
should I not make for myself a servant, one that will tend the fire for
me on the Sabbath?"

He set to work on his novel idea and in a few weeks had completed his
mechanical creature, a woman. She looked like a big, strong, laboring
woman, and the rabbi was greatly pleased with his handiwork.

"Now to endow it with life," he said.

Carefully, in the silence of his mysterious study at midnight, he wrote
out the Unpronounceable Sacred Name of God on a piece of parchment. Then
he rolled it up and placed it in the mouth of the creature.

Immediately it sprang up and began to move like a living thing. It
rolled its eyes, waved its arms, and nearly walked through the window.
In alarm, Rabbi Lion snatched the parchment from its mouth and the
creature fell helpless to the floor.

"I must be careful," said the rabbi. "It is a wonderful machine with its
many springs and screws and levers, and will be most useful to me as
soon as I learn to control it properly."

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

All the people marveled when they saw the rabbi's machine-woman running
errands and doing many duties, controlled only by his thoughts. She
could do everything but speak, and Rabbi Lion discovered that he must
take the Name from her mouth before he went to sleep. Otherwise, she
might have done mischief.

One cold Sabbath afternoon, the rabbi was preaching in the synagogue and
the little children stood outside his house looking at the machine-woman
seated by the window. When they rolled their eyes she did, and at last
they shouted: "Come and play with us."

She promptly jumped through the window and stood among the boys and
girls.

"We are cold," said one. "Canst thou make a fire for us?"

The creature was made to obey orders, so she at once collected sticks
and lit a fire in the street. Then, with the children, she danced round
the blaze in great glee. She piled on all the sticks and old barrels she
could find, and soon the fire spread and caught a house. The children
ran away in fear while the fire blazed so furiously that the whole town
became alarmed. Before the flames could be extinguished, a number of
houses had been burned down and much damage

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

done. The creature could not be found, and only when the parchment with
the Name, which could not burn, was discovered amid the ashes, was it
known that she had been destroyed in the conflagration.

The Council of the city was indignant when it learned of the strange
occurrence, and Rabbi Lion was summoned to appear before King Rudolf.

"What is this I hear," asked his majesty. "Is it not a sin to make a
living creature?"

"It had no life but that which the Sacred Name gave it," replied the
rabbi.

"I understand it not," said the king. "Thou wilt be imprisoned and must
make another creature, so that I may see it for myself. If it is as thou
sayest, thy life shall be spared. If not--if, in truth, thou profanest
God's sacred law and makest a living thing, thou shalt die and all thy
people shall be expelled from this city."

Rabbi Lion at once set to work, and this time made a man, much bigger
than the woman that had been burned.

"As your majesty sees," said the rabbi, when his task was completed, "it
is but a creature of wood and glue with springs at the joints. Now
observe," and he put the Sacred Name in its mouth.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

Slowly the creature rose to its feet and saluted the monarch who was so
delighted that he cried: "Give him to me, rabbi."

"That cannot be," said Rabbi Lion, solemnly. "The Sacred Name must not
pass from my possession. Otherwise the creature may do great damage
again. This time I shall take care and will not use the man on the
Sabbath."

The king saw the wisdom of this and set the rabbi at liberty and allowed
him to take the creature to his house. The Jews looked on in wonderment
when they saw the creature walking along the street by the side of Rabbi
Lion, but the children ran away in fear, crying: "The bogey-man."

The rabbi exercised caution with his bogey-man this time, and every
Friday, just before Sabbath commenced, he took the name from its mouth
so as to render it powerless.

It became more wonderful every day, and one evening it startled the
rabbi from a doze by beginning to speak.

"I want to be a soldier," it said, "and fight for the king. I belong to
the king. You made me for him."

"Silence," cried Rabbi Lion, and it had to obey. "I like not this," said
the rabbi to himself.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "This monster must
not become my master, or it may destroy me and perhaps all the Jews."

He could not help but wonder whether the king was right and that it must
be a sin to create a man. The creature not only spoke, but grew surly
and disobedient, and yet the rabbi hesitated to break it up, for it was
most useful to him. It did all his cooking, washing and cleaning, and
three servants could not have performed the work so neatly and quickly.

One Friday afternoon when the rabbi was preparing to go to the
synagogue, he heard a loud noise in the street.

"Come quickly," the people shouted at his door. "Your bogey-man is
trying to get into the synagogue."

Rabbi Lion rushed out in a state of alarm. The monster had slipped from
the house and was battering down the door of the synagogue.

"What art thou doing?" demanded the rabbi, sternly.

"Trying to get into the synagogue to destroy the scrolls of the Holy
Law," answered the monster. "Then wilt thou have no power over me, and I
shall make a great army of bogey-men who shall fight for the king and
kill all the Jews."

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

"I will kill thee first," exclaimed Rabbi Lion, and springing forward he
snatched the parchment with the Name so quickly from the creature's
mouth that it collapsed at his feet a mass of broken springs and pieces
of wood and glue.

For many years afterward these pieces were shown to visitors in the
attic of the synagogue when the story was told of the rabbi's bogey-man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[243:1](jftl25.htm#fr_0.md) The 'Bogey-Man' of this
story is, of course, the famous 'Golem,' the folkloric predecessor of
such famous literary artificial life-forms as the Dr. Frankenstein's
monster, as well as HAL 9000 and the Terminator.--JBH

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Frog](jftl26.md)
