[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl08)  [Next](jftl10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

# The Star-Child

When Abraham was born, his father, Terah, who was one of the chief
officers of King Nimrod, gave a banquet to a large number of his
friends. He entertained them most sumptuously, and the merriest of the
guests was the chief of the king's magicians. He was an old man,
exceedingly fond of wine, and he drank deeply. The feast lasted
throughout the night, and the gray dawn of early morning appeared in the
sky before Terah's friends thought of rising from the table.

Suddenly the old magician jumped to his feet.

"See," he cried, excitedly, pointing through the open door to the sky.
"See yon bright star in the east. It flashes across the heavens."

The others looked, but said they could see nothing.

"Fools," shouted the old man, "ye may not see, but I do. I, the wisest
of the king's magicians and astrologers, tell you it is an omen.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

 

<span id="img_08800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![''The big fellow
here got angry, beat the others and smashed them to bits.''
(&lt;i&gt;Page 95&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/08800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08800.jpg.md)  
''The big fellow here got angry, beat the others and smashed them to
bits.'' (*Page 95*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> See how the
brilliant star darts across the sky! It has swallowed a smaller star,
and another, even a third, yet a fourth. It is an omen, I say, a portent
that bodes ill. And, moreover," he added, growing still more excited,
"it is an omen connected with the birth of the little son of Terah."

"Nonsense," cried Terah.

"Talk not to me of nonsense," said the magician, sternly. "I must hasten
to inform the king."

Hurriedly he left the house of Terah, followed by the other magicians,
some of whom now said they also had seen a star swallow four others.
They did not think it wise to contradict their chief, although he had
drunk a great deal of wine and could not walk steadily.

King Nimrod was awakened from his sleep, and his magicians appeared
before him.

"O King, live for ever," said the chief, by way of salute. "Grave indeed
is the news that has led us to disturb thee in thy slumbers. This night
a son has been born unto thy officer, Terah, and with the coming of the
dawn a warning has appeared to us in the skies. I, the chief of thy
magicians, did observe a brilliant

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

star rise in the east and dart across the heavens and swallow four
smaller stars."

"We observed it, too," said the other magicians.

"And what means this?" inquired the king.

"It means," said the chief magician, mysteriously, "that this star-child
will destroy other children, that his descendants will conquer thine.
Take warning. Purchase this child from thy officer, Terah, and slay it
so that it may not grow up a danger to thee."

"Thy advice pleases me," said the cruel king.

In vain Terah protested. King Nimrod would not disregard the warning of
his magicians, but he consented to give Terah three days in which to
deliver up the child. Sad at heart Terah returned home, and on the
second day told his wife the terrible news.

"We must not allow our little son, Abraham, to be slain," she said. "If
he is to become great he must live. I have a plan. King Nimrod will not
be satisfied unless a child is slain. Therefore, take thou the child of
a slave to him and tell him it is Abraham. He will not know the
difference. And so that the trick shall not be discovered, take our
child away and hide it for a time."

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Terah thought this an excellent idea, and he carried it out. The sick
child of a slave, which was born only a few hours before Abraham, was
taken to King Nimrod who killed it with his own hands, and Terah's
little boy was secretly carried by his nurse to a cave in a forest.
There Abraham was carefully nurtured and brought up.

From time to time Abraham was visited by his father and mother, and not
until he was ten years old did they think it safe to bring him from the
cave in the forest to their home. Even then they deemed it best to be
careful. Their elder son, Haran, was a maker of idols and Abraham became
his helper without Haran being told it was his brother.

Abraham, the star-child, was a strange little boy. He did not believe in
the idols.

"I worship the sun by day and the moon and the stars by night," he said
to Haran.

"There are times when you cannot see the sun by day, nor the moon and
stars by night," said Haran, "but you can always have your idol with
you."

This troubled little Abraham for a while, but one day he came running to
his brother and said, "I have made a discovery. I shall no

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

longer worship the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars. There must be some
mighty power behind them that orders them to shine, the sun by day and
the moon and stars by night. That great power shall be my God."

Abraham asked all sorts of queer questions of his father. "Who made the
sun and the moon and the stars?" he asked.

"I know not," replied Terah.

"I have asked all your idols, your gods. and they answer not," said
Abraham.

"They cannot speak," said Terah.

"Then why do you pray to them and worship them?" persisted the boy.

Terah did not answer. Abraham asked his mother, but she could only tell
him that the gods who created everything were with them in the house.

"But Haran made those silly things of wood and clay," said Abraham, and
at last they refused to answer his awkward questions.

Mostly he stood at the door of the house, gazing at the sky as if trying
to read the secrets behind the sun and stars.

"Thou shouldst have been placed with an astrologer," said Haran to him
one day. "Thou art a child of the stars."

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

Terah heard this and was angry with Haran, for he feared that the secret
of the child's birth might be betrayed.

"I know not why my father keeps thee here," said Haran afterward to
Abraham. "Thou art becoming lazy. I have worked enough this day and will
go out to the woods to watch the hunting. Stay thou here. Perchance a
purchaser may come. Be heedful and obtain good payment for the idols."

Not long after Haran left, an old man entered the shop and said he
wished to buy an idol.

"I dropped my idol on the ground yesterday and it broke," he said. "I
must have a stronger one."

"Certainly thou must have a god so strong that naught can break it,"
answered Abraham. "Tell me, how old art thou?"

"Full sixty years, boy," replied the man.

"And yet thou hast not reached years of wisdom," said Abraham. "See how
easy it is to break thy gods," and he took a stick and smashed one of
the idols with a single blow.

The old man fled from the shop horrified.

Next, a woman entered.

"I am too poor to have an idol of my own,"

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

she said. "Therefore, I have brought a little food as an offering to one
of the many gods here."

"Offer it to any idol that pleases thee," said Abraham, with a laugh.

The woman placed it before the smallest idol.

"This idol is small and surly," said the boy. "It does not accept thy
offering," and he raised his stick and smashed it.

"Try a bigger idol with thy offering," he said, and the woman did so.

"Thou also hast no manners," said Abraham, addressing the god; "eat, or
I shall smash thee to pieces."

The idol, of course, did not eat, and so Abraham broke it, and the woman
rushed out into the street in great alarm.

Abraham tried all the idols in turn with the food, and as each was
unable to eat, he broke them all except the largest. Before this idol,
which was as tall as a man, he paused. Then, laughing loudly, he placed
the stick which he had used in the idol's hand.

By this time, a crowd, attracted by the cries of the old man and the
woman, had gathered at the door.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"What hast thou done?" they demanded, angrily.

"I? Nothing," answered Abraham. "See, the largest idol holds in its hand
a big stick. It seems to me that he has been angry and has killed all
the others. Ask him why he did this."

The people stood bewildered until Terah and Haran returned.

"What is the meaning of this?" they asked, pointing to the broken idols.

"Oh! Such fun," replied Abraham. "There has been a fight here. A woman
brought a food offering to the gods, and they quarrelled because they
all wanted it. So the big fellow here got angry, and, taking up the
stick which you see he still holds, he beat the others and smashed them
to bits."

"Absurd!" cried Haran. "The idols cannot do these things."

"Ask the big fellow to strike me if I have told lies," returned Abraham.

"Cease your nonsense," commanded his father.

"What funny gods yours are," said Abraham, musingly, standing before the
big idol. "Do you think he will hit me if I smack his face?"

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Before anybody could stop him, he smacked the idol's face and then
knocked off its head with the stick.

Some of the people ran off to the palace, and soon came an order from
King Nimrod that the idol-breaker should be brought before him. Abraham,
Haran and Terah were seized by the guards and marched off to the palace.

"Which of you broke the idols?" asked the king, angrily.

"I did, because they were rude and would not accept the offering," said
Abraham. "How can they be gods if they have no sense?"

"Not altogether a foolish remark," said Nimrod, smiling. "If idols
please thee not, then worship fire which has the power to consume."

"Fire itself can be quenched by water," replied Abraham.

"Then worship water," returned Nimrod. "But water is absorbed by the
clouds," said the boy.

"And clouds are blown by the wind," said Nimrod.

"Man can withstand the force of the wind." said Abraham.

"So he will talk all day long, this child of the stars," exclaimed
Haran.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

"Child of the stars!" said the chief magician. "Now I understand. O
king, this must be no other than the child of Terah against whom, at his
birth, we warned your majesty. The message of the stars has come true.
He has dared to destroy our gods. Soon he will destroy us."

"Is this, in truth, the child of the stars?" asked Nimrod, of Terah, but
the latter did not answer.

"It is in truth, your majesty," said Haran. "I have long suspected it."

"Then why didst thou not inform me?" exclaimed the king in a rage. "I
will test this star-child with the power of my god, fire. And thou,
Haran, for thy neglect, must also suffer. Guards, let them be bound and
cast into the furnace to which I pray daily. Terah, thou art their
father. I can forgive thee; thou wilt suffer sufficiently in losing both
thy sons to my god."

The fire was made so hot that the men who endeavored to cast Abraham and
Haran into the flames were caught and burned to death. Twelve men in all
perished before Terah's sons were thrown into the furnace. Haran was
burned to ashes at once, but to the surprise of the vast crowd that
stood at a safe distance, Abraham walked unharmed in the flames, the
fetters which bound him having been consumed.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

When King Nimrod saw this, he trembled.

"Come forth, boy," he cried to Abraham, "and I will pardon thee."

"Bid your men take me out," he answered.

All who approached the terrific fire, however, were burned to death, and
at last when Nimrod said he would bow down before Abraham's God the boy
came forth unharmed.

All the people bowed down before the boy who told them to rise, saying,
"Worship not me, but the true God who dwells in Heaven beyond the sun
and the stars and whose glory is everywhere."

King Nimrod loaded the boy with presents and bade him return home in
peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abi Fressah's Feast](jftl10.md)
