[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl23)  [Next](jftl25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

 

<span id="img_23400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![He crouched on his
throne and imagined he saw angels and demons and fairies. (&lt;i&gt;Page
241&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/23400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23400.jpg)  
He crouched on his throne and imagined he saw angels and demons and
fairies. (*Page 241*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

# The Paradise in the Sea

Hiram, king of Tyre, was a foolish old man. He lived so long and grew to
such a venerable age that he [absurdly](errata.htm#7) imagined he would
never die. The idea gained strength daily in his mind and thus he mused:

"David, king of the Jews, I knew, and afterward his son, the wise King
Solomon. But wise as he was, Solomon had to appeal to me for assistance
in building his wondrous Temple, and it was only with the aid of the
skilled workmen I sent to him that he successfully accomplished the
erection of that structure. David, the sweet singer in Israel, who, as a
mere boy slew the giant Goliath, has passed away. I still live. It must
be that I shall never die. Men die. Gods live for ever. I must be a god,
and why not?"

He put that question to the chief of his counselors, who, however, was
much too wise to answer it. Now the counselors of the king had never yet
failed to answer his queries, and so

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hiram felt sure he
had at last puzzled them by a question beyond the power of mortal man to
answer. That was another proof, he told himself, that he was different
from other men and kings--that, in short, he was a god.

"I must be, I must be," he muttered to himself, and he repeated this to
himself so regularly that he came to the conclusion it was true.

"It is not I, but the voice of the Spirit of God that is in me that
speaks," he said to himself, and he thought this remark so clever that
he regarded it as still further proof. It is so easy to delude one's
self.

Then he decided to make the great secret known to the people, and the
doddering old man thought if he would do this in an unusual way, his
subjects would have no doubts. He did not make a proclamation commanding
everybody to believe in him as a god; he whispered the secret first to
his chief counselor and instructed him to tell it to one person daily
and to order all who were informed to do likewise. In this way the news
soon spread to the remotest corners of the country, for if you work out
a little sum you will discover that if you take the figure one and
double it thus: two, four, eight, sixteen, and so on, it will run into
millions.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

In spite of this, nothing happened. Hiram, now quite idiotic, commanded
the people to worship him. Some obeyed, fearing that if they refused
they would be punished, or even put to death. Others declared there was
no evidence that the king was a god. This came to the knowledge of Hiram
and troubled him sorely.

"What proof do the unbelievers require?" he asked of his counselors.

They hesitated to reply, but presently the vizier, a shrewd old man with
a long beard, said quietly, "I have heard people say a god must have a
heaven from which to hurl lightning and thunderbolts, and a paradise in
which to dwell."

"I shall have a heaven and a paradise," said Hiram, after a few moments'
silence, adding to himself: "If Solomon could build a marvelous temple
by the help of my workmen, surely I can devise a paradise."

He spent so much thought over this that it seemed to become easier each
day. Besides, it would be so nice to live in a paradise all to himself.
At first he decided to build a great big palace of gold, with windows of
precious stones. There would be a high tower on which the throne would
be placed so far above the people

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

that they must be impressed with the fact that he was God.

Then it occurred to him this would not do. A palace, however vast and
beautiful, would only be a building, not a paradise. Day and night he
pondered and worried until his head ached badly. Then one day, while
watching a ship on the sea, an extraordinary idea came into his head.

"I will build a palace which will seem to hang above the water on
nothing!" he said to himself, chuckling. "None but a god could conceive
such a brilliant idea."

Hiram set about his ingenious plan at once. He sent trusted envoys far
and wide for skilled divers. Only those who did not know the language of
the country were selected. Hiram himself gave them their orders and they
worked only at night, so that none should see or know of their work.
Their task was to fasten four huge pillars to the bottom of the sea.
Their work completed, the divers were well paid and sent away.

Next, a different gang of workmen was brought from a strange land. They
constructed a platform on the pillars in the sea. Then a third lot of
artisans began to erect a wonderful

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

edifice on the platform. They, too, only worked at night, but the
building could no longer be concealed. It was showing itself above the
sea. The people were therefore told, by royal proclamation, in these
words:

I, Hiram of Tyre, the King, and of all the People,  
GOD OMNIPOTENT,  
Hereby make known to you that it has become my pleasure to reveal unto
you my  
PARADISE  
which hitherto I have concealed in the clouds. Ye who are worthy shall
behold it  
TODAY!

Of all the clever things he had done, Hiram believed the composition of
that proclamation the cleverest.

"Those who do not see, will think themselves unworthy," he said, "and
will tremble in fear of my wrath. They will see a little more each day
and will think themselves growing worthy. And they will believe; they
must, when they see it all. Besides, they will look upward, toward the
clouds, to see the paradise descending. They will never think of looking
below to see it rising."

And so it happened. The people could not

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

help but be impressed when they saw the amazing structure. It grew
daily, apparently of its own accord, for no workmen were seen; and most
wonderful of all, it seemed to rest on nothing in the air!

This was because the first story was of clearest glass, so clear,
indeed, that the people saw through it and thought they saw nothing. On
this the other stories were erected, and, of course, they appeared to be
suspended in space.

There were seven stories to represent seven heavens. The second, the one
above the glass, was constructed of iron, the third was of lead, the
fourth of shining brass, the fifth of burnished copper, the sixth of
glistening silver, and the last story of all, of pure gold.

The whole building was lavishly studded with precious stones, gems and
jewels of many hues. By day, when the sun shone and was reflected from
the thousands of jewels and the polished metals, the appearance was
dazzling; the people could not help but regard as a heaven that which
they could scarcely look upon without being blinded. In the setting sun
the uppermost story, with its huge golden dome, glowed like an expanse
of fire; and by night, the myriad gems twinkled like additional stars.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

Yet some people would not believe this was a paradise, and so Hiram had
to set his wits to work again.

"Thunder and lightning I must produce," he said, and this part of his
ambition he found not at all difficult.

In the second story he kept huge boulders and round heavy stones. When
these were rolled about the people thought the noise was thunder. By
means of many revolving windows and reflectors, Hiram could flash a
light on the town and delude simple people, who were easily impressed
and frightened, into the belief that they saw lightning.

"When I am seated here above the forces of the storm," said Hiram, "the
people must surely accept me as God and extol me above all mortal
kings."

He was foolishly happy on his throne in the clouds, but his counselors
shook their heads. They knew that such folly would meet with its due
punishment. They warned Hiram against remaining in his paradise during a
storm, but he replied, in a rage: "I, the God of the storm, am not
afraid."

But when the real thunder rolled and the lightning flashed all around
his paradise, Hiram

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

lost his boastful courage. He saw visions. Trembling in every limb, he
crouched on his throne and imagined he saw angels and demons and fairies
dancing round him and jeering at his pretensions and his wonderful
structure.

The storm grew fiercer, the lightning more vivid, the thunder-crashes
louder, and Hiram screamed when there was a tremendous noise of crashing
glass. The first story could not withstand the terrible buffeting of the
waves. It cracked and crumbled. There was no support left for the six
heavens above. They could no longer hang in space.

With a mighty crash, that struck terror into the hearts of the
beholders, the whole structure collapsed in a thousand pieces in the
sea.

Marvelous to relate, Hiram was not killed or drowned. It seemed a
miracle that he should be saved, but such was the case; and some people
thought that proved him to be a god more than his unfortunate paradise.
But his life was only spared to end in greater misery and sorrow. He was
dethroned by Nebuchadnezzar and ended his days a wretched captive. And
all the people knew that Hiram, once the great king of Tyre, the friend
of King David and King Solomon, was but a mortal and a foolish one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rabbi's Bogey-Man](jftl25)
