[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl13)  [Next](jftl15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# Sinbad of the Talmud

"Rabba, Rabba, silly, silly Rabba, have you caught another whale
to-day?"

With this strange cry a number of children followed an elderly man
through the streets of a town in the East. Their parents looked on in
amusement and some of them called after the man as the little ones did.
Rabba, however, took no notice, but walked straight on with a faraway
look in his eyes, as if his thoughts were elsewhere. Presently, on
turning the corner of a street, he nearly ran into an Arab coming in the
opposite direction. As soon as the children saw the Arab they turned and
fled.

"Ali Rabba is coming," they cried to one another in warning, and as fast
as their legs would carry them they made off to their homes.

The Arab shook his fist threateningly after the children. Then he turned
to the man whom they had followed.

"It is a shame," he said, hotly, "that the impudent

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

 

<span id="img_13400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![They saw the land
rise up like a huge mountain and a tremendous stream of water gush
forth. (&lt;i&gt;Page 138&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/13400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13400.jpg.md)  
They saw the land rise up like a huge mountain and a tremendous stream
of water gush forth. (*Page 138*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

ragamuffins of the town should be allowed to cast words of disrespect in
the public streets at my sainted master, Rabba bar Chana, the man of
profound learning and the famous traveller--"

"Be gentle, good Ali," interrupted Rabba. "Remember they are little more
than babes and have not full understanding. And how can they be
respectful when their parents, who should have wisdom and faith, accept
not our stories of the many adventures we have had? Yesterday, I told
them of the day when our ship had been surrounded by five thousand
whales, each a mile long, and they jeered and cried 'Impossible!'"

"Impossible!" echoed Ali, in a rage. "Was I not there with thee, my
master? Did I not count every single whale myself? Who dares to doubt my
word? Have I not, for years, been thy faithful guide on thy marvelous
journeys? Bah! What know these town fools, whose lives are no wider than
the narrow streets in which they dwell, of the wonders of the vast world
beyond the seas? Fools, ignorant fools, every one of them, my good
master. Why stay you here with them and brook their insults and their
sneers? Let us journey forth again this very day. A good ship waits in
the harbor."

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

Ali's voice grew louder as his rage became stronger and a crowd was
collecting. Rabba hurried him away and together they made for the
harbor. There they were soon engaged in earnest conversation with the
captain of a vessel that had come from a distant land.

"I shall be glad to have two such famous travelers on my ship," said the
captain. "I have heard of your adventures, and in my country ’tis said
that only those meet with wonders who dare to seek them and believe in
them. I, too, would see the wonders of the world, and gladly will I give
you passage on my ship."

Next day Rabba and Ali stood on the deck of the vessel as the sail was
hoisted, and it moved slowly from the harbor to the accompaniment of
cheering and some laughter from a crowd on shore.

"Silly Rabba and Ali Rabba, don't forget to bring back the moon," they
cried. "Find out where it goes when it is not here."

Soon the land was out of sight, and scudding before favorable breezes
the ship made good progress. In ten days it had reached a sea in which
no vessel had ever sailed before. Ali said he could tell this because
the fishes behaved queerly. They poked their heads out of the

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

water to gaze at the ship and then darted swiftly out of sight again. It
was quite plain that they had never before seen a ship, and they
evidently mistook it for some strange sea monster. Every day the fishes
grew larger, but no land was sighted until another five days had passed.
Then a desert island appeared straight ahead, and the captain steered
toward it. A few blades of grass grew here and there, and Rabba
determined to land and explore the island.

Accompanied by his faithful Ali, he entered a small boat and was rowed
to the shore. They found a few vegetables growing that they had never
seen before, and so, collecting twigs from the short, stumpy bushes,
they made a fire to cook them. While the vegetables were cooking they
looked around.

"It seems a vast land," said Rabba, "and yet over there, about three or
four miles away, I think I see water."

"I think so, too," said Ali. "This must be the width of the land, but in
the other directions I can see no end. But hark! What sound is that?"

"’Tis like the rumbling of an earthquake," said Rabba, "and I am sure I
felt the ground move. Indeed, it seems to me as if it is heaving up and
down, like a living thing."

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

A shout from the boat caused them to look in that direction, and they
saw their comrades pointing wildly and calling upon them to come back.
Looking in the direction indicated, they saw the land rise up like a
huge mountain and a tremendous stream of water gush forth.

"This is not land; this is a whale," cried Rabba, in alarm. "Our fire
has wakened it from slumber. Let us hasten to the ship before the
monster plunges and drowns us."

They hurried back to the boat and boarded the ship just as the whale
began to move. It sank below the waves to quench the fire on its back,
but it rose again, and then the vessel found itself in a new danger. It
was lying between the body of the monster and one of its fins.

"Let me take command," said Ali. "I know best how to act in times of
danger like this. We must avoid being struck by the fin, or we shall be
destroyed. We must find which way the monster is moving and go in the
opposite direction; otherwise we shall be wrecked when we come to the
place where the fin joins the body."

There was no sleep for the crew that night. Everyone watched carefully,
for the least false move may have meant instant disaster. Luckily the
whale began to move on the surface of the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

sea against the wind, so that the ship, traveling in the opposite
direction, had the wind behind it. Swiftly flew the ship before the
breeze, but the fin seemed to have no end, although the whale was
traveling fast, too. Three days and three nights the ship continued
before it came to the end of the fin. Then everyone on board breathed
more freely.

"That was a lucky escape," said the captain to Rabba.

"Speak not too soon," replied the latter. "I have fears yet. We must
hasten to get completely away from this monster, but the wind does not
favor any alteration of our course."

Even as he spoke there was a great commotion in the water, and the whale
began to move back-ward at so fearful a speed that they could scarcely
see it. The water was violently agitated and the ship was tossed about
as if it were a mere cork. A whole day this lasted. Then the motion grew
slower as the head of the whale came past the ship.

"See," cried Ali, excitedly. "A small fish has stuck in the nostril of
the monster. That is the cause of this commotion. The monster will
surely be killed."

The agitation of the water now died down,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

and it was seen that the whale was beginning to turn over.

"The monster is dead," said Rabba. "It will float on the waves like a
vast desert land and will be a danger to ships."

For several days the vessel was compelled to follow the dead whale.
Whenever an attempt was made to move away, the current or the wind
changed and the carcass of the monster followed the ship. The captain
did not like this at all, for it was dangerous in the extreme. He was
afraid that the dead whale would strike the vessel and wreck it.

At last land was sighted. Not even Rabba and Ali could recognize the
country. They said they had never seen it before. Beautiful cities
dotted the shore, but to everybody's alarm, the body of the whale began
to float toward the land.

To make matters worse, a storm arose, and the monster rose and fell with
each motion of the angry waves.

"The cities will be destroyed if the whale strikes them," cried Rabba,
"and it is impossible for us to warn the people."

Nearer and nearer the whale was driven, while the captain of the ship
did his utmost to keep away so as not to be struck by the backwash.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

At length, with a tremendous crash, the monster was flung by the waves,
which had increased to a great height, against the shore. Above the
shrieking of the wind could be heard the noise of falling buildings and
the wild cries of the people. A huge wave caught the ship and carried it
a mile out to sea and then whirled it back again at a speed that made
the crew hold their breath in awe.

It seemed certain that the vessel would be dashed to pieces on the land,
and the crew, with cries of warning and alarm, made haste to lash
themselves to the masts. The mighty wave swept over the land, over the
ruins of the towns, carrying the ship with it, and finally deposited it
among the trees of a dense forest a mile from the shore.

"At least we are safe for the present," said Rabba, when he had
recovered from the shock and the surprise. "We are more fortunate than
the poor people who have been overwhelmed by this strange disaster."

"I should like to know how I am going to get my ship back to the sea,"
said the captain. "I never heard of such a predicament before."

Rabba merely shrugged his shoulders, and with Ali he walked to the
shore. An extraordinary sight met their gaze. Thousands of people were

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

rushing madly to the forests. Everywhere was ruin and desolation. All
the towns along the coast, sixty in number they learned afterward, had
been destroyed by the stranding of the monster and the tidal wave that
followed, and what had not been leveled and swept out to sea had been
carried inland to the forests and beyond. All along the coast, as far as
the eye could see, lay the body of the whale like a mountain range, and
hundreds of people ran up and down, weeping bitterly and wringing their
hands.

Rabba gathered as many of them as he could together and addressed them.

"Good people," he said, "ye are the victims of a terrible calamity that
has robbed you at one cruel blow of your homes, and many of you of your
families. But ye that have survived have duties to yourselves and to the
future. In this hour of grief, despair not. There lies the fearful
monster that has been your destruction. It shall also be your salvation.
Its body can supply you all with food. What you cannot eat, you can salt
and store for the future. Thousands of casks of oil can be obtained from
its blubber, and with this ye can trade. Then, too, its bones are
valuable."

The people thanked Rabba for his good advice,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

and immediately they set about doing what he bade them. They told him
this was a bewitched land, the country of Kishef, abounding with
terrible monsters both on land and in the sea, and ruled over by a
malignant jinn, named Hormuz, who gave them no peace. They asked Rabba
to try and kill this sprite who said that only a stranger to the land
could do him harm, and so Rabba and his faithful All, mounted on horses,
set forth on their adventures.

"I think I know this country," said Ali. "I believe I landed once on the
other shore. We cannot be far from the wilderness in which the
Israelites wandered."

For several days they journeyed through forests and across plains and
nothing happened. At last they came to a broad, high wall which barred
their progress. They could find no opening through which to pass, and
while they were wondering what to do, a strange figure suddenly appeared
on the wall. One of his legs was longer than the other, and his arms
were also of different length. His ears and eyes were also unequal, and
he hopped and bounded along the wall at amazing speed.

"My name is Hormuz," he cried. "Who are ye?"

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

"Strangers," called Rabba, and as soon as he heard the word, the sprite
darted swiftly off along the top of the wall. But although the horses
ran at topmost speed, they could not over-take him, and he quickly
disappeared. Where he was lost to sight, however, there was a hole in
the wall, and through this Rabba and Ali just managed to take their
horses. A vast wilderness lay before them.

Ali picked up two clods of earth and smelt them.

"As I thought," he said, "this is the wilderness of the Israelites.
Come, I will show thee strange sights."

Before nightfall, they came to a place where the bodies of a large
number of men lay strewn on the ground.

"These men must have been giants," said Rabba, as Ali, with his spear
uplifted, rode under the raised knee of one of the bodies. "These must
be the bodies of the Ephraimites who left Egypt before the rest of the
children of Israel and were slain."

He cut off a portion of a garment that still covered one of the bodies,
but when he tried to move he could not. He seemed to be rooted to the
spot. Nor could his horse move.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

"Oh, oh," cried Ali, "my horse has lost its power to move. Thou must
have taken something from the dead. Return it, good master, or we shall
be held fast here until we perish."

Rabba returned the piece of garment, and they were able to move again.
They hurried from the place and came to a chasm in the ground from which
smoke was rising.

"This is the pit in which Korah and his children were swallowed," said
Ali.

"That must have been a wonderful sight," said Rabba. "I have heard that
the pit became like a funnel and that the air all about eddied and
sucked in everything that belonged to Korah. Even the things that people
had borrowed from him, such as dishes, rolled along the ground from a
distance and into the pit. Come, let us hasten away.

They continued their journey for many days, but could not see the demon
again. One day the desert ended and they came to the sea. They encamped
for the night, and when morning broke Rabba was surprised to find that
the basket, in which they kept their provisions, had disappeared.

"I think I can explain," said Ali. "No thieves have been here, but this
is the end of the world,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

the edge of the earth. Here, once in every twenty-four hours, the sky
and the earth in their revolution, scrape together. The sky must have
caught up your basket and carried it away. It will be returned at the
same hour tomorrow morning."

Rabba awoke next morning before the sunrise and saw his basket floating
down to earth on a cloud. Both he and All were overjoyed when they
recovered it, for they were very hungry. While they were eating, the sky
grew dark, and looking up they saw what appeared to be a great cloud
above their heads. Out of the sea a mighty tree seemed suddenly to have
grown. They moved cautiously forward to investigate.

"Take heed," cried a voice of thunder. "I am a bird standing in the
water. It is so deep, with such swift currents, that seven years ago an
axe fell in and has not yet reached the bottom."

Rabba and Ali crouched on the ground in great fear, until at last Rabba
called: "Mighty bird, we seek your help. We are anxious to find the
wicked jinn, Hormuz, and slay him so that people shall be free."

"Follow me," answered the bird, and like a spreading cloud it flew along
the coast. Rabba and Ali followed on their horses.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

"Look," cried Ali, suddenly, pointing out to sea.

A huge snake and dragon were fighting, and at last the sea-serpent,
which was almost as big as the whale that had destroyed the towns,
swallowed the dragon. No sooner had it done so, however, than the giant
bird swooped down and gobbled up the snake.

"That was a good fat worm for breakfast," called the bird. "Now I shall
rest."

It flew toward a gigantic tree which now appeared. So tall was it that
its upper branches were lost in the clouds. The bird perched on a branch
of the tree.

"Proceed along the coast until you come to two bridges," said the bird.
"There you will find Hormuz. Give him two cups of wine to drink, then
you can slay him. But be sure you take the diamond from his cap. I, the
ziz, give you this warning."

Rabba thanked the bird for its information, and with Ali continued on
his journey. After three days they came to a river crossed by two
bridges, and with one foot on each stood Hormuz.

As soon as he saw them he began to run, but Rabba called after him, "We
bring thee an offering of good wine," and he promptly returned.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabba filled the
two cups which he had from a leathern bottle, and Hormuz took a cup in
each hand, smacking his lips as he did so.

"See," he said, and he tossed the wine into the air, and the wine from
the right hand cup fell into the left hand cup and that from the left
hand cup into the right and not a drop was spilt. Then he swallowed them
both at one gulp.

Almost immediately he fell down in a stupor, and Rabba stabbed him again
and again with his spear. Yet, when he seemed quite dead, he jumped up
again.

"The diamond," cried Rabba, excitedly, and Ali snatched it from the cap
of Hormuz. Then the demon fell dead.

"We can return now," said Rabba, and they set out at once, taking the
body with them. They halted only to take food, and the first time they
did so a funny thing happened. Ali had killed an animal and Rabba had
caught some fish, and, while these were cooking, Rabba took the jinn's
diamond from his pocket and examined it. At once the fish and the animal
came to life again, jumped out of the cooking pot and made off.

"This is a magic diamond," said Rabba, "that has the power to bring dead
things to life. We must keep it covered when we wish to eat."

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

They did so, and after long journeying they came in sight of the great
wall and at last reached the place from which they had started. They had
been away twelve months in all, and the people were heartily glad to see
them, especially when they heard that Hormuz had been killed and saw his
body. They had worked hard on the carcass of the huge whale and were
re-building the sixty towns and villages that had been destroyed, with
the bones of the monster, using the skin as coverings for their tents.

With the help of the magic diamond, Rabba called the ziz, and it took
the ship which had been carried into the forest in its beak and flew
with it to the sea. Gathering their old comrades, Rabba and Ali set sail
for home.

All the inhabitants stood on shore and cheered as long as the ship was
in sight. They were sorry that Rabba was gone, but they felt certain now
that Hormuz was dead, that nevermore would they be troubled by monsters
which brought them such terrible disasters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Outcast Prince](jftl15.md)
