[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl27)  [Next](jftl29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

 

<span id="img_27600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Then the door
slowly opened and a figure in white stood in the entry. (&lt;i&gt;Page
286&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/27600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27600.jpg.md)  
Then the door slowly opened and a figure in white stood in the entry.
(*Page 286*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

# King Alexander's Adventures

### I. THE VISION OF VICTORY

More than two thousand years ago there lived a king in the land of
Macedon who was a great conqueror, and when his son, Alexander, was
born, the soothsayers and the priestesses of the temples predicted that
he would be a greater warrior than his father. Alexander was a wonderful
boy, and his father, King Philip, was very proud of him when he tamed a
spirited horse which nobody else could manage. The wisest philosophers
of the day were Alexander's teachers, and when he was only sixteen years
of age, Philip left him in charge of the country when he went to subdue
Byzantium. Alexander was only twenty when he ascended the throne, but
before then he had suppressed a rebellion and had proved himself
possessed of exceptional daring and courage.

"I shall conquer the whole world," he said.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

and although he only reigned thirteen years and died at the age of
thirty-three, he accomplished his ambition. All the countries which were
then known had to acknowledge his supremacy.

King Alexander was a drunkard and very cruel, but he treated the Jews
kindly. When they heard he had been victorious over Darius, king of
Persia, who was their ruler, and that he was marching on Jerusalem, they
became seriously alarmed. Jadua, the high priest, however, counseled the
people to welcome Alexander with great ceremony.

All the priests and the Levites donned their most gorgeous robes, the
populace put on their holiday garb, and the streets of the city were
gaily decorated with many colored banners and garlands of flowers. The
night before Alexander arrived at the head of his army, a long
procession was formed of the priests, the Levites, and the elders of the
city, each carrying a lighted torch. At the gates of the city they
awaited the approach of the mighty warrior.

In the early morning, before the sun had risen, Alexander made his
appearance and was astonished at the magnificent spectacle which met his
gaze. At the head of the procession' stood the high priest in his
shining white robes,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

with the jewels of the ephod glittering on his breast. To the surprise
of his generals, Alexander descended from his horse and bowed low before
the high priest.

"Like unto an angel dost thou appear to me," he said.

"Let thy coming bring peace," replied Jadua.

Parmenio, the chief of Alexander's generals, had promised the soldiers
rich store of plunder in Jerusalem, and he approached the king and said:

"Wherefore do you honor this priest of the Jews above all men?"

"I will tell thee," answered Alexander. "In dreams have I often seen
this dignified priest. Ever he bade me be of good courage and always did
he predict victory for me. Shall I not then pay homage to my guardian
angel?"

Turning to the priest, he said, "Lead me to your Temple that I may offer
up thanksgiving to the God of my guardian angel."

It was now daylight, and the priests walked in procession before King
Alexander past cheering multitudes of people. At the Temple the king
removed his sandals, but the priests gave him a pair of jeweled
slippers, fearing that he might slip on the pavement. The king was

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

pleased with all that he saw and desired that a statue of himself, or a
portrait, should be placed in the holy building.

"That may not be," replied the high priest, "but in honor of thy visit
all the boys born in Jerusalem this year shall be named Alexander."

"It is well," said the king, much pleased; "ask of me what you will, and
if it be in my power I shall grant it."

"Mighty monarch," said Jadua, "we desire naught but to be permitted to
serve our God according to our laws. Permit us to practice our religious
observances free and unhindered. Grant also this privilege to the Jews
who dwell in all thy dominions, and we shall ever pray for thy long life
and triumph."

"It is but little that ye ask," replied the king, "and that little is
easily granted."

The people cheered loudly when they heard the good news, and many Jews
enrolled themselves in the army.

Alexander stayed some time in Jerusalem, and messengers arrived from
Canaan to ask him to compel the Jews to restore them their land.

"It is written in the Books of Moses," they said, "that Canaan and its
boundaries belong to the Canaanites."

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

Gebiah, a hunchback, undertook to answer.

"It is also written in the Books of Moses," he said, "'Cursed be Canaan;
a servant shall he be unto his brethren.' The property of a slave
belongs to his master, therefore Canaan is ours."

Alexander gave the envoys of Canaan three days in which to reply to
this, but they fled from Jerusalem.

Messengers from Egypt came next, asking for the return of the gold and
silver taken by the Israelites from the land of Pharaoh.

"What says Gebiah to this?" asked Alexander.

"We shall return the gold and silver," answered the hunchback, "when we
have been paid for the many, many years of labor of our ancestors in
Egypt."

"Truly a wise answer," said Alexander, and he gave the Egyptians three
days to consider it. But they also fled.

When Alexander left Jerusalem he sought the advice of the wise men of
Israel.

"I desire," he said, "to conquer the land beyond the Mountains of
Darkness in Africa; it is also my wish to fly above the clouds and
behold the heavens, and also to descend into the depths of the sea and
gaze with mine own eyes on the monsters of the deep."

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

How to accomplish these things he was instructed by the wise men, but
they warned him never to enter Babylon.

"For shouldst thou ever enter the city of Babylon," they said, "thou
wilt assuredly die."

King Alexander thanked them for the advice and the warning, and set
forth on his adventures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Land of Darkness and the Gate of Paradise](jftl29.md)
