[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tolkien](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](two21)  [Next](two23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXH3K/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Worm Ouroboros*, by E. R. Eddison, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

# XVI

### The Lady Sriva's Embassage

HOW THE DUKE CORSUS THOUGHT IT PROPER TO COMMIT AN ERRAND OF STATE UNTO
HIS DAUGHTER: AND HOW SHE PROSPERED THEREIN.

SRIVA fared swiftly to her father's closet, and finding her lady mother
sewing in her chair, nodding toward sleep, two candles at her left and
right, she said, "My lady mother, there's a queen's crown waits the
plucking. 'Twill drop into the foreign woman's lap if thou and my father
bestir you not. Where is he? Still i' the banquet house? Thou or I must
fetch him on the instant."

"Fie!" cried Zenambria. "How thou'st startled me! Fall somewhat into a
slower speech, my girl. With such wild sudden talk I know not what thou
meanest nor what's the matter."

But Sriva answered, "Matter of state. Thou goest not? Good, then I fetch
him. Thou shalt hear all anon, mother;" and so turned towards the door.
Nor might all her mother's crying out upon the scandal of their so
returning to the banquet long past the hour of the women's withdrawal
turn her from this. So that the Lady Zenambria,

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

seeing her so wilful, thought it less evil to go herself; and so went,
and in awhile returned with Corsus.

Corsus sat in his great chair over against his lady wife, while his
daughter told her tale.

"Twice and thrice," said she, "they passed me by, as near as I stand to
thee, O my father, she leaning most familiarly on the arm of her curled
philosopher. 'Twas plain they had never a thought that any was by to
overhear them. She said so and so;" and therewith Sriva told all that
was spoke by the Lady Prezmyra as to an expedition to Demonland, and as
to her purposed speaking with the King, and as to her design that Corund
should be his general for that sailing, and letters sealed on the morrow
for his straight recall from Orpish.

The Duke listened unmoved, breathing heavily, leaning heavily forward,
his elbow on his knees, one great fat hand twisting and pushing back the
sparse gray growth of his moustachios. His eyes shifted with sullen
glance about the chamber, and his blabber cheeks, scarlet from the
feast, flushed to a deeper hue.

Zenambria said, "Alas, and did not I tell thee long ago, my lord, that
Corund did ill to wed with a young wife? And thence cometh now that
shame that was but to be looked for. It is pity indeed of so goodly a
man, now past his prime age, she should so play at fast and loose with
his honour, and be at the far end of the world. Indeed and indeed, I
hope he will revenge it on her at his coming home. For sure I am, Corund
is too high-minded to buy advancement at so shameful a price."

"Thy talk, wife," said Corsus, "showeth long hair and a short wit. In
brief, thou art a fool."

He was silent for a space, then raised his gaze to Sriva, where she
rested, her back to the massive table, half standing, half sitting, a
dainty jewel-besparkled hand planted on the table's edge at her either
side, her arms like delicate white pillars supporting that fair frame.
Somewhat his dull eye brightened, resting on her. "Come hither," he
said, "on my knee: so."

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

When she was seated, "'Tis a brave gown," said he, "thou wearest
to-night, my pretty pug. Red, for a sanguine humour." His great arm gave
her a back, and his hand, huge as a platter, lay like a buckler beneath
her breast. "Thou smell'st passing sweet."

'Tis malabathrum in the leaf," answered she.

"I'm glad it likes thee, my lord," said Zenambria. "My woman still
protesteth that such, being boiled with wine, yieldeth a perfume that
passeth all other."

Corsus still looked on Sriva. After a while he asked, "What madest thou
on the terrace i' the dark, ha?"

She looked down, saying, "It was Laxus prayed me meet him there."

"Hum!" said Corsus. "'Tis strange then he should await thee this hour
gone by in the paved alley of the privy court."

"He did mistake me," said Sriva. "And well is he served, for such
neglect."

"So. And thou turnest politician to-night, my little puss-cat?" said
Corsus. "And thou smellest an expedition to Demonland? 'Tis like enow.
But methinks the King will send Corinius."

"Corinius?" said Sriva. "It is not thought so. 'Tis Corund must have it,
if thou push not the matter to a decision with the King to-night, O my
father, ere my lady fox be private with him to-morrow."

"Bah!" said Corsus. "Thou art but a girl, and knowest nought. She hath
not the full blood nor the resolution to carry it thus. No, 'tis not
Corund stands i' the light, it is Corinius. It is therefore the King
withheld from him Pixyland, which was his due, and tossed the bauble to
Laxus."

"Why, 'tis a monstrous thing," said Zenambria, "if Corinius shall have
Demonland, which surely much surpasseth this crown of Pixyland. Shall
this novice have all the meat, and thou, because thou art old, have
nought but the bones and the parings?"

"Hold thy tongue, mistress," said Corsus, looking upon

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

her as one looketh on a sour mixture. "Why hadst not the wit to angle
for him for thy daughter?"

"Truly, husband, I'm sorry for it," said Zenambria.

The Lady Sriva laughed, placing her arm about her father's bullock-neck
and playing with his whiskers. "Content thee," she said, "my lady
mother. I have my choice, and that is very certain, of these and of all
other in Carcë. And now I bethink me on the Lord Corinius, why, there's
a proper man indeed: weareth a shaven lip too, which, as experienced
opinion shall tell thee, far exceedeth your nasty moustachios."

"Well," said Corsus, kissing her, "howe'er it shape, I'll to the King
to-night to move my matter with him. Meanwhile, madam," he said to
Zenambria, "I'll have thee take thy chamber straight. Bolt well the
door, and for more safety I will lock it myself o' the outer side.
There's much mirth toward to-night, and I'd not have these staggering
drunken swads offend thee, as full well might befall, whiles I am on
mine errand of state."

Zenambria bade him good-night, and would have taken her daughter with
her, but Corsus said nay to this, saying, "I'll see her safe bestowed."

When they were alone, and the Lady Zenambria locked away in her chamber,
Corsus took forth from an oaken cupboard a great silver flagon and two
chased goblets. These he brimmed with a sparkling yellow wine from the
flagon and made Sriva drink with him not once only but twice, emptying
each time her goblet. Then he drew up his chair and sinking heavily into
it folded his arms upon the table and buried his head upon them.

Sriva paced back and forth, impatient at her father's strange posture
and silence. Surely the wine lighted riot in her veins; surely in that
silent room came back to her Corinius's kisses hot upon her mouth, the
strength of his arms like bands of bronze holding her embraced. Midnight
tolled. Her bones seemed to melt within her as she bethought of her
promise, due in an hour.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

"Father," said she at last, "midnight hath stricken. Wilt thou not go
ere it be too late?"

The Duke raised his face and looked at her. He answered "No." "No," he
said again, "where's the profit? I wax old, my daughter, and must
wither. The world is to the young. To Corinius; to Laxus; to thee. But
most of all to Corund, who if a be old yet hath his mess of sons, and
mightiest of all his wife, to be his ladder to climb thrones withal."

"But thou saidst but now--" said Sriva.

"Ay, when thy mammy was by. She cometh to her second childhood before
her time, so as to a child I speak to her. Corund did ill to wed with a
young wife, ha? Phrut! Is not this the very bulwark and rampire of his
fortune? Didst ever see a fellow so spurted up in a moment? My secretary
when I managed the old wars against the Ghouls, and now climbed clean
over me, that am yet nine year his elder. Called king, forsooth, and
like to be ta'en soon (under the King) for Dominus fac totum, throughout
all the land if a play this woman as a should. Will not the King, for
such payment as she intends, give Demonland upon Impland and all the
world beside? Hell's dignity, that would I, and 'twere offered me."

He stood up, reaching unsteadily for the wine jug. Furtively he watched
his daughter, shifting his gaze ever as her eye met his.

"Corund," said he, pouring out some wine, "would split his sides for
laughter to hear thy mother's prim-mouthed brabble: he that hath
enjoined upon his wife, there's ne'er a doubt on't, this very errand,
and if he visit it on her at his coming home 'twill but be with hotter
love and gratitude for that she wins him in our despite. Trust me, 'tis
not every lady of quality shall find favour with a King."

The casement stood open, and while they stood without speech sounds of a
lute trembled upward from the court below, and a man's voice; soft and
deep, singing this song:

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

  Hornes to the bull,  
    Hooves to the steede,  
  To little hayres  
    Light feete for speed,  
And unto lions she giveth tethe  
  A-gaping dangerouslye.

  Fishes to swim,  
    And birds to flye,  
  And men to judge  
    And reeson why,  
She teacheth. Yet for womankind  
  None of these thinges hath she.

  For women beautie  
    She hath made  
  Their onely shielde  
    Their onely blade.  
O'er sword and fire they triumph stille,  
  Soe they but beautious be.

The Lady Sriva knew it was Laxus singing to her chamber window. Her
blood beat wildly, the spirit of enterprise winging her imagination not
toward him, nor yet Corinius, but into paths strangely and perilously
inviting, undreamed of until now. The Duke her father came towards her,
thrusting the chairs from his way, and saying, "Corund and his mess of
sons! Corund and his young Queen! If he conjure with the white rose, why
not thou and I with the red? It hath as fair a look, the devil damn me
else, and savoureth as excellent sweet perfume."

She stared at him big-eyed, with blushing cheeks. He took her hands in
his.

"Shall this outland woman," he said, "and her sallow-checked gallant
still ruffle it over us? Long beards, whether they be white or black,
are too huge a blemish in our eye, methinks. The thing seemeth not
supportable, that

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

this precise madam with her foreign fashions--Dost fear to stand i' the
field against her?"

Sriva put her forehead on his shoulder and said, scarce to be heard,
"And it come to that, I'll show thee."

"It must be now," said Corsus. "Prezmyra, thou hast told me, seeketh
audience betimes i' the morning. Women are best at night-time, too."

"If Laxus should hear thee!" she said.

He answered, "Tush, he need never blame thee, even if he knew on't, and
we can manage that. Thy silly mother prated but now of honour. 'Tis but
a school-name; and if 'twere other, tell me whence springeth the fount
of honour if not from the King of Kings? If he receive thee, then art
thou honoured, and all they that have to do with thee. I am yet to learn
dishonour lieth on that man or woman whom the King doth honour."

She laughed, turning from him toward the window, her hands still held in
his. "Foh, thou hast given me a strong potion! and I think that swayeth
me more than thy many arguments, O my father, which to say truth I
cannot well remember because I did not much believe."

Duke Corsus took her by the shoulders. His face overlooked her by a
little, for she was not tall of build. "By the Gods," he said, "'tis a
stronger sweet scent of the red rose to make a great man drunk withal
than of the white, though that be a bigger flower." And he said, "Why
not, for a game, for a madcap jest? A mantle and hood, a mask if thou
wilt, and my ring to prove thee mine ambassador. I'll attend thee
through the court-yard to the foot o' the stairs."

She said nothing, smiling at him as she turned for him to put the great
velvet mantle about her shoulders.

"Ha," said he, "'tis well seen a daughter is worth ten sons."

 

In the meanwhile Gorice the King sate in his private chamber writing at
a parchment spread before him on the table of polished marmolite. A
silver lamp burned at his

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

left elbow. The window stood open to the night. The King had laid aside
his crown, that sparkled darkly in the shadow below the lamp. He put
down his pen and read again what he bad writ, in manner following:

Fram Me, Gorice the Twelft, Greate Kyng of Wychlande and of Ympelande
and of Daemonlande and of al kyngdomes the sonne dothe spread hys bemes
over, unto Corsus My servaunte: Thys is to signifye to the that thoue
shalt with all convenient spede repaire with a suffycyaunt strengthe of
menne and schyppes to Daemonlande, bycause that untowarde and traytorly
cattell that doe there inhabyt are to fele by the the sharpnes of My
correctioun. I wyll the, as holdynge the place of My generalle ther,
that thow enter forcybly ynto the sayd cuntrie and doe with al dilygence
spoyl ravysche and depopulate that lande, enslavying oppressyng and
puttyng to the dethe as thow shalt thynke moost servychable al them that
shal fall ynto thy powre, and in pertyculer pullyng downe and ruinating
all thayr stronge houlds or castels, as Galinge, Dreppabie, Crothryng,
Owleswyke, and othere. Thys enterpryse in head is one of the gretest
that ever was since yt is to trampe downe Daemonlande and once and for
al to cutt thayr coames whose crestes may daunger us, and thow art toe
onderstande that withowt extraordinair experiens of thy former merrits I
wolde not commyt to the so greate a chairge, and especially in such a
tyme. And since al gret enterpryses oughte to bee sodeynly and
resolutely prosequuted, therefore thys oughte to bee done and executed
at furthest in harveste nexte. Therefore yt is My commaundemente that
thow Corsus take order for the instant furnesshynge of shippes, seamen,
souldiers, horsemen, officiers, and pertyculer personnes, wepons,
municions, and al other necessaries whych is thought to be needfull for
the armie and boast whych shalbe levied for the sayd entrepryse, for
whyche this letter shalbe thy suffycyaunt warrant under My hande. Given
under My signeth of Ouroboros in My

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

pallaice of Carcie thys xxix daie of may, beynge the vij daie of My
yeare II.

 

The King took wax and a taper from the great gold inkstand, and scaled
the warrant with the ruby head of the worm Ouroboros, saying, "The ruby,
most comfortable to the heart, brain, vigour, and memory of man. So,
'tis confirmed."

In that instant when the wax was yet soft of the King's seal sealing
that commission for Corsus, one tapped gently at the chamber door. The
King bade enter, and there came the captain of his bodyguard and stood
before the King, with word that one waited without, praying instant
audience, "And showed me for a token, O my Lord the King, a bull's head
with fiery nostrils graven in a black opal in the bezel of a ring, which
I knew for the signet of my Lord Corsus that his lordship beareth alway
on his left thumb. And 'twas this, O King, that only persuaded me to
deliver the message unto your Majesty in this unseasonable hour. Which
if it be a fault in me, I do humbly hope your Majesty will pardon."

"Knowest thou the man?" said the King.

He answered, "I might not know him, dread Lord, for the mask and great
hooded cloak he weareth. It is a little man, and speaketh a husky
whisper."

"Admit him," said King Gorice; and when Sriva was come in, masked and
hooded and holding forth the ring, he said, "Thou lookest questionable,
albeit this token opened a way for thee. Put off these trappings and let
me know thee."

But she, speaking still in a husky whisper, prayed that they might be
private ere she disclosed herself. So the King bade leave them private.

"Dread Lord," said the soldier, "is it your will that I stand ready
without the door?"

"No," said the King. "Void the ante-chamber, set the guard, and let none
disturb me." And to Sriva he said, "If thine errand prove not more
honester than thy looks,

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

this is an ill night's journey for thee. At the lifting of my finger I
am able to metamorphose thee to a mandrake. If indeed thou beest aught
else already."

When they were alone the Lady Sriva doffed her mask and put back her
hood, uncovering her head that was crowned with two heavy trammels of
her dark brown hair bound up and interwoven above her brow and ears and
pinned with silver pins headed with garnets coloured like burning coals.
The King beheld her from under the great shadow of his brows, darkly,
not by so much as the moving of an eyelid or a lineament of his lean
visage betraying aught that passed in his mind at this disclosing.

She trembled and said, "O my Lord the King, I hope you will indulge and
pardon in me this trespass. Truly I marvel at mine own boldness how I
durst come to you."

With a gesture of his hand the King bade her be seated in a chair on his
right beside the table. "Thou needest not be afraid, madam," he said.
"That I admit thee, let it make thee assured of welcome. Let me know
thine errand."

The fire of her father's wine shuddered down within her like a low-lit
flame in a gust of wind as she sat there alone with King Gorice XII. in
the circle of the lamplight. She took a deep breath to still her heart's
fluttering and said, "O King, I was much afeared to come, and it was to
ask you a boon: a little thing for you to give, Lord, and yet to me that
am the least of your handmaids a great thing to receive. But now I am
come indeed, I durst not ask it."

The glitter of his eyes looking out from their eaves of darkness
dismayed her; and little comfort had she of the iron crown at his elbow,
bright with gems and fierce with uplifted claws, or of the copper
serpents interlaced that made the arms of his chair, or of the bright
image of the lamp reflected in the table top where were red streaks like
streaks of blood and black streaks like edges of swords streaking the
green shining surface of the stone.

Yet she took heart to say, "Were I a great lord had

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

done your majesty service as my father hath, or these others you did
honour to-night, O King, it had been otherwise." He said nothing, and
still gathering courage she said, "I too would serve you, O King. And I
came to ask you how."

The King smiled. "I am much beholden to thee, madam. Do as thou hast
done, and thou shalt please me well. Feast and be merry, and charge not
thine head with these midnight questionings, lest too much carefulness
make thee grow lean."

"Grow I so, O King? You shall judge." So speaking the Lady Sriva rose up
and stood before him in the lamplight. Slowly she opened her arms
upwards right and left, putting back her velvet cloak from her
shoulders, until the dark cloak hanging in folds from either uplifted
hand was like the wings of a bird lifted up for flight. Dazzling fair
shone her bare shoulders and bare arms and throat and bosom. One great
hyacinth stone, hanging by a gold chain about her neck, rested above the
hollow of her breasts. It flashed and slept with her breathing's
alternate fall and swell.

"You did threaten me, Lord, but now," she said, "to transmew me to a
mandrake. Would you might change me to a man."

She could read nothing in the crag-like darkness of his countenance, the
iron lip, the eyes that were like pulsing firelight out of hollow caves.

"I should serve you better so, Lord, than my poor beauty may. Were I a
man, I had come to you to-night and said, 'O King, let us not suffer any
longer of that hound Juss. Give me a sword, O King, and I will put down
Demonland for you and tread them under feet.'"

She sank softly into her chair again, suffering her velvet cloak to fall
over its back. The King ran his finger thoughtfully along the upstanding
claws of the crown beside him on the table.

"Is this the boon thou askest me?" he said at length. "An expedition to
Demonland?"

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

She answered it was.

"Must they sail to-night?" said the King, still watching her.

She smiled foolishly.

"Only," he said, "I would know what gadfly of urgency stung thee on to
come so strangely and suddenly and after midnight."

She paused a minute, then summoning courage: "Lest another should first
come to you, O King," she answered. "Believe me, I know of preparations,
and one that shall come to you in the morning praying this thing for
another. What intelligence soever some hath, I am sure of that to be
true that I have."

"Another?" said the King.

Sriva answered, "Lord, I'll say no names. But there be some, O King, be
dangerous sweet suppliants, hanging their hopes belike on other strings
than we may tune."

She had bent her head above the polished table, looking curiously down
into its depths. Her corsage and gown of scarlet silk brocade were like
the chalice of a great flower; her white arms and shoulders like the
petals of the flower above it. At length she looked up.

"Thou smilest, my Lady Sriva," said the King.

"I smiled at mine own thought," she said. "You'll laugh to hear it, O my
Lord the King, being so different from what we spoke on. But sure, of
women's thoughts is no more surety nor rest than is in a vane that
turneth at all winds."

"Let me hear it," said the King, bending forward, his lean hairy hand
flung idly across the table's edge.

"Why thus it was, Lord," said she. "There came me in mind of a sudden
that saying of the Lady Prezmyra when first she was wed to Corund and
dwelt here in Carcë. She said all the right part of her body was of
Witchland but the left Pixy. Whereupon our people that were by rejoiced
much that she had given the right part of her body to Witchland.
Whereupon she said, but her heart was on the left side."

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

"And where wearest thou thine?" asked the King. She durst not look at
him, and so saw not the comic light go like summer lightning across his
dark countenance as she spoke Prezmyra's name.

His hand had dropped from the table edge; Sriva felt it touch her knee.
She trembled like a full sail that suddenly for an instant the wind
leaves. Very still she sat, saying in a low voice, "There's a word, my
Lord the King, if you'd but speak it, should beam a light to show you
mine answer."

But he leaned closer, saying, "Dost think I'll chaffer with thee? I'll
know the answer first i' the dark."

"Lord," she whispered, "I would not have come to you in this deep and
dead time of the night but that I knew you noble and the great King, and
no amorous surfeiter that should deal false with me."

Her body breathed spices: soft warm scents to make the senses reel:
perfume of malabathrum bruised in wine, essences of sulphur-coloured
lilies planted in Aphrodite's garden. The King drew her to him. She cast
her arms about his neck, saying close to his ear, "Lord, I may not sleep
till you tell me they must sail, and Corsus must be their captain."

The King held her gathered up like a child in his embrace. He kissed her
on the mouth, a long deep kiss. Then he sprang to his feet, set her down
like a doll before him upon the table by the lamp, and so sat back in
his own chair again and sat regarding her with a strange and disturbing
smile.

On a sudden his brow darkened, and thrusting his face towards hers, his
thick black square-cut beard jutting beneath the curl of his shaven
upper lip, "Girl," he said, "who sent thee o' this errand?"

He rolled his eye upon her with such a gorgon look that her blood ran
back with a great leap towards her heart, and she answered, scarce to be
heard, "Truly, O King, my father sent me."

"Was he drunk when he sent thee?" asked the King.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

"Truly, Lord, I think he was," said she.

"That cup that he was drunken withal," said King Gorice, "let him prize
and cherish it all his life natural. For if in his sober senses he
should make no more estimation of me than think to bribe my favours with
a bona roba; by my soul, in his evil health he had sought to do it, for
it should cost him nothing but his life."

Sriva began to weep, saying, "O King, your gentle pardon."

But the King paced the room like a prowling lion. "Did he fear I should
supply Corund in his place?" said he. "This was a cocksure way to make
me do it, if indeed his practice had might to move me at all. Let him
learn to come to me with his own mouth if he hope to get good of me.
Other else, out of Carcë let him go and avoid my sight, that all the
great masters of Hell may conduct him thither."

The King paused at length beside Sriva, that was perched still upon the
table. showing a kind of sweetness in tears, sobbing very pitifully, her
face hidden in her two bands. So for a time he beheld her, then lifted
her down, and while he sat in his great chair, holding her on his knee
with one hand, with the other drew hers gently from before her face.
"Come," he said, "I blame it not on thee. Give over all thy weeping.
Reach me that writing from the table."

She turned in his arms and stretched a hand out for the parchment.

"Thou knowest my signet?" said the King.

She nodded, ay.

"Read," said he, letting her go. She stood by the lamp, and read.

The King was behind her. He took her beneath the arms, bending to speak
hot-breathed in her ear. "Thou seest, I had already chose my general.
Therefore I let thee know it, because I mean not to let thee go till
morning; and I would not have thee think thy loveliness,

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

howe'er it please me, moveth such deep-commanding spells as to sway my
policy."

She lay back against his breast, limp and strengthless, while he kissed
her neck and eyes and throat; then her lips met his in a long voluptuous
kiss. Surely the King's hands upon her were like live coals.

Bethinking her of Corinius, fuming at an open door and an empty chamber,
the Lady Sriva was yet content.

<span id="img_flower"></span> ![](img/flower.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. The King Flies His Haggard](two23)
