[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06004)  [Next](cc06006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span><span id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
10:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)<span id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span>**29.** And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of
Raguel the Midianite, Moses’ father-in-law, We are journeying unto the
place of which the Lord said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and
we will do thee good; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span>**29.** Dixit autem Moses ad Hobab filium
Reuel Madianitae soceri sui, Nos proficiscimur ad locum de quo dixit
Jehova, Illum dabo vobis: veni nobiscum, et benefaciemus tibi: quia
Jehova loquutus est beneficentiam super Israelem.

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span>**30.** And he said unto him, I will not go;
but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span>**30.** Respondit autem ei, Non veniam: sed
ad terram meam, et ad natale solum meum ibo.

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span>**31.** And he said, Leave us not, I pray
thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness,
and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span>**31.** Tunc dixit, Ne derelinquas nos: quia
propterea nosti mansiones nostras in deserto, et fuisti nobis pro
oculis.

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span>**32.** And it shall be, if thou go with us,
yea, it shall be, that what goodness the Lord shall do unto us, the same
will we do unto thee.

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span>**32.** Quum autem veneris nobiscum, et
evenerit nobis bonum illud quod benefacturus est Jehova nobis, tum
benefaciemus tibi.

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span>**33.** And they departed from the mount of
the Lord three days’ journey: and the ark of the covenant of the Lord
went before them in the three days’ journey, to search out a
resting-place for them.

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span>**33.** Profecti sunt itaque a monte Jehovae
via trium dierum: et arca foederis Jehovae proficiscebatur ante eos via
trium dierum illorum, ad explorandam illis requiem.

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span>**34.** And the cloud of the Lord was upon
them by day, when they went out of the camp.

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span>**34.** Et nubes Jehovae erat super eos
interdiu, dum proficiscerentur e castris.

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span>**35.** And it came to pass, when the ark
set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee.

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span>**35.** Quum autem coepit proficisci arca,
dicebat Moses, Surge Jehova, et despergantur inimici tui, et fugiant
odio habentes te a facie tua:

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span>**36.** And when it rested, he said, Return,
O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel.

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span>**36.** Quando vero requiescebat, dicebat,
Revertere Jehova ad decem millia millium Israelis.

<span id="ii.iv-p19"></span><span id="ii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p20"></span>**29.** *And Moses said unto Hobab the son
of Raguel.* Very grossly are those mistaken who have supposed Hobab
 <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) to be Jethro, the father-in-law of
Moses, whom we have already seen to have returned a few days after he
had come to see him. Now, old age almost in a state of decrepitude would
have been but little suited for, or equal to, such difficult labors.
Moses was now eighty years old, and still far short of the age of his
father-in-law. But all doubt is removed by the fourth chapter of Judges,
where we read that the descendants of Hobab were still surviving in the
land of Canaan. When, therefore, the good old man went home, he left
Hobab his son — still in the vigor of life, and to whom on account of
his neighborhood, the desert-country was well known — as a companion for
his son-in-law, that might be useful to him in the performance of many
services. Here, however, whether wearied by delay and difficulties, or
offended by the malignant and perverse spirit of the people, or
preferring his home and a stationary life to those protracted
wanderings, he desired to follow his father. In order, however, that we
might know that he had not sought his dismissal as a mere feint, (as is
often the case,)  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) Moses expressly
states that he could not immediately prevail upon him to stay by his
prayers; nay, that he was not attracted by the promises whereby Moses
endeavored to tempt him, until he had been perseveringly entreated.
Although the expectation of the promised land is set before him, yet,
since mention is only made of temporal and transient prosperity, it may
thence be probably conjectured that he had not profited by his
advantages as he should. He had seen and heard the tokens of God’s awful
power when the Law was given; yet Moses urges him to come on by no other
argument than that he would enjoy the riches of the land. Unless perhaps
Moses desired to give him some taste of the graciousness and fatherly
love of God as manifested in the temporal blessing, in order to lift up
his mind to higher things. Still he merely refers to the promise of God,
and then engages that he shall share in all their good things.
Nevertheless, this alone is no trifle, that he should be attracted by no
uncertain hope, but by the sure enjoyment of those good things which
God, who cannot lie, had promised: for deceptive allurements often
invite men to undergo labors, and to encounter perils; but Moses brings
forward God, as it were, as his surety, inasmuch as tie had promised
that He would give the people a fertile land, full of an abundance of
all good things. At any rate, Hobab represents to us, as in a mirror,
the innate disposition of the whole human race, to long for that which
it apprehends by the carnal sense. It is natural to prefer our country,
however barren and wretched, to other lands the most fertile and
delightful: thus the Ithaca of Ulysses has passed into a proverb.  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) But let me now reprove another fault, viz.,
that, generally speaking, all set their affections on this present life:
thus Hobab despises the promise of God, and holds fast to the love of
his native land.

<span id="ii.iv-p24"></span><span id="ii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p25"></span>**31.** *And he said, Leave us not, I pray
thee.* Moses perseveres and urges what he had just said, that Hobab
should be a sharer in the prosperity which God had given his people
reason to expect. *“To this end”* (he says) “thou hast known all our
stations in the desert,” which words commentators do not appear to have
observed or understood; for they translate them simply, “for thou hast
known,” as if Moses desired to retain Hobab to be of use to himself,
whereas there is more than one causal particle here;  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) and thus it is literally, *“Since, for this
cause,* thou hast known all our resting-places,” etc. Its meaning, then,
is as follows, that Hobab was ill-advised for his own interest; for he
had borne many inconveniences, for this reason, that he might at sonic
time or other receive his recompense; as if it were said, Wherefore hast
thou hitherto endured so many inconveniences whilst directing our
course, unless that thou mightest enjoy with us the blessings of our
repose? In a word, Moses signifies that the labors of Hobab would be
vain and fruitless, unless he should endure them a little while longer,
until, together with the children of Israel, he should enjoy the
promised inheritance. What is here said, then, does not relate to the
future, as if Moses had said, Be to us instead of eyes, as thou hast
been heretofore; but by reminding him that the reward of his labors was
at hand, he urges and encourages him to proceed.

<span id="ii.iv-p27"></span><span id="ii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p28"></span>**33.** *And they departed from the mount of
the Lord.* He calls Sinai “the mount of the Lord,” because in no other
place had God’s glory been so conspicuously manifested. This, I admit,
it had been called by anticipation (<span id="ii.iv-p28.1"></span>κατὰ
πρόληψιν) before the promulgation of the law; but this name was imposed
upon it afterwards to inspire eternal reverence for the law. By “three
days’ journey,” we must understand a continuous march of three days, for
they did not pitch their tents until they reached the desert of Paran,
but slept in the. open air. When it is said that the ark went before
them in the three days’ journey, there is no reference to its distance,
as if it was sent forward three days ahead; but that it was so placed in
their van that, when the cloud settled upon it, they halted as at a
station prescribed to them by God. This was the searching for a
resting-place of which he speaks.

<span id="ii.iv-p29"></span><span id="ii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p30"></span>**35.** *And it came to pass, when the ark
set forward.* Since their journey was by no means a peaceful one, but
the attack of enemies was constantly to be dreaded, it was needful to
beseech God that He would go forth as if prepared for battle. Thus, too,
did Moses support their courage, lest any more immediate cause for
terror should render them sluggish and inert. It is, then, as if he had
prayed thus: O Lord, not only show us the way, but open it to us also by
the power of thy hand in the destruction of the enemies. He calls them
not the enemies of *the people* but of *God,* in order that the
Israelites might be assured that they fought under His auspices; for
thus might both a more certain victory be expected, since the righteous
God, who avenges iniquity, was defending His own cause; and also, it was
no slight matter of consolation and rejoicing, when the people heard,
that whosoever should arise to harass them unjustly were also the
enemies of God, since He will protect his people as the apple of His
eye. Therefore has the Prophet borrowed this passage, in order to arm
the Church with confidence, and to maintain it in cheerfulness under the
violent assaults of its enemies. (<span id="ii.iv-p30.1"></span>[Ps
68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv-p30.1"></span>.)
Further, the analogy and similitude between the visible sign, and the
thing signified, must be observed; for Moses was not so foolish as to
address the Ark in these words; he only asked God to prove effectually
that the Ark was a lively image of His power and glory.

<span id="ii.iv-p31"></span><span id="ii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p32"></span>**36.** *And when it rested, he said,
Return, O Lord.* By thus praying he also exhorts the people to be
patient, lest the weariness which arose from the delay should beget
indignation. Otherwise it would have been annoying that the time of
their journeying should be protracted, so that they would arrive the
later at their rest. And we see, indeed, how their minds were
exasperated, as if a slower progress was a kind of disappointment. In
order, therefore, to correct this impatience, Moses reminds them that
their halts were advantageous to them, so that God, dwelling at home
like the father of a family, might manifest His care of them; for the
allusion is to men who Lake advantage of a time of repose and release
from other business, to occupy themselves more un-restrainedly in paying
attention to their own family.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc06005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p21"></span> So De Lyra, *S.M.,* Fagius, Tostatus, the
70, etc. See note on <span id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>[Exodus
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>,
*ante,* vol. 1, p. 54.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc06005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.iv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p22"></span> “(Comme il adviendra souventes fois que les
hommes font des rencheris);” as it will often happen that people want to
be pressed to stay. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc06005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p23"></span> “Comme l’isle en laquelle Ulysses estoit
ne, n’estant qu’une poure isle, voire quasi semblable a un rocher, est
venue en un proverbe;” thus the island in which Ulysses was born, being
but a poor island, indeed almost like a rock, has passed into a proverb.
— *Fr.* See Cicero *De Orat.,* 1:44, and *De Legg.,* 2:1.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc06005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p26"></span> <span id="ii.iv-p26.1"></span>כי על-כן.
Translated in *A. V.,* <span id="ii.iv-p26.2"></span>[Ge
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv-p26.2"></span>,
*for therefore;* <span id="ii.iv-p26.3"></span>[Jud
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv-p26.3"></span>,
*for because;* <span id="ii.iv-p26.4"></span>[Jer
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv-p26.4"></span>,
*for thus;* and here, *forasmuch as.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 11:1-35](cc06006)
