[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06055)  [Next](cc06057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#000)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span><span id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
32:1-52](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will
speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Auseultate coeli, et loquar, et audiat
terra eloquia oris mei.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my
speech shall distill as the dew; as the small rain upon the tender herb,
and as the showers upon the grass:

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Stillabit, ut pluvia, doctrina mea:
stillabit ut ros eloquium meum, ut pluviae gramen, et ut irabet super
herbam.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Because I will publish the name of the
Lord; ascribe ye greatness unto our God.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Quia nomen Jehovae invocabo: date
magnitudinem Deo nostro.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** He is the Rock, his work is perfect;
for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity;
just and right is he.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>**4.** Dei perfectum est opus: omnes enim
viae ejus judicium: Deus veritas, et non est iniquitas, justus et rectus
est.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** They have corrupted themselves; their
spot is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked
generation.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>**5.** Corrupit sese illi, non filii ejus,
macula eorum, generatio prava et perversa.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee?
hath he not made thee, and established thee?

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>**6.** Jehovae retribuitis istud popule
stulte et insipiens: nonne ipse est pater tuus qui acquisivit te, ipse
fecit te, et praeparavit te?

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Remember the days of old, consider
the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will show thee;
thy elders, and they will tell thee.

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**7.** Memento dierum seculi, intellige
annos generationis et generationis, interroga patrein tuum, annuntiabit
tibi: senes tuos, et dicent tibi.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>**8.** When the Most High divided to the
nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set
the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of
Israel:

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>**8.** Quando haereditates distribuit
Excelsus gentibus, quando separavit filios hominum, statuit terminos
populorum pro numero filiorum Israelis.

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>**9.** For the Lord’s portion is his people;
Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>**9.** Pars enim Jehovae populus ejus, Jacob
sors haereditatis ejus.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>**10.** He found him in a desert land, and
in the waste howling wilderness: he led him about, he instructed him, he
kept him as the apple of his eye.

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>**10.** Invenit eum in terra deserti, et in
vastitate horroris deserti: circunduxit eum, introduxit eum, custodivit
eum, ut pupillam oculi sui.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>**11.** As an eagle stirreth up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them,
beareth them on her wings;

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>**11.** Ut aquila quae excitat nidum suum,
super pullos suos cubat, expandit alas suas, assumit eum, portando super
alas suas.

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span>**12.** So the Lord alone did lead him, and
there was no strange god with him.

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>**12.** Jehova solus deduxit eum, et non
fuit eum illo deus alienigenae.

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>**13.** He made him ride on the high places
of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made
him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>**13.** Equitare fecit eum super excelsa
terrae, et comedit fructus agri, et fecit ut sugeret mel e petra, et
oleum e silice petrae.

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Butter of kine, and milk of sheep,
with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the
fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blood of the
grape.

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span>**14.** Butyrum bovis, et lac ovium, cum
adipe agnorum, et arietes filios Basan, et hircos una cum adipe granorum
tritici, et sanguinem uvae bibisti rubicundum.

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>**15.** But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked:
thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness:
then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his
salvation.

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span>**15.** Et impinguatus est Rectus, et
recalcitravit: impinguatus es, in-rassatus es, operuisti: et dereliquit
Deum qui fecit eum, ac despexit Ileum salutem suam.

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>**16.** They provoked him to jealousy with
strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger.

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span>**16.** Provocaverunt eum ad zelum super
extraneos, per abominationes irritaverunt eum.

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span>**17.** They sacrificed unto devils, not to
God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom
your fathers feared not.

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span>**17.** Sacrificaverunt daemoniis, non Deo,
diis quos non noverant, novis qui de propinquo venerunt quos non
timuerunt patres vestri.

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Of the Rock that begat thee thou art
unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span>**18.** Dei qui genuit te, oblitus es,
oblitus es, inquam, Dei qui creavit te.

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span>**19.** And when the Lord saw it, he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons and of his
daughters.

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>**19.** Quum autem vidisset Jehova,
exacerbatus est irritatione filiorum et filiarum suarum.

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span>**20.** And he said, I will hide my face
from them, I will see what their end shall be: for they are a very
forward generation, children in whom is no faith.

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span>**20.** Et dixit, Abscondam faciem meam ab
eis, Videbo quid in novissimo eorum: generatio enim perversitatum sunt:
et filii in quibus nulla est fides.

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span>**21.** They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their
vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a
people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span>**21.** Ipsi ad zelum provocaverunt me, in
eo quod non est Deus, ad iracundiam me provocaverunt in vanitatibus
suis: et ego ad zelum provocabo eos in eo qui non est populus: in gente
stulta provocabo eos ad iram.

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span>**22.** For a fire is kindled in mine anger,
and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with
her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span>**22.** Ignis enim succendetur in
excandescentia mea, et ardebit usque ad infernum inferiorem:
devorabitque terram et fructum ejus, et inflammabit fundamenta montium.

<span id="iii.i-p47"></span>**23.** I will heap mischiefs upon them; I
will spend mine arrows upon them.

<span id="iii.i-p48"></span>**23.** Cumulabo super eos mala, sagittas
meas consumam in eis.

<span id="iii.i-p49"></span>**24.** They shall be burnt with hunger, and
devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction: I will also
send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the
dust.

<span id="iii.i-p50"></span>**24.** Combusti erunt fame, et comesti
aegritudine calida, et excisione amara: dentes quoque bestiarum immittam
in eos cum veneno serpentium super terram.

<span id="iii.i-p51"></span>**25.** The sword without, and terror
within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling
also, with the man of gray hairs.

<span id="iii.i-p52"></span>**25.** Foris orbabit gladius, et in
cubiculis erit terror: etiam juvenem, etiam virginera, lactentem cum
viro sene.

<span id="iii.i-p53"></span>**26.** I said, I would scatter them into
corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men:

<span id="iii.i-p54"></span>**26.** Dicerem, Dispergam eos per angulos,
cessare faciam ex hominibus memoriam eorum.

<span id="iii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Were it not that I feared the wrath
of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely,
and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done
all this.

<span id="iii.i-p56"></span>**27.** Nisi iram inimici timerem, ne forte
alienos se ostentent hostes eorum: ne forte dicant, Manus nostra
excelsa, neque Jehova operatus est omnia ista.

<span id="iii.i-p57"></span>**28.** For they are a nation void of
counsel, neither is there any understanding in them.

<span id="iii.i-p58"></span>**28.** Gens enim perdita consiliis sunt,
nec est illis intelligentia.

<span id="iii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Oh that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

<span id="iii.i-p60"></span>**29.** Si sapientes essent, intelligerent
novissimum suum.

<span id="iii.i-p61"></span>**30.** How should one chase a thousand, and
two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the
Lord had shut them up?

<span id="iii.i-p62"></span>**30.** Quomodo persequutus fuisset unus
mille, et duo fugassent decem millia, nisi quod Deus eorum vendisset
eos, et Jehova tradidisset eos?

<span id="iii.i-p63"></span>**31.** For their rock is not as our Rock,
even our enemies themselves being judges.

<span id="iii.i-p64"></span>**31.** Nam non est sient Deus noster, Deus
illorum: et inimici nostri sunt judices.

<span id="iii.i-p65"></span>**32.** For their vine is of the vine of
Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall,
their clusters are bitter:

<span id="iii.i-p66"></span>**32.** Ex vite enim Sodom est vitis eorum,
et ex vitibus Emorrhaeorum uvae eorum, uvae veneni, botri amaritudinum
sunt eis.

<span id="iii.i-p67"></span>**33.** Their wine is the poison of dragons,
and the cruel venom of asps.

<span id="iii.i-p68"></span>**33.** Venenum draconum, vinum eormn: et
venenum aspidum crudele.

<span id="iii.i-p69"></span>**34.** Is not this laid up in store with
me, and sealed up among my treasures?

<span id="iii.i-p70"></span>**34.** Nonne est reconditum apud me,
obsignatum in thesauris meis?

<span id="iii.i-p71"></span>**35.** To me belongeth vengeance and
recompense: their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their
calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make
haste.

<span id="iii.i-p72"></span>**35.** Mea est ultio, et retributio,
tempore nutabit pes eorum: quia propinquus est dies afflictionis eorum,
et festinant quae futura sunt eis.

<span id="iii.i-p73"></span>**36.** For the Lord shall judge his people,
and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that their power is
gone, and there is none shut up, or left.

<span id="iii.i-p74"></span>**36.** Quia judicabit Jehova populum suum,
et super servos suos poenitebit ipsum, quum videbit quod abierit manus,
et non sit clausus et derelictus.

<span id="iii.i-p75"></span>**37.** And he shall say, Where are their
gods, their rock in whom they trusted;

<span id="iii.i-p76"></span>**37.** Et dicet, Ubi sunt dii eorum, deus
in quo sperabant?

<span id="iii.i-p77"></span>**38.** Which did cat the fat of their
sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink-offerings? let them rise
up and help you, and be your protection.

<span id="iii.i-p78"></span>**38.** Qui adipem sacrificiorum illorum
comedebant, et bibebant vinum libaminis illorum: surgant et opitulentur
vobis, sit super vos absconsio.

<span id="iii.i-p79"></span>**39.** See now that I, even I, am he, and
there is no god with me: I kill and I make alive; I wound, and I heal:
neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

<span id="iii.i-p80"></span>**39.** Videte nunc quod ego, ego suae, et
non sunt dii mecum: ego mori faciam, et vivere faciam: percutiam, et ego
sanabo, et nemo est qui de manu mea eruat.

<span id="iii.i-p81"></span>**40.** For I lift up my hand to heaven, and
say, I live for ever.

<span id="iii.i-p82"></span>**40.** Certe levabo ad coelum manum roeare,
et dicam, Vivo ego in seculum.

<span id="iii.i-p83"></span>**41.** If I whet my glittering sword, and
mine hand take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine
enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

<span id="iii.i-p84"></span>**41.** Si acuero aciem gladii mei, et
arripuerit judiceum manus mea, reddam ultionem hostibus meis, et odio
habentibus me retribuam.

<span id="iii.i-p85"></span>**42.** I will make mine arrows drunk with
blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the
slain, and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the
enemy.

<span id="iii.i-p86"></span>**42.** Inebriabo sagittas meas sanguine, et
gladius meus devorabit carnem, sanguine, inquam, occisorum et captivorum
a capite in ultionibus inimici.

<span id="iii.i-p87"></span>**43.** Rejoice, O ye nations, with his
people; for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render
vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to
his people.

<span id="iii.i-p88"></span>**43.** Laudate Gentes populum ejus, quia
sanguinem servorum suorum vindceabit, et vindictam reddet hostibus suis,
et propitius erit terrae suae, populo suo.

<span id="iii.i-p89"></span>**44.** And Moses came and spake all the
words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hoshea the son of
Nun.

<span id="iii.i-p90"></span>**44.** Venit autem Moses, et recitavit
omnia verba cantici istius in auribus populi, ipse et Josue filius Nun:

<span id="iii.i-p91"></span>**45.** And Moses made an end of speaking
all these words to all Israel:

<span id="iii.i-p92"></span>**45.** Et finivit Moses recitare omnia
verba ista ad universum Israelem:

<span id="iii.i-p93"></span>**46.** And he said unto them, Set your
hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye
shall command your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.

<span id="iii.i-p94"></span>**46.** Dixitque illis, Adjicite cor vestrum
ad omnia verba quae ego testificor adversum vos hodie, ut praecipiatis
ea filiis vestris, ut custodiant, et faciant omnia verba legis istius.

<span id="iii.i-p95"></span>**47.** For it is not a vain thing for you;
because it is your life: and through this thing ye shall prolong your
days in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.

<span id="iii.i-p96"></span>**47.** Non enim verbum hoc inane a vobis,
sed est vita vestra, et per hoc verbum prolongabitis dies super terram
ad quam possidendam vos transitis Jordanem.

<span id="iii.i-p97"></span>**48.** And the Lord spake unto Moses that
self-same day, saying,

<span id="iii.i-p98"></span>**48.** Loquutusque est Jehova ad Mosen eo
ipso die, dicendo:

<span id="iii.i-p99"></span>**49.** Get thee up into this mountain
Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over
against Jericho, and behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the
children of Israel for a possession;

<span id="iii.i-p100"></span>**49.** Ascende in montem Abarim istum,
montem Neboh, qui eat in terra Moab, et qui est e regione Jericho, et
vide terram Chenaan, quam ego do filiis Israel in haereditatem.

<span id="iii.i-p101"></span>**50.** And die in the mount whither thou
goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as Aaron thy brother did in
mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people:

<span id="iii.i-p102"></span>**50.** Et morere in monte ad quem
ascendis, et congregare ad populos tuos, quemadmodum mortuus est Aharon
frater tuus in Hor monte, et congregatus est ad populos suos.

<span id="iii.i-p103"></span>**51.** Because ye trespassed against me
among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the
wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the
children of Israel.

<span id="iii.i-p104"></span>**51.** Et quod praevaricati estis me in
medio filiorum Israelis ad aquas jurgii Cades desertl Sin, eo quod non
sanctificastis me in medio filiorum Israelis:

<span id="iii.i-p105"></span>**52.** Yet thou shalt see the land before
thee; but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the
children of Israel.

<span id="iii.i-p106"></span>**52.** E regione quidera videbis terram,
sed illuc non ingredieris ad terram illam quam do filiis Israelis.

<span id="iii.i-p107"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p108"></span><span id="iii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p109"></span>**1.** *Give ear, O ye heavens.* Moses
commences in a strain of magnificence, lest the people should disdain
this song with their usual pride, or even reject it altogether, being
exasperated by its severe censures and reproaches. For we well know how
the world naturally longs to be *flattered,* and that no strain can be
gratifying to it unless it tickles and soothes the ear with praise. But
Moses here not only inveighs bitterly against the vices of the people,
but with the utmost possible vehemence stigmatizes their perverse
nature, their utterly corrupt morals, their obstinate ingratitude, and
incorrigible contumacy. Moreover, he desired that these accusations,
whereby he rendered their name detestable, should daily echo from their
tongues; and thus they became still more offensive. It was, therefore,
requisite that their impatience should be bridled, as it were, in order
that they might patiently and humbly receive these just reproofs,
however severe they might be. If, therefore, they should repudiate this
song, or should turn a deaf ear to it, he declares at the outset that
heaven and earth would be witnesses of their prodigious obtuseness; nay,
he turns and addresses himself to heaven and earth, and thus signifies
that it was worthy of the attention of all creatures, even although they
were without intelligence or feeling. For it is a hyperbolical mode of
expression, when he assigns the faculty of hearing, and being
instructed, to the senseless elements; just as Isaiah, when he would
intimate that he found none to give heed to him amongst the whole
people, in like manner appeals to the heavens and the earth, and even
summons them to bear witness to the prodigious iniquity, that there
should be less of intelligence amongst the whole people than in oxen and
asses. (<span id="iii.i-p109.1"></span>[Isa.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="iii.i-p109.1"></span>.)
For it is but a meager exposition, which some give of these words, that
they are used, by metonymy, for angels and men.  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)

<span id="iii.i-p111"></span><span id="iii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p112"></span>**2** *My doctrine shall drop as the rain.*
Some, as I think improperly, here resolve the future tense into the
optative mood,  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) for in this
splendid eulogium he rather celebrates, in order to commend his
doctrine, the fruitfulness  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
which is actually imparted to it by the Holy Spirit, than asks for it to
be given to him; and my readers must at once perceive that such a
request would have been by no means seasonable. He therefore compares
his speech to rain or dew, as if he had said that, if only the people
were like the soil in a state of softness and preparation, he would
deliver doctrine to them which would irrigate them unto abundant
fruitfulness.

<span id="iii.i-p115"></span>Although this expression refers especially,
and <span id="iii.i-p115.1"></span>κατ <span id="iii.i-p115.2"></span>᾿
ἐξοχὴν to the Song, still its force and propriety extends to all divine
teaching; for God never speaks except to render men fruitful in good
works, just as, by instilling succulency and vigor into the earth by
means of rain, He makes it fertile for the production of fruit. But,
like the rocks and stones, which imbibe no moisture from the most
abundant rains, so many are hindered by their own perversity from being
fertilized by spiritual irrigation. Wherefore Moses indirectly throws
the blame upon the Israelites, if the doctrine of this Song should drop
upon them in vain.

<span id="iii.i-p116"></span><span id="iii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p117"></span>**3** *Because I will publish the name of
the Lord.* He signifies by these words that, if there were any spark of
piety in the Israelites, it must be manifested by their welcoming this
address, wherein the majesty of God shines forth. The first clause of
the verse, therefore, stands last in order, since it is an assignment of
a reason for the other. For when he exhorts them that they should
ascribe to God the glory He deserves, he inculcates upon them obedience
and attention, as if he had said that, unless they reverently submit
themselves to his teaching, God would be defrauded of this due honor;
and this he confirms by adding as a reason that he will sincerely and
faithfully publish the name of God. For the word *invoke*  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) is not used here as in many other
passages, but is equivalent to making a profession of God. Moses, then,
declares himself to be His proclaimer, in order that, under cover of His
most Holy name, he may awaken attention to his words.

<span id="iii.i-p119"></span><span id="iii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p120"></span>**4.** *His work is perfect.* Those who
take these expressions generally, and without particular reference to
this passage, not only obscure their meaning, but also lessen the force
of the doctrine they contain. Let us, then, understand that the
perfection of God’s works, the rectitude of His ways, etc., are
contrasted with the rebellion of the people; for if there were anything
 <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) in God’s works imperfect and in
arranged, if His mode of dealing were deficient in rectitude, if His
truth were doubtful; if, in a word, there were anything wanting, then
there would have been a natural excuse why the people should have sought
for something better than they found in Him, since the desire of
obtaining that which is best is deserving of no reprehension. Lest,
then, the Israelites should offer any such pretext, Moses anticipates
them. Before he begins to treat of the wicked ingratitude of the people,
he lays down this principle, that they were not induced to transfer
their affections elsewhere by any deficiency in God. The general
statement is indeed true in itself, and may be applied to various
purposes; but we must consider what the object of Moses here is, namely,
to remove from the people every pretext for their impious and perfidious
rebellion, and this in order that their amazing folly may be more
apparent, when they forsake the fountain of living waters, and hew them
out cisterns with holes in them, as God himself complains in <span
id="iii.i-p121.1"></span>[Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span id="iii.i-p121.1"></span>.
We perceive therefore, that every honorable distinction which is here
attributed to God, brands the people with a corresponding mark of
ignominy, in that they had knowingly and voluntarily deprived themselves
of the plenitude of all good things, which might have been enjoyed by
them had they not alienated themselves from God.

<span id="iii.i-p122"></span>God’s work is spoken of, not only with
reference to the creation of the world, but to the whole course of His
providence; as if it were said that nothing could be discovered in God’s
works which could be found fault with.

<span id="iii.i-p123"></span>Now this perfection is not perceptible in
every individual thing, for even vermin are God’s creatures; and amongst
men some are blind, some lame, some deaf, and others mutilated in one of
their members; and many fruits also never arrive at maturity. Yet we
plainly see that it is foolish and misplaced to bring forward such
questions as these as objections to the perfection of God, here
celebrated by Moses, inasmuch as the very defects and blemishes of our
bodies tend to this object, that God’s glory may be made manifest.
(<span id="iii.i-p123.1"></span>[Joh
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003)<span id="iii.i-p123.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p124"></span>The next statement, *that all his ways are
right,*  <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) conveys a similar
truth; for it is well known that the word <span
id="iii.i-p125.1"></span>משפט, *mishphat,* is used for *rectitude,* and
*works* and *ways* are synonymous.

<span id="iii.i-p126"></span>The latter part of the verse is a
confirmation of the former part, since Moses signifies in both that all
who censure God may be clearly convicted of petulant impiety, since
supreme justice shines forth in all His acts.

<span id="iii.i-p127"></span>The words I have rendered, “God is truth,”
others construe with the genitive case, “a God of truth.” Either is
true, and agreeable to the usage of Scripture; but the apposition is
more emphatic, which declares that God is not only true, but the Truth
itself. At any rate, this applies to the persons who pay entire
allegiance to the word of God, for their expectations shall never be
frustrated. Thus the people are indirectly reproved for their unbelief,
in that they deserted God, whose faithfulness was not only tried and
proved, but who is the very fountain of truth.

<span id="iii.i-p128"></span>Although what follows, that there is no
iniquity in God, seems to some to have but little force, it is
nevertheless of great importance; for we well know how often men are so
absurd in their subterfuges, as in a manner to arraign God instead of
themselves; and although they do not dare to accuse Him openly, still
they do not hesitate to acquit themselves, and thus to cast direct
obloquy upon Him. Elsewhere, therefore, God inquires by His Prophet,
“what iniquity *the people* had found in Him?” (<span
id="iii.i-p128.1"></span>[Jer 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005)<span
id="iii.i-p128.1"></span>,) and in another place expostulates with them,
because He was loaded with their hatred and abuse, as if He dealt
unjustly with such sinners. (<span id="iii.i-p128.2"></span>[Ezek.
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#002),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#005)<span id="iii.i-p128.2"></span>.)
When, therefore, He vindicates Himself from such calumnies, it follows
that no blame attaches itself to Him, but that the wickedness of those
who turn away from Him is abundantly condemned.

<span id="iii.i-p129"></span><span id="iii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p130"></span>**5.** *They have corrupted themselves.*
Moses now inveighs unhesitatingly against the perfidy of the people, and
gives loose to the most unmeasured upbraidings; for if God be just and
true, then it was plain enough that the Israelites were a depraved and
perverse nation. This perverse nation, he says, has corrupted itself
towards Him, namely Him, whom he has just lauded for His perfect justice
and faithfulness; and he accuses them of having basely prostituted to
every sort of sin the chastity which they had promised to God. There is
no doubt but that they were sorely wounded by these epithets, and would
have been transported with rage, had they not seen that God’s
incomparable servant, when he had now been called upon to die by God’s
command, spoke as it were from heaven. The voice, therefore, of the
dying man restrained their pride, so that they did not now dare to
oppose him as a mortal; and afterwards, when the condemnation had been
assented to by public authority, and by general accord, they were less
at liberty to vent their madness against it. He introduces, by way of
anticipation, the statement that they were not His children; for else
they might obviously have made the objection that the sacred race of
Abraham, which God had adopted, should be dealt with less reproachfully.
Moses, therefore, declares that they are not children, because they are
a perverse nation. For although their adoption always stood firm, still
its efficacy was restricted to the elect part of them, so that God,
without breaking His covenant, might reject the general body. But to
explain the matter more clearly, it must be borne in mind that the
Spirit, on different grounds, at one time assigns the name of God’s
children to hypocrites, at another takes it away; for sometimes it is an
aggravation of their criminality, when they are called the children of
Abraham and Jacob as well as of God, an instance of which will soon
occur. Here, however, in order that they may cease to glory without
cause, they are said not to be children, because they are degenerate,
and therefore disinherited by God, so as no longer to retain their
honorable position. In this sense Moses declares that they are not
children, as having cast off God from being their Father. It is added
this was done with their spot (or disgrace;  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) ) unless it be thought preferable to
take it that. they were corrupted by their spots, or by their sins, to
which I willingly assent; although I do not reject the other sense,
namely, that their alienation from God had rendered them ignominious, or
that they had *contracted* the stain of disgrace by their faithlessness.

<span id="iii.i-p132"></span><span id="iii.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p133"></span>**6.** *Do ye thus requite the Lord.* In
order to expose the ingratitude of the people to greater infamy, he now
begins to commemorate the benefits whereby God had laid them under
obligation to Himself: for the more liberally God deals with us, the
more earnest ought to be the piety awakened in our hearts; nay, His
goodness, as soon as we have tasted of it, ought to draw us at once to
Him. Now God, although he has been always bountiful towards the whole
human race, had, in a peculiar manner showered down an immense abundance
of His bounty upon that people; this, then, Moses alleges, and shows how
basely ungrateful they had been. He first expostulates with them
interrogatively, asking them whether this was a fitting return for God’s
especial blessings; and then proceeds to enumerate them. He inquires of
them, then, whether God was not their father, from the time when He had
honored them with the distinction of His adoption: and under this single
head he comprehends many things, because from this source proceeded
whatever blessings God had conferred upon them. Not, however, to examine
every point with the accuracy it deserves, what more binding obligation
could be imagined than that God should have chosen one nation for
Himself out of the whole world, whose father He should be by special
privilege? For, although all human beings, since they were created in
the image of God, are sometimes called His children, still to be
accounted His children was the special privilege of the sons of Abraham.
And, in order to prove that this was not a natural, but an acquired
dignity, Moses immediately afterwards explains in what way God was their
Father: viz., that he purchased, made, and prepared them. The foundation
and origin, then, was the gratuitous good pleasure of God, when He took
them to be His own peculiar people. Elsewhere, indeed, His second
purchase of them is mentioned, when He redeemed them from Egypt; here,
however, Moses goes back farther, viz., to the covenant made with
Abraham, whereby they were separated from other nations, as will
presently more clearly appear. I reject, as not in harmony with the
context, the translation which some give of the word, <span
id="iii.i-p133.1"></span>קנה, *kanah,* i.e., *to possess.*  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253)

<span id="iii.i-p135"></span>In the same sense it is added, that they
were *made by* God: which does not. refer to the general creation, but
only to the privilege of adoption, whereby they became God’s new work,
and in which another form was imparted to them; in which sense also He
is called their framer, or Maker. Elsewhere, also, when the Prophet
says,

<span id="iii.i-p136"></span>“Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he
that hath made us, and not we ourselves,” (<span
id="iii.i-p136.1"></span>[Ps
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span id="iii.i-p136.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.i-p137"></span>he undoubtedly magnifies that special
prerogative, whereby God had distinguished the sons of Abraham above all
other races. For, since the fall of Adam had brought disgrace upon all
his posterity, God restores those, whom He separates as His own, so that
their condition may be better than that of all other nations. At the
same time it must be remarked, that this grace of renewal is effaced in
many who have afterwards profaned it. Consequently the Church is called
God’s work and creation, in two senses, i.e., generally with respect to
its outward calling, and specially with respect to spiritual
regeneration, as far as regards the elect; for the covenant of grace is
common to hypocrites and true believers. On this ground all whom God
gathers into His Church, are indiscriminately said to be renewed and
regenerated: but the internal renovation belongs to believers only; whom
Paul, therefore, calls God’s “workmanship, created unto good works,
which God hath prepared,” etc. (<span id="iii.i-p137.1"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="iii.i-p137.1"></span>.)
The same is the tendency of the third word, which may, however, be taken
for to “establish;”  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) although I
have preferred to follow the more received sense, viz, that God had
prepared His people, as the artificer fashions and fits his work.

<span id="iii.i-p139"></span><span id="iii.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p140"></span>**7** *Remember the days of old.* This is
an explanation of the preceding verse, for Moses again shows how God had
acquired this people, viz., because he had chosen to separate them from
other nations according to His own good pleasure. But, since the
Israelites might be inflated by their present superiority, they are
reminded of their origin, and Moses commands them not to consider what
they now are, but also from whence they had been taken, and with this
view he says, Remember the old times; ask the elders, etc. For we know
how men, when they do not reflect that whatever they have, proceeded
from God, and is held, as it were, at will, are blinded by their
dignity, so as not only to despise others, but also to exalt themselves
against, the Author of all good things. Moses, in order to subdue this
arrogance, says that all peoples were alike under the hand and power of
God, and thus that their diversity was not in their original nature, but
derived from elsewhere, i.e., from God’s free choice. In the word <span
id="iii.i-p140.1"></span>בהנחל, *behanchel,* there is some ambiguity:
for some translate it, When the Most High divided the earth to the
nations; and, though I do not reject this, still I have preferred the
meaning more in accordance with the context;  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) for Moses says the same thing twice
over, and the second clause is the explanation of the first. He says,
therefore, that God *distributed* the nations, as an inheritance is
divided; and then this is more clearly repeated, when he mentions the
separation of the sons of Adam. When, in the latter part of the verse,
it is said, that He set bounds to the nations according to the number of
the children of Israel, it is commonly explained that He set bounds to
the nations in such sort, that the habitation of the sons of Abraham was
secured to them. Some of the Hebrews take it in a more restricted sense,
viz., that in the distribution of the world, so much was given to the
seven nations of Canaan as should be sufficient for the children of
Israel. In my opinion, however, his meaning is, that in the whole
arrangement of the world, the object which God had in view was to
provide for His elect people: for, although His bounty extended to all,
still He had such regard for His own, that, chiefly on their account,
His care also extended to others. The word *number* is expressly
employed; as if Moses had said, that, however small a portion of the
human race the posterity, of Abraham might be, nevertheless that number
was before God’s eyes, when He ordered the state of the whole world;
unless it be preferred to take the word <span
id="iii.i-p141.3"></span>מספר, *misphar*,  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) for a *ratio*; but it will not be
unsuitable to the passage to understand it that this small body was so
precious to God, that he arranged the whole distribution of the world
with a view to their welfare. Some refer it to the calling of the
Gentiles, as if Moses had said that the empire of the whole world was
destined to the seed of Abraham, because it was to be propagated through
all the regions of the world; but this is altogether erroneous, for
nothing is here indicated but the distinction, formerly conferred upon
one nation.  <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257)

<span id="iii.i-p144"></span><span id="iii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p145"></span>**9** *For the Lord’s portion is his
people.* This is the main point, that God was moved by nothing but His
own good pleasure to make so much of this people, who had been derived
from a common origin with all others: for when he says, that Jacob was
the portion of Jehovah, and the lot of His inheritance, he does not mean
that there was anything better in them than in others, but he assigns
the reason why God preferred this one nation to the rest of mankind;
viz., because He took it to Himself as His hereditary portion, which
dignity depends upon His gratuitous election.

<span id="iii.i-p146"></span><span id="iii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p147"></span>**10.** *He found him in a desert land.* If
the intention of Moses had been to record all the instances of God’s
paternal kindness towards the people, he must have commenced from the
time of Abraham; like the prophet who, when presenting a complete
narrative in the Psalm, begins from that original covenant, which God
had made with the fathers, (<span id="iii.i-p147.1"></span>[Ps
105:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#008)<span id="iii.i-p147.1"></span>;)
and also introduces the benefits which He had conferred upon them, when
they were but few in number, and strangers in the land, when they went
from one nation to another, yet he suffered no man to do them wrong, and
reproved kings for their sakes. (<span id="iii.i-p147.2"></span>[Ps
105:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#014)<span
id="iii.i-p147.2"></span>.) But Moses, studying brevity, deemed it
sufficient to bring forward a more recent and more notorious blessing;
nay, he omits the early part of their deliverance, and only makes
mention of the desert, he says, then, that God *found them in the
desert*; not because He then first began to take pity upon them, since
they had been previously rescued from the tyranny of Pharaoh by His
marvelous power, and had passed the Red Sea dry-shod, but because it was
profitable for them to have set before their eyes how they had been
extricated from the deep abyss of death, in order that they might more
readily acknowledge this to have been, as it were, the beginning of
their life. For what was that waste and barren desert, in which not a
crumb of bread, nor a drop of water was to be found, but a grave to
swallow up a thousand lives? and, therefore, it is further called “the
devastation of horror.”  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) The
suae is, that it was a kind of type of resurrection, not from one death
only, but from innumerable deaths, that the people should have escaped
from it in safety. That they should have done so, even had their march
through it been straight and speedy, could not have been the case
without a miracle; but, inasmuch as they wandered therein for forty
years, our minds can hardly comprehend a hundredth part of the miracles
(which followed one upon the other.  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) ) Thus the word “led about,” is not
superfluous, for God’s power was far more conspicuous than as if they
had flown swiftly through the air. I apply the same meaning to what
follows, “he instructed him;” for some, in my opinion improperly, refer
it to the Law,  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) whereas it
rather relates to the teaching of experience. For there was manifold,
and no ordinary instruction in all these acts of bounty and punishment,
wherein God, as it were, put forth His hand, and manifested His glory.

<span id="iii.i-p151"></span>Two similitudes follow, to express God’s
love, mingled with solicitude more than paternal. First, he says, that
God no less anxiously protected them from all injury and annoyance than
every one is wont to protect the pupil of his eye, which is the most
tender part of the body, and against the injury of which the greatest
precautions are taken. And David also, when requesting that he may be
kept safe under the special guardianship of God, uses the same
expression. (<span id="iii.i-p151.1"></span>[Ps
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)<span id="iii.i-p151.1"></span>.)
Secondly, God compares Himself to an eagle, which not only fosters her
young ones under her outspread wings, but also indulgently, and with
maternal tenderness tempts them to fly. It would be unseasonable to
enter here into more subtle philosophical discussions respecting the
nature of the eagle. The Jews, who are wont to trifle hazardously with
things they do not understand, have invented fables respecting this
passage, which have no relation to the meaning of Moses, who
unquestionably spoke of the eagle as he might of any other bird. Nor can
it be doubted but that Christ, when He compares Himself to a hen,
desired to express the same sedulous care.

<span id="iii.i-p152"></span>“How often (he says) would I have gathered
thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not!” (<span id="iii.i-p152.1"></span>[Mt
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="iii.i-p152.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p153"></span>If, however, any should choose to apply
here, what Aristotle writes respecting the eagle, I would not stand in
his way: although I do not think Moses had anything in his mind, beyond
what the words naturally express. And, surely that which at once occurs
to us ought to be sufficient for us, viz., that we ought to be ravished
with just. admiration of God’s inestimable goodness and indulgence, when
He condescends so to stoop to us as to protect us with His wings, like a
bird, and, hovering before us, to instruct and accustom us to follow
Him: in which latter words a more than maternal anxiety to teach us is
represented.

<span id="iii.i-p154"></span><span id="iii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p155"></span>**12.** *So the Lord alone did lead hive.*
This is spoken by anticipation, in order to take away every pretext from
the Israelites, provided they should seek, according to their custom, to
mingle their superstitions with the pure service of God. For, when they
were bringing in, from all quarters, gods of various nations, this was
the excuse they commonly made, that God was not thus despoiled of His
due honor: and hence it came to pass, that they permitted themselves to
heap together a multitude of false gods, whom they worshipped as their
patrons. But Moses anticipates them, and declares that God, as having no
need of external aid, had not associated with Himself any strange gods
in His preservation of the people. Hence it follows, that whatever gods
the people introduced, they transferred to them the honor due to the one
true God. Let us then learn from this passage, that, unless God be
served without a rival, religion is altogether perverted by the impious
admixture.

<span id="iii.i-p156"></span><span id="iii.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p157"></span>**13.** *He made him ride on the high
places.* Theirs is but a frivolous imagination, who suppose that Judea
was so called as being the navel or center of the earth;  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) it is more likely that it was called
*high* in reference to Egypt; and, indeed, it is by no means an unusual
expression, that those who go into Egypt, are said to go down, and those
who come into Judea to *come* up. Still I am rather disposed Lo think
that by *height* he denotes its excellency; inasmuch as that land, on
account of its illustrious endowments, was, as it were, the most noble
theater in the world.

<span id="iii.i-p159"></span>Moses celebrates its fertility, when he
says that the people *sucked honey from the rock and oil from the
stones:* for he means to indicate, that no part of it was unproductive,
since they gathered honey from the rocks, and upon them also the olive
grew. The same is the intention of the other figures, that they ate
“butter of kine, and milk of sheep;” by which he signifies that the land
was full of rich pastures. By “fat of lambs,” he undoubtedly means the
plumpness of their flesh, because it was not lawful to eat their actual
fat; but it is not unusual to denote by this word any kind of richness,
as soon afterwards he calls the best meal or flour, from which the more
delicate kind of bread was made, “the fat of wheat.” With respect to the
wine, he magnifies God’s liberality by the use of a poetic figure, when
he says they *drank of the blood of the grape.* There is no doubt but
that he alludes to its color; yet he takes occasion to extol more highly
the *beneficence* of God, by intimating that, when the juice of the
grapes is expressed, it is just as if their blood flowed forth for the
nutriment of men. Since, then, the metaphor is taken from the redness of
wine, I have not hesitated to translate the epithet <span
id="iii.i-p159.1"></span>חמר, *chamer,* at the end of the verse, *red.*
 <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) From many passages it appears
to have been very delicious; and in <span id="iii.i-p160.1"></span>[Isa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002)<span id="iii.i-p160.1"></span>
the word <span id="iii.i-p160.2"></span>חמר, *chamer,* is used for a
vine of great preciousness and of exquisite flavor. Those who render it
*pure,* have rather taken into consideration the fact, than the
signification of the word.

<span id="iii.i-p161"></span><span id="iii.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p162"></span>**15** *But Jeshurun*  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) *waxed fat.* Moses here severely
censures the ingratitude of the people, because when filled with
delicacies, they began to wax wanton against God; for, according to the
vulgar proverb, satiety breeds violence; but this arises from men’s
detestable depravity, who ought rather to be inclined to humility and
gentleness by the loving-kindness of God, since the more abundantly He
supplies us with food, the more does He invite us to show forth the
affection that becomes children, inasmuch as He thus more closely and
familiarly declares Himself to be our Father. Intolerable, then, is the
impiety of profane persons, who increase in insolence against Him, when
they have gorged themselves with an abundance of all good things. They
are here compared to restive horses, which, if they are well fed,
without exercise, kick under their rider, and are rendered almost
intractable. By using the word “upright” for Israel, he ironically
taunts them with having departed from rectitude, and, reminding them of
the high dignity conferred upon them, more severely reproves their sin
of unfaithfulness. For elsewhere  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) Israel is honored with the same title
without any evil imputation in respect to their calling; but here Moses
reproachfully shows them how far they had departed from the pursuit of
that piety, to the cultivation of which they had been called.

<span id="iii.i-p165"></span><span id="iii.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p166"></span>**16** *They provoked him to jealousy.* It
is only figuratively that jealousy is attributed to God, who is free
from all passions; but, since men never sufficiently reflect how great
pollution they contract by their idolatries, it is necessary that the
grossness of the sin should *be* expressed in such terms as this,
implying that men do no less injury to God, when they transfer to others
the honor due to Him, and that the offense is no lighter than as if a
licentious woman should provoke her husband’s mind to jealousy, and
inflict a wound upon him by running after adulterers. This jealousy has
reference to the sacred and spiritual marriage, whereby God had bound
His people to Himself. The suae is, that the Israelites were as
insulting to God by their superstitions as if they had designedly
provoked Him.

<span id="iii.i-p167"></span>In the next verse an amplification follows,
viz., that they had transferred to devils the worship due to God alone.
By the general consent of all nations God ought to be worshipped by
sacrifices; for, although the Gentiles invented for themselves divers
gods, still the persuasion continued to prevail, that this service was
the peculiar prerogative of Deity. Nothing, then, could be more
disgraceful or detestable than to rob God of His honor, and to offer it
to demons. This, indeed, would never have been admitted by the
Israelites, inasmuch as they pretended that their minor gods were their
advocates with the supreme and only Creator of the world, and did not
hesitate to account as rendered to Him whatever they shared among their
idols. Here, however, He first of all repudiates all such mixtures
whereby His holy name is unworthily profaned, and suffers Himself not to
be associated with idols; and, secondly, by whatever titles they may
dignify their idols, He declares all false gods to be demons. Hence it
follows that the sacrifices made to them are infected with sacrilege.
Both of these points are worthy of careful remark, viz., that God
abominates all corruptions of His service; and also, that whatever names
the world may invent for its gods, they are so many masks, under which
the devil hides himself for the deception of the simple.

<span id="iii.i-p168"></span>Furthermore, Moses reproves the folly of
the Israelites in having promiscuously devoted themselves to unknown
gods; just as an adulterous woman might prostitute herself
indiscriminately to all comers. When he says that they came *from near*,
 <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) it has reference to time, and
is equivalent to saying that they had lately sprung up. Thirdly, it is
said, that these gods were not honored by their fathers; for thus their
perverse love of novelty is proved against them, inasmuch as they had
not been even led by imitation of their fathers, but in their restless
innovation had procured for themselves new and unwonted gods. Not that
the law of piety is founded on antiquity alone, as if it were sufficient
to follow the customs handed down by our ancestors; for thus any of the
religions of the Gentiles might be proved true, but because the genuine
and faithful tradition of their fathers would be the sure and approved
rule for the worship of God. For Moses assumes a higher principle, viz.,
that their fathers were truly and most unmistakably instructed who was
the one and only God, in whom alone they ought to trust. Yet a
distinction is here to be drawn between these holy fathers and the
reprobate; for the imitation of their fathers, which here seems to be
deemed praiseworthy, is elsewhere severely condemned, because the Jews
were carried away, without discrimination, after the bad examples of
their fathers. Moses, therefore, here refers to no other fathers than
those who were in a position to hand down what they had learned from God
Himself. The word *fear* often comprises, by synecdoche, the whole
service of God, and sometimes is applied to outward ceremonies: the word
<span id="iii.i-p169.1"></span>שער*, sagnar* however, is here used,
which means properly to *stand in awe of*, or *to dread*;  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) but still in the same sense.

<span id="iii.i-p171"></span><span id="iii.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p172"></span>**18.** *Of the Rock*  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) *that begat thee.* He again aggravates
the criminality of the people by referring to their ingratitude,
inasmuch as they did not fall through ignorance, but willfully stifled
that knowledge of God, which ought to have shone brightly in all their
hearts: for this is the effect of the reproach, that they were
*unmindful of their Rock*: as much as to say, that they would never have
given themselves up to their impious superstitions, unless they had cast
into voluntary oblivion that God whom, by the most conspicuous proofs,
they had experimentally found to be the foundation and support of their
salvation.

<span id="iii.i-p174"></span><span id="iii.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p175"></span>**19.** *And when the Lord saw it.* The
*seeing* of God, which is mentioned here, has reference to His
forbearance in judgment: as if it were said, that He does not act
hastily, and is not alienated from His children, without having duly
weighed their case; in the same way as it is said elsewhere: “Because
the cry of Sodom is great, I will go down now and see whether” it is so,
and “I will know.” (<span id="iii.i-p175.1"></span>[Gen.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="iii.i-p175.1"></span>)
Assuredly God has no need to make any examination, since nothing escapes
His eyes, however hidden it may be; but this going down and inquiring is
contrasted with preposterous haste. Thus in this passage Moses shows
that God was wroth, when he saw His sons and His daughters drawn away so
faithlessly after their idols. Again, when he calls them God’s children,
he does not judge them to be so on account of their merits, but in
reference to God’s adoption, which, although it was canceled as regarded
themselves, still had the effect of aggravating the guilt of their
ingratitude. And for the same reason that he had just. said that God
*saw* them, Moses introduces Him deliberating, as it were, that the time
for punishing them might be perceived to be fully come. But we must
notice the degrees; for God does not at once break forth into extreme
severity, but is said to *hide His face,* that He might secretly
consider what they would do: since this is a middle course between the
manifest exhibition of His grace and favor, and the tokens of His wrath.
God is, indeed, elsewhere said, in many passages, to hide His face, when
He rejects men’s prayers, and withdraws His aid; but here He assumes the
character of a man who, when he sees that he produces no effect by
acting,  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) goes aside to some
place, from whence he may quietly contemplate the result, And thus God’s
weariness of them is expressed; for when He at length saw that His
efforts to control them were thrown away, He abandoned the care of them.
It is a false inference, which some draw from hence, that men, when
forsaken by God, recover themselves by the exercise of their own
free-will; as if God sat calmly and inactively in a watch-tower
expecting what they may do; inasmuch as this *hiding* of Himself has
reference only to the outward manifestation of His grace. In a word, it
is a similitude taken from the conduct of men, whereby God signifies
that He is overcome with weariness, and will no more be the leader and
guardian of the people, until it shall effectually appear that they are
altogether intractable. And this is gathered from the reason, which is
presently added, wherein He censures their forward nature and want of
faith, as much as to say, that, after long trial, nothing remained for
Him but to abandon them.

<span id="iii.i-p177"></span><span id="iii.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p178"></span>**21.** *They have moved me to jealousy.*
He now proceeds further, viz., that God, after having withdrawn Himself
for a time, would, at length be the open enemy of the people, so as to
repay them in kind. And he points out the mode of this retaliation, that
as they had insultingly brought into antagonism with God empty phantoms
and vanities, so on His part, He would exalt against them barbarous and
worthless nations. This similitude is also taken from jealous husbands,
who, when they perceive themselves to be despised by their adulterous
wives, avenge themselves by their own amours. Why God should attribute
to Himself the feeling of jealousy has been explained under the Second
Commandment; Moses now only shows that it would be a most equitable mode
of revenge, that God should insult, by means of despised and ignoble
nations, those apostates, who had made to themselves idols in
disparagement of Him.

<span id="iii.i-p179"></span>The fulfillment of this sentence was
manifested from time to time, when they were tyrannically oppressed by
the neighboring nations. It is true, indeed, that the Egyptians, the
Assyrians, and the Chaldeans were included among those people of nought
and foolish nations, although they were preeminent in power and wealth,
and famous for other splendid endowments; but it is no matter of
surprise that, in comparison with that dignity which God had conferred
upon the Israelites, all other nations should be accounted but refuse.
The suae is, that God’s vengeance was ready whereby He would punish the
vanities of His people, inasmuch as He could create out of nothing the
enemies by whom they should be reduced to nothing. There is much
elegance in the allusion of Paul, in which he extends this sentence
further, inasmuch as, when God introduced the Gentiles into His Church,
He stirred up the Jews to jealousy, in order that they might be led to
repentance by a sense of their ignominy. Surely the calling of the
Gentiles was exactly as if He created shadows, whom he might prefer to
His reprobate people. (<span id="iii.i-p179.1"></span>[Ro
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p179.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p180"></span><span id="iii.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p181"></span>**22.** *For a fire is kindled in mine
anger.* He confirms what went before, but more generally; for He
compares His anger to a burning fire*,* which should penetrate to the
deepest abysses, and should utterly consume their land, so as not to
spare the very roots of the mountains. This metaphor is, indeed, of
frequent occurrence; but here more is expressed by it than in other
passages. In the same sense also it is presently added, that God would
spend all his scourges and arrows upon them; since, when His implacable
anger is once aroused, there are no bounds to His severity. The verb
<span id="iii.i-p181.2"></span>אספה *aspheh,* may, however, also be
taken for to *heap,* or to *superadd*;  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) but I willingly follow the more
received interpretation, viz., that God will not omit anything to
destroy them, as if He would apply to this purpose all weapons which
were at hand.

<span id="iii.i-p183"></span><span id="iii.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p184"></span>**24.** *They shall be burnt with hunger.*
He now descends to some particular modes of punishment, not, indeed, to
enumerate them all, but only to adduce such specimens of them as to
inspire the people with greater terror, inasmuch as mere generalities
would not have sufficiently affected them. He mentions three especial
scourges, pestilence, famine, and the sword, on which the prophets
constantly dilate, when their object was to apply the Law to the actual
use of the people, from whence it arose that they familiarly employ many
of the expressions used by Moses. He introduces indeed other
punishments, which the prophets also mention; but the sum of what he
says is this, that the Israelites should feel that God was armed with
all the punishments which were only too well known by experience, and by
them would utterly destroy them.

<span id="iii.i-p185"></span>First., he says, that they should be dried
up, or rather roasted with hunger.  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) Instead of pestilence he uses the
words *burning (uredinem,)* and *bitter* *destruction:* and before he
speaks of the sword, declares that He would send forth *beasts* and
*serpents,* so that on the one hand, open violence should assail them,
and, on the other, secret wiles. Amos has also imitated this figure:

<span id="iii.i-p187"></span>“The day of the Lord (he says) is darkness
and not light: as if a man did flee from a lion and a bear met him; or
went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit
him.”  
(<span id="iii.i-p187.2"></span>[Amos
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p187.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p188"></span>To war, and the cruelty of enemies he adds
another evil, viz., *terror*: and this is, indeed, an aggravation worse
than death itself, when we tremble within with terror, for it would be
better to be slain ten times over bravely fighting in battle, than to be
consumed with constant fear, as by a lingering death.  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)

<span id="iii.i-p190"></span>Let us learn, then, from this passage,
that, whatever perils surround us, and whatever adversities, they are
God’s weapons, and that they do not occur by chance to this or that
person, but are directed by His hand. Thus it is the case that He not;
only stirs up enemies against us, but fierce and noisome beasts also;
that He shuts up the heaven and the earth; that He infects the
atmosphere with deadly disease; that, in a word, he draws forth from all
the elements manifold means of destruction.

<span id="iii.i-p191"></span>But if it be the fact, that the godly are
involved in similar punishments, since they suffer from hunger and want,
and are not exempt from any evil; for even Paul acknowledges that he had
himself experienced what God here denounces against those that wickedly
despise Him, for he says that he was *troubled without* with
*fightings,* and *within* with *fears,* (<span
id="iii.i-p191.1"></span>[2Co 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span
id="iii.i-p191.1"></span>;) we must bear in mind that all adversities
are in themselves signs of God’s wrath, since they derive their origin
from sin; but that through God’s marvelous provision it comes to pass,
that to believers they are exercises of their faith and proofs of their
patience. Hence we often see God’s children afflicted in common with the
ungodly, but to a different end; though nevertheless all adversities are
proofs of God’s wrath against the reprobate. On this point I have spoken
at greater length in treating of the curses of the Law.

<span id="iii.i-p192"></span><span id="iii.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p193"></span>**26.** *I said, I would scatter them.* God
again represents Himself in the character of a man, as if He were
meditating opposite determinations, and restrained His vehemence in
consideration of the impediments He encountered. What it amounts to,
however, is this, that God suspended His final judgment upon them for no
other reason but because He had regard to His own glory, which would
else have been subjected to the taunts of the Gentiles. Hence the Jews
were reminded that, whereas they had deserved certain destruction, they
were preserved on no other grounds but because God was unwilling to give
the reins to the insolence of the Gentiles. The expression *wrath,* is
here used for arrogant boasting, because in their prosperity ungodly and
profane men burst forth into cruelty; unless it be preferred to render
it simply *irritation,*  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) in
which sense it is used in <span id="iii.i-p194.3"></span>[2Ki
23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#000)<span id="iii.i-p194.3"></span>
Immediately afterwards it is explained, “lest the adversaries should
behave themselves strangely.” <span id="iii.i-p194.4"></span>נכר,
*nacar,* signifies sometimes to be strange, sometimes to put on a
different face, sometimes to acknowledge. Thus I do not doubt but that
Moses meant to express the arrogance of those who in a manner transform
themselves that they may dazzle the eyes of the simple by their pomp and
empty exaltation. If any approve of a different sense, i.e., lest they
should separate themselves from God, and arrogate to themselves what
belongs to Him alone, I make no objection: and this, indeed, seems to
agree with what follows,  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) “Our
high hand, and not the Lord, has done this:” for when men indulge in
such unbridled license, they go so far astray as to have nothing in
common with God. Thus the judgment of God, which should have been
conspicuous in these punishments, would have been put out of sight, when
the enemies appropriated to themselves the glory of the people’s
destruction. Nevertheless the ungodly did not cease to pride themselves
on their victories, (as God complains by Isaiah, and Habakkuk confirms;)
 <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) although their insolence was in
some measure repressed, as long as there were some remnants of the elect
people preserved.  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275)

<span id="iii.i-p198"></span>It is only figuratively that God says, he
feared this insolence, which He might have easily remedied and
restrained: but I have already stated, that He speaks after the manner
of men, to show the Israelites that they escaped rather on account of
their enemies, than by their own merits. The question, however, arises,
how such a consultation as this could have taken place after God had
determined to *consume* them with the fire of His wrath;  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) I reply, that the *consump*tion there
indicated was not such as totally to annihilate the nation, so that no
ruins should remain as witnesses of their former state; whereas He now
speaks of the destruction, which should altogether blot out the name of
the nation, as if it had never been chosen by God.

<span id="iii.i-p200"></span><span id="iii.i-p200.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p201"></span>**28.** *For they are a nation void of
counsel.* The cause is assigned why God had almost blotted out
altogether the memory of the people, viz., because their faculty was
incurable: for He does not merely indicate that their conduct was rash
and inconsiderate, because they lacked reason mid discretion: but that
they could be by no means brought to their senses, and, in fact, that
not one drop of sagacity existed in them. The proof of this immediately
follows, viz., that the tokens of God’s wrath were too clearly set
before their eyes to escape their notice, unless they were utterly blind
and stupid. The word <span id="iii.i-p201.1"></span>לו, *lu,* which they
render, “Would that”  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277)
(*utinam*,) denotes commiseration rather than desire; and therefore it
may be properly translated, “Oh*,* if they understood,” etc.

<span id="iii.i-p203"></span>By the expression, “latter*,*” their
exceeding stupidity is censured: since not even by many and long
experiences were they aroused to reflect on the causes of their
calamities; whereas length of time extorts some sense at last from the
very dullest, and almost idiotic persons. It was, therefore, a sign of
desperate stupidity that they were still without understanding after so
many years; as if by experience itself they had grown callous, when they
ought to have shaken off their lethargy, and to have bestirred
themselves to earnest inquiry. Justly, then, does Moses reproach them
with not having considered even at the latter end; for not once only,
nor in a single year, but by constant inflictions of punishment during a
long series of years, had they been instructed without profit.

<span id="iii.i-p204"></span><span id="iii.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p205"></span>**30.** *How should one chase a thousand.*
Of all the many tokens of God’s wrath, he selects one which was
peculiarly striking; for as long as God was on their side, they had put
to flight mighty armies, nor had they been supported by any multitude of
forces. Now, when, though in great numbers, they are conquered by a few,
this change plainly shows that they are deprived of God’s aid,
especially when a thousand, who were wont before, with a little band, to
rout the greatest armies, gave way before ten men. Moses, therefore,
condemns the stupidity of the people, in that it does not occur to their
minds that they are rejected by God, when they are so easily overcome by
a few enemies, whom they far exceed in numbers. Moses, however, goes
still further, and says, that they were *sold* and *betrayed*;  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) inasmuch as God, having so often found
them to be unworthy of His aid, not only deserted them, but made them
subject to heathen nations, and, as it were, sold them to be their
slaves. This threat is often repeated by the prophets: and Isaiah,
desiring to awake in them a hope of deliverance, tells them that God
would redeem the people whom He had sold.  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) But, in case any should object that it
was no matter of wonder, if the uncertain chance of war should confer on
others the victory which often, as a profane poet says,

<span id="iii.i-p208"></span><span id="iii.i-p208.1"></span>“Hovers
<span id="iii.i-p208.2"></span>between the two on doubtful wings,”
 <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)

<span id="iii.i-p211"></span>Moses anticipates the objection by
declaring that, unless the people should be deprived of God’s aid, they
could not be otherwise than successful. A comparison is therefore
instituted between the true God and false gods: as though Moses had said
that, where the God of hosts presides, the issue of war can never be
doubtful. Hence it follows, that God’s elect and peculiar people are
exempted from the ordinary condition of nations, except in so far as it
deserves to be rejected on the score of its ingratitude. He calls the
unbelievers themselves to be the arbiters and witnesses of this,
inasmuch as they had often experienced the formidable power of God, and
knew assuredly that the God of Israel was unlike their idols. It is,
then, just as if he had said, that this was conspicuous even to the
blind, or were to cite as witnesses those who are blessed with no light
from on high. In thus inviting unbelievers to be judges, it is not as if
he supposed that they would pronounce what was true, and thoroughly
understood by them, but because they must needs be convinced by
experience: for, if any one had asked the heathen whether the supreme
government and power of heaven and earth were in the hands of the One
God of Israel, they never would have confessed that their idols were
mere vanity. Still, however malignantly they might detract from God’s
glory, Moses does not hesitate to boast, even themselves being judges,
that God had magnificently exerted His unconquered might; although he
refers rather to the experience of facts themselves, than to their
feelings. Other commentators extract a different meaning, viz., that
although unbelievers might be victorious, still God remained unaffected
by it: neither was his arm broken, because he permitted them to afflict
the apostate Israelites:  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) the
former exposition, however, is the more appropriate one.

<span id="iii.i-p213"></span><span id="iii.i-p213.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p214"></span>**32.** *For their vine is of the vine of
Sodom.* I think it was far from the intention of Moses, as some make it
to be, to refer to the punishment which the Israelites deserved; but
that he rather inveighs against their corrupted morals, and obstinate
disposition. But metaphorically he calls them an offshoot from the vine
of Sodom and Gomorrah, inasmuch as they resemble in their nature both
those nations, as much as if they had sprung from them, just as grafts
of the vine produce fruits similar to the stocks from which they are
taken. God complains by Isaiah that, when he looked for good and sweet
grapes from His vineyard, *it* *brought forth wild grapes.* (<span
id="iii.i-p214.1"></span>[Isa 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)<span
id="iii.i-p214.1"></span>.) And also by Jeremiah that, when He had
planted a trustworthy and genuine seed, it was turned into the branches
of a strange vine, (<span id="iii.i-p214.2"></span>[Jer
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022)<span id="iii.i-p214.2"></span>;)
but Moses goes further here, that the people was not merely a degenerate
vine, bun poisonous, and producing nothing but what was deadly; and
therefore he adds, not only that *their clusters* were *bitter,* but
that their wine was *the poison of dragons and asps;* whereby he
signifies that nothing worse or more abominable than that nation could
be imagined.

<span id="iii.i-p215"></span><span id="iii.i-p215.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p216"></span>**34.** *Is not this laid up in store with
me?* Although some explain this verse as relating to their punishments,
as if God asserted that various kinds of them were laid up with Him,
which He could produce whenever He pleased, it is more correct to
understand it of their crimes. We are well aware that the ungodly, when
God stays His severity, promise themselves impunity, as if His
forbearance were a kind of connivance. Unless, therefore, He straightway
lifts up His hand to chastise them, they imagine that all recollection
of their crimes has vanished from before Him; and consequently the
prophets often remind hypocrites of the day of visitation, in order that
they may not suppose that they have gained anything by the delay. For
this reason Jeremiah says that

<span id="iii.i-p217"></span>“the sin of Judah is written with an iron
pen  
and with the point of a diamond,” (<span
id="iii.i-p217.2"></span>[Jeremiah
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p217.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p218"></span>Moses employs a different figure, that,
although God may not appear as an immediate avenger, still their sins
are stored up in his treasures, and will be brought to light by Him at
the fitting season. Hence we gather the profitable lesson, that although
God may make as though He saw not *(dissimulet)* for a time, still He
does not forget the iniquities, the memory of which wretched men
foolishly imagine to be blotted out, unless they are pursued by God’s
immediate vengeance.

<span id="iii.i-p219"></span><span id="iii.i-p219.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p220"></span>**35** *To me belongeth vengeance.* This
passage is quoted to different purposes by Paul, and by the author
 <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
(<span id="iii.i-p221.4"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p221.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.i-p221.5"></span>[Heb
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030)<span id="iii.i-p221.5"></span>;)
for Paul, with a view of persuading believers to bear injuries
patiently, admonishes them to “give place unto wrath,” inasmuch as God
declares vengeance to be His; but the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, proclaiming that God will be the avenger of impiety, confirms
his declaration by this testimony. Hence it is that part of the
commentators suppose that punishment is here denounced against heathen
nations because they have cruelly afflicted God’s elect people. And,
indeed, this appears to be the meaning of Paul’s words, that injuries
should be patiently endured, since God claims for Himself the office of
Avenger; but there is nothing to prevent the same statement from being
accommodated to different uses, and therefore Paul did not irrelevantly
confirm his exhortation by this saying of Moses, although it literally
refers to the internal chastisements of the Church. Besides, the
apostles are not in the habit of quoting every word from the testimonies
which they adduce, but briefly remind their readers to examine more
closely the passages quoted. But, since God here joins the two things
together, that He will punish the sins of His people, and at the same
time be the avenger of their oppressions, there will be nothing absurd
in saying that Paul, as it were, points his finger at this passage;
 <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) still, the simple explanation
will be, that the general declaration is accommodated to a special case,
in order that believers should bear their injuries patiently, and leave
to God the office which He pronounces to appertain to Himself. In my
judgment, indeed, these words are connected with the preceding verse;
for God pertinently confirms His statement, that he takes account of the
number of men’s sins, and has them stored among His treasures, by adding
that the power and office of judging rests with Himself; inasmuch as
these two things are contrary to each other, that He should be cognizant
of whatever is done unrighteously and amiss, and still leave it
unpunished. Not that it is opposed to God’s justice to pardon sinners
when they repent, but because this principle always continues firm, that
God is the judge of the world, for the punishment of all iniquities.
Thus the confidence of hypocrites is destroyed, who flatter themselves
with the hope of impunity, unless they are overtaken by immediate
punishment.

<span id="iii.i-p223"></span>The clause which follows some interpreters
pervert by supplying the relative, “in the time in *which* their foot
shall slide;” whereas Moses simply concludes that they will fall in
their due time, or that, although they may think they stand, their ruin
or fall was not far off; and this is further confirmed by what he adds,
viz., that their day of calamity was at hand. This statement, as I have
before said, often occurs in the Prophets, that there is with God a fit
time,  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) in which to punish the
sins which He has appeared to overlook, and therefore His long-suffering
detracts nothing from the judgment which He delays. In this doctrine
there is a twofold moral; first, that those whom God spares for a time,
should not give way to self-indulgence; and, secondly, that the
prosperity of the wicked should not disturb the minds of believers, but
that they should allow God to decide the time and the place of executing
vengeance. Inasmuch, however, as God’s delay renders hypocrites secure,
so that they lull themselves to sleep in their vices, and, although they
hear that they will have to render account of them, thoughtlessly
indulge themselves during  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) their
period of enjoyment, Moses declares that *the day is near*, and *makes
haste*; for, if God does not openly alarm them, and reduce them to
straits, they exult in their immunity. Hence those blasphemous sayings
recorded by Isaiah, (<span id="iii.i-p225.1"></span>[Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p225.1"></span>,)
“Let him make speed, and hasten his work that we may see it; and let the
counsel of the Holy One draw nigh and come, that we may know it!
“Meanwhile we must bear in mind the words of Habakkuk, (<span
id="iii.i-p225.2"></span>[Hab 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)<span
id="iii.i-p225.2"></span>,) “Though *the prophecy* tarry, wait for it;
because it will surely come, it will not tarry.”

<span id="iii.i-p226"></span><span id="iii.i-p226.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p227"></span>**36.** *For the Lord shall judge his
people.* Some connect this sentence with what precedes it, and thus take
the word *judge* for *to punish,* and the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, seems to support their opinion, inasmuch as he proves by this
testimony how fearful a thing it is “to fall into the hands of the
living God.” (Hebrews10:30, 31.) But there is no reason why the Apostle
should not have accommodated to a different purpose what was set forth
by Moses for the consolation of the godly, in order that believers might
be the more heedful, the nearer they saw God to show Himself as the
Judge of His Church; unless it be perhaps preferred to construe the
words of Moses thus: Although God should judge His people, yet at length
He will be propitiated, or touched with repentance, so as to temper the
vehemence of His anger. Whichever way we understand them will be of
little difference in the main; for, after Moses has threatened the
despisers of God, and the apostates, who desire to be accounted members
of His household the Church, he now turns to the strangers and denounces
against them that the cruelty which they have exercised towards the
Israelites shall not be unpunished, because God will at length be
mindful of His covenant, and will pardon His elect people. If you take
the word *judge* for to *govern,* or to *undertake their cause,* the
particle *for* must be rendered adversatively, as though it were said
*nevertheless* or *but;* if we prefer the other sense, it will be
equivalent to *although,* or *even though.* Doubtless the object of
Moses is to encourage the hopes of the pious, who have profited by God’s
chastisement, by showing that He will mitigate His severity towards His
elect people, and *in* His *wrath* will *remember mercy.* (<span
id="iii.i-p227.1"></span>[Hab 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.i-p227.1"></span>.) Thus, then, Moses here teaches the same
thing which God afterwards more clearly unfolded to David:

<span id="iii.i-p228"></span>“If *thy* children forsake my law,... I
will visit their transgressions with the rod of man,... nevertheless my
loving-kindness will I not take away from them,” etc.  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) (<span id="iii.i-p229.1"></span>[Ps.
89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)<span id="iii.i-p229.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.i-p229.2"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="iii.i-p229.2"></span>,
15.)

<span id="iii.i-p230"></span>For nothing is more fitted to sustain us in
afflictions than when God promises that there shall be some limit to
them, so that He will not utterly destroy those whom He has chosen.
Whenever, therefore, the ills which we suffer tempt us to despair, let
this lesson recur to our minds, that the punishments, wherewith God
chastises His children, are temporary, since His promise will never fail
that “his anger endureth but a moment,” (<span
id="iii.i-p230.1"></span>[Ps 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span
id="iii.i-p230.1"></span>,) whilst the flow of His mercy is continual.
Hence, too, that lesson which is especially directed to the Church:
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287)

<span id="iii.i-p232"></span>“For a moment I afflicted thee, but I will
pursue my mercies towards thee for ever.” (<span
id="iii.i-p232.1"></span>[Isa
54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)<span id="iii.i-p232.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p233"></span>He here calls them His *servants,* not
because they had deserved His pardon by their obedience, but because He
condescends to acknowledge them as His own; for this honor has reference
to His gratuitous election; as when David says, “I am thy servant, and
the son of thine handmaid,” (<span id="iii.i-p233.1"></span>[Ps
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016)<span
id="iii.i-p233.1"></span>,) he assuredly arrogates nothing peculiar to
himself; but only boasts that he from the womb had been of God’s family,
just as slaves are born in the house of their masters. At the same time
we must observe that, whenever God declares that He will be merciful to
His servants, he only refers to those who heartily seek for
reconciliation, and not to the reprobate, who are carried away to
destruction by their desperate obstinacy. In short, to the end that God
should repent of His severity, repentance is required on the part of
sinners; as he teaches elsewhere:

<span id="iii.i-p234"></span>“Turn ye unto me,... and I will turn unto
you.”  
(<span id="iii.i-p234.2"></span>[Zec
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003)<span id="iii.i-p234.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p235"></span>Instead of *shall repent,* some translate
the word, *shall console himself.*  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) Jerome, regarding the drift of the
passage rather than the meaning of the word, translates it *shall have
mercy.*

<span id="iii.i-p237"></span>We must, however, remark the time which God
prefixes for the exertion of His grace, viz., when all their power
*(virtus)* shall have departed from them, and all shall be reduced to
almost entire destruction; for the word *hand* is used for *vigor;*
 <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) as though it were said that God
would be by no means content with a light chastisement, and consequently
would not be appeased until they should have come to extremities. This
circumstance is well worthy of notice, so flint our hopes may not fail
us even in the most severe afflictions of the Church; but that we may be
assured that although all may be in the worst state possible, still the
due season of reparation will come even yet.

<span id="iii.i-p239"></span>That none should remain behind, or *shut up
or left,* is almost a proverbial phrase in Hebrew; as when it is said,
(<span id="iii.i-p239.1"></span>[1Ki
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010)<span id="iii.i-p239.1"></span>,)
“I will cut off from Jeroboam,... him that is shut up and left in
Israel,” i.e., as well in the city as in the country, or at home as
abroad. And this is again repeated respecting the posterity of Ahab.
(*Ibid*. 21:21.) And hence it is plain that they are mistaken  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) who explain this as referring to
riches shut up in treasure-houses, and cattle dispersed through the
fields. And this will be still more apparent from another passage in
which the Prophet unquestionably referred to this, “The Lord saw the
affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter; for there was not any
shut up, nor any left,” and inasmuch as He had not determined to *blot
out* His people,” he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam;” as much as to
say, that God, as He had promised, had pity upon His people in their
extreme destitution. (<span id="iii.i-p240.1"></span>[2 Kings
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#027)<span id="iii.i-p240.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p241"></span><span id="iii.i-p241.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p242"></span>**37.** *And he shall say, Where are their
gods?* Commentators are here at issue, for some continue the paragraph,
as if Moses were reporting the boastings and insults of their enemies in
the afflicted state of the Church; whilst others consider it to be a
pious exultation, wherein the faithful will celebrate the deliverance of
the Church. If we suppose the enemies to be here speaking, it will be
inconsistent that the word “gods” should be used in the plural number:
besides, what follows will proceed from their mistake and ignorance,
that the Israelites “did eat the fat,” which was not lawful for them
even in their common food, and much less in the sacrifices wherein the
fat was burnt. The other exposition, however, is that which I rather
approve of, viz., that when the tables were turned, and God should have
shown Himself as the avenger of the unbelievers cruel injustice, — God’s
children would be at liberty to upbraid them. The word “he shall say,”
 <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) is used indefinitely for “It
shall be said by any or all of God’s children.” Just, then, as
unbelievers, when they see the saints afflicted, impudently ridicule
their faith, so on the other side Moses, when God comes to the help of
His Church, introduces the saints derisively inquiring, where are the
gods of the Gentiles, and where are all their patrons? since all of
them, as is well known, had their tutelary gods. Thus their impure and
spurious sacrifices are satirized in which they ate the fat, and drank
the libations of wine. In short, Moses intimates that, when God succors
His people, their mouth is opened to sing the song of triumph to the
glory of the true God, and to upbraid unbelievers with the false
confidence whereby they are deceived.

<span id="iii.i-p244"></span><span id="iii.i-p244.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p245"></span>**39** *See now that 1, even I, am he.*
Those who attribute the preceding verses to the unbelievers, now
introduce God speaking, as it were, abruptly, and asserting His glory,
in rebuke of their blasphemies. But it is rather a confirmation of that
holy boasting which He has just dictated to the believers, when God not
only bids His people lift up their voices against the idols, but Himself
comes forward to condemn the senselessness of the Gentiles; although the
context clearly shows that He addresses Himself to the faithful, After,
therefore, He has exhorted His people to despise the idols, He now adds
that He supplies them with ample grounds of confidence in Himself. For
when He bids them “look,” He signifies that no obscure manifestation of
His power is before their eyes, if they will only pay attention to it.
The repetition of the pronoun I is emphatic, both to arouse the people
from their sluggishness, and to keep their minds steadfast, lest they
should waver as if in doubt. For we know that men’s minds can hardly be
drawn to the true knowledge of God, because they wind about by
circuitous courses, so as not to direct themselves straight to Him. And
again, when they do apprehend God, we are aware how easily they are
drawn away from Him; since the vicissitudes of things becloud them, so
that they wander hither and thither in uncertainly. For this reason,
when God has overthrown all fictitious deities, He declares that He
always remains the same, whether he kills or makes alive, so that in the
thick darkness of affliction believers may not cease to look to Him. Let
us learn from this passage that God is defrauded of His right, unless He
alone is preeminent, all idols being reduced to nothing; and also that
our faith is then truly fixed in Him, and has firm roots, if, amidst the
various changes which occur, it does not stagger or waver, but surmounts
such obstacles, so as not to cease to hope in Him even when He seems to
“slay” us, as Job says, (<span id="iii.i-p245.1"></span>[Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)<span id="iii.i-p245.1"></span>.)
And surely nothing is more unreasonable than that our faith should look
round upon all events so as to depend upon them; since God would have
His promises to quicken us in death itself. The close of the verse may
fitly be referred to their enemies, inasmuch as God declares that none
can deliver them out of His hand.

<span id="iii.i-p246"></span><span id="iii.i-p246.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p247"></span>**40.** *For*  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) *I lift up my, hand to heaven.* Others
render it, “When I shall have lifted up my hand,” and read it
connectedly with the foregoing verse, that God’s power in destroying and
preserving will be manifest, if He raises up His hand to heaven. I do
not doubt, however, but that it is the beginning of a new sentence, and
that God thus commences, in order to affirm more strongly what He
immediately adds respecting the future destruction of their enemies. If,
however, any prefer the adverb of time “when,” I have no great objection
to offer, provided these clauses are connected, “As soon as I shall have
lifted up my hand to heaven, I will put to confusion the enemies of my
Church.”

<span id="iii.i-p249"></span>*To lift up the hand* is explained in two
ways; for some suppose it to be a manifestation of power, as men are
wont, by the uplifting of their hand, to glow, when they are confident
in their strength, and despise their enemies. Others, however, more
correctly state it to be a form of adjuration God, who is exalted above
all heavens, cannot, indeed, be literally said to lift His hand; but it
is no new thing for Him to borrow modes of expression taken from men’s
common habits and customs, especially when He suddenly rises again to
sublimity, after having appeared for a while to sink below the level of
His greatness. Certainly the words which follow contain in them an oath,
“I live for ever;” and hence it is probable  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) that the elevation of His hand was
expressive of His taking the oath.

<span id="iii.i-p251"></span>God swears by His life in a very different
sense from men. Sometimes, indeed, He adopts our common modes of
speaking, as when He is said to swear by His soul; but here, “I live,”
is tantamount to His swearing by Himself, or by His eternal essence.

<span id="iii.i-p252"></span><span id="iii.i-p252.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p253"></span>**41** *If I whet my glittering sword.* The
conditional particle does not leave the matter doubtful, or in suspense,
but must be resolved into an adverb of time; as though He had said, As
soon as He should take up arms, the destruction of the enemies would be
certain; not indeed that God wants arms for the overthrow of His
enemies; just as when He adds directly afterwards, “When my hand shall
have taken hold of judgment,” He does not mean that it ever is taken
away from Him, or escapes Him, but He thus designates its present and
manifest operation.  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) Since,
therefore, God, when He spares His enemies, seems, as it were, to have
thrown aside His weapons, and to be at rest, having ceased to execute
the office of judge, He declares that His arms shall be ready wherewith
to destroy His enemies; and again, that then He will once more take upon
Him the judgment which He had seemed to lay aside; in which words He
indirectly animadverts upon the foolish security of those who conceive
that His power is annihilated, unless He openly exerts it, and that the
judgment which He postpones is altogether extinct.

<span id="iii.i-p255"></span><span id="iii.i-p255.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p256"></span>**42** *I will make my arrows drunk with
blood.* In these words He describes a horrible massacre, as though He
had said, There shall be no end to my vengeance, until the earth shall
be full of blood and corpses. Elsewhere  <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) also, God’s sword is said to be “drunk
with blood,” as here His arrows, when His wrath proceeds to inflict
great acts of carnage; and in the same sense it is here said to “devour
flesh.”

<span id="iii.i-p258"></span>The second <span
id="iii.i-p258.1"></span>מדם, *midam,* some render, “on account of the
blood;” and I admit that <span id="iii.i-p258.2"></span>מ, *mem,* is
sometimes the causalparticle. They understand it, then, that this would
be the just recompense of their cruelty, when the wicked, who had slain
the Israelites, or led them away captive, should be cut off by God. But
I do not see why the same word should be expounded in two different
senses; and I have no doubt but that it is a repetition of the same
thing, that God will make His “arrows drunk with blood;”  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) but He says, “the blood both of the
slain and of the captives,” since, when an army is put to the sword,
some fall in the battle itself, whilst others, maimed and wounded, make
an effort to escape.

<span id="iii.i-p260"></span>The conclusion of the verse is twisted into
various senses; some expound the word “head” by change of number,
“heads,” as though it were said, “I will cut off the heads of the
enemies;” it would, however, be more plausible to apply it
metaphorically to the leaders. But others translate it more correctly,
“the beginning,” not, indeed, with reference to time, but as though it
were said, the flower, or best of the multitude, according to the common
phrase, “from the first to the last.” My interpretation of “the revenges
of the enemy” is, not those which God will inflict upon His enemies, but
such as are capital, or deadly, as though He had said that He would deal
as an enemy with the wicked, so that there should be no place for mercy.
 <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)

<span id="iii.i-p262"></span><span id="iii.i-p262.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p263"></span>**43.** *Rejoice, O ye nations, with his
people.* The appositive reading, which some prefer, “Praise him, O
nations, His people,” supplying the word “God,” is constrained. For
there is no incongruity in the notion that the Gentiles should celebrate
the benefits which God has conferred upon His people; at any rate, it is
more simple to take it thus, that so conspicuous was the favor of God
towards the Israelites, that the knowledge and favor of it should
diffuse itself far and wide, and be renowned even among the Gentiles.
For Scripture thus magnifies some of the more memorable exertions of
God’s power, especially when reference is made to the redemption of the
elect people, and commands His praise to be proclaimed among the
nations, since it would be by no means fitting that it should be
confined within the narrow limits of Judea. A question, however, occurs,
because Paul seems to quote this passage differently; for he says,
“Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people,” (<span
id="iii.i-p263.1"></span>[Ro
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#010)<span id="iii.i-p263.1"></span>;)
and undoubtedly the word <span id="iii.i-p263.2"></span>נקם*, nakam,*
which Moses uses, also signifies to rejoice.  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) If we admit that Paul took this
sentence from Moses, the same Spirit, who spoke both by Moses and Paul,
is the best interpreter of His own words; nor will it be inconsistent
that the Gentiles should rejoice at the felicity of God’s people. But it
may have been the case that Paul did not take this testimony from any
particular place, but from the general teaching of Scripture. At any
rate, the dignity of the people is celebrated on the ground that God
esteems their blood precious, and will deem their persecutors His own
adversaries.

<span id="iii.i-p265"></span>The word <span
id="iii.i-p265.1"></span>כפר*, capbar, at* the end of the verse, some
render to *expiate,* others, to *be propitious,* which is the rendering
I have preferred, although I do not reject the former meaning. The verb
<span id="iii.i-p265.2"></span>כפר*, caphar,* signifies that an
expiation is made with sacrifice to appease God; and it is probable that
Moses alludes to the legal mode of reconciliation; nevertheless, in my
judgment, he means that God will restore His land and people to His
favor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc06056.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iii.i-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p110"></span> See *ante,* on <span
id="iii.i-p110.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026)<span id="iii.i-p110.1"></span>,
vol. 3, p. 269, and note.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc06056.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p113"></span> So the *LXX., V*., Vatablus, Junius, and
others. Ainsworth combines the two, and says, “*shall drop,* or *let it
drop,* as being a wish, and also a promise, that his doctrine should be
profitable and effectual,” etc.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc06056.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iii.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p114"></span> *“L’eloquence.”* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc06056.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p118"></span> *Hebr.* <span
id="iii.i-p118.1"></span>אקרא *A.V.,* “I will publish,” from <span
id="iii.i-p118.2"></span>קרא, which is stated by Taylor to signify, in
its first sense, ”Vocare, advocare, eonvocare, invocare, clamare,
exclamare, legere.” — *Concord, in voce.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc06056.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iii.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p121"></span> “Quelque chose de coupe on mutile, ou bien
real compasse et confus;” anything defective or mutilated, or even
ill-contrived and confused. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc06056.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iii.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p125"></span> *A. V*., “all his ways are judgment.”

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc06056.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iii.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p131"></span> Added from the *Fr*.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc06056.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iii.i-p133.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p134"></span> *S. M.* has rendered this word *possessed.
A. V*. agrees more nearly with *C*. in rendering it *bought.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc06056.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iii.i-p137.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p138"></span> So in., which Ainsworth follows; but
explains, ”formed, fitted; and ordered, firm and stable, that thou
mightest abide in his grace.”

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc06056.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iii.i-p140.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p141"></span> Ver. 8. *C*.’s application of this
expression, <span id="iii.i-p141.1"></span>בהנחל, can scarcely be deemed
admissible; for <span id="iii.i-p141.2"></span>כחל does not mean to
divide, unless with reference to an inheritance, or, at least, to
property. — *W*

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc06056.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iii.i-p141.4"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p142"></span> A noun *heemantic:* like our word *tale,*
as used in Milton’s time, and *account,* as still used, it may either
mean a narrative, or an enumeration, or a number, which is the result of
an enumeration. — *W*. I have not ventured to translate *C.’s* very
ambiguous word *ratio.* In the *Fr*. it is “Facon ou regle.”

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc06056.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p143"></span> “La distinction du peuple eleu d’avec les
autres nations, du temps qu’ils estoyent comme retranchez de l’Eglise;”
the distinction of the elect people from the other nations, from the
time when these last were, as it were, cut off from the Church.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc06056.htm#fr_258) <span
id="iii.i-p147.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p148"></span> “The waste howling wilderness.” — *A. V*.
“Un lieu vague off il n’y avoit *qu’horreur,* ou hurlement;” a waste
place, in which there was nothing but horror or howling. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc06056.htm#fr_259) <span
id="iii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p149"></span> Added from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc06056.htm#fr_260) <span
id="iii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p150"></span> “He taught them the words of his law.” —
*Chaldee.*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc06056.htm#fr_261) <span
id="iii.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p158"></span> “In summa parte orbis, qubd Terra Saneta
sit in medio climate mund” — Vatablus, in Poole’s Synopsis.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc06056.htm#fr_262) <span
id="iii.i-p159.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p160"></span> It may either mean *red* or
*effervescing;* it is not easy to see why *A. V*. renders it *pure* —
*W.*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc06056.htm#fr_263) <span
id="iii.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p163"></span> *Lat.,* “Rectus.” See next note.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc06056.htm#fr_264) <span
id="iii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p164"></span> This word <span
id="iii.i-p164.1"></span>ישרון, *yeshurun* occurs only here, and in
<span id="iii.i-p164.2"></span>[Deut.
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)<span id="iii.i-p164.2"></span>,
and <span id="iii.i-p164.3"></span>[Isa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002)<span id="iii.i-p164.3"></span>.
Commentators appear to be by no means agreed as to its derivation or
meaning, — variously rendering it, *the upright; the beloved; the
fortunate; the abounding; the seer of God,* etc. Singularly enough, *C*.
himself, in his Commentary on Isaiah, (*E* *Soc. Edit.* vol. 3., p.
359,) gives the following contradictory opinion: “This designation is
also bestowed upon that nation by Moses in his song: for although some
render it in that passage Upright, and in this passage also, the old
rendering is more suitable, “My beloved is grown fat.” (<span
id="iii.i-p164.5"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="iii.i-p164.5"></span>.)

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc06056.htm#fr_265) <span
id="iii.i-p168.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p169"></span> *A. V*., “newly.” *Lat.,* e propinquo.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc06056.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iii.i-p169.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p170"></span> In the editions of Geneva, 1563 and 1573,
*C*. is made to say, that this word is equivalent to “*formare, vel*
*pavere;”* the former being probably a misprint for *reformidare.* —
*W.* The *Fr*. renders the words “Redouter, ou avoir peur.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc06056.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iii.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p173"></span> *Lat.,* “of the God,” etc.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc06056.htm#fr_268) <span
id="iii.i-p175.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p176"></span> ’Voyant qu’il ne profite rien en
advertissant son ami qu’il se pert;’ seeing that he does not at all
profit his friend by warning him against selfdestruction. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc06056.htm#fr_269) <span
id="iii.i-p181.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p182"></span> It will be seen that *C*. translates both
the verbs in this verse, <span id="iii.i-p182.1"></span>אספה *aspheh,*
and <span id="iii.i-p182.2"></span>אכלה, *acalleh,* by the same word,
*consumam;* whilst *A. V*. renders the first *I will heap,* and the
latter, *I will spend*; in accordance with the view of Ainsworth,
Mareldus, and Dathe.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc06056.htm#fr_270) <span
id="iii.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p186"></span> Professor Liebig has pointed out the
dreadful fact, in singular confirmation of the expression here employed
by Moses, that “when a person is starved to death, he is, in fact,
slowly burnt, as, during the process of starvation, a slow combustion of
the body takes place.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc06056.htm#fr_271) <span
id="iii.i-p188.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p189"></span> Un accessoire pire que toutes los morts du
monde, quand nous maigrissons et sommes minez de frayeur;” an
aggravation worse than all the deaths in the world, when we are wasted
away, and preyed upon by fear. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc06056.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iii.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p194"></span> *Hebr.,* <span
id="iii.i-p194.1"></span>כעס*, cagnas,* used in the plural number in
<span id="iii.i-p194.2"></span>[2Ki
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026)<span id="iii.i-p194.2"></span>,
and translated in *A. V. provocations;* margin, “*Heb*. angers.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc06056.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iii.i-p194.5"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p195"></span> See Margin, *A.V*.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc06056.htm#fr_274) <span
id="iii.i-p195.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p196"></span> The references in the original to both
these passages are obviously incorrect; it is probable, however, that
Marckius *in* *loco* supplies them aright, viz., <span
id="iii.i-p196.1"></span>[Isa. 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#013)<span id="iii.i-p196.1"></span>,
etc. and <span id="iii.i-p196.2"></span>[Hab.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)<span id="iii.i-p196.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc06056.htm#fr_275) <span
id="iii.i-p196.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p197"></span> “Quand il y est tousjours demeure quelque
reserve du peuple eleu;” since some remains of the elect people always
existed. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc06056.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iii.i-p198.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p199"></span> See ante on ver 23.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc06056.htm#fr_277) <span
id="iii.i-p201.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p202"></span> So S.M. “O that.” — *A. V*.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc06056.htm#fr_278) <span
id="iii.i-p205.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p206"></span> “Shut them up.” — *A. V.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc06056.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iii.i-p206.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p207"></span> The reference is here generally to <span
id="iii.i-p207.1"></span>[Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003)<span id="iii.i-p207.1"></span>,
however, to which *C*. probably alludes, hardly bears out the statement
in the text: “Ye have *sold yourselves* for nought, etc. The *Fr*.
stands thus, ”Isaie, en parlant du retour de la captivite de Babylone,
dit que Dieu rachetera le peuple qu’il a vendu.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc06056.htm#fr_280) <span
id="iii.i-p208.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p209"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p210"></span>diuque  
Inter utrumque volat dubiis Victoria pennis.  
Ovid, Metam. viii. 11, 12.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc06056.htm#fr_281) <span
id="iii.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p212"></span> This is the view of *S.M*. “Although our
enemies now be our judges, this they have not from their own gods, but
from our God, who has delivered us into their hands.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc06056.htm#fr_282) <span
id="iii.i-p220.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p221"></span> It is notorious that *C*. adopted the
opinion of the Western Church in the third and fourth centuries, and did
not admit St. Paul to be the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews: see
the Argument to his Commentary, *(C., Soc. Edit.,)* p. 27. This
discrepancy is noticed, *ibid,* p. 249, and in Mr. Owen’s additional
note, p. 394.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc06056.htm#fr_283) <span
id="iii.i-p221.6"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p222"></span> “Sans l’alleguer au long;” without
adducing it in full. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc06056.htm#fr_284) <span
id="iii.i-p223.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p224"></span> “Son temps et saison determinee;” his time
and determined season. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc06056.htm#fr_285) <span
id="iii.i-p224.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p225"></span> “Usura.” — *Lat*. “Ils ne laissent pas de
se donner bon temps, suyvant le proverbe diabolique, Que le terme vaut
l’argent;” they cease not to indulge themselves, according to the
diabolical proverb, that the delay is worth the money. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc06056.htm#fr_286) <span
id="iii.i-p228.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p229"></span> *C*. evidently quoted from memory, and
amalgamated the two citations.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc06056.htm#fr_287) <span
id="iii.i-p230.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p231"></span> Here also the substance, and not the words
of the passage, are given.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc06056.htm#fr_288) <span
id="iii.i-p235.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p236"></span> *LXX* <span
id="iii.i-p236.1"></span>Παρακληθήσεται *V.* “*miserebitur.*” Addition
in *Fr.,* “Le mot de *repentir* s’accorde mieux au stile de
l’Escriture;” the word *repent* accords best with the style of
Scripture.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc06056.htm#fr_289) <span
id="iii.i-p237.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p238"></span> *Vide* margin, *A. V.*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc06056.htm#fr_290) <span
id="iii.i-p239.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p240"></span> This notion is attributed in Poole to
“many of the Hebrews, and Malvenda.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc06056.htm#fr_291) <span
id="iii.i-p242.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p243"></span> This sentence is omitted in the *Fr.,* but
implied in the translation, “On dira.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc06056.htm#fr_292) <span
id="iii.i-p247.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p248"></span> *Lat.,* certe; *Fr*., car; *V*., cum.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc06056.htm#fr_293) <span
id="iii.i-p249.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p250"></span> I hardly understand the hypothetical form
in which this sentence is put, after what *C*. has already said on this
point on <span id="iii.i-p250.1"></span>[Exodus
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008)<span id="iii.i-p250.1"></span>
(vol. 1, p. 131,) and on <span id="iii.i-p250.3"></span>[Numbers
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030)<span id="iii.i-p250.3"></span>
*(ante,* p. 81.) Perhaps he merely meant that the coincidence of the
adjuration with the uplifting of the hand fixed the sense of the latter
expression in this place.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc06056.htm#fr_294) <span
id="iii.i-p253.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p254"></span> “C’est pour signifier un effet present et
manifest, lequel n’estoit point apparu devant;” it is to signify a
present and manifest effect, which had appeared before. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc06056.htm#fr_295) <span
id="iii.i-p256.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p257"></span> <span id="iii.i-p257.1"></span>[Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)<span id="iii.i-p257.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc06056.htm#fr_296) <span
id="iii.i-p258.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p259"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “pour confermer le
propos avee plus grand vehemence;” to confirm the point in question with
greater vehemence.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc06056.htm#fr_297) <span
id="iii.i-p260.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p261"></span> <span id="iii.i-p261.1"></span>מראש פרעות
אויב *A.V*., “From the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.”
*S.M*.,”From the head of revenges of the enemy.” *V*. and Luther,” Of
the bare head of the enemies.’ *LXX.,* “From the head of the chief
enemies.” The word <span id="iii.i-p261.2"></span>ראש is either the
*head* of a body, or the *beginning of* an event. <span
id="iii.i-p261.3"></span>פרעות comes from a verb signifying to *deal out
retribution,* and has therefore been taken by some to mean *revenge,*
and by others to mean *chiefs* or *rulers,* whose office it is to avenge
wrongs; there are, however, instances in which <span
id="iii.i-p261.4"></span>פרע is acknowledged to be the *hair of the
head.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc06056.htm#fr_298) <span
id="iii.i-p263.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p264"></span> It would scarcely be conceded now that
<span id="iii.i-p264.1"></span>נקם ever means to rejoice. — *W*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 27:12-14](cc06057)
