[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06041)  [Next](cc06043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p1"></span><span id="ii.xli-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
27](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#000)<span id="ii.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p2"></span><span id="ii.xli-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
27:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)<span id="ii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p3"></span>**1.** Then came the daughters of
Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph: and
these are the names of his daughters, Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="ii.xli-p4"></span>**1.** Accesserunt autem filiae Salphaad,
filii Hepher, filii Galaad, filii Machir, filii Manasse de familiis
Manasse, filii Joseph: haec vero sunt nomina filiarum ejus, Malhah,
Noah, Hoglah, et Milchah, et Thirsah.

<span id="ii.xli-p5"></span>**2.** And they stood before Moses, and
before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all the
congregation, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,

<span id="ii.xli-p6"></span>**2.** Hac steterunt coram Mose et coram
Eleazar sacerdote, et coram principibus atque universa congregatione ad
ostium tabernaculi conventionis, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xli-p7"></span>**3.** Our father died in the wilderness,
and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together
against the Lord in the company of Korah; but died in his own sin, and
had no sons.

<span id="ii.xli-p8"></span>**3.** Pater noster mortuus est in deserto,
qui tamen non fuit in congregatione qum congregata fuit adversus
Jehovam, in congregatione Core: quia in peccato mortuus est, et filii
non fuerunt el.

<span id="ii.xli-p9"></span>**4.** Why should the name of our father be
done away from among his family, because he hath no son? Give unto us
therefore a possession among the brethren of our father.

<span id="ii.xli-p10"></span>**4.** Quare tolletur nomen patris nostri
de medio familiae suae, propterea quod non sit ei filius? da nobis
haereditatem inter fratres patris nostri.

<span id="ii.xli-p11"></span>**5.** And Moses brought their cause before
the Lord.

<span id="ii.xli-p12"></span>**5.** Retulit autem Moses causam earum
coram Jehova.

<span id="ii.xli-p13"></span>**6.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xli-p14"></span>**6.** Et respondit Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xli-p15"></span>**7.** The daughters of Zelophehad speak
right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among
their father’s brethren: and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their
father to pass unto them.

<span id="ii.xli-p16"></span>**7.** Rectum filiae Salphaad loquuntur:
dando dabis eis possessionem haereditatis in medio fratrum patris sui,
et transferes haereditatem patris earum ad eas.

<span id="ii.xli-p17"></span>**8.** And thou shalt speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, If a man die and have no son, then ye shall
cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.

<span id="ii.xli-p18"></span>**8.** Ad filios autem Israel loqueris,
dicendo, Quum quis mortuus fuerit, et filius non fuerit illi, tum
transferetis haereditatem ejus ad filiam ipsius.

<span id="ii.xli-p19"></span>**9.** And if he have no daughter, then ye
shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.

<span id="ii.xli-p20"></span>**9.** Quod sinon fuerit ei filia, tunc
dabitis haereditatem ejus fratribus ipsius.

<span id="ii.xli-p21"></span>**10.** And if he have no brethren, then ye
shall give his inheritance unto his father’s brethren.

<span id="ii.xli-p22"></span>**10.** Si vero non fuerint ei fratres,
tunc dabitis haereditatem ejus fratribus patris ipsius.

<span id="ii.xli-p23"></span>**11.** And if his father have no brethren,
then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him
of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the
children of Israel a statute of judgment; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="ii.xli-p24"></span>**11.** Quod si non fuerint fratres patri
ipsius, tunc dabitis haereditatem ejus propinquiori illi de familia
ipsius, haereditatemque accipiet illam: erit autem istud filiis Israel
in statutum judicii, quemadmodum praecepit Jehova Mosi.

<span id="ii.xli-p25"></span> 

<span id="ii.xli-p26"></span><span id="ii.xli-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p27"></span>**1.** *Then came the daughters of
Zelophehad.* A narrative is here introduced respecting the daughters of
Zelophehad, of the family of Machir, who demanded to be admitted to a
share of its inheritance; and the decision of this question might have
been difficult, unless all doubt had been removed by the sentence of God
Himself. For, since in the law no name is given to women, it would seem
that no account of them was to be taken in the division of the land.
And, in fact, God laid down this as the general rule; but a special
exception is here made, *i.e.,* that whenever a family shall be
destitute of male heirs, females should succeed, for the preservation of
the name. I am aware that this is a point which is open to dispute,
since there are obvious arguments both for and against it, but let the
decree that God pronounced suffice for us.

<span id="ii.xli-p28"></span>Although (the daughters of Zelophehad)
plead before Moses for their own private advantage, still the discussion
arose from a good principle; inasmuch as they would not have been so
anxious about the succession, if God’s promise had not been just as much
a matter of certainty to them as if they were at this moment demanding
to be put in possession of it. They had not yet entered the land, nor
were their enemies conquered; yet, relying on the testimony of Moses,
they prosecute their suit as if the tranquil possession of their rights
were to be accorded them that very day. And this must have had the
effect of confirming the expectations of the whole people, when Moses
consulted God as respecting a matter of importance, and pronounced by
revelation that which was just and right; for the discussion, being
openly moved before them all, must have given them encouragement, at
least to imitate these women.

<span id="ii.xli-p29"></span><span id="ii.xli-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p30"></span>**3.** *Our father died in the wilderness.*
The plea they allege is no contemptible one, *i.e.,* that their father
died after God had called His people to the immediate possession of the
promised land; for, if the question had been carried back to an earlier
period, it might have originated many quarrels. This restriction with
respect to time, therefore, aided their cause. In the second place, they
plead that their father had committed no crime whereby he might have
been excepted from the general allotment of the land; for in the
conspiracy of Dathan and Abiram, they include by *synecdoche,* in my
opinion, the other sins, whose punishment affected the posterity of the
criminals. His private sin is, therefore, contrasted with public
ignominy; for so I interpret what they say of his having “died in his
own sin.” And surely it is mere childish nonsense which the Jews  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) affirm of his having been the man who
gathered sticks on the Sabbath-day, or one of the number of those who
were slain by the bite of the serpents; and it is unnatural, too, to
refer it to the curse under which the whole human race is laid. They
distinguish, then, his private sin from any public crime, which would
have caused him to deserve to be disinherited, lest the condition of
their father should be worse than that of any other person. At the same
time, they hold fast to the principle which is dictated to us by the
common feelings of religion, that death, as being the curse of God, is
the wages of sin.

<span id="ii.xli-p32"></span><span id="ii.xli-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p33"></span>**5.** *And Moses brought their cause
before the Lord.* It is probable either that there was a difference of
opinion, or that the minds of the judges were in doubt, as respecting an
obscure and uncertain point. At any rate, it was expedient that the law
should be laid down by God, lest any future controversy should arise;
for, if a sentence had been pronounced by human judgment on the matter
before them, the obstinacy of many would not perhaps have been
sufficiently set at rest. It is worth while to remark the pious modesty
of Moses, who was not ashamed to confess his ignorance, until he had
been instructed by the mouth of God. Although he had promulgated the law
forty years before, still he was always ready to learn. Besides, there
is no doubt but that God impelled him to inquire of Himself, whenever
any serious matters were in question, until his doctrine was absolutely
perfect. And, although God does not now deliver from heaven what is to
be done, nevertheless rulers are reminded that they ought to have
recourse to God in points of perplexity, in order that He may instruct
them by the Spirit of wisdom; and assuredly they will not be without
this, if they ask Him; since he is no less ready to listen to them, than
He here shewed Himself to be to Moses.

<span id="ii.xli-p34"></span><span id="ii.xli-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p35"></span>**8.** *And thou shalt speak to the
children of Israel.* This question was the occasion of the delivery of a
law, which was to be a perpetual and general rule as to the right of
inheritance. But, although God prefers the daughters to all other
relatives, when there is no male issue, still, with this single
exception of the first degree, He admits none but males to the
succession, and thus preserves the usual order. And surely it would be
very unjust to exclude a man’s (natural) heirs on account of their sex;
but when it became necessary to pass from his own children to other
kindred, the prerogative of the male line began to be established. I
speak of the land of Canaan, in which not only the name of Abraham but
also that of the twelve tribes was to be preserved, in order that the
memory (of God’s blessing)  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199)
might be more distinct and unclouded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc06042.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ii.xli-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p31"></span> *S.M.* refers to this Rabbinical gloss. R.
Sal. Jarchi tells us: “R. Akiba says, that he collected the wood; but R.
Simeon says that he was one of those who were contumacious.” — Edit.
Breihthaupt, *in loco,* p. 1243, and notes.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc06042.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ii.xli-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p36"></span> Added from *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 36:1-13](cc06043)
