[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06057)  [Next](cc06059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
33](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span><span id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
33:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>**1.** And this is the blessing wherewith
Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>**1.** Haec autem benedictio qua benedixit
Moses vir Dei filiis Israel in morte sua.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>**2.** And. he said, The Lord came from
Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount
Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand
went a fiery law for them.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>**2.** Et dixit, Jehova e Sinai prodiit, et
ortus est e Seir ipsis, illuxit e monte Pharam, et venit cum decem
millibus sanctitatis: a dextra ejus ignea lex illis:

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>**3.** Yea, he loved the people; all his
saints are in thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet; every one shall
receive of thy words.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>**3.** Utique diligit populos, onmes sancti
in manibus tuis, et ipsi adhaeserunt pedibus tuis, ut sumerent ex
eloquiis tuis.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span>**4.** Moses commanded us a law, even the
inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>**4.** Legem praecepit nobis Moses in
haereditatem coatus Israel.

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>**5.** And he was king in Jeshurun, when
the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>**5.** Et fuit in Recto rex, in
colligendis capitibus populi, simulque tribubus Israel.

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span>**6.** Let Reuben live, and not die; and
let not his men be few.

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>**6.** Vivat Ruben, et non moriatur, et
(vel, quamvis) sit parvus numero.

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>**7.** And this is the blessing of Judah:
and he said, Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his
people: let his hands be sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him
from his enemies.

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span>**7.** Hoc etiam Judae, et dixit, Audi
Jehova vocem Jehuda, et ad populum suum duc eum, manus ejus sufficiat
el, dum auxilio fueris contra hostes ejus.

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>**8.** And of Levi he said, Let thy
Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at
Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span>**8.** Ad Levi vero dixit: Perfectiones
tuae et splendores tui fuerunt viro misericordi tuo, quem tentasti in
Masa: et contendere fecisti eum ad aquas Meriba.

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>**9.** Who said unto his father, and to
his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word,
and kept; thy covenant.

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span>**9.** Qui dixit patri suo et matri suae,
Non vidi eum: et fratres suos non agnovit, et filios suos non cognovit:
nam custodierunt eloquium tuum, et pactum tuum servarunt.

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span>**10.** They shall teach Jacob thy
judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and
whole burnt-sacrifice upon thine altar.

<span id="iii.iii-p22"></span>**10.** Docebunt judicia tua ipsum Jacob,
et legem tuam Israelem: ponent suffitum in nares tuas: et holocaustum
super altare tuum.

<span id="iii.iii-p23"></span>**11.** Bless, Lord, his substance, and
accept the work of his hands: smite through the loins of them that rise
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again.

<span id="iii.iii-p24"></span>**11.** Benedic Jehova substantiae ejus,
et in opere manuum ejus complaceas tibi: transfige lumbos inimicorum
ejus, et odio habentium eum: ne resurgant.

<span id="iii.iii-p25"></span>**12.** And of Benjamin he said, The
beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; and the Lord shall
cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.

<span id="iii.iii-p26"></span>**12.** Ad Benjamin dixit, Dilectus
Jehovae habitabit confidenter juxta illum, tegens illurn tota die, et
inter humeros ejus habitabit.

<span id="iii.iii-p27"></span>**13.** And of Joseph he said, Blessed of
the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew,
and for the deep that coucheth beneath,

<span id="iii.iii-p28"></span>**13.** Ad Joseph vero dixit, Benedicta a
Jehova terra ejus ab excellentia coeli, ob rorem, et ob voraginem
cubantern deorsmn.

<span id="iii.iii-p29"></span>**14.** And for the precious fruits
brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the
moon.

<span id="iii.iii-p30"></span>**14.** Et ob praestantiam proventuum
solis, et ob praestantiam fructuum lunae:

<span id="iii.iii-p31"></span>**15.** And for the chief things of the
ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,

<span id="iii.iii-p32"></span>**15.** Et ob praestantiam cacuminis
montium antiquorum, et ob praestantiam collium perpetuorum.

<span id="iii.iii-p33"></span>**16.** And for the precious things of the
earth, and fullness thereof, and for the good-will of him that dwelt in
the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the
top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren.

<span id="iii.iii-p34"></span>**16.** Et ob prastantiam terrae, et ob
plenitudinem ejus: et beneplacitum habitatoris rubi veniat super caput
Joseph, et super verticem separati a fratribus suis.

<span id="iii.iii-p35"></span>**17.** His glory is like the firstling of
his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he
shall push the people together to the ends of the earth; and they are,
the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.

<span id="iii.iii-p36"></span>**17.** Primogeniti boris ejus decor erit
ei, et cornua unicornis cornua ejus: ipsis populos cornupetes simul
usque ad fines terrae. Atque haec sunt decem millia Ephraim, et ista
millia Manasse.

<span id="iii.iii-p37"></span>**18.** And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice,
Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents.

<span id="iii.iii-p38"></span>**18.** Et ipsi Zebulon dixit, Laetare
Zebulon quum egredieris, et Issachar in tabernaeulis tuis.

<span id="iii.iii-p39"></span>**19.** They shall call the people unto
the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for
they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in
the sand.

<span id="iii.iii-p40"></span>**19.** Populos ad montem vocabunt: et
illic sacrificabunt sacrificia justitiae, quoniam affluentiam maris
sugent, et tecti thesauri arenae.

<span id="iii.iii-p41"></span>**20.** And of Gad he said, Blessed be he
that enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the
crown of the head.

<span id="iii.iii-p42"></span>**20.** Et ad Gad dixit, Benedictus qui
dilatare fecit Gad: sicut leo habitabit, et rapiet brachium atque
verticem.

<span id="iii.iii-p43"></span>**21.** And he provided the first part for
himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and
he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the
Lord, and his judgments with Israel.

<span id="iii.iii-p44"></span>**21.** Et vidit principium sibi, quod
illic portio legislatoris tecta, veniet autem cum principibus populi:
justitiam Jehovae faciet, et judicia ejus cum Israele.

<span id="iii.iii-p45"></span>**22.** And of Dan he said, Dan is a
lion’s whelp: he shall leap from Bashan.

<span id="iii.iii-p46"></span>**22.** Et ad Dan dixit, Dan ut catulus
leonis saltabit e Basan.

<span id="iii.iii-p47"></span>**23.** And of Naphtali he said, O
Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord;
possess thou the west and the south.

<span id="iii.iii-p48"></span>**23.** Et Nephthali dixit, O Nephthali
satur beneplacito, et plene benedictione Jehovae, occidentem et meridiem
posside.

<span id="iii.iii-p49"></span>**24.** And of Asher he said, Let Asher be
blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let
him dip his foot in oil.

<span id="iii.iii-p50"></span>**24.** Et Aser dixit, Benedictus prae
filiis Aser, erit beneplacens fratribus suis, et tingens in oleo pedem
suum.

<span id="iii.iii-p51"></span>**25.** Thy shoes shall be iron and brass;
and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.

<span id="iii.iii-p52"></span>**25.** Ferrnm et, aes, calceamenta tua
(vel, ferae tuae): et sicut dies tui fortitudo tua.

<span id="iii.iii-p53"></span>**26.** There is none like unto the God of
Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency
on the sky.

<span id="iii.iii-p54"></span>**26.** Non est similis Deo recti, qui
equitat super coelos in auxilium tuum, et in magnificentia sua super
nubes.

<span id="iii.iii-p55"></span>**27.** The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy
from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.

<span id="iii.iii-p56"></span>**27.** Habitaculum est Deus aeternus: et
subter brachia sempiterna, ejecit a facie tua inimicum, et dixit,
Disperde.

<span id="iii.iii-p57"></span>**28.** Israel then shall dwell in safety
alone: the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also
his heavens shall drop down dew.

<span id="iii.iii-p58"></span>**28.** Et habitabit Israel confidenter
solus (vel, suus) oculus Jacob: in terra frumenti et vini, etiam coeli
ejus stillabunt rorem.

<span id="iii.iii-p59"></span>**29.** Happy art thou, O Israel: who is
like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and
who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found
liars unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.

<span id="iii.iii-p60"></span>**29.** Beatus es o Israel, quis similis
tibi popule qui servaris in Jehova scuto auxilii tui, et gladio
excellentiae tuae? humiliabuntur inimici tui, et tu super excelsa eorum
calcabis.

<span id="iii.iii-p61"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p62"></span><span id="iii.iii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p63"></span>**1.** *And this is the blessing.* The
bitterness of the Song was seasoned,  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) as it were, by this palliative,
wherein Moses left a testimony with respect to God’s future and
perpetual grace, as if depositing an inestimable treasure in the hands
of the people. For, as God, after the deliverance of His people, and the
giving of the Law, renewed the covenant which Jacob had testified of and
proclaimed, so Moses was, as it were, their second father, to ratify
anew its blessings, lest the memory of them should ever be lost.

<span id="iii.iii-p65"></span>In order to beget confidence in his
benedictions, he commences by magnifying his vocation before he proceeds
to them; for, although the word *benediction* is equivalent to a prayer
for success, yet must it be borne in mind that Moses does not here pray
in the ordinary manner, like a private person, in such a way as fathers
are wont to offer supplications for their children; but that, in the
spirit of prophecy, he sets forth the blessings which were to be
expected from God. This, then, is the reason why he extols the dignity
and glory of his office as ruler in such lofty terms, viz., that the
twelve tribes of Israel may be thoroughly assured that God is the author
of these blessings. For the same reason he calls himself “the man of
God:” that the people may receive what he is about to say as if it.
proceeded from God, whose undoubted minister he is. Nor is the
circumstance of time without its weight — “before his death,” or, “in
his death,” which adds to the prophecy the force of a testament.

<span id="iii.iii-p66"></span><span id="iii.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p67"></span>**2** *And he said, The Lord came from,
Sinai.*  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) In these words he
reminds them that he is setting before them, a confirmation of the
covenant, which God had made with them in this Law*,* and that it is
nothing different from it; for this connection was of exceeding efficacy
in establishing the certainty of the blessings, provided only the Law
was duly honored; for nothing was better adapted to confirm the grace of
God than the majesty which was displayed in the promulgation of the Law.
Some, as I conceive improperly, translate it, — “God comes to Sinai,”
whereas Moses rather means that he came from thence, when His brightness
was made manifest. By way of ornament, the same thing is repeated with
respect to Seir and Paran; and, since these three words are
synonymous*,* therefore to *go forth,* to *rise up,* and to *come,* also
represent the same thing, viz., that manifestation of the divine glory
which should have ravished into admiration the minds of all; as though
he had said that his blessings were to be received with the same
reverence, as that which God had procured for His Law, when His face was
conspicuously displayed on Mount Sinai. The Prophet Habakkuk (<span
id="iii.iii-p68.1"></span>[Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii-p68.1"></span>)
has imitated this figure, though with a different object, viz., that,
the people might confidently rely upon his power, which had formerly
been manifested to the fathers in visible brightness.

<span id="iii.iii-p69"></span>By “ten thousands of sanctity,”  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) I do not understand, as many do, the
faithful, but the angels, by whom God was accompanied as by a royal
retinue; for God also commanded the ark to be placed between the
Cherubim, in order to show that the heavenly hosts were around Him. So
in Isaiah, (<span id="iii.iii-p70.2"></span>[Isa
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii-p70.2"></span>,)
the Seraphim surround His throne; and Daniel says that he saw “ten
thousand times ten thousand,” (<span id="iii.iii-p70.3"></span>[Da
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii-p70.3"></span>;)
thus designating an infinite multitude, as does Moses also by “ten
thousand.” It is probable that both Paul and Stephen derived from this
passage their statement that the Law was “ordained by Angels in the hand
of a mediator,” (<span id="iii.iii-p70.4"></span>[Ga
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="iii.iii-p70.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p70.5"></span>[Ac
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053)<span id="iii.iii-p70.5"></span>;)
for its authority was greatly confirmed by its having so many witnesses
*(obsignatores.)*

<span id="iii.iii-p71"></span>The Law is placed *at His right hand,* not
only as a scepter or mark of dignity, but as His power or rule of
government; for He did not merely show Himself as a king, but also made
known how He would preside over them.  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) The Law is called *fiery,* in order to
inspire terror and to enforce humility upon them all; although I am not
adverse to the opinion that Moses alludes in this epithet to the outward
signs of fire and flame, of which he spoke in <span
id="iii.iii-p72.1"></span>[Exodus
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii-p72.1"></span>.
But, since the word <span id="iii.iii-p72.2"></span>דת, *dath,* means
any statute or edict, some restrict it to the prohibition that none
should more closely approach the mountain. In my own mind, however,
there is no doubt but that it designates all the doctrine whereby God’s
dominion is maintained.

<span id="iii.iii-p73"></span><span id="iii.iii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p74"></span>**3.** *Yea, he loved the people.*  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) If it be preferred to apply this to
the Gentiles, the sentence must be thus resolved, “Although He loves all
human beings, still His saints are honored with His peculiar favor, in
that He watches over their safety;” but it is more correct to expound it
as referring only to the children of Abraham, whom He calls “peoples,”
because, on account of the multitude into which they had grown, in their
several tribes, they might be reckoned as so many nations. And since the
particle <span id="iii.iii-p75.1"></span>אף, *aph,*  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) signifies prolongation of time, like
*adhuc* in Latin, the following sense will be very satisfactory, that,
Although the descendants of Abraham were divided into various races, and
might therefore seem to be no longer a single family, nevertheless God
still continued to regard them all with affection, and their numbers and
divisions did not prevent Him from accounting them to be a single body.
The sum is, that God’s favor towards them was not extinguished, either
by the progress of time, or the increase of the people; but that it was
constantly extended to the race of Abraham, however far or widely it
might be spread.

<span id="iii.iii-p77"></span>It must, however, be observed, that in
proof of His love, it is presently added, that they were *in the hand*
of God. Hence we infer that, from the time that God has embraced us with
His favor, He is the sure guardian of our safety; whence also arises the
firm assurance of eternal life. The change of person, from the third to
the second, throws no obscurity on the meaning. Since many hypocrites
were mixed up with the faithful — for the Church of God has always been
like a threshing-floor  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) — Moses
restricts this special grace of God to those who willingly submit
themselves to Him, and with pious teachableness embrace this
instruction, by which sign he distinguishes between the true children of
God, and those spurious or degenerate ones, who falsely assume the name.
Where my translation is, “They cleaved to thy feet,” others render the
words, “They were struck at thy feet,” but in my judgment constrainedly.
Others extract from it a useful piece of instruction, that “they were
subdued by God’s chastisements, so as to render Him obedience;” but the
metaphor is rather taken from disciples, who, according to the common
usage of the Hebrew language, are said to sit at their master’s feet, in
order to attend more diligently. And this is confirmed by the context,
for the faithful are said to have attached themselves to God’s feet,
that they might *receive of this words,* i.e., profit by His
instruction.

<span id="iii.iii-p79"></span><span id="iii.iii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p80"></span>**4** *Moses commanded us a law.* What he
had declared respecting the glory of God, and the excellency of the Law,
he now applies to his own person, since it was his purpose, as I have
said, to establish the authority of his own ministry. In order,
therefore, to prove the certainty of his mission, he boasts that he was
appointed by God to be the teacher of the people, and that not for a
brief period, but throughout all ages; for by the word “inheritance,”
the perpetuity of the Law is signified. He then claims for himself the
royal supremacy, not because he had ruled after the manner of kings, but
that the dignity of this high office might add weight to his words. He
says that “the heads of the people and the tribes were gathered
together,” with reference to their unhappy disorganization, which was
tending to their destruction, as much as to say that, under his
guidance, rind by his exertions, the state of the people was
reestablished.

<span id="iii.iii-p81"></span>He begins with Reuben, the first-born, and
so far removes or mitigates the ignominy of that condemnation wherewith
he had been branded by his father Jacob, as only to stop short of
restoring him to his place of honor. For the holy Patriarch had
pronounced a severe sentence, namely, that Reuben should be “as unstable
as water, and should not excel.” (<span id="iii.iii-p81.1"></span>[Ge
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p81.1"></span>.)
Lest, therefore, the whole of his posterity should be discouraged, or
should be rejected by the other tribes, he abates the severity of his
disinheritance, as if to pardon the condemned. In short, he assigns to
the family of Reuben a place among the sons of Jacob, lest despair
should drive them to headlong ruin. The second clause admits of two
contrary meanings. Literally it is, “Let him be small in number;” and,
in fact, this tribe was not of the more numerous ones. Since, however,
it occupied a middle place, and surpassed several of the others, some
repeat the negative, “Let him not die, nor let him be few in number.”
 <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) But it appears more probable
that an abatement is made from the rank to which his primogeniture
entitled the family of Reuben, and thus that some remainder of dishonor
was introduced into the promise of grace. And, in fact, not only the
tribe of Judah, but those of Simeon, Issachar, Zebulun, Dan, and
Naphthali, surpassed it in size. Thus the qualification will be by no
means inappropriate, that, although Reuben was to be reckoned among the
people of God, still he should not altogether recover his dignity.

<span id="iii.iii-p83"></span><span id="iii.iii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p84"></span>**7.** *And this is the blessing of
Judah.*  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) Jerome has faithfully
given the sense, “This is the blessing,” although it is not actually
expressed.

<span id="iii.iii-p86"></span>It might at first sight appear
inconsistent that some abatement should be made from the splendid and
abundant blessings which had been promised to the tribe of Judah. This,
however, is by no means the case; for the inviolable decree respecting
the supremacy of Judah is not thus altered; but Moses merely reminds
them how difficult of accomplishment it would be. Jacob had declared, as
if speaking of a peaceful dominion, that his “brethren should praise”
him, that his “father’s children should bow down before” him; that “the
scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his
feet,” (<span id="iii.iii-p86.1"></span>[Gen.
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii-p86.1"></span>;)
but, inasmuch as this dignity lay dormant for a long time, and it was
necessary that it should contend with many tedious obstacles before it
finally manifested itself, Moses consequently speaks in more limited
terms. Still, he seems to have referred not merely to the earlier
period, but to the various calamities whereby the kingdom of David was
not only apparently diminished, but destroyed; and especially to the
melancholy interruption of it which arose from the Babylonish captivity.
The sum is, that the prosperity of which Jacob prophesied was not to be
so conspicuous in the tribe of Judah, as that all things were to be
expected to be joyous and successful, but rather that those, to whom the
supreme power as well as wealth was promised, would be exposed to many
evils, so that they should be reduced to extremities, and be greatly in
want of the help of God. He therefore betakes himself to prayer, and by
his example admonishes not that tribe only, but the others also, to
implore the faithfulness of God in their overwhelming difficulties. And
this lesson applies to ourselves also, in order that we may be the more
aroused to prayer and supplication, the more Satan is urgent for the
destruction of Christ’s kingdom. At the same time, what I have stated
must be observed, namely, that the promise remains firm, since it is not
in vain that Moses places all the tribes under the dominion of Judah,
when he petitions that he may be *brought unto his people,* nor promises
in vain that God will be at hand to help him, so that he may prevail
against his enemies.

<span id="iii.iii-p87"></span><span id="iii.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p88"></span>**8** *And of Levi he said.* This
qualification, or modification of the harsher sentence of Jacob was
introduced not only for the sake of the tribe of Levi, but rather of the
whole people. Jacob had said,

<span id="iii.iii-p89"></span>“Simeon and Levi are brethren: instruments
of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul, come not thou into their
secret; unto their assembly, my tongue,  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) be not thou united,”  
(<span id="iii.iii-p90.4"></span>[Gen.
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii-p90.4"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p91"></span>Assuredly their descendants might have
been discouraged, or at least might have been regarded contemptuously,
when a patriarch, and the founder of their race, had thus abominated
them. God, however, afterwards consecrated this tribe to Himself, so
that their sanctity might be communicated to the other tribes; which
could not be the case unless their previous opprobrium were removed.

<span id="iii.iii-p92"></span>But if any contentious person had objected
to this blessing, as if Moses were too much disposed to favor his own
tribe, such a suspicion could not justly be harbored against him; first,
because he, who now makes such honorable mention of the tribe of Levi,
was also the proclaimer of their ignominy; and on many other occasions
had not spared his own family, but, whenever it was requisite, had
freely inveighed against their vices; and, secondly, he now commends
nothing in the Levites except the new dignity, which it had pleased God
to confer upon them. On this point, indeed, he ought to have been least
of all suspected, inasmuch as he had degraded his own sons, and had
exalted the posterity of Aaron alone to the highest place of honor. Now,
therefore, he has no other object but that the dignity of the priesthood
should not be depreciated on account of the sins of men, and thus their
religion itself be despised. For we all know how disposed people are to
lay charges against the persons of men which may derogate from the
sacredness of their office. Assuredly, if Levi had not been purged from
that disgrace which he had incurred, the priesthood would have been
altogether deprived of reverence; and thus God’s worship would have been
very lightly esteemed. Now, however, when God sanctifies this family to
himself, he, as it were, restores it entirely; and hence it is apparent
that its punishment was only temporary, since Moses had no intention of
retracting what the Spirit had dictated to holy Jacob. Nor does he,
indeed, advance anything of himself; but the same Spirit removes the
ignominy, which might have disgraced the tribe of Levi, inasmuch as it
had only been imposed upon it for a time. We have already seen elsewhere
that what Jacob prophesied respecting the dispersion of this family,
resulted in its honor; since God posted the Levites in all directions
like sentinels, that through their means purity of doctrine might be
fostered amongst the whole people. They were, therefore, scattered in
such a manner as that their punishment might be productive of benefit.
We must, therefore, conclude, that Moses spoke not to gratify his
brethren, but made honorable mention of the priesthood, lest those, whom
God had chosen as this ministers, should be treated with contempt. And,
doubtless, the subsequent grace of their calling should have blotted out
the recollection of their previous infamy. Thus Christ, when He would
restore Peter to the office of an apostle, cancels his triple denial, by
thrice setting him over His sheep. (<span id="iii.iii-p92.1"></span>[Joh
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii-p92.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p93"></span>The address, which follows, must be
applied to God; for some translate it improperly, “The Urim and Thummim
shall be with thee,” as if Moses were addressing the tribe of Levi. In
order, therefore, to avoid ambiguity, it will be well to translate it
*of* Levi, rather than *to* Levi; and <span id="iii.iii-p93.1"></span>ל,
*lamed,* is often used in this sense. Thus, with the purpose of
increasing the authenticity of the benediction, Moses addresses God
Himself, as if citing Him as a witness, or referring his injunctions to
God’s tribunal.

<span id="iii.iii-p94"></span>Although in Hebrew the words Urim and
Thummim  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) are here used, which
were principal parts of the sacred Ephod, I have not hesitated to
translate them as common nouns: for it is unquestionable that by these
symbols were denoted, *the knowledge of the Law* which is the only light
of our souls, and *integrity of life.* The sum, however, is that the
honor of the priesthood was deposited with Aaron, whom he calls *the man
of God’s clemency,* or, *the meek.* Jerome, as usual, renders it the
*holy,* but improperly; for  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314)
<span id="iii.iii-p97.1"></span>חסיד, *chasid,* signifies *mild,* or
*humane;* and this epithet is constantly applied to the children of God,
in order that we may learn to imitate that Father of mercy, who “maketh
his sun to rise upon the evil and the good.”

<span id="iii.iii-p98"></span>What follows, viz., that God tried him at
Massah, I conceive to be added by way of exception; for I have no doubt
but that Moses magnifies God’s mercy by this allusion, in that He had
dignified Aaron with so great an honor, notwithstanding his having been
overcome by impatience, and having fallen. Still it must be remarked
that, in reference to the people, the zeal of Aaron is recorded as
praiseworthy; as much as to say, that the sin of Aaron flowed from the
fountain of virtue, since it was from holy indignation that he fell into
the passion of impatience, when he could not endure that the people
should rebel against God. Unless perhaps it be preferred to understand
these words by way of apostrophe to the people, “Thou didst try, thou
didst provoke him to contention, or didst quarrel with him.” But the
context will run better, if we understand that God then had a
controversy with Aaron; inasmuch as, although overcome by the trial, he
still gave no despicable proof of his piety, and from that time forward
did not cease to execute his office with sedulity.

<span id="iii.iii-p99"></span><span id="iii.iii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p100"></span>**9.** *Who said unto his father and his
mother.* In the person of Aaron an example is set before all the Levites
for their imitation. And, first, he is said to have renounced his own
flesh and blood, in order that he might be more disencumbered for
obeying God; and in fact it is necessary that all the pastors of the
Church should put off their earthly affections, which would otherwise
often keep them back from devoting themselves entirely to God. Aaron,
then, is said to have bid farewell to all his family, that he might be
at liberty to lay himself out for God. Christ now requires the same
thing of His disciples, that sons should forget their fathers, and
fathers their sons, and husbands their wives, lest anything should
retard their course, and prevent them from earnestly advancing through
life and death to the end to which they are called. (<span
id="iii.iii-p100.1"></span>[Mt
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span
id="iii.iii-p100.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p101"></span>Moses afterwards, by using the plural
number, embraces the whole Levitical order; and hence we may infer that
what had preceded is not to be confined in its application to a single
individual. But when he says that they “guarded *(custodisse)* the word
of God, and kept his covenant,” he does not refer to mere ordinary
obedience, but to the peculiar care of preserving that which was
intrusted to their charge. It is true that in like manner all believers
are said to keep the Law, when they zealously devote themselves to live
a holy life; but special allusion is here made to the office of
teaching. The Levites, therefore, are called guardians of the Law, and
keepers of it, as being <span id="iii.iii-p101.1"></span>φύλακες*,*
since with them was deposited the treasure of Divine instruction, as is
more clearly set forth in the next verse, “They shall teach Jacob, etc.”
If any should prefer that this observing of the Law should be understood
of their life and habits, as though it were said, that the Levites
should surpass others in the examples they gave, I do not contend the
point, though it seems to me that the second clause is explanatory, and
that it more familiarly sets forth what was spoken with some little
obscurity, pointing out the way in which the Law is to be observed,
viz., by their being the teachers and masters of the people. We must,
however, remark the method they are to adopt in teaching; for they are
not permitted to introduce their own inventions, or to frame a rule of
life out of their own heads; but they are commanded to seek in the Law
itself what they are to teach, and to interpret it honestly and
faithfully. And this condition was inserted in order that whosoever
should desire to be successors in the honor should be mindful of their
vocation, and faithfully devote themselves to the office of teaching.
Thus, when in a corrupt state of the Church, priests, who had nothing of
this sort about them, paraded their mere empty title; their silly vaunt
is refuted by Malachi:

<span id="iii.iii-p102"></span>“My covenant (he says) was with Levi of
life and peace;.... *for* the law of truth was in his mouth, and the
priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his
mouth, but ye have corrupted *my* covenant,” (<span
id="iii.iii-p102.1"></span>[Mal. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii-p102.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p103"></span>Let us learn, then, from this passage,
that whosoever claims for himself the primacy in the Church must be
repudiated, unless he manifests himself to be a faithful teacher.

<span id="iii.iii-p104"></span>The third part of the priest’s office
follows, viz., that he should apply himself to the performance of the
religious services; for God had disencumbered them from the labors of
agriculture and other earthly business, that they might be more entirely
at liberty for the duties of teaching and sacrifice; and, although this
latter might appear to be but an humble occupation, still, if we regard
it aright, it was no common honor that they should be mediators and
intercessors for the reconciliation of the people to God; for even the
very least of the Levites had something to do with making atonement.

<span id="iii.iii-p105"></span>Under the words “incense and whole
burnt-sacrifice,” the entire legal service is comprehended; and the
incense is said to be put before the nose of God;  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) because the odor of this offering was
grateful, and, as it were, sweet-smelling to Him, as we have elsewhere
seen.

<span id="iii.iii-p107"></span><span id="iii.iii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p108"></span>**11.** *Bless, Lord, his substance.*
This supplication appears to have been intended tacitly to provide
against the poverty which awaited the Levites, if God had not supplied
them with food from some other source besides the produce of the soil;
for they were deprived of a share in the general inheritance, and God
alone was their property. Lest, therefore, their condition should be
painful to them, Moses offers them consolation, and bids them expect
from God abundance for their support, whilst he promises that His
blessing shall stand them in stead of the most redundant produce; as it
is said in <span id="iii.iii-p108.1"></span>[Ps
132:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii-p108.1"></span>, “I will abundantly bless her provision, and
satisfy her *priests*  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) with
bread.”

<span id="iii.iii-p110"></span>What follows, that “the work of his hands
may be acceptable to God,” may be either explained generally of the
labor which is bestowed for the purpose of obtaining food, or of the
service and ministry of the tabernacle; but, inasmuch as God engaged the
Levites in sacred occupations, it seems indirectly to promise them that
such exercises would be no less profitable to them than as if they were
altogether occupied in the pursuit of gain. It was allowable for the
rest to employ their industry for the advancement of their domestic
interests, whilst the Levites, in order properly to perform their
duties, were obliged to neglect their private affairs. Lest, then, they
should be afraid of destitution, Moses reminds them that they might
expect from God an earthly reward also for their spiritual labors.

<span id="iii.iii-p111"></span>The third point appears to be purposely
introduced, that “God would smite through or transfix their enemies,”
because pious teachers are very much exposed to envy, and ill-will, and
persecution; for the complaint which is made by Jeremiah, (<span
id="iii.iii-p111.1"></span>[Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii-p111.1"></span>,) that he was “a man of strife,” is
applicable to all the prophets and ministers of God; since the world can
hardly bear its affections to be slain by the spiritual sword of God’s
word, and hence many contentions arise. Besides, Satan, in order to
render their: doctrine contemptible, does not cease to harass them by
whatever means he can, and to arm his bands to war against them; so that
the pastors of the Church have need of God’s special aid. This point,
then, is peculiarly worthy of observation that, although many
adversaries always threaten God’s servants, besiege them, provoke them
to conflict, in a word, are always plotting their destruction, still
God’s succor will be at hand, whereby they may be rendered invincible;
as it was said to Jeremiah,

<span id="iii.iii-p112"></span>“They shall fight against thee,  
but they shall not prevail against thee.” (<span
id="iii.iii-p112.2"></span>[Jer
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii-p112.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p113"></span>The words I have translated “lest they
rise again,” others render “lest they rise against them;” and, although
I do not reject this, still it seems to be less appropriate; for Moses
did not wish to exempt the Levites from the annoyances of combat, but
only to promise them victory, inasmuch as God would overwhelm and
destroy their enemies.  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317)

<span id="iii.iii-p115"></span><span id="iii.iii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p116"></span>**12.** *And of Benjamin he said.* It is
probable that Moses alludes to the inheritance which fell to the lot of
the children of Benjamin; for the part of Jerusalem in which the temple
stood was contained in it. Since, therefore, God assigned them a
dwelling-place, in which He in a manner protected them, and cherished
them beneath His wings, they are not without reason called His
*beloved,* for this was no ordinary pledge of His love To “dwell upon
God,”  <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) and “between his
shoulders,” is equivalent to reposing upon Him; a similitude taken from
fathers who carry their children whilst yet they are small and tender.
Others extract a different meaning, viz., that God would dwell upon the
shoulders of Benjamin; but this is very unnatural.  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)

<span id="iii.iii-p119"></span><span id="iii.iii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p120"></span>**13.** *And of Joseph he said.* Moses
repeats some portions of the blessing of Jacob; nor with respect to any
other tribe does he approach so closely to the words of the Patriarch.
And, although the family of Joseph was already divided into two tribes
or nations, still he begins by the head itself, and at the conclusion
declares that what had been given to their fathers pertains to Ephraim
and Manasseh. First, he celebrates the exceeding fertility of the land,
in which the descendants of Joseph were to dwell; and then ratifies his
testimony by the authority of God. He promises them, then, that their
land shall be fertile, from the best treasures of heaven; for <span
id="iii.iii-p120.1"></span>מגד, *meged,* signifies whatever is best and
most precious. I do not, therefore, approve of their translation, who
render it *fruits,* although I know not whether Moses speaks of the
excellency of the climate, or commends the beneficence of God; the
latter, however, accords best with the context, in which he makes
mention of the external means of fertility, viz., the dew, and the deep,
by which word I understand the depth of the soil itself. In the next
verse I admit that by the word <span id="iii.iii-p120.2"></span>מגד,
*meged,* the choicest fruits are indicated, but without any change of
its meaning. Others render it *delicacies:* others *sweet fruits,* on
account of the peculiar excellency of the fruits. But I do not see why
some translate the word <span id="iii.iii-p120.3"></span>גרש, ge*resh,*
“influence.” It literally means *thrusting out;* and is used
metaphorically for the fruit, which arises and breaks forth from the
earth. But it is not very clear to me what fruits he speaks of
respectively as “of the sun, and the moon;” for I cannot tell whether
there are any grounds for assigning, as some do, to the sun the produce
which springs from seed and the vintage; and to the moon, cucumbers and
gourds; nor do I attempt to decide whether their idea is more correct
who suppose the latter to be flowers or fruits which appear every month.

<span id="iii.iii-p121"></span><span id="iii.iii-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p122"></span>**15.** *And for the chief things of the
ancient mountains.* In these words he shows that no part of the land
would be barren. We know that the tops of mountains are generally and
uncultivated, or at any rate bear nothing but trees that have no fruit.
But Moses affirms that even there also there shall be the richest
produce, for which reason, at least in my opinion, he calls the
mountains *ancient,* and the hills *lasting,* as if being very highly
renowned; for their antiquity is not praised, as if they were created
before the rest of the world, but these mountains are honorably
distinguished as the first-born, because God’s blessing eminently rests
upon them. Thus in the blessing of Jacob it is said, “unto the utmost
bound of the everlasting hills,” as much as to say, that no corner of
these most celebrated mountains should be devoid of fertility. (<span
id="iii.iii-p122.1"></span>[Ge
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii-p122.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p123"></span>In the next verse he extends generally to
the whole land what he had said of the mountains.

<span id="iii.iii-p124"></span>Those are wide of the meaning of Moses,
who translate what follows: “On account of the good-will of the dweller
in the bush the blessing shall come;” and *his* rendering is altogether
barbarous who gives it, “On account of the piety,” etc. My opinion is
that the word <span id="iii.iii-p124.1"></span>רצון, *retzon,* is in the
nominative case; for it is quite in accordance with the context that the
“favor of God would come upon the head of Joseph;” for, after Moses had
magnified His bounty, he now points out its source or cause, viz., that
this extraordinary fertility was the result of God’s gratuitous favor.
The words of Jacob, “by the God of thy father,” and “by the Almighty,”
exactly correspond with these; where also I have explained why Joseph
was called a Nazarene among his brethren.  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320)

<span id="iii.iii-p126"></span>God is called “the dweller in the bush”
by *periphrasis,* with reference to the vision which was presented to
Moses on Mount Sinai; for God then appeared a second time as the
Redeemer and Father of His people; after having made His covenant with
Abraham and Jacob. And this serves by way of confirmation; as if it were
said, that the same God who had formerly blessed Joseph by the mouth of
His servant Jacob, now repeated the same prophecy, in order to give
fuller assurance of its truth.

<span id="iii.iii-p127"></span><span id="iii.iii-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p128"></span>**17** *His glory is like the firstling.*
Translators obscure the meaning by translating the word *firstling* in
the nominative case. I have no doubt, however, but that he compares the
glory of Joseph to the size of a very fine bullock, as if He had said,
“His beauty is as of the most choice bullocks in his herds.” At least it
is very consistent that the word *firstling* should be used for
*pre-eminent.* He says, then, that no more magnificent or glorious
bullocks should be found in the land of Joseph than the people itself
would be. And to beauty he adds strength and vigor, so that they should
be victorious over all their enemies.

<span id="iii.iii-p129"></span>At the end of the verse (as I have before
stated,) he declares that what he had prophesied of Joseph should be
common to the two families of Ephraim and Manasseh. At the same time he
confirms the declaration of Jacob, whereby he had preferred Ephraim the
younger to the elder. Manasseh, therefore, only reckons his thousands,
but Ephraim his tell thousands, a proof of which fact God had given in
the census which has been already recorded, in which the tribe of
Ephraim was found to be the more numerous.

<span id="iii.iii-p130"></span><span id="iii.iii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p131"></span>**18.** *And of Zebulun he said.* He
compares two tribes with each other, which, although neighbors in
position, were still very dissimilar; for the one being devoted to
mercantile pursuits, went forth frequently in various directions; the
other took more delight in quietude and repose; and this their great
variety of condition is indicated, when he bids Zebulun rejoice in its
expeditions, and Issachar in its domestic repose. Moses thus confirms
the prophecy of Jacob, who said that Zebulun should “dwell at the haven
of the sea,” so as to make voyages of traffic; whilst Issachar, as
delighting more in repose, should be lazy and idle, so as to make no
objections against paying tribute, in order to purchase peace. (<span
id="iii.iii-p131.1"></span>[Ge
49:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii-p131.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p132"></span>What follows I suppose to be added, as
though Moses had said that their distant location should not prevent
them from going up with the others to Jerusalem, for the purpose of
performing their religious duties. For in that they were farther removed
from the temple, their zeal in the legal service might have grown cold.
Although, then, they dwelt in the utmost borders of the land, Moses says
that they should nevertheless come to offer sacrifices to God. By the
*peoples* some understand the other tribes, which does not appear at all
consistent; and others, foreign nations, to which their commercial
intercourse gave them access. My interpretation, however, is simply
that, although the length of the journey should invite them to remain at
home, still they should mutually exhort each other to betake themselves
in large companies to the temple. The end of the verse may be the
statement of a reason for this, as if it were said, that they will be
more attentive to the service of God, because, being enriched by him,
they will be desirous to offer Him the praise. And assuredly it is a
sign of gross ingratitude, when we are not stimulated by God’s blessings
to strive more earnestly to render thanks to him, in proportion as he
deals more liberally with us. At the same time, Moses shows that, in
consideration of their great wealth, the expenses of the journey would
be by no means onerous to them; for, although their country was not very
fertile, still its position was most advantageous for the acquirement of
riches. Thus when it is here said, “they shall suck of the abundance of
the seas,” an antithesis is to be understood between the fruits of the
earth and the abundant revenues derived from merchandise. To the same
effect, “the treasures hid in the sand” are spoken of. For the
exposition given by some, that their treasures should be so great as
that they should hide them in the sand; and by others, that the sands
should there be so prolific in silver and gold; and by others, that they
should collect what the sea should throw up, is poor and vapid. Whereas,
therefore, others should grow rich from their lands, Moses says, by an
elegant figure, that the sands of Zebulun should be filled with hidden
treasures, on account of their foreign traffic.

<span id="iii.iii-p133"></span><span id="iii.iii-p133.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p134"></span>**20.** *And of Gad he said.* In the
blessing of the tribe of Gad, mention is only made of the hereditary
portion, which it had obtained without casting of lots. He therefore
celebrates the blessing of God, because He had accorded to the Gadites
an ample dwelling-place; for the word “enlargeth” refers to the extent
of their possession. But inasmuch as in that extremity of the land
beyond Jordan, they were on a hostile border, he declares that they
would be warlike, and hence compares them to a lion, which tears its
prey sometimes from the head, and sometimes from the arm. Since, then,
that position would not be so peaceful as any other region in the midst
of Canaan, he declares that they should be safe and sound, through their
own audacity. And although it is not a very pleasant condition to be
harassed by constant wars, still, in such a disagreeable case, God’s
grace was not to be despised, which made them formidable to their
enemies, and of great valor, whereby they might not only repel hostile
invasions, but be willing of themselves to make predatory expeditions.
If any should object that license for rapine was quite unsuitable for
God’s children, the solution is obvious, that reference is not here made
to what was lawful, or what was desirable and praiseworthy, but that a
consolation was offered them by way of protection against the incursions
and annoyances of their enemies. Besides, the lust for booty is not made
permissible, but praise is merely given to their courage in overcoming
their enemies.

<span id="iii.iii-p135"></span><span id="iii.iii-p135.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p136"></span>**21.** *And he provided the first part
for himself.*  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) Others translate
it not badly, *the first-fruits.* Jerome’s rendering, *pre-eminence*
(*principatum*,) however, is quite out of the question. The word
*beginning* (*principium*,*)* however, is very suitable, for Moses thus
signifies that the Gadites were beforehand in seeking a dwelling-place
for themselves; for before possession of the land was accorded to the
people, they asked for the kingdom of Sihon for themselves. It is
afterwards added, in what way they were provident in choosing their
abode, namely, because God suggested to them that Moses was at liberty
to assign this portion to them. For it is called the “portion of the
lawgiver,” as being that respecting which Moses might lawfully decide,
since he appropriated it to the Gadites, not by hazard, nor otherwise
than by God’s command. It is called the *hidden* portion,  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) as not having been included by God in
His promise. The sum is, that although God’s will was not yet revealed,
with respect to this addition to the land, still they obtained it
through His secret liberality. And Moses desires flint his decision with
regard to the Gadites remaining on this side Jordan should be thus
confirmed, since disputes might have otherwise arisen, inasmuch as God’s
promise had assigned the boundaries of the whole people on the opposite
bank. Theirs is a poor exposition who explain it that Moses was buried
there; and those also violently wrest the words, who understand by “the
lawgiver” the chiefs of the Amorites, and render the words “hidden
portion,” *the ceiled palaces;*  <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323)
nor would they have been thus extravagant in their notions, if the
natural meaning which I have given had occurred to them.

<span id="iii.iii-p140"></span>The other clause of the verse is added by
way of qualification; for Moses shows that this advantageous provision
was made for the children of Gad, on condition that they should
accompany the other tribes, and not return home until the land of Canaan
was at peace, and their enemies subdued. And we have already seen that,
when they sought for themselves this location outside the land, in the
kingdom of the Amorites, they were severely rebuked by Moses, until they
promised that they would share the war with their brethren until its
conclusion. This is what Moses means by “executing the justice of God,
and his judgments with Israel;” not only because it was but just that
they should share the war with their brethren, and assist them in
obtaining possession of the land, but because God ordained that His just
vengeance should be executed upon those heathen and wicked nations by
the whole of Israel, and had chosen all the tribes generally to be the
ministers of His judgment; as it is said, in <span
id="iii.iii-p140.1"></span>[Ps. 149:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii-p140.1"></span>,
that they were charged “to execute vengeance upon the heathen, to bind
their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; to
execute upon them the judgment written;” for it was no common honor to
be appointed to be, as it were, the judges of the ungodly, so as to
destroy them all, and thus to purify the land.

<span id="iii.iii-p141"></span><span id="iii.iii-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p142"></span>**22.** *And of Dan he said.* He
foretells that the tribe of Dan, like that of Gad, should be warlike,
not so much from voluntary disposition, as from necessity; for their
love of war was not to be deemed praiseworthy, inasmuch as it is
altogether contrary to humanity; but because the unscrupulousness of the
enemies, by which that tribe was infested, compelled them to take up
arms. He compares it to a lion impetuously leaping from Mount Bashan;
and the particle of comparison must be understood here, for Mount Bashan
was not situated in the territory of this tribe. But Moses means to say
that they should be as ready for the combat as a lion, which, after it
has issued from its den into the open plains, makes an attack upon every
one that it meets.

<span id="iii.iii-p143"></span><span id="iii.iii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p144"></span>**23.** *And of Naphtali he said.* He
predicts that God would deal bountifully towards these two tribes; for
to the first a fertile district would be allotted towards “the west and
the south.” What he declares respecting the tribe of Asher is not free
from ambiguity; for he is said to be blessed, <span
id="iii.iii-p144.1"></span>מבנים, *mibanim,* i.e., either *with*
children, or *above* children. If we prefer the former meaning, his
prolificness (<span id="iii.iii-p144.2"></span>πολυτεκνία) is
celebrated, as though it were said, Asher shall be blessed with a
numerous progeny. There may, however, be a comparison between this tribe
and the others; and this might justly be made to its advantage, because
it had a very fertile district allotted to it, and abounding in wheat of
the best quality, as the blessing of Jacob testifies,

<span id="iii.iii-p145"></span>“Out of Asher shall bread be fat, and he
shall yield royal dainties.” (<span id="iii.iii-p145.1"></span>[Ge
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii-p145.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p146"></span>He adds that “Asher shall be acceptable
to his brethren;” from whence we gather that his tribe should be of a
placid disposition: and afterwards figuratively celebrates the abundance
of his oil, and iron, and brass. For to “dip his foot in oil,” is as
much as to say that he should collect an abundant supply of oil; and
that “his shoes should be iron and brass,” is nothing more than that he
should tread upon a soil full of these metals. It is to be readily
inferred from hence, as from preceding passages, that the blessings,
which are now mentioned, are not so much wishes or prayers, as
prophecies; since without the spirit of prophecy Moses could never have
divined what, or what sort of, territory was to be bestowed on the
several tribes.

<span id="iii.iii-p147"></span>Commentators vary as to the latter words;
for some render the word <span id="iii.iii-p147.1"></span>דבא, *daba,
old age,* or, *grief, as* if there were a transposition of the letters,
 <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) and thus restrict the meaning
of the word “days” to youth; but others more correctly suppose, that
Asher was to be strong and vigorous through the whole course of his
life. Since, therefore, years gradually debilitate men, Moses promises
to the posterity of Asher that their rigor should be retained to the
very end of life.

<span id="iii.iii-p149"></span><span id="iii.iii-p149.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p150"></span>**26.** *There is none like unto the
God.* Moses proceeds from the parts to the whole, and now comes to speak
of the whole body, which consisted of the twelve families. All that he
says tends to the same end, viz., that the people of Israel were happy
as being taken by God under this faithful guardianship: for nothing is
more to be desired with regard to our best interests, than that our
welfare should be intrusted to the hand of God. But, since this
inestimable blessing of being protected by the care of God is often but
lightly prized, Moses exclaims in admiration, that there is none to be
compared to the God of Israel. We know that all nations had their
tutelary gods or patrons, and foolishly gloried in their respective
idols; although they often found from experience, that whatever
confidence they placed in them was vain and frivolous. Moses, therefore,
separates from this imaginary multitude of false gods the God of Israel,
like whom, he says, none can be anywhere found. He also extols His
power, because He rides gloriously on the heavens and clouds, which is
tantamount to all high things being subject to His dominion. But,
whereas it would be of little profit to reflect on his infinite power
except; in its connection with ourselves, Moses expressly reminds us
that God is not strong for Himself, but in order that He may help His
people.

<span id="iii.iii-p151"></span><span id="iii.iii-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p152"></span>**27.** *The eternal God is thy refuge.*
This is just as if he had said that the Israelites were protected from
above by the help of God, and also based, as it were, upon Him. The
beginning of the prayer corresponds with that other in <span
id="iii.iii-p152.1"></span>[Ps
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii-p152.1"></span>,
“Lord*,* thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations.” The sum
is, that although the Israelites might be exposed to many injuries,
still there was secure repose for them under the shadow of God’s wings;
and assuredly unless the hand of God had been like a roof to protect
them, they would have perished a thousand times over. But, inasmuch as
it would not be sufficient for our heads to be in safety, the other
point is also added, viz., that God’s arms should be stretched forth to
sustain them from beneath. He calls them “everlasting,” because the
security of the pious, who rely upon God, is never shaken: it is,
therefore, just as though he represented God to be at the same time the
foundation, and the roof, of their abode. Others translate it less
correctly, “Thou shalt live under the arms of the Everlasting;” for an
elegant distinction is drawn,  <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325)
which, however, tends to the same point, when God it called <span
id="iii.iii-p153.1"></span>קדם, *kedem,* and His arms <span
id="iii.iii-p153.2"></span>עלם, *gnolam,* the first of which words has
reference to the past, whilst in the other there is allusion to the
future; as if he had said of God, that He was from the beginning, and
that His power would endure unto the end.

<span id="iii.iii-p154"></span>He adduces experimental evidence of the
above statements, inasmuch as God had  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) miraculously destroyed the enemies of
His people; at the same time he specifies the manner in which this was
done, viz., that He had said, Destroy, or blot out, or dissipate. And by
this word he signifies that, although God had made use of the agency of
the Israelites, still He only was the conqueror; since the Israelites
prevailed not except at His bidding, and by His will.

<span id="iii.iii-p156"></span><span id="iii.iii-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p157"></span>**28.** *Israel then shall dwell in
safety alone.*  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) The beginning of
the verse is by no means obscure, for Moses promises in it to the elect
people what all have naturally a great desire for, viz., peace or
tranquillity; for he is said to *dwell* confidently *alone,* who: fears
no danger, whom no care harasses, and who needs no garrison, or defense.
This, indeed, God never vouchsafed altogether to the Israelites, that
they should inhabit their land in security and without the fear of
enemies, inasmuch as their ingratitude did not allow of it; and
therefore the prophets, in enumerating the blessings of Christ’s
kingdom, declare that every one should “dwell beneath his own vine, and
his own fig-tree.”

<span id="iii.iii-p159"></span>For “the *fountain* of Jacob,” some have
the word *eye,*  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) and suppose it
to be used metaphorically for his vision; as though it were said, that
the quiet and peaceful habitation referred to was to be expected by the
people from the vision of their father Jacob. Others, however, more
correctly read the words “fountain of Jacob,” in apposition (with
Israel,) inasmuch as all the tribes derived their origin from that one
father. In this way the “fountain” will not be only the actual source;
but the rivulet, or stream, which flows down from it.

<span id="iii.iii-p161"></span>In conclusion, Moses promises that the
very sky of the Holy Land should be propitious, and benignant.

<span id="iii.iii-p162"></span><span id="iii.iii-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p163"></span>**29** *Happy art thou, O Israel.* He
again exclaims that happy is the people, whose salvation is in God; and
surely this is the only true happiness; for unless we ascend to the
first cause of Salvation, all salvations, so to speak, are but
transitory. And, since God had honored the Israelites alone with this
privilege, their condition is here distinguished from the common lot of
the whole human race. By the words *shield* and *sword* is meant a
perfect defense, as much as to say, that no part of their armor was to
be sought elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc06058.htm#fr_303) <span
id="iii.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p64"></span> “Ceste benediction a este comme du
suere,” etc.; this blessing was like sugar, etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc06058.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p68"></span> *Lat.,* “*Went* from Sinai.”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc06058.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iii.iii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p70"></span> *A. V*.,” Ten thousands of saints.
Ainsworth: “Heb., *of sanctity*; meaning, *spirits of sanctity;* which
Jonathan in his Thargum expoundeth *holy angels:* — so we by grace in
Christ are come to ten thousands of angels. <span
id="iii.iii-p70.1"></span>[Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii-p70.1"></span>.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc06058.htm#fr_306) <span
id="iii.iii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p72"></span> “Comme il vouloit presider, et estre
honore de son peuple;” how He would preside, and be honored by this
people. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc06058.htm#fr_307) <span
id="iii.iii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p75"></span> *Lat.,* “the peoples.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc06058.htm#fr_308) <span
id="iii.iii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p76"></span> *A. V., “yea.”*

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc06058.htm#fr_309) <span
id="iii.iii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p78"></span> In the *Fr*. this expression is thus
*explained,* — “ou les grains de ble sont cachez sous la paille;” where
the grains of wheat are hidden beneath the straw.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc06058.htm#fr_310) <span
id="iii.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p82"></span> *A. V*., “and let *not* his men be few.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc06058.htm#fr_311) <span
id="iii.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p85"></span> And this also of Judah.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc06058.htm#fr_312) <span
id="iii.iii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p90"></span> *A.V., “Mine honour.”* See *C*. on <span
id="iii.iii-p90.1"></span>[Genesis
49](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii-p90.1"></span>.,
*C. Soc. Edit.,* vol. 2, p. 447.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc06058.htm#fr_313) <span
id="iii.iii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p95"></span> *C.’s* criticism will be better
understood here by giving his version in English:

<span id="iii.iii-p96"></span><span id="iii.iii-p96.1"></span>[De
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii-p96.1"></span>.,
“But to Levi he said, Thy perfections and splendours were to Thy
merciful man, whom Thou didst try in Massah, and madest him to contend
at the waters of Meribah.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc06058.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iii.iii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p97"></span> *A. V*., “Holy one.” It cannot be
reasonably said that this word is not used for *holy,* as well as for
*merciful.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc06058.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iii.iii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p106"></span> Margin, *A. V., “Heb.* at thy nose.”

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc06058.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iii.iii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p109"></span> *A. V*., “poor.” *C.’s* memory seems
here to have failed him, and to have imported the word “priests” from
the following verse.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc06058.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iii.iii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p114"></span> Addition in *Fr*., ”voire en sorte
qu’ils demeurerent couchez tous plats;” that is to say, in such sort as
they should remain altogether east down.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc06058.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iii.iii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p117"></span> *A. V*.*, “by* God.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc06058.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iii.iii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p118"></span> It is, nevertheless, the exposition of
the great majority of commentators, who suppose that by *shoulders* are
figuratively meant *mountains, or coasts.*

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc06058.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iii.iii-p124.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p125"></span> *A. V*., “Separated from his
*brethren.*” See on <span id="iii.iii-p125.1"></span>[Genesis
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii-p125.1"></span>, *C. Soc. Edit.,* vol. 2, p. 470.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc06058.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iii.iii-p136.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p137"></span> *Lat.,* “And he saw the beginning
*(principium)* for himself,” etc. *Heb.* <span
id="iii.iii-p137.1"></span>וירא ראשית

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc06058.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iii.iii-p137.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p138"></span> *A. V*., “seated;” *marg., “Heb.*
ceiled.” See next note.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc06058.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iii.iii-p138.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p139"></span> <span id="iii.iii-p139.2"></span>ספון.
Part. pahul, <span id="iii.iii-p139.3"></span>ספן*, to bide. S. M.,*
(“Pro legislatore) abscondendo.” *C.* learnt from the notes of *S. M*.
that Rabbi Salomon expounds this clause, “He saw that in that land the
legislator, Moses, would be buried,” and that Aben-Ezra had interpreted
<span id="iii.iii-p139.4"></span>סהוקק, *great,* and <span
id="iii.iii-p139.5"></span>ספון*, a house with a* *dome-like roof,* and
had then paraphrased the clause, as meaning, “there is the place
suitable for the great and noble, who dwell in palaces.” — *W*

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc06058.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iii.iii-p147.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p148"></span> <span id="iii.iii-p148.1"></span>דבא, a
word whose root does not occur in Hebrew. The *LXX*., and the Chaldee
paraphrast, and the Syriac, are unanimous in rendering it *strength;*
but the *V*. has *old age,* and those critics, who maintain this to be
its meaning, are driven to suppose that it is formed irregularly from
<span id="iii.iii-p148.2"></span>דאב — *W*

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc06058.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iii.iii-p152.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p153"></span> This sentence is omitted in the Latin
edition of 1563 though given in substance in the French of 1564.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc06058.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iii.iii-p154.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p155"></span> It will be seen that *C*. translates the
verbs here in the past tense; *A. V*. in the future: “he *shall* thrust
out, etc.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc06058.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iii.iii-p157.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p158"></span> *Lat*., “Israel *hath* dwelt,” etc.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc06058.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iii.iii-p159.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p160"></span> <span id="iii.iii-p160.1"></span>עין. A
*spring*, or an *eye* (from its weeping.) The *V*. with *S.M.* have
taken it to mean *an eye* here. Luther, Diodati, and *A.V. a fountain.
C.* saw in the notes of *S.M.* that Kimchi and the Chaldee paraphrast
had taken the word literally to be *the eye,* and, by metaphor, the
vision of Jacob. — *W*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 34:1-12](cc06059)
