[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06020)  [Next](cc06022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p1"></span><span id="ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
17](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#000)<span id="ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p2"></span><span id="ii.xx-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
17:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001)<span id="ii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying,

<span id="ii.xx-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo,

<span id="ii.xx-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel, and
take of every one of them a rod, according to the house of’ their
fathers, of all their princes, according to the house of’ their fathers,
twelve rods: write thou every man’s name upon his rod.

<span id="ii.xx-p6"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel, et cape ab
eis singulas virgas per domos patrum, a cunctis scilicet principibus
eorum, juxta domos patrum suorum, duodecim virgas: et uniuscujusque
nomen scribes super virgam ejus.

<span id="ii.xx-p7"></span>**3.** And thou shalt write Aaron’s name upon
the rod of Levi: for one rod shall be for the head of the house of their
fathers.

<span id="ii.xx-p8"></span>**3.** Nomen autem Aharon scribes super
virgam Levi: quia virga una erit capiti domus patrum suorum.

<span id="ii.xx-p9"></span>**4.** And thou shalt lay them up in the
tabernacle of the congregation before the testimony, where I will meet
with you.

<span id="ii.xx-p10"></span>**4.** Reponesque illas in tabernaculo
conventionis coram testimonio ubi conveniam vobiscum.

<span id="ii.xx-p11"></span>**5.** And it shall come to pass, that the
man’s rod, whom I shall choose, shall blossom; and I will make to cease
from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur
against you.

<span id="ii.xx-p12"></span>**5.** Et erit, vir ille quem elegero,
illius virga florebit; et ita quiescere faciam a me murmurationes
filiorum Israel quibus murmurant adversum vos.

<span id="ii.xx-p13"></span>**6.** And Moses spoke unto the children of
Israel, and every one of their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each
prince one, according to their fathers’ houses, even twelve rods; and
the rod of Aaron was among their rods.

<span id="ii.xx-p14"></span>**6.** Loquutus est ergo Moses ad filios
Israel, et dederunt illi onmes principes eorum virgam; singuli principes
virgam per domos patrum suorum, duodecim scilicet virgas; virga autem
Aharon erat in medio virgarum eorum.

<span id="ii.xx-p15"></span>**7.** And Moses laid up the rods before the
Lord in the tabernacle of witness.

<span id="ii.xx-p16"></span>**7.** Et posuit Moses virgas coram Jehova
in tabernaculo testimonii.

<span id="ii.xx-p17"></span>**8.** And it came to pass, that on the
morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod
of Aaron, for the house of Levi, was budded, and brought forth buds, and
bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.

<span id="ii.xx-p18"></span>**8.** Et fuit, postridie venit Moses ad
tabernaculum testimonii, et ecce germinaverat virga Aharon e domo Levi,
ac produxerat germinationem, protuleratque flores, ad maturitatemque
perduxerat amygdala.

<span id="ii.xx-p19"></span>**9.** And Moses brought out all the rods
from before the Lord unto all the children of Israel: and they looked,
and took every man his rod.

<span id="ii.xx-p20"></span>**9.** Et protulit Moses omnes virgas illas
a facie Jehovae ad onmes filios Israel: qui viderunt, et acceperunt
singuli virgam suam.

<span id="ii.xx-p21"></span>**10.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Bring
Aaron’s rod again before the testimony, to be kept for a token against
the rebels; and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me,
that they die not.

<span id="ii.xx-p22"></span>**10.** Dixit autem Jehova ad Mosen, Refer
virgam Aharon coram testimonio in custodiam, in signum filiis
rebellibus; et cessare facies murmurationes eorum apud me, ut non
moriantur.

<span id="ii.xx-p23"></span>**11.** And Moses did so: as the Lord
commanded him, so did he.

<span id="ii.xx-p24"></span>**11.** Et fecit Moses quemadmodum
praeceperat Jehova, sic fecit.

<span id="ii.xx-p25"></span>**12.** And the children of Israel spoke
unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, we all perish.

<span id="ii.xx-p26"></span>**12.** Et dixerunt filii Israel ad Mosen,
dicendo, Ecce mortui sumus, periimus, omnes nos periimus.

<span id="ii.xx-p27"></span>**13.** Whosoever cometh any thing near unto
the tabernacle of the Lord shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?

<span id="ii.xx-p28"></span>**13.** Quicunque accesserit, qui
accesserit, inquam, ad tabernaculum Jehovae, morietur; nunquid
consumendi sumus moriendo?

<span id="ii.xx-p29"></span> 

<span id="ii.xx-p30"></span><span id="ii.xx-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p31"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spoke unto Moses.*
Howsoever stubborn the Israelites might be, yet their hardness of heart
being now subdued, and their pride broken down, they ought to have
acknowledged the authority of the priesthood, and to have perpetually
held it in pious reverence. But it is plain from the confirmation of it,
which is now added, that they were not yet thoroughly overcome. For God
never appoints anything in vain; the remedy, therefore, was necessary,
that He now applied to that disease of obstinacy which He perceived
still to maintain its secret hold upon their hearts. Herein we also
behold His inestimable goodness, when He not only had regard to the
relief of their infirmity, but even struggled with their depravity and
perverseness, in order to restore them to their senses. In the same way
also He now deals with us, for he not only strengthens the weakness of
our faith by many aids, but He puts constraint upon our light and
inconstant minds, and retains us in the path of duty though we strive
against Him. He likewise anticipates our willfulness, so as to keep us
from growing presumptuous, or rouses us up when we are disposed to be
slothful. In fact, his our business so to apply to our use whatever
helps to faith and piety He sets before us, as to be assured that they
are so many pieces of evidence to convict us of unbelief Although,
therefore, the majesty of the priesthood had been already sufficiently,
and more than sufficiently established, still God saw float in the
extreme perversity of the people there would be no end to their murmurs
and rebellions, unless the final ratification were added, and that, too,
in a season of repose, inasmuch as, whilst the sedition was in progress,
they were not so disposed and ready to learn. By this confirmation,
then, He set aside whatever doubts could at any time arise, when Aaron’s
rod, severed as it was from the tree, was the only one of the twelve
which blossomed. For it was no natural circumstance that a branch which
derived no sap from the root, and which at that season of the year would
have been dry upon the tree, should produce flowers and fruit, when it
was east before the Ark of the Covenant, whilst the others, although
altogether similar, remained dry and dead.

<span id="ii.xx-p32"></span><span id="ii.xx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p33"></span>**2.** *Speak unto the children of Israel.*
They are mistaken who suppose that to the twelve rods there was another
added for the tribe of Levi;  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)
for, since there was no question here as to the possession of the land,
there was no occasion at all for the division of the tribe of Joseph
into two parts. We know, too, that it was endowed with a double portion,
because the Levites had no inheritance; and in this case the
circumstances were different, because all the other tribes were
contending for the priesthood with the tribe of Levi alone. Hence it
was, then, that rods were given to each of them, in accordance with the
origin of their race. But, when Aaron’s rod is said to have been “in the
midst of them,”  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) it is in the
usual phrase of the Hebrew language, because it was mixed with them as
one of their number. And this is expressly stated, to show us that all
ground for caviling might be taken from the ungodly, *since* all the
rods were east promiscuously into the same bundle, so that none should
be distinguished above the others, and thus nothing could be ascribed to
the collusion of men. If any should object that by these means the
rivalry was not extinguished which the other Levites had with the house
of Aaron, since his own name alone was inscribed upon the rod, so that
there would be no comparison between the families; I reply, that since
the power of God manifested itself distinctly in the name of Aaron, the
rejection of the others was sufficiently shown forth by his election;
for, if this honor had been common to the others, God would have
defrauded them by giving distinction to him alone. Besides, no other
plan could have been adopted for putting an end to this quarrel; for if
there had been several rods for one tribe, the whole people would have
complained of the inequality. It was necessary, then, that all should be
brought to the contest on equal terms, so that the difference between
them might be seen to depend upon God’s good pleasure. But if the name
of Levi had been inscribed, all its families would have claimed the
right of succession, as if common to them all. There was, therefore, no
other course open but that God should prefer to the whole people one
individual chosen from amongst the members of his own kindred and tribe.

<span id="ii.xx-p36"></span><span id="ii.xx-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p37"></span>**4.** *And thou shalt lay them up in the
tabernacle.* The place itself had not a little to do with the effectual
decision of the matter; because it was clearly manifested that God was
the author of the miracle, and consequently that the priesthood
proceeded from Him. For we have elsewhere said that the whole government
of the Church so entirely depends upon His decree, that men are not
permitted to interfere with it. Wherefore He set the ark of the covenant
in opposition to the voices of the whole people, in order to testify
that no further dispute was to be raised respecting the priest, whom He
had appointed by His own declaration and authority. At the same time, it
had the effect of consoling the people, and silencing their complaints
that the rods of all the tribes were brought in common into the
sanctuary before God; for, although a peculiar dignity was accorded to
that of Aaron alone, still the people ceased not to be a priestly
kingdom. Hence it follows, that the honorable privilege conferred on one
family contributed to the public welfare of all; so far was it from
being the case that their inferiority ought to have caused them pain or
envy.

<span id="ii.xx-p38"></span><span id="ii.xx-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p39"></span>**5.** *And it shall come to pass, that the
man’s rod.* Aaron, indeed, had been previously chosen; but the
expression here refers to his manifestation;  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) because God is said again to choose
those, whom He has chosen by His secret counsel, when He brings them
forth into the sight of men with their peculiar marks of distinction;
and this not once only, but as often as he confirms their election by
new indications. And this seems to be spoken of by way of concession, as
if God would pass over all His former decrees, and invite the people
afresh to take cognizance of the matter. With this view tie states that
He will put an end to all the malevolent and noisy detractions of the
people, so that Aaron may henceforth exercise his office without
controversy; for, although not even thus was their perverseness
altogether cured, still their insolence was restrained.

<span id="ii.xx-p41"></span><span id="ii.xx-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p42"></span>**8.** *And it came to pass, that on the
morrow.* It is not without cause that, the time is notified, for by no
skill could it be brought about that a rod should blossom in the lapse
of a single night. Again, all suspicion of fraud was removed by the fact
that Moses departed when he had placed the rods in the sanctuary, and,
returning on the next day, brought out the bundle of rods before them
all. But in this respect was the power of God principally shown forth,
that in so short a space of time not only flowers, but fruits also, were
formed upon a dry bough, which could not have occurred but by the
reversal of the order of nature. And further, the time of year is to be
taken into account, which was by no means in accordance with such
maturity, Now, by this miracle the dignity of the typical priesthood was
undoubtedly ratified to the ancient people under the Law; but, in so
much as the truth itself is more excellent than its figure or image, the
intention of God unquestionably was to assert the priesthood of His
only-begotten Son rather than that of Aaron. Hence the profit to be
derived from this miracle most especially pertains to us,(“Nous
appartient plus qu’aux Juifs;” pertains to us more than to the Jews. —
*Fr*.) in order that we may embrace the Priest presented to us by God
with the veneration He deserves. I pass by the frivolous allegories
 <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) in which others take delight.
And in fact it ought to be abundantly sufficient for us, that the power
of God which might direct the people to the Mediator, appeared of old
under a visible symbol; but when the Son of God came, whatever He then
represented to their sight was spiritually revealed in Him: for not only
was He a sprout *(surculus)* from the stem of Jesse, as He is called by
Isaiah (<span id="ii.xx-p46.1"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="ii.xx-p46.1"></span>);
and a stone hewn without the art or labor of man, under which form he
was shown to Daniel (<span id="ii.xx-p46.2"></span>[Da
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)<span id="ii.xx-p46.2"></span>);
but by His resurrection tie was separated from the whole human race. For
this, too, we must diligently observe, that it is not enough that He
should obtain with us the prerogative and title of Priest, unless He is
so only and indivisibly. Hence it is plain that His honor is in the
Papacy torn in pieces by foul and intolerable sacrilege, when they
invent innumerable mediators.

<span id="ii.xx-p47"></span><span id="ii.xx-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p48"></span>**10.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.* What
God had prescribed concerning the censers, He now commands as to the
rod, *i.e.,* that it should be preserved as a monument for future ages;
because men are forgetful and slow to consider His works, and not only
so, but because they bury their memory as if of deliberate malice, he
bids, therefore, and not without reproach, that this sign should be laid
up in safety, saying, that this is done on account of their
perverseness. At the same time, however, He commends His paternal love
and pity, in that, whilst tie chastises their pride, He provides for
their welfare. For, as they were given to rebellion, they would still
have provoked His wrath by new murmurings. He says, then, that He
anticipates them, and restrains their impetuous fury, lest they should
die. Thus in humbling us, tie not only punishes our transgressions, but
tie has regard to what is profitable for us, and proves that He cares
for us.

<span id="ii.xx-p49"></span><span id="ii.xx-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p50"></span>**12.** *And the children of Israel spoke
unto Moses.* It was indeed somewhat better to be alarmed by admiration
of God’s power than as if they had despised it in brutal stupidity; but
there is a medium between torpor or obstinacy, and consternation. It is
true that believers tremble at the judgments of God, and, in proportion
as each of us has advanced in piety, so we are the more affected by a
sense of His anger. But this fear humbles believers in such a manner
that they nevertheless seek after God; whilst the reprobate so tremble
as fretfully to desire to drive God far away from them. Hence it arose
that the Israelites, stunned as it were by God’s severity, which they
deemed excessive, deplored their wretched lot; for, inasmuch as they had
no sense of God’s goodness, the chastisement to them was like a gibbet
rather than a medicine. They exclaim, therefore, that they are
destroyed, because God so severely avenges His polluted worship; as if
all such instances of rigor were not profitable for the purpose of
rendering them more heedful and cautious. No doubt this servile fear
sometimes prepares men for repentance; but nothing is more perilous than
to rest in it, because it first engenders bitterness and indignation,
and at length drives them to despair, Howsoever formidable, then, may be
God’s severity, let us learn at the same time to apprehend His mercy, so
that we may be prepared to endure willingly with meek and quiet minds
the punishments which we have deserved. In short, this passage shows how
little progress the Israelites had made, since the rods of God so
greatly exasperated them, that they cut themselves off from all hope of
salvation. For this is the meaning of the words, “Shall we be consumed
with dying?” as if it were not the case that God, on the contrary, was
preserving them from death, when in His paternal solicitude He warned
them of their danger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc06021.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ii.xx-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p34"></span> So, amongst others, Corn. a Lapide. *C’s*
view is that of the Jewish Commentators.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc06021.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ii.xx-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p35"></span> *A. V.,* “Among them,” <span
id="ii.xx-p35.1"></span>[Nu 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#006)<span
id="ii.xx-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc06021.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.xx-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p40"></span> *Fr.,* “A la seconde declaration.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc06021.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ii.xx-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p43"></span> Corn. a Lapide reports many of these, —

<span id="ii.xx-p44"></span>*“Symbolice et tropologice,* (he says,) this
rod signifies what sort of person a pontifex and pastor ought to be,
viz., watchful, active, laborious, and austere, such as were St.
Nicholas of Myra, St. Andrew the Carmelite, Pius II., and Cardinal
Julian Cesarinus.

<span id="ii.xx-p45"></span>“*Allegorice*, it is Christ; or the Virgin
Mary, whose flower is Christ.

<span id="ii.xx-p46"></span>“*Anagogice,* it is a symbol of’ the
resurrection.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 20:1-13](cc06022)
