[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06058)  [Next](cc06060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
34](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#000)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span>**1.** And Moses went up from the plains of
Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over
against Jericho: and the Lord showed him all the land of Gilead, unto
Dan,

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span>**1.** Ascendit ergo Moses e planitie Moab
ad mentern Nebo, in verticem collis qui est e regione Jericho, et
ostendit illi Jehova omnem terram Gilaad usque Dan,

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span>**2.** And all Naphtali, and the land of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the utmost sea.

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>**2.** Et universam Nephthali, et terram
Ephraim, et Manasse, et omnem terram Jehuda usque ad mare novissimum:

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>**3.** And the south, and the plain of the
valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>**3.** Et meridiem, et planitiem, vallem
Jericho urbis palmarum, usque ad Soar.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>**4.** And the Lord said unto him, This is
the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying,
I will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine
eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither.

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>**4.** Et dixit ei Jehova, Haec est terra
de qua juravi Abrahae, Isaac et Jacob, dieendo: Semini tuo dabo illam:
videre to feci oculis tuis, at illuc non transibis.

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>**5.** So Moses the servant of the Lord,
died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord.

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>**5.** Itaque mortuus est illic Moses
servus Jehovae in terra Moab, sesundum mandatum Jehovae.

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span>**6.** And he buried him in a valley in the
land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his
sepulcher unto this day.

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span>**6.** Et sepelivit eum in Gai, in terra
Moab, e regione Beth-peor: neque cognovit quisquam sepulchrum ejus usque
ad diem hunc.

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span>**7.** And Moses was an hundred and twenty
years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force
abated.

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span>**7.** Moses autem natus erat centum et
viginti annos quando mortuus est: non caligavit oculus ejus, neque
aufugit vigor ejus.

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>**8.** And the children of Israel wept for
Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping and
mourning for Moses were ended.

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span>**8.** Et fleverunt filii Israel Mosen in
campestribus Moab triginta diebus, completique sunt dies fletus luctus
Mosis.

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span>**9.** And Joshua the son of Nun was full
of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the
children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord commanded
Moses.

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span>**9.** Josua autem filius Nun repletus est
spiritu sapientiae, quoniam posuerat Moses manus suas super eum:
parueruntque ei filii Israel, ac fecerunt quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova
Mosi.

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span>**10.** And there arose not a prophet since
in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face;

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span>**10.** Neque surrexit prophera ultra in
Israele sient Moses, quem nosset Jehova facie ad faciem.

<span id="iii.iv-p23"></span>**11.** In all the signs and the wonders
which the Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to
all his servants, and to all his land,

<span id="iii.iv-p24"></span>**11.** In onmibus signis et portentis ad
quae facienda in terra Aegypti Pharaoni et servis ejus, et universae
terrae ejus, miserat eum Jehova.

<span id="iii.iv-p25"></span>**12.** And in all that mighty hand, and in
all the great terror which Moses showed in the sight of Israel.

<span id="iii.iv-p26"></span>**12.** Et ia omni manu forti, et in omni
terrore magno, quae fecit Moses in oculis totius Israelis.

<span id="iii.iv-p27"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p28"></span><span id="iii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p29"></span>**1.** *And Moses went. up from the plains
of Moab.* It is not certain who wrote this chapter; unless we admit the
probable conjecture of the ancients, that Joshua was its author. But
since Eleazar the priest might have performed this office, it will be
better to leave a matter of no very great importance undecided.

<span id="iii.iv-p30"></span>We have elsewhere said, that one part of
mount Abarim was called Nebo, as another was called Pisgah, because they
were distinct summits.

<span id="iii.iv-p31"></span>Now, the ascent of Moses was equivalent to
a voluntary going forth to death: for he was not ignorant of what was to
happen, but being called by God to die, he went to meet death of his own
accord. Such willing submission proceeded from no other source than
faith in God’s grace, whereby alone all terror is mitigated, and set at
rest, and the bitterness of death is sweetened. Doubtless to Moses, as
to every one else, it must have been naturally an awful thing to die;
but inasmuch as the testimony of God’s grace is interposed, he does not
hesitate to offer himself without alarm; and Because he was firmly
persuaded that the inheritance of the people would be there set before
his eyes, he cheerfully ascended to the place from which he was to
behold it. Already, indeed, by faith had he beheld the land, and the
promise of God had been, as it were, a lively representation of it; but;
since some remaining infirmities of the flesh still environ even the
most holy persons, an ocular view of it was no slight consolation, in
order to mitigate the bitterness of his punishment, when he knew that he
was prevented from actually entering it by the just sentence of God.

<span id="iii.iv-p32"></span>When it is said, that God “showed him all
the land,” it could not have been the case without a miracle. For,
although history records that some have been endued with incredible
powers of vision, so as to have been able to see further than the whole
length of Canaan; there is still a peculiarity to be remarked in this
case, that Moses distinctly examined every portion of it, as if he had
been really on the spot. I allow, indeed, that Naphtali, and Ephraim,
and Manasseh are mentioned by anticipation, but, nevertheless, the Holy
Spirit would express that *every* part was shown to Moses, as if they
were close beneath his feet. Else the vision would have been but
unsatisfactory and useless, if he had not been allowed to behold the
future habitation of the people. And to the same effect is also what is
afterwards added, that it was the land, which God sware to give unto His
servants; for otherwise the desire of Moses would not have been
satisfied, unless he had seen what a pleasant, fertile, and wealthy
region the sons of Abraham were about to inhabit.

<span id="iii.iv-p33"></span><span id="iii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p34"></span>**5.** *So Moses the servant of the Lord
died.* Since it was mark of ignominy to die without the borders of the
Holy Land, Moses is honored with high eulogy, in order that the
Israelites might learn the more to tremble at the judgment of God, who
did not spare even his most illustrious servant. And it is expressly
added, “according to the word (or mouth) of the Lord,” lest they should
despise the threatenings which were accomplished in so memorable a
manner. For, if God spared not His own distinguished Prophet, but at
length executed upon him what He had threatened, how should the ordinary
multitude escape?

<span id="iii.iv-p35"></span>What follows, “he buried him,” some render
passively, “he was buried;” and others transitively, “he buried
himself;” but in both cases improperly; for, whilst they are afraid to
assign this office to God, they labor to avoid an absurdity which does
not exist; since it may be gathered from the end of the verse, that
Moses was buried by divine means, for it is said that his sepulcher is
unknown. It is likely that an effort to discover it was not omitted, or
neglected to be made by the people; since it would have been barbarous
for them not to discharge the last offices of humanity towards such, and
so great a man. Since, therefore, no signs of his funeral, nor his body
itself, were anywhere to be found, it might be inferred that he was
hidden by God’s determinate counsel; whilst it is superfluous to discuss
in what manner God buried him, inasmuch as all the elements are under
His control. It was enough, therefore, for Him to signify *(annuere) to*
the earth, that it was to receive the body of the holy man into its
bosom: nor was there any necessity to call in the assistance of angels,
as some think, since the earth would have instantly obeyed the command
of its Creator. From the Epistle of Jude (<span
id="iii.iv-p35.1"></span>[Jude
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p35.1"></span>) we
learn that it was a matter of no slight importance that the sepulcher of
Moses should be concealed from the eyes of men, for he informs us that a
dispute arose respecting it. between Michael the archangel, and Satan:
and, although the cause of its concealment is not stated, still it
appears to have been God’s intention to prevent superstition; for it was
usual with the Jews, and it is a custom for which Christ reproves them,
to kill the prophets, and then to pay reverence to their tombs. (<span
id="iii.iv-p35.2"></span>[Lu
11:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#047)<span id="iii.iv-p35.2"></span>.)
It would have, therefore, been probable that, in order to blot out the
recollection of their ingratitude, they would have paid superstitious
veneration to the holy prophet, and so have carried his corpse into the
land, from which the sentence of God had excluded it. Timely precaution,
then, was taken, lest in their inconsiderate zeal the people should
attempt to subvert the decree of heaven.

<span id="iii.iv-p36"></span><span id="iii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p37"></span>**7** *And Moses was an hundred and twenty
years old.* Again he celebrates a special favor of God, viz., that all
the senses of Moses remained unimpaired to extreme old age, in order
that he might be fit for the performance of his duties: for thus it was
manifested how dear to God was the welfare of the people, for which He
so carefully provided. Some, indeed, though very few, are found, who are
capable of public government, even to their hundredth year. Already,
however, at that period, the rigor of the whole human race had so
diminished that, after their seventieth year, they dragged on their life
in “labor and sorrow,” as Moses himself bears witness. (<span
id="iii.iv-p37.1"></span>[Ps
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p37.1"></span>.)
It was, consequently a conspicuous sign of the paternal favour wherewith
God regarded His people, that Moses should have been thus unusually
preserved in rigor and strength. If the powers of Moses had failed him
long before their entrance of the promised land, his debility would have
been very inconvenient to the people: yet naturally he would not have
been so long sufficient for the performance of his onerous duties. It
follows, then, that when God did not suffer him to fail, He showed
wonderful consideration for the people’s welfare. Mention is specially
made of his eyes, by *synecdoche,* yet the sum of the matter is this,
that he was neither imbecile nor feeble, for neither were the faculties
of his mind exhausted, nor his body dried up.

<span id="iii.iv-p38"></span>It needs not that I expound at any length,
what is added respecting the solemn mourning, because I have elsewhere
shown,  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) that the ancients were
particular in their attention to the performance of funeral rites, on
account of their faith not being as yet so elevated from the measure of
revelation they had received, as to be easily able to forego those
external aids to it, for which there is not the same necessity under the
Gospel. It is natural to man to mourn for the dead; and, besides, this
mourning was justly instituted in consequence of the loss which the
Church had sustained; but a ceremony is here recorded, which was brought
to an end with the fulfillment of the shadows of the Law. Our dead are,
therefore, now to be buried in such a manner as that our grief may be
restrained by the hope of resurrection so clearly revealed by the coming
of Christ.

<span id="iii.iv-p40"></span><span id="iii.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p41"></span>**9.** *And Joshua the son of Nun.* It is
again shown how perseveringly God provided for the welfare of the
people. We have already seen how, at the request of Moses, Joshua was
chosen to succeed him. Now, when he is about to take upon him his
office, “the spirit of wisdom” was imparted to him, that it might be
effectually manifested that he was appointed by God. He had been,
indeed, previously endowed with excellent gifts, but he was now much
more splendidly adorned with the ensigns of dignity, in order that his
calling by God might be more certainly proved; for thus is God wont to
furnish those, whom He calls, with capacity for action. The imposition
of hands was also subjoined, which was no empty symbol of God’s grace.
But inasmuch as I have already fully spoken of these things, I now only
lightly touch upon them.

<span id="iii.iv-p42"></span><span id="iii.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p43"></span>**10** *And there arose not a prophet.*
This eulogy seems to have been added, that the children of Abraham might
place dependence on Moses until the manifestation of Christ; for
although prophets were from time to time raised up, still it was fitting
that the superiority should remain with Moses, lest they should decline
in the smallest degree from the rule of the Law. It must be concluded,
therefore, that Moses was here placed in a position of supremacy, so as
to be superior to all the prophets; as also Malachi (<span
id="iii.iv-p43.1"></span>[Mal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv-p43.1"></span>) exhorts the ancient people, in order that
they may continue obedient to the law of Moses. Two signs of his
excellency are here recorded, namely, his familiar acquaintance with
God, and the glory of his miracles. We have elsewhere seen that, by this
prerogative, Moses was distinguished from the other prophets, that God
spake to him face to face. For, although Jacob makes the same
declaration respecting himself, still we know that God was more
intimately revealed afterwards to Moses; not indeed that He beheld His
glory in its perfection, but because*,* in comparison with others, he
went beyond them all. As regards miracles, though they were wrought by
others, still none of them came near to Moses in their performance.

<span id="iii.iv-p44"></span>END OF COMMENTARIES ON THE FOUR LAST BOOKS
OF MOSES, IN THE FORM OF A HARMONY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc06059.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p39"></span> See on <span
id="iii.iv-p39.1"></span>[Leviticus
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p39.1"></span>,
vol. 2 p. 228.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc06060)
