[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06056)  [Next](cc06058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>A Repetition of the same History

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span><span id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
27](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span><span id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Numbers
27:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)<span id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span>**12.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Get
thee up into this mount Abarim, and see the land which I have given unto
the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span>**12.** Dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Ascende in
montem istum Abarim: et vide terram quam dedi fillis Israel.

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>**13.** And when thou hast seen it, thou
also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was
gathered.

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span>**13.** Ubi videris eam, aggregaberis ad
populos tuos tu quoque, sicut aggregatus est Aharon frater tuus.

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>**14.** For ye rebelled against my
commandment in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to
sanctify me at the water before their eyes: that is the water of Meribah
in Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin.

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>**14.** Quandoquidem rebelles fuistis ori
meo in deserto Sin, in jurgio congregationls, ut sanctificaretis me in
aquis coram oculis eorum. Istae sunt aquae jurgii Cades in deserto Sin.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>**<span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#044)<span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>.** *And Moses came and spake.* It is not
without reason that Moses again records that he repeated this Song
before the people; because it thence appears how far from all ambition
he was, in that he did not fear, at the very close of his life, to
irritate all their minds, so as to render the memory of his name
hateful; and besides, his authority was sanctioned by the silence and
submissiveness of the people, when they suffered themselves to be thus
severely dealt with. For, such was their general refractoriness, that
they never would have listened to him, had not the secret inspiration of
the Spirit interposed to subdue them.

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span>He associates with himself Joshua, whom he
undoubtedly desired to furnish with equal authority, and, what is worthy
of observation, he bids them be attentive to the threatenings and
reprehensions, in order to obtain reverence for the law. For we often
see that bare doctrine is cold and nerveless, unless the sluggishness,
which as it were stifles men’s minds, is sharply stimulated; lest, then,
the teaching of the Law should be despised or forgotten, or, from being
but languidly received, should gradually be obliterated from their
minds, he as it were spurs them up by the vehemence of this Song, and
commands that their posterity should be instructed in it, in order that
their attention may be aroused by its menaces. In the next verse (47) he
recommends to them zeal in the observance of the Law on the score of its
profitableness; for translators render it improperly, as it seems to me,
“Lest it should be an empty word to you,” or, “It is not an empty word,
such as you should despise.” Jerome’s translation is better — “The
precepts are not given you in vain;” for Moses simply intimates that the
Law was not given in vain, so as to end in fruitlessness; and
consequently they were to beware lest they should frustrate God’s
purpose, who desired to do them good. <span id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>רק,
*rek,* therefore, is used as the converse of “fruitful,” as more clearly
appears from the confirmation immediately added, that they “might
prolong their days in the promised land.” The Law, then, is said not to
be vain, because it is fruitful unto salvation. In what way it is also
deadly, and has no inherent efficacy, I have already shown.  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) It is indeed true that the Law, as
being the sure rule of righteousness, does not deceptively promise
salvation to men; but, since there is no one who actually performs what
God requires, through the *accidental* guilt of men, life is turned into
death; but, when all are plunged beneath the curse, a new remedy
supervenes, and by God’s gratuitous pardon they are so reconciled to
Him, as that their obedience, such as it is, becomes acceptable.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>**48.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.* We
infer that this is not recorded in its regular order, because it is
certain that Moses was warned of his approaching death before the Song
was composed; and this the second passage, which I have here appended,
expressly confirms; for he says that, before he substituted Joshua for
himself, the place was pointed out to him in which he was to die. It is,
however, by no means unusual for the order of narration to be inverted.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span>We may here perceive a singular specimen of
faith and obedience. All naturally fly from death, so that no one
hastens towards it of his own accord. He would never, therefore, have
voluntarily entered the tomb, unless relying on the hope of a better
life. We have already seen a similar instance in the case of Aaron:
although the resurrection was not then so clearly revealed as it now is
by the Gospel, nor had Christ appeared, who is the first-fruits of them
that rise again. Wherefore, though our carnal sense may be averse from
death, let our faith prevail to overcome all its terrors: even as Paul
teaches that God’s children, although they desire not “to be unclothed,”
still long to be “clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed up of
life.” (<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[2Co
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>.)
This, however, was remarkable obedience, to prepare himself no less
willingly for death than as if he had been invited to some joyful
banquet. Thus it is plain that these holy men had so consecrated
themselves to God, that they were ready to live or to die, according to
His pleasure.

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>Mount Abarim seems to have obtained its
name from its angles or sides, because it was divided  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) into many hills; as it is called also
Nebo in this place, and elsewhere by divers other names. Others think it
is named from a *passage;* but the other opinion is more probable, since
it is called in the plural number Abarim, that is, heights, or summits,
or interstices, which were situated on opposite heights.

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span>Although we shall presently see that there
was another reason why God desired to withdraw His servant from the
sight of men, still we must take notice of the consolation, which is
here referred to, that the pain of his death was alleviated by the
permission to behold the land of Canaan. For this reason he is commanded
to get up into the top of the mountain; for, although he would have been
satisfied with the mere promise of God, even had he been deprived of
this blessing, still it had no slight additional effect in enabling him
more cheerfully to leave the people on the threshold of their
inheritance. For faith does not altogether deprive God’s children of
human feelings; but our heavenly Father in His indulgence has compassion
on their infirmity. Thus, as it was a cause of sorrow to Moses to be
withheld from entering the land, he was supported by a seasonable
remedy, that he might not be hindered in his course by this impediment.

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span>**51.** *Because ye trespassed against me.*
We perceive from his punishment how necessary to Moses was such a token
of favor.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) For death in itself
would not have been so bitter, but the cause, which is again alleged,
grievously wounded the mind of the holy man, in that he saw himself to
be excluded in God’s just vengeance from the common inheritance on
account of his own guilt, which is more afflictive to the pious than a
hundred, nay, innumerable deaths. Hence those mournful complaints of
David and Hezekiah, and others elsewhere, when their life is taken from
them by all angry God:

<span id="iii.ii-p25"></span>“the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot
celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy
truth.” (<span id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Isa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018)<span id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.ii-p25.2"></span>[Ps
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="iii.ii-p25.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.ii-p25.3"></span>[Ps
115:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#017)<span
id="iii.ii-p25.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii-p26"></span>Surely it was not so formidable a thing for
them to die, but that they would have calmly and cheerfully departed
from the world when their time came; but what they deprecated was the
awful judgment of God, at the thoughts of which they were alarmed. The
same grief might have overwhelmed the mind of Moses, had it not been
alleviated.

<span id="iii.ii-p27"></span>But since none, however eminent, have been
altogether exempt from temporal punishments, let us learn to bear them
patiently. God did not spare Moses; what wonder if our condition is no
better than his? Moreover, in the opinion of men it was a trifling
offense, for the sake of which he was so severely chastised; for,
carried away by indignation, he had been so irritated against the people
that he had attributed less power to God that was due to Him. Now, those
errors, into which we fall through thoughtless impetuosity, are more
easily pardoned; but hence it is manifest; how precious to God is His
glory, when He does not suffer it to be obscured with impunity even by
inadvertence. At the same time, also, we are taught that nothing is more
irrational than to assume to ourselves the judgment respecting sins, and
to weigh them in our own balance, when God is their only legitimate
assessor.

<span id="iii.ii-p28"></span>But, although He declares that Moses and
Aaron revolted, and were rebellious “to His mouth,”  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) still, lest it should be thought that
they studiously refused credence to God’s word, a kind of qualification
is added, viz., that they did not *sanctify* God in the midst, or
*before the eyes,* of the children of Israel. Hence it. is plain that
they were only condemned for the excessive violence of their passion,
whereby they did not uphold God’s glory before the people with
sufficient energy.

<span id="iii.ii-p30"></span>As to the rest, it may be looked for under
<span id="iii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Nu
20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc06057.htm#fr_299) <span
id="iii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span> See especially, “On the use of the Law,”
vol. 3. 196.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc06057.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span> It seems that Abarim is the general name
of a range of mountains; and as Moses is said in one text to die in
Mount Nebo, and in the present, (viz, <span id="iii.ii-p19.1"></span>[De
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)<span id="iii.ii-p19.1"></span>,)
on the top of Pisgah, we must infer that Nebo was a mountain in the
range of Abarim, and that Pisgah was the most elevated and commanding
peak of that mountain.” — Illustr. Com.

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span>Abarim, from <span
id="iii.ii-p20.1"></span>עבר *gnabar,* to pass over; translated by
Taylor *vada, transitus, latera.*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc06057.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span> “Que nous avons veu;” as we have seen. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc06057.htm#fr_302) <span
id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p29"></span> <span id="iii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Nu
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#011)<span id="iii.ii-p29.1"></span>.
“Against my commandment.” — *A. V.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 33:1-29](cc06058)
