[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06035)  [Next](cc06037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
22](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
22:1-41](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p3"></span>**1.** And the children of Israel set
forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab, on this side Jordan by
Jericho.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p4"></span>**1.** Inde profecti sunt filii Israel, et
castrametati sunt in campestribus Moab trans Jordanem Jericho.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p5"></span>**2.** And Balak the son of Zippor saw all
that israel had done to the Amorites.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p6"></span>**2.** Quum autem vidisset Balac filius
Sippor qumcunque fecerat Israel Emorrhaeo:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p7"></span>**3.** And Moab was sore afraid of the
people, because they were many; and Moab was distressed because of the
children of Israel.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p8"></span>**3.** Timuit Moab propter populum valde,
quod multus esset: et anxius fuit Moab propter filios Israel.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p9"></span>**4.** And Moab said unto the elders of
Midian, Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as
the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor
was king of the Moabites at that time.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p10"></span>**4.** Dixit igitur Moab ad seniores
Madian, Nunc lambet congregatio haec omnes circuitus nostros,
quemadmodum lambit bos gramen agri. Porto Balac filius Sippor erat rex
Moab tempore illo.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p11"></span>**5.** He sent messengers therefore unto
Baalam the son of Beor, to Pethor, which is by the river of the land of
the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, there is a
people come out from Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth,
and they abide over against me.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p12"></span>**5.** Misit igitur legatos ad Balaam
filium Beor in Pethor, quae erat juxta flumen terrae filiorum populi
sui, ut vocaret eum, dicendo, En populus egressus est ex Aegypto, ecce,
operuit superficiem terrae, et habitat contra me.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p13"></span>**6.** Come now, therefore, I pray thee,
curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure I
shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of
the land: for I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom
thou cursest is cursed.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p14"></span>**6.** Nunc ergo veni, obsecro, maledic
mihi populum hunc, quia fortior me est: fortepotero, et percutiam eum,
expellamque e terra. Novi enim quod cui benedixeris benedictus erit, et
cui maledixeris maledictus erit.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p15"></span>**7.** And the elders of Moab and the
elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand;
and they came unto Baalam, and spake unto him the words of Balak.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p16"></span>**7.** Profecti ergo sunt seniores Madian,
et divinationes in manu eorum: et pervenerunt ad Balaam, et retulerunt
ei vrrba Balac.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p17"></span>**8.** And he said unto them, Lodge here
this night, and I will bring you word again, as the Lord shall speak
unto me. And the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p18"></span>**8.** Ille vero dixit eis, Pernoctate hic
nocte ista, et reddam vobis responsum, quemadmodum loquetur Jehova ad
me. Manseruntque principes Moab cum Balaam.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p19"></span>**9.** And God came unto Balaam, and said,
What men are these with thee?

<span id="ii.xxxv-p20"></span>**9.** Et venit Deus ad Balaam, ac dixit,
Qui sunt viri isti qui sunt apud te?

<span id="ii.xxxv-p21"></span>**10.** And Balaam said unto God, Balak
the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me, saying,

<span id="ii.xxxv-p22"></span>**10.** Respondit Balaam Deo, Balac filius
Sippor rex Moab misit ad me:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p23"></span>**11.** Behold, there is a people come out
of Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them;
peradventure I shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p24"></span>**11.** En populus iste qui egressus est
ex AEgypto operuit superficiem terrae: nunc ergo veni, maledic mihi
illi: forte potero pugnare cum eo, et expellere eum.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p25"></span>**12.** And God said unto Baalam, Thou
shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people: for they are
blessed.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p26"></span>**12.** Et dixit Deus ad Balaam, Ne eas
cum illis, neque maledicas populo qui benedictus est.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p27"></span>**13.** And Balaam rose up in the morning,
and said unto the princes of Balak, Get you into your land: for the Lord
refuseth to give me leave to go with you

<span id="ii.xxxv-p28"></span>**13.** Surrexit itaque Balaam mane, et
dixit ad principes Balac, Revertimini ad terram vestram: quia renuit
Jehova concedere mihi, ut eam vobiscum.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p29"></span>**14.** And the princes of Moab rose up,
and they went unto Balak, and said, Balaam refuseth to come with us.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p30"></span>**14.** Et surrexerunt principes Moab, et
perverternut ad Balac, ac dixerunt, Renuit Balaam venire nobiscum.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p31"></span>**15.** And Balak sent yet again princes,
more, and more honorable than they.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p32"></span>**15.** Rursus ergo misit Balac principes
plures, et nobiliores istis.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p33"></span>**16.** And they came to Balaam, and said
to him, Thus saith Balak the son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee,
hinder thee from coming unto me;

<span id="ii.xxxv-p34"></span>**16.** Qui venientes ad Balaam dixerunt
ei, Sic dixit Balac filius Sippor, Noli quaeso prohibere teipsum ne
venias ad me:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p35"></span>**17.** For I will promote thee unto very
great honor, and I will do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come
therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p36"></span>**17.** Nam honorando honorabo te valde,
et quicquid dixeris mihi, faciam: veni igitur obsecro, et maledic mihi
populo huic.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p37"></span>**18.** And Balaam answered and said unto
the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or
more.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p38"></span>**18.** Respendens autem Balaam dixit
servis Balac, Etiamsi daturus sit mihi Balac plenam domum suam argento
et auro, non possim transgredi sermonem Jehoare Dei mei, ut faciam
aliquid, sive parvum, sive magnum.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p39"></span>**19.** Now therefore, I pray you, tarry
ye also here this night, that I may know what the Lord will say unto me
more.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p40"></span>**19.** Nunc ergo manete, obsecro, hic vos
quoque hac nocte, ut sciam quid addet Jehova loqui mihi.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p41"></span>**20.** And God came unto Balaam at night,
and said unto him, If the men come to call thee, rise up, and go with
them; but yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p42"></span>**20.** Tunc venit Deus ad Balaam nocte,
et dixit ei, Si vocandum te venerint viri isti, surge, vade cum eis:
veruntamen quod dixero tibi, illud facies.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p43"></span>**21.** And Balaam rose up in the morning,
and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p44"></span>**21.** Surrexit itaque Balaam mane,et
stravit asinam suam, et perrexit cum principibus Moab.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p45"></span>**22.** And God’s anger was kindled
because he went: and the angel of the Lord stood in the way for an
adversary against him. (Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two
servants were with him.)

<span id="ii.xxxv-p46"></span>**22.** Iratus vero est furor Dei quod
ipse iret cum illis: stetitque angelus Jehovae in ipsa via, in
adversarium illi: ipse autem equitabat super asinam suam, et duo pueri
ejus erant cum co.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p47"></span>**23.** And the ass saw the angel of the
Lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass
turned aside out of the way, and went into the field; and Balaam smote
the ass, to turn her into the way.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p48"></span>**23.** At videns asina angelum Jehovae
stantem in via, et gladium ejus evaginatam in manu ejus, declinavit ilia
e via, et ivit in agrum: itaque percussit Balaam asinam ut declinare
faceret eam in viam.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p49"></span>**24.** But the angel of the Lord stood in
a path of the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a wall on that
side.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p50"></span>**24.** Stetitque postea angelus Jehovae
in semita vinearum: maceria una erat hinc, et maceria altera inde.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p51"></span>**25.** And when the ass saw the angel of
the Lord, she thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed Balaam’s foot
against the wall; and he smote her again.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p52"></span>**25.** Videns vero secundo asina angelum
Jehovae, coarctavit sese parieti, coarctavit quoque pedem Balaam ad
parietem: propterea addidit percutere cam.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p53"></span>**26.** And the angel of the Lord went
further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to
the right hand or to the left.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p54"></span>**26.** Addidit praeterea angelus Jehovae
transire, et stetit in loco angusto ubi nulla erat via ad declinandum
sire ad dextram sire ad sinistram.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p55"></span>**27.** And when the ass saw the angel of
the Lord, she fell down under Balaam: and Balaam’s anger was kindled,
and he smote the ass with a staff.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p56"></span>**27.** Quum autem vidisset asina angelum
Jehovah, succubuit sub Balaam, unde iratus furor Balaam percussit asinam
baculo.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p57"></span>**28.** And the Lord opened the mouth of
the ass; and she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou
hast smitten me these three times?

<span id="ii.xxxv-p58"></span>**28.** Et aperuit Jehova os asinae,
dixitque ilia ad Balaam, Quid feci tibi, quod percussisti me jam tribus
vicibus:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p59"></span>**29.** And Balaam said unto the ass,
Because thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand,
for now would I kill thee.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p60"></span>**29.** Tunc dixit Balaam ad asinam, Quia
illusisti mihi, utinam esset gladius in manu mea, certe nunc occiderem
te.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p61"></span>**30.** And the ass said unto Balaam, Am
not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto
this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p62"></span>**30.** Dixit autem asina ad Balaam, Nonne
sum asina tua? super me equitasti ex quo esse coepisti usque ad diem
hanc, nunquid solita sum facere tibi sic? Qui respondit, Nequaquam.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p63"></span>**31.** Then the Lord opened the eyes of
Balaam, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the way, and his
sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed down his head, and fell flat on
his face.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p64"></span>**31.** Et detexit Jehova oculos Balaam,
viditque angelum Jehovae stantem in via, et gladium ejus evaginatum in
manu ejus: tum demisso capite adoravit pronus in faciem suam.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p65"></span>**32.** And the angel of the Lord said
unto him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times?
Behold, I went out to withstand thee, because thy way is perverse before
me:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p66"></span>**32.** Et alloquutus est eum angelus
Jehovae, Quare percussisti asinam tuam jam tribus vicibus? en ego
egressus sum in adversarium tibi, quia declinavit a via coram me.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p67"></span>**33.** And the ass saw me, and turned
from me these three times: unless she had turned from me, surely now
also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p68"></span>**33.** Et vidit me asina, declinavit-que
ante me jam tribus vicibus: quod si non declinasset a facie mea, jam
nunc etiam te occidissem, et ipsam vivam reservassem.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p69"></span>**31.** And Balaam said unto the angel of
the Lord, I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way
against me: now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get me back
again.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p70"></span>**34.** Dixit igitur Balaam ad angelum
Jehovae, Peccavi: non enim sciebam quod tu stares in occursum mei in
via: Nunc autem si malum est in oculis tuis, revertar mihi.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p71"></span>**35.** And the angel of the Lord said
unto Balaam, Go with the men: but only the word that I shall speak unto
thee, that thou shalt speak. So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p72"></span>**35.** Angelus vero Jehovae dixit ad
Balaam, Vade cum istis viris: veruntamen verbum quod loquar ad te illud
loqueris. Abiit igitur Balaam cum principibus Balac:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p73"></span>**36.** And when Balak heard that Balaam
was come, he went out to meet him unto a city of Moab, which is in the
border of Arnon, which is in the utmost coast.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p74"></span>**36.** Audiens vero Balac quod adveniret
Balaam, egressus est in occursam ejus in civitatem quandam Moab, quae
erat juxta terminun Arnon, quae est in extremo finium.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p75"></span>**37.** And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I
not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? wherefore camest thou not
unto me? am I not able indeed to promote thee to honor?

<span id="ii.xxxv-p76"></span>**37.** Et dixit Balac ad Balaam, Annon
mittendo misi ad te ad accersendum te? an vere non possum honorare te?

<span id="ii.xxxv-p77"></span>**38.** And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I
am come unto thee: have now any power at all to say any thing? the word
that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p78"></span>**38.** Respondit autem Balaam ad Balac,
Ecce veni ad te: nunc autem nunquid omnino potero loqui quicquam? Verbum
quod posuerit Deus in ore meo, illud loquar.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p79"></span>**39.** And Balaam went with Balak, and
they came unto Kirjath-huzoth.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p80"></span>**39.** Et perrexit Balaam cum Balac, et
pervenerunt in civitatem Husoth:

<span id="ii.xxxv-p81"></span>**40.** And Balak offered oxen and sheep,
and sent to Balaam, and to the princes that were with him.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p82"></span>**40.** Et mactavit Balac boves, et oves:
misitque ad Balaam et ad principes qui cum ipso erant.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p83"></span>**41.** And it came to pass on the morrow,
that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal,
that thence he might see the utmost part of the people.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p84"></span>**41.** Postera autem die accepit Balac
ipsum Balaam, et ascendere fecit eum in excelsa Baal, et vidit illinc
extremum populi.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p85"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxv-p86"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p87"></span>**1.** *And the children, of Israel set
forward.* This narrative contains many circumstances worthy of record:
First, it shews that there is no stone which Satan does not turn for the
destruction of the Church, and that, after he has assailed her in vain
by force of arms, he attacks her by snares and secret artifices, whilst
the ungodly also work under his impulse, as far as they are able, to
overthrow her by deceit, and to make the promises of God, and His
unchangeable decree for the preservation of the Church which He has
chosen, of none effect. But God shews, on the other hand, that He so
watches over His own, as to turn to their salvation whatever plots their
enemies may devise for their destruction. He likewise represents as in a
mirror how foolish and vain are their attempts who endeavor to undermine
the grace of God; and especially He demonstrates that God’s truth will
always be so completely victorious as to receive the testimony even of
its professed enemies; just as Balaam was made to proclaim it. These and
other observations, however, will be better made in their several
places.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p88"></span>We have already seen that there was no
reason why Balak should devise any evil against God’s people, since he
had no inconvenience to fear from them. Their faith had been voluntarily
pledged; security had been promised him, and a treaty proposed. When,
therefore, he and all the Moabites prepare themselves, and arouse their
neighbors for resistance, they were ungrateful to God as well as men. In
his very alarm we see the truth of what Scripture declares, viz., that
the reprobate are always agitated by groundless terrors; and this is the
just reward of those who seek not peace with God, that they should be
constantly harassed by wretched disquietude. By special privilege God
had exempted the Moabites from being at all interfered with; but they
invent for themselves causes of anxiety, because they see that God’s
people had overcome great and powerful kings. For as the brightness of
the sun is painful and injurious to those who have weak eyes, so the
blessings which God bestows upon the Church, in token of His paternal
favor, torment the reprobate and stir them up to envy. If the Moabites
had prudently considered their own advantage, they might have easily so
arranged with their old connections as to provide for their own
tranquillity; but now, by provoking their ill-will, they make the worst
bargain possible for themselves. Nor is it the unwise alarm of Balak
only which is described, but that of the whole nation of Moab. At first,
indeed, the king’s name is introduced alone, but immediately afterwards
Moses includes them all without exception, hence it is plain that this
error was universal, by the contagion of which they presently corrupt
others also. For they invite the Midianites to associate themselves with
them in the work of repulsing the Israelites. The pretext alleged is,
that as oxen consume the grass of the field, so there was imminent
danger lest if the people of Israel were not resisted, they should as it
were lick up and devour all the nations; whereas they had experienced
quite the reverse, for the people had turned aside of their own accord
into circuitous paths, in order to avoid doing them injury. This
forbearance would have delivered them from all anxiety, unless their own
malignity had taught them to entertain foul suspicions; for why had not
the Israelites made a direct aggression upon their territories, except
because they were desirous to leave them safe and intact? Otherwise they
would have boldly made a way for themselves by force of arms.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p89"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p90"></span>**5.** *He sent messengers therefore unto
Balaam.* This passage shews us, like many others, that the errors
wherein Satan entangles unbelievers are derived from good principles.
The modesty of king Balak appears to be worthy of praise, in that,
conscious of his own weakness, and placing no confidence in human aid,
he sets about imploring the help of God. For this is our only safe
refuge, although earthly aids may fail us, still to maintain our
courage, and to rely upon God, who is all-sufficient in Himself, and
independent of external means. Thus far, then, Balak acts rightly, for
he seeks nothing more than to conciliate God’s favor, nor places his
confidence of victory in anything but God’s good-will; but, when he
seeks for God amiss by circuitous ways, he departs far from Him. And
this is a common error with all hypocrites and unbelievers, that, whilst
they aspire after God, they wander into indirect paths of their own.
Balak desires Divine deliverance from his danger; but the means are of
his own device, when he would purchase incantations from a mercenary
prophet; thus it is, that he binds down God, and subjects Him to his own
inventions. He knows, he says, that the power of blessing and cursing
appertained to Balaam; but, whence arose this persuasion, unless,  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) by catching at the more empty name of
Prophet, he separates God from Himself? He ought first to have inquired
what the will of God was, and to have addressed prayer in earnest faith
to Him, in order to propitiate Him; whereas, omitting the main thing, he
is satisfied with a mere venal blessing. We gather, therefore, from his
anxiety to obtain peace and pardon from God, that there was some seed of
religion implanted in his mind. The reverence which he pays to the
Prophet is also a sign of his piety. But that he desires to win over God
by his own vain inventions is a proof of foolish superstition; and that
he seeks to lay Him under obligation to himself, of impious pride.
 <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)

<span id="ii.xxxv-p93"></span>I know not how it came into the mind of
the Chaldee interpreter to suppose that Pether was on the banks of the
Euphrates; nor is it probable that (Balaam) was fetched from so great a
distance. Neither would his celebrity have extended from so distant a
place to these nations. I am persuaded that it is the proper name of a
place, because the termination of the word *Petorah* does not admit of
its being an epithet, such as “the soothsayer,” as Jerome has rendered
it. Although, however, the country is not specified, it is probably
gathered from the context that Balaam was a Midianite; and for this
reason I conceive the Midianites were sought in alliance, in order that
they might gain over their fellow-countrymen.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p94"></span>It is a poor exposition of what follows in
verse 7, that they had “the divinations in their hand,”  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) to refer it to the art of divination,
or even that they were accompanied by those who were skillful in the
same science. It is more simple to interpret it of their commission, as
though Moses said that the messengers were instructed as to what they
sought of Balaam, viz., that he should curse the people of Israel, for
there is no absurdity in supposing that Moses again repeats what he had
related in the preceding verse. Still, I am not indisposed to accept the
view which others take, viz., that they took with them the reward or
price of divination, for there have been in all ages hireling prophets
who made a sale of their revelations; and since even amongst the
Israelites many impostors thus set themselves up for hire, this abuse
had much vogue (among them.) Hence it was that Saul and his servant
hesitated to go to Samuel, because they had not any gift at hand to
offer him, until the servant replied that he had the fourth part of a
shekel of silver, as if Samuel set up his prophecies for sale, as was
commonly the case. (<span id="ii.xxxv-p95.3"></span>[1 Sam.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxxv-p95.3"></span>.)
Ezekiel, indeed, charges the false prophets with this, that they sold
themselves for a trifling bribe.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p96"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p97"></span>**8.** *And he said unto them, Lodge here
this night.* Inasmuch as he waits for a revelation from the true God, it
is probable that he was not a magician or sorcerer, whose only power to
divine arose from superstition or evil arts. We shall, indeed, see
hereafter, that he was accustomed to use many impostures and deceptions;
but it will be plain, from the evidence of facts, that he was furnished
with the gift of prophecy. Not that he is to be reckoned among the true
prophets whom God set over His Church, because neither was the perpetual
office of prophesying conferred upon him, nor was it conjoined with that
of teaching. For those servants of His, to whom God intrusted the office
of prophesying, He so directed by His Spirit, that they never spoke
except out of His mouth. And although they did not foresee all that was
to happen, but only according to the measure of their revelation, still
He concealed nothing from them which it was profitable for them to know.
Hence the expression of Amos,

<span id="ii.xxxv-p98"></span>“Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but
he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.” (<span
id="ii.xxxv-p98.1"></span>[Am 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p98.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxv-p99"></span>In a word, they were the organs of the
Holy Spirit for all necessary predictions; and the credit due to their
prophecies was of an equable and constant character, so that they never
spoke absurdly or in vain. Besides, they were endowed with the power of
adapting their prophecies to a just object and use. Thus, after the Law
was promulgated, they were its interpreters. In prosperity they bore
witness to the grace of God; in adversity, to His judgments. In fine,
their business was to ratify God’s covenant, whereby He reconciles men
to Himself through Christ. Far different was the case with Balaam, and
such like, who were only endued with a particular gift,  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) so that they truly foretold some
things, and were mistaken in others; and, indeed, they only uttered bare
revelations without any admixture of doctrine. God willed, indeed, that
such should exist even among heathen nations, so that some sparks of
light should shine amidst their darkness, and thus the excuse of
ignorance should be taken away. Indeed, all those who have dared to
delude the world by their impostures have usurped the name of prophet;
and although the word *divination* is honorable and sacred, it has been
improperly applied to the art of deception, and the liberty to lie, as
it is the custom of the devil to profane God’s name by its impious
abuse. Still, there were some among the Gentiles who occasionally
predicted future events by divine inspiration; and this was especially
the case before the Law was given, inasmuch as God had not then
distinguished His elect people from others by this mark. At this time,
it is true, the promise had been given,

<span id="ii.xxxv-p101"></span>“The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee
prophets,”  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) etc, (<span
id="ii.xxxv-p102.2"></span>[De
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p102.2"></span>.);

<span id="ii.xxxv-p103"></span>but it was not yet generally known, and
therefore God was unwilling that the nations should be deprived of their
soothsayers, who still were very different from those true prophets,
whose call was clear and legitimate.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p104"></span>I have said thus much briefly with
reference to Balaam, whom God addresses in a vision by night, or dream,
no less familiarly than any of His own servants; but only on a
particular point. By the inquiry, “What men are these with thee?” Hie
indirectly reproves his improper desires. At first sight he pretends a
holy anxiety to obey, when he dares to attempt nothing without God’s
permission, and refuses to stir a foot, until he shall have received His
answer. Yet secret covetousness influences him to obtain from God, by
bargaining as it were, what he still feels not to be right. God glances
at this astuteness, when He inquires respecting the men; as much as to
say, that there was no reason why he should detain them a moment, since
their demand should have been peremptorily refused. And, assuredly, if
he had been free, he would have hastened at once to obey the wishes of
king Balak, even contrary to the will of God. He now requests that
permission should be given him; as if he desired to have the reins,
which withheld him from his evil purposes, slackened, when he would have
willingly shaken them off altogether, if he were not well aware that he
could do nothing further than God would permit. Nor, indeed, does he
regard what is lawful and right; but only seeks that his mouth may be
opened to curse with impunity.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p105"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p106"></span>**12.** *Thou shalt not go with them.* If
there were any room for doubt, God peremptorily removes it, and confirms
the prohibition; because it was unlawful to curse, those whom He had
blessed. For nothing more is permitted to prophets than that they should
be the witnesses, or ambassadors *(internuntii,)* or heralds of the
grace which God freely deigns to bestow at His own pleasure upon whom He
will. Moreover, God is said to *bless* those whom He has embraced with
His favor, and to whom He experimentally declares Himself to be
propitious, when He displays His liberality towards them. Of this
*blessing* He willed that the prophets should be His ministers in such a
manner that the power should still remain altogether in His own hands.
If, therefore, they usurp to themselves the prerogative of blessing
without His commission, their act is not merely frivolous and
inefficacious, but even blasphemous. Justly, then, does Ezekiel convict
of falsehood and deception those false prophets, who, by their
flatteries, encourage the souls which were doomed to die; whilst they
slay by their terrors and threats those to whom God had promised life.
(<span id="ii.xxxv-p106.1"></span>[Eze
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxxv-p106.1"></span>
and 22.) Hence we gather, how vain it is for hypocrites, as they are
wont to do, to purchase pardon from men in order to propitiate God; and
also that we need not be afraid of those degenerate ministers,  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) who desire to domineer tyrannically in
virtue of their office, although they launch their fulminations against
the innocent.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p108"></span>It is plain, however, that Balaam’s
obedience to God’s command does not proceed from the heart. His words,
indeed, might deceive the simple, from their appearance of humility; “I
will not go, because God forbids it; “but there is no doubt but that,
led as he was to gratify them by ambition and by avarice, he indicates
that he would be disposed to undertake the journey, unless he were
forbidden by God. If his heart had been sincere, the honest reply he
should have given was obvious, viz., that it was vain to send either for
himself or any one else, in order that Balak might resist the inviolable
decree of God. If he had thus heartily and unequivocally given glory to
God, another embassy would not have been sent to him; but by his
faltering excuse he appeared to inflame the desire of the foolish king,
in order to sell his curse at a higher price; for we know that this is
the usual way with impostors, that they obtain higher pay for themselves
in proportion to the difficulty of the matter. Still, however, if we
compare the mercenary prophets of the Pope with Balaam, his servile and
enforced submission will deserve no little praise by the side of their
detestable and indomitable folly, who, in despite of God, hesitate not
to burst forth in impious curses. The truth, which they oppugn, is
conspicuous: that terrible judgment, which (God) denounces by the mouth
of Isaiah, rings in their ears, “Woe unto them that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness,” (<span id="ii.xxxv-p108.1"></span>[Isa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p108.1"></span>;) nevertheless they proceed, and in their
brutal madness vomit forth their blasphemies not only to the destruction
of the Church, but, if it were possible, to the extinction of all
religion.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p109"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p110"></span>**15.** *And Balak sent yet again
princes.* Here we see that, however humbly ungodly men implore God’s
grace, still they do not lay aside their pride; as if their grandeur
could avail to dazzle the eyes of God. In order, therefore, to make Him
comply with their wishes, they think it enough to display their
magnificent ceremonies; and, indeed, whatever modesty superstition may
pretend, it always swells with secret confidence Thus Balak, in order to
obtain favor, makes a show of his dignity and power, and deems that
Balaam will be thus at his service. Although, however, the impostor
shews much more spirit in this his second reply than before, still his
hypocrisy is soon discovered, and he betrays the duplicity of his mind.
It is, indeed, a noble speech, and indicative of much magnanimity, “If
Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I will not
disobey the command of God:” but why does he not instantly banish from
him altogether these unholy traffickers, who are instigating him to
transgression? We see, then, that he speaks rather in a spirit of
boasting, than to ascribe to God the glory due to Him; for his desire
was to acquire for himself the title and credit of a holy Prophet by
this parade of obedience. In the meantime, when he begs that a season of
delay should be granted him for the purpose of inquiring what God’s
pleasure was, he is convicted of impious rebellion. He does not dare
openly, and in flagrant contempt of God, to put himself forward for the
purpose of cursing God’s people: and so far well: but why does he not
acquiesce in the Divine decision? why, when he has been assured whether
a matter was lawful or not, does he still doubtingly inquire? For thus
does he deliberate, and question whether that which God has once
prescribed ought to be certain and unchangeable; nay, he endeavors to
force God to alter His determination. From the time that he had heard,
“Thou shalt not go,” upon what pretense was it permissible to continue
the controversy? This, then, is the object of Balaam’s endeavor, that
God, by withdrawing the decision which He had pronounced, should deny
Himself; and this was an act of most blasphemous impiety. Still many
such persons will be found now-a-days, who, though fully assured of the
will of God, cease not nevertheless to countermine it, so that they may
at length attain the end, towards which they are hurried by their
lawless cupidity. At the outset, it is anything but their desire to know
what is right; or, when they know it, to follow it: but ambition
instigates some, lust inflames others, and others are urged forward by
avarice: in a word, evil affections preside over every deliberation.
Straightway God interposes some obstacle, and compels them, whether they
will or no, to understand what they ought to do. They proceed, however,
notwithstanding; and, inasmuch as the way is closed, they endeavor by
subterfuges, by crooked paths or evasions, to elude the sure word of
God; and, although they appear to do this modestly, because they
hesitate until permission shall have been obtained from God, yet herein
does their impudence betray itself, that they do not cease to importune
God and His prophets, until they have extorted what they have already
heard to be unlawful. It is plain, therefore, that all those are
disciples of Balaam, who try the indulgence, of God, that He may at
length permit them to attempt what; He has once refused.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p111"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p112"></span>**20.** *And God came to Balaam at,
night.* Although God is far from being deceitful, still hypocrites with
their quibbles deserve that He should delude their craft. If we more
closely consider the desire of Balaam, it was that God should belie
Himself. For, if he was persuaded that He was truthful, what else was
there to be hoped except that he should ratify His reply ten times over?
Nevertheless, he wickedly lies to God, when he asks for a permission to
go, which would convict God Himself of capriciousness and inconstancy.
God, therefore, ironically permits what He had before forbidden. If any
should deem it to be absurd that God, who is truth itself, should speak
deceptively, the answer is easily found, viz., that God was guilty of no
falsehood, but that He loosed the reins to a man obstinate in his own
perverseness, just as a person might emancipate a wayward and grossly
immoral son, because he will not suffer himself to be ruled. For had not
his ungodly covetousness blinded Balaam, the meaning of this ironical
permission was not difficult to be understood. Hence, then, let
hypocrites learn, that they profit nothing by their vain pretences,
although God may indulge them for a time, since He at length taketh the
wily in their own craftiness; wherefore, nothing is better than, in pure
and simple teachableness, to inquire what He would have us do, that we
may instantly succumb, nor try to alter a word or a syllable as soon as
He shall have deigned to open His holy mouth to instruct us. For to call
in question what has been decided by Him, what is it but to compel Him
by our importunity to bend Himself to our wishes?

<span id="ii.xxxv-p113"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p114"></span>**22.** *And God’s anger was kindled
because he went.* How is it consistent that God should be angry when
Balaam had attempted nothing, thus far, contrary to His command? But we
must bear in mind, what I have lately hinted, that God apparently
permits much which He does not approve. He allowed the people in the
wilderness to eat flesh: He permitted men to give a writing of divorce
to their wives, and even to marry several at once; still it was not
right for them to eat the flesh, nor were divorce and polygamy free from
culpability. At any rate, Balaam sinned by pertinaciously urging what
was sinful, and thus deserved the punishment of death, though God was
pleased to mitigate it. On this point it behoves us also to be soberly
wise, lest, when God’s secret judgments differ from our moral sense, we
should cry out against Him. That prophet, who, having faithfully
delivered his message, tasted bread on his way back, and this at the
instigation of another prophet, so that he only fell through
carelessness and want of reflection, He punished with death, (<span
id="ii.xxxv-p114.1"></span>[1Ki
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxxv-p114.1"></span>;)
in this case, the punishment which He inflicts upon an impostor and
cheat, who  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) prostitutes his
tongue for hire, is no harsher than to terrify him by threats. Here the
temerity of the flesh would willingly lay hold of the occasion to find
fault with God; but the fact was, that the punishment which awaited
Balaam, and from which he did not finally escape, was delayed for a
certain period in order to display more brightly the glory of God.
Wherefore, if a doubt ever pervades our minds, when the reason for any
of God’s works is not apparent, let us learn at once to repress it.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p116"></span>The external manifestation of God’s anger
is afterwards described; *i.e.,* that the Angel meets him with a drawn
sword; wherein we may observe that, to the great disgrace of the
Prophet, the glory of the Angel was first revealed to the ass. For,
although the Angel had assumed a body, by the sight of which a
brute-animal might be affected, how did it come to pass that the ass was
terrified at this alarm ing sight, whilst the eyes of the Prophet were
closed against it, unless because God wished to brand the stupidity of
this faithless man with a mark of ignominy? He had previously boasted of
his extraordinary visions; a vision now escapes him which was manifest
to the eyes of a beast. Whence did such blindness as this arise, except
from avarice, by which he was so stupified as to prefer filthy lucre to
the holy calling of God? In a word, in him was fulfilled, what Scripture
so often denounces against the reprobate, that he was struck by a spirit
of dizziness and folly so as to be unable to perceive anything. I have
already said, that although angels are naturally invisible, yet that
they assume bodies whenever God so pleases, and act in the character of
human beings. Who supplied the Angel with a sword? Even He, who created
all things out of nothing. If any curious person should go further, and
inquire of what material the sword was made? it will be easy to reprove
his folly by another question, viz., Whether it is easier for mortal man
or for God to apply iron and steel to their various purposes? And it
might be the case that a bright light shone from the sword, as when the
Cherubim were placed with swords to shut the entrance of Paradise
against Adam. In a word, God clothed His Angel in such a form as might
strike with terror both the brute-animal and the false prophet. But He
began with the ass, in order to put the stolidity of the wicked man more
completely to shame.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p117"></span>Moses proceeds to relate how the ass,
first of all, was turned aside out of the way, and then, when she was
met in a narrow place, how she tremblingly started back so as to crush
her master’s foot against the wall, and at length how she fell down
under him. Surely this miserable impostor ought to have been awakened,
if he had not been fascinated by the devil. But Moses carefully details
all these circumstances, in order to show that he was not only deprived
of common sense, but so utterly astounded, as to pay no attention to a
most illustrious miracle.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p118"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p119"></span>**28.** *And the Lord opened the mouth of
the ass.* Sceptical persons criticize this passage, and ridicule it, as
if Moses related an incredible fable. And, indeed, their scoff appears
to be plausible, when they object that there is a great difference
between the bray of all ass and all articulate voice; but, however they
may now indulge in such wanton observations, they will at length be made
to feel how seriously and reverently we ought to speak of the marvellous
works of God, by their jokes and trifling about which they seek to
appear facetious. Now, since their chattering is unworthy of a
lengthened refutation, let us be satisfied by the contempt into which it
is thrown by a single expression of Moses, when he says that God “opened
the mouth of the ass.” For whence would men possess the faculty of
speech, unless God had opened their mouth at the first creation of the
world? Whence comes it that magpies and parrots imitate the human voice,
unless it were the will of God to manifest in them a specimen of a
certain extraordinary power? Who is there, then, who shall now impose a
law upon the Maker of the world, to prevent Him from adapting the mouth
of a beast to the utterance of words? Unless perhaps they would suppose
Him to be bound irrevocably, because He has once appointed a certain
order in nature, to abstain from displaying His power by miracles. If
the ass had been changed into a man, we should have been bound to
reverence this proof of God’s incomprehensible power;  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) now, when we are told that merely a
few words were drawn from it without intelligence or judgment, as if a
sound of any kind were diffused through the air, shall the miracle be
regarded as a fable? Moreover, if unclean spirits utter words in
spectral illusions, why shall God be unable to endow mute tongues with
the faculty of speech? Let us, then, learn to reverence with becoming
humility the sentence which God executed on the false prophet. He might
have chastised him directly by the words of the Angel; but, because the
reproof would not have been sufficiently severe if unattended by gross
ignominy, He ordained that a beast should instruct him. The voice of the
Angel was, indeed, added afterwards; but, since he had been so
unteachable, he is treated according to his desert, when, after having
made some proficiency in the school of the ass, he begins to listen to
God. And, further, the ass convicts him of being dull, and deluded in
mind in this respect, that he was not aroused by this unusual
circumstance. For she says that she had never before been refractory.
If, therefore, there had been any spark of apprehension in the wretched
man, he ought to have reflected as to what was the meaning of this novel
proceeding and sudden change. Thus was he awakened from his lethargy, in
order that he might listen more attentively to what the Angel afterwards
spoke.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p121"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p122"></span>**31.** *Then the Lord opened the eyes of
Balaam.* This passage teaches us, that whatever be the acuteness of our
senses, it is not only implanted in us by God, but also either sustained
or extinguished by His secret inspiration. Balaam’s eyes are opened;
consequently there was a veil before them previously, which prevented
him from seeing what was manifest. Thus God at His pleasure makes dull
the senses of those who seem to themselves to be very acute; since
perception is His special gift.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p123"></span>By this example we are shewn as in a
mirror how hypocrites fear God, viz., when they are influenced by His
presence; for as soon as they can withdraw themselves, they revel like
fugitive slaves. Balaam saw the angel threatening him with a drawn
sword, and he hung down his head, and adored; that is to say, because
the vengeance of God was impending. But this fear by no means induced
him to true correction of himself, he confesses, indeed, that he had
sinned, and puts forth some fruit of repentance in that he is ready to
return home; but he betrays a servile and compulsory fear, which only
trembles at the thought of punishment. “I knew not (he says) that thou
stoodest in the way.” Unless, therefore, the Angel had been armed for
his punishment, he was proceeding in security, as if impunity were
conceded to him. Another expression also discovers his craft and
perfidiousness, he is ready to return, if his proceeding should
*displease* God; as if he had not known before that it was by no means
pleasing to God. This, then, is a ridiculous condition, as if he were in
doubt on a point which was abundantly clear. If he really feared God,
and in pure sincerity of heart, he ought at once to have renounced an
expedition which was wicked in itself, and improperly undertaken. For
what avail was it to say, “I have sinned,” if he thinks that he can
prosecute the journey he had begun in opposition to God? Let us,
therefore, learn, when God’s will is positively known, to have recourse
to no crooked subterfuges, whereby we may delay to perform it.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p124"></span>When the Angel says: Unless the ass had
turned aside, that he should have slain Balaam without injuring her, he
intimates not only that, in accordance with God’s justice and
loving-kindness, he would have spared the harmless animal, but that by
the very sagacity of the beast, — as though she had deprecated God’s
anger, — the life of her master, who was else unworthy of mercy, had
been redeemed.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p125"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p126"></span>**35.** *And the angel of the Lord said
unto Balaam.* Again this wicked man is ironically permitted to do what
could not be carried out without sin. But, as I have said before, he was
so conscious of his ungodly covetousness, that he knowingly and wilfully
deceived himself, instead of being deceived. At the same time, we must
observe that, as Paul calls God’s wisdom “manifold,” (<span
id="ii.xxxv-p126.1"></span>[Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p126.1"></span>,) so His will is declared in various ways,
as if He were inconsistent with Himself, though it always actually
remains the same. Certain it is, that it was a mere pretense of Balaam,
that he went at the command or permission of God. Nevertheless, this
answer was given him, “Go,” etc. God, indeed, cast derision on the
pertinacious folly of this wicked man, and did not approve as proper
that which, as far as words went, He permitted; meanwhile, these two
things are consistent with each other, that God did not approve what He
condemned, and yet chose that it should be done. For, even when He
executes His purpose by means of wicked men, He does not prescribe to
them that they are to act thus. He willed to require punishment of
Solomon by the hands of Jeroboam, and that the impiety of the house of
Ahab should have vengeance inflicted upon it by Jehu; and still it was
not right of Jeroboam to upset what God had declared, *i.e.,* that the
posterity of David should continue upon the throne; and Jehu also,
although he had been anointed by the Prophet, still was guilty of a
criminal act in seizing the kingdom: inasmuch as nothing but ambition
impelled him to it. As far as relates to the history before us, it was
His will to prove by the mouth of Balaam how effectual and unchangeable
was His determination as to the adoption of the people, whereby His
truth and faithfulness might be more conspicuously shewn forth.
Nevertheless, Balaam sinned, in that he was attracted, like a hound, by
the scent of gain, to sell his curses for money.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p127"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p127.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p128"></span>**36.** *And whenBalak heard that Balaam
was come.* This passage admirably represents to us the spirit of all
those who are devoted to their various superstitions without a sincere
fear of God. They are cringing to their false prophets; they meanly
flatter them, and hardly stop short of worshipping them, so that nothing
more obsequious can be imagined; yet they inwardly cherish pride, which
breaks out when they by no means expect, it. The king goes forth to meet
the prophet, and to pay due honors to himself and his office. It is a
great condescension; for it is equivalent to laying his crown and
sceptre at his feet: but his dissimulation soon discovers itself, when,
expostulating with Balaam, he boasts of his power and riches, wherewith
he was able to reward him. Now this is precisely as if he should make
the prophetical office subservient to money, and claim the dominion over
its revelations by means of his wealth. However great, then, may be the
servility with which superstitious persons flatter their idols and
priests, still they never lay aside their proud spirits. Such zeal we
may see in the Papists, who are as prodigal as possible of the reverence
which they parade towards their prelates and monks; but on this
condition, that they will be, on their part, complacent to their lusts.
If, therefore, a priest, *(sacrificus)* will not gratify his
worshippers, they inveigh against him with as much bitterness as if he
were any swine-herd.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p129"></span>The answer of Balaam at first sight
breathes nothing but piety: “I have come, (he says,) but I must needs
speak as God shall command.” Whereby he signifies, that, as far as
civility required, and inasmuch as depended upon himself, he would have
complied with the wishes of the king; but that, in regard to his office
as a prophet, he was not at liberty to do this, inasmuch as he would
disregard the favor of all mankind, in order that he might obey the
commands of God alone.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p130"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p131"></span>**39.** *And Balaam went with Balak.*
Moses proceeds to relate how honorably and sumptuously Balaam was
received. And first, he records that he was taken to the city of Huzoth;
 <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) which some would understand as
a proper name, others as a noun appellative. In whichever way you take
it, it denotes the extent of the city, which was divided into various
streets. Secondly, Moses tells us that an abundance of animals were
slain in preparation for the feast, and that guests were invited to
banquet with Balaam himself.  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150)
The object of all this is, that Balaam was enticed by blandishments, in
order that he might be ashamed to refuse anything to so munificent a
king, by whom he had been treated not merely in a friendly, but in a
liberal manner; just as if Balaam stood in the place of God, or as if
the grace of God Himself were marketable. At length Moses adds that
Balaam was brought up into the high places of Baal, that from this
elevation he might more conveniently see the camp of the people. Moses,
however, says that he only saw the extreme part of the camp; because the
whole country was mountainous, and the view was obstructed by distance;
still, in my opinion, the sanctity of the spot was the reason why it was
chosen by Balak. He, therefore, brought Balaam to a temple, as it were,
in order the more to conciliate God’s favor. Hence, too, it is apparent
that this impostor had no fixed or solid views with regard to the
service of God, but that he worshipped idols promiscuously amongst the
heathen, either because he was involved in the same superstitions, or
because he made no difficulty in complying with any customs or rites, in
order to curry favor. For there have always been  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) trimmers in the world, who for
flattery’s sake have corrupted religion by various devices, and have
mingled heaven with earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc06036.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p91"></span> “Si ce n’est qu’en prenant a la volee le
titre vain de Prophete sans son effet, il separe Dieu de soy-mesme, ou
le veust couper par pieces?” unless it be that, laying hold at random of
the empty title of Prophet without its essence, he separates God from
himself, and would cut him in pieces? — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc06036.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p92"></span> “D’un orgueil diabolique; “of diabolical
arrogance. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc06036.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p95"></span> *A.V.* “The rewards of divination;”
Ainsworth says, “So Targum Jonathan expoundeth it, *The fruits of
divination sealed in their hand;* and thus *Besorah,* i.e., *good
tidings,* is used for *the reward of good tidings,* in <span
id="ii.xxxv-p95.1"></span>[2Sa
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxxv-p95.1"></span>.”
“Non raro Hebraei rem ponunt pro pretio rei; ut <span
id="ii.xxxv-p95.2"></span>[Ex
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxxv-p95.2"></span>,
*humiliatio,* i.e., pretium pudicitiae.” — Bonfrerius in Poole.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc06036.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p100"></span> “Pour predire ceci ou cela;” to predict
this or that. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc06036.htm#fr_145) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p102"></span> *A.V.* “A Prophet.” See *C.’s* Comment.
*in loco,* vol. 1, p. 433.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc06036.htm#fr_146) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p107"></span> “Les ministres masques;” the masked
ministers. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc06036.htm#fr_147) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p115"></span> “Qui vouloit vendre la grace du sainct
Esprit;” who would sell the grace of the Holy Spirit. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc06036.htm#fr_148) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p120"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “Plutost que d’en
faire nos farceries;” rather than to make our mock at it.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc06036.htm#fr_149) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p131.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p132"></span> *A. V., “Kirjath-huzoth.” Margin* “a
city of streets.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc06036.htm#fr_150) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p132.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p133"></span> “Et que Balaam a este accompagne de gens
honorables;” and that Balaam was accompanied by persons of honor.— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc06036.htm#fr_151) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p134"></span> *Lat.,* “medii homines.” *Fr*., “des
nageurs entre deux eaux; “swimmers between two waters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 23:1-30](cc06037)
