[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06002)  [Next](cc06004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span><span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
9:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017)<span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span>**17.** And when the cloud was taken up from
the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed: and in
the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched
their tents.

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>**17.** Quum discederet nubes a tabernaculo,
postea proficiscebantur filii Israel: atque in loco ubi manebat nubes,
illic castrametabantur filii Israel.

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**18.** At the commandment of the Lord the
children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the Lord they
pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in
their tents.

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span>**18.** Ad os Jehovae proficiscebantur filii
Israel, et ad os Jehovae castrametabantur: cunctis diebus quibus stabat
nubes supra tabernaculum, manebant.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>**19.** And when the cloud tarried long upon
the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of
the Lord, and journeyed not.

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span>**19.** Quum autem moram trahebat nubes supra
tabernaculum diebus multis, tunc observabant filii Israel custodiam
Jehovae, et non proficiscebantur.

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span>**20.** And so it was, when the cloud was a
few days upon the tabernacle; according to the commandment of the Lord
they abode in their tents, and according to the commandment of the Lord
they journeyed.

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>**20.** Quando autem nubes paucis diebus
erat super tabernaculum, ad os Jehovae manebant, et ad os Jehovae
proficiscebantur.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>**21.** And so it was, when the cloud abode
from even unto the morning, and that the cloud was taken up in the
morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day or by night that the
cloud was taken up, they journeyed.

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span>**21.** Quando igitur erat nubes a vespera
usque mane, ascendebat autem nubes mane, tunc proficiscebantur: aut si
nocte et die, et postea ascendebat nubes, tunc proficiscebantur.

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>**22.** Or whether it were two days, or a
month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining
thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not:
but when it was taken up, they journeyed.

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span>**22.** Aut duobus diebus, aut mense, aut
anno, quando moram trahebat nubes super tabernaculum, manendo super
illud, in castris manebant filii Israel, nec proficiscebantur: si autem
illa ascendebat, tunc proficiscebantur.

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span>**23.** At the commandment of the Lord they
rested in the tents, and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed:
they kept the charge of the Lord, at the commandment of the Lord by the
hand of Moses.

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>**23.** Ad os Jehovae castrametabantur, et
ad os Jehovae proficiscebantur: custodiam Jehovae servabant ad os
Jehovae per manum Mosis.

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span><span id="ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span>**17.** *And when the cloud was taken up
from the tabernacle.* Moses before informed us that the tabernacle was
so distinguished by a visible miracle, that God made it manifest that He
dwelt there: not that He left heaven and removed to that earthly house,
but in order to be nigh to His people by the presence of His power and
grace, whenever He was invoked by them. He now reports another miracle,
that God, by uplifting the cloud, gave a sign, as it were, by which He
commanded them to strike the camp; and when the cloud rested on the
tabernacle, it was a sign that they should abide where they were. Here,
however, a question arises; since it has been already said that,
immediately after their departure from Egypt, the cloud was like a
banner to direct the march of the people, it follows that they were not
now for the first time admonished by its being lifted up to collect
their baggage, and ordered as it were to advance. The answer is easy,
that the people were indeed previously directed by the sight of the
cloud, as we have seen; but that here a new fact is related, viz., that
since the tabernacle was set up, the cloud, which hitherto was suspended
in the air and went before the camp, now settled on the sanctuary: for a
fresh acquisition of grace is here proclaimed by the more certain and
conspicuous sign, as if God showed himself more closely and familiarly
as the leader of the people. Although, therefore, the cloud had been the
director of their march from its very commencement, yet it more fully
illustrated the glory of the tabernacle when it proceeded from thence.

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span><span id="ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p20"></span>**18.** *At the commandment of the Lord.*
 <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) The *mouth* is here used by metonymy
for the speech; nor does there appear to me to be so much harshness in
the Hebraism, but that it may be appropriately retained. But it is asked
whether God actually spoke or not; for the word *mouth* is often
repeated. It is indeed likely that Moses was instructed but *once* what
was meant by the removal or remaining of the cloud; yet I doubt not but
that the name of *word,* or *commandment,* was given to the sign,
inasmuch as God speaks as much to the eyes by outward signs as He does
to the ears by His voice. Still, from this mode of expression we may
gather that the use of signs  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) is
perverted and nullified, unless they are taken to be visible doctrine,
as Augustin writes. The repetition, which certainly has no little force,
shows how worthy this is of observation.

<span id="ii.ii-p23"></span><span id="ii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p24"></span>**19.** *Then the children kept the charge
of the Lord.* Some,  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) in my opinion,
extend this too far, thinking that when the cloud tarried, the children
of Israel, being as it were at leisure, employed themselves in the
worship of God; but I restrict it rather to that heedfulness which is
then praised at some length. To keep the charge *(custodiam,)* then, is
equivalent to regarding the will of God with the greatest earnestness
and care. For, when the cloud had begun to rest in any place, the people
knew that they were to remain there; but if on the next day they were
not attentive, the cloud might vanish, and thus their neglect and
carelessness might deprive them of this incomparable advantage.

<span id="ii.ii-p26"></span>To this end it is said immediately
afterwards that, If for one day, or more, or even for a month, or a
year, the cloud stood still, the people was, as it were, tied to the
spot. The old interpreter  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) has not
badly rendered it, “The children of Israel were upon the watch;” since
day and night they anxiously expected the time when God would command
them to move forward. The last verse of the chapter confirms this sense,
where it is again added, that “they kept the charge of the Lord at His
mouth by the hand of Moses:” whence it appears that Moses was God’s
interpreter, so that they might set forth on their march whenever the
cloud being lifted up pointed out to them the way. Nor can it be doubted
but that it preceded them; so that they might know in what direction God
would have them proceed, and whither they were to go. Moreover, it must
be observed that in both respects it is counted worthy of praise in the
people, that they should either journey, or continue where they were, at
God’s command. Thus is that absurd activity condemned which engages
itself in endless work; as if men could only obey God by turmoil.
Whereas it is sometimes no less a virtue to rest, when it so pleases
God.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc06003.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p21"></span> “At the mouth of the Lord.” — *Lat.*

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc06003.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p22"></span> “Des sacremens.” — *Fr.* I cannot find that
Augustin anywhere uses the exact words which *C.* here attributes to
him. In his *Tract. in Evang. Johan.,* 80. Section 3, however, he says,
“Detrahe verbum, et quid est aqua nisi aqua? Accedit verbum ad
elementum, et fit sacramentum, etiam ipsum tanquam *visibile verbum*.”
(Edit. Bened. vol. 3, part. 2, p. 703.) And again, *Contra Faustum,
lib.* 19. *cap.* 16: “Quid enim sunt aliud quaeque corporalia
sacramenta, nisi quaedam quasi *verba visibiliar?* Etc. Vol. 8:32l. Both
these passages are quoted by *C.* *Inst.* 4, 14. Section 6.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc06003.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p25"></span> Dathe agrees with Malvenda and other
ancient commentators in adopting the opinion here rejected by *C.* “The
sense of the passage (he says) is, that the Israelites set up the holy
tabernacle, and observed the holy rites, if they were detained for many
days in one place; but if for a short time only, the tabernacle was not
set up. Whether this was to be the case or not was indicated to them by
Moses, according to <span id="ii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Nu
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#023)<span id="ii.ii-p25.1"></span>.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc06003.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p27"></span> *I.e.,* the Vulgate: “Erant filii Israel in
excubiis Domini.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc06003.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p28"></span> “They also serve, who only stand, and
wait.” — Milton; Sonnet on his blindness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 40:36-38](cc06004)
