[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06005)  [Next](cc06007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
11](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#000)<span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span><span id="ii.v-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
11:1-35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001)<span id="ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span>**1.** And when the people complained, it
displeased the Lord: and the Lord heard it; and his anger was kindled;
and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were
in the uttermost parts of the camp.

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span>**1.** Et fuit populus quasi fatiscentes,
displicuit in auribus Jehovae. Audivit enim Jehova, et iratus est furor
ejus, exarsitque ignis ipsius contra eos, consumpsitque extremum
castrorum.

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>**2.** And the people cried unto Moses; and
when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire was quenched.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span>**2.** Tunc clamavit populus ad Mosen, et
oravit Moses Jehovam, et concidit ignis.

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span>**3.** And he called the name of the place
Taberah; because the fire of the Lord burnt among them.

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span>**3.** Vocavitque nomen illius loci Taberah:
quia accensus fuerat in eos ignis Jehovae.

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>**4.** And the mixed multitude that was among
them fell a lusting; and the children of Israel also wept again, and
said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span>**4.** Et collectio quae erat in medio ejus,
concupiverunt concupiscentia, et aversi sunt: quinetiam fleverunt filii
Israel, dicentes, Quis pascet nos carnibus?

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span>**5.** We remember the fish which we did eat
in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the
onions, and the garlic:

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span>**5.** Recordamur piscium quos comedebamus in
AEgypto gratis, cucumerum, et peponum, et porrorum, et ceparum et
alliorum.

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span>**6.** But now our soul is dried away: there
is nothing at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span>**6.** At nunc anima nostra arida est, nec
quicquam est nisi man in oculis nostris.

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span>**7.** And the manna was as coriander seed,
and the color thereof as the color of bdellium.

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span>**7.** Man autem sicut coriandri semen erat,
et color ejus sicut color bdellii.

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span>**8.** And the people went about, and
gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked
it in pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste
of fresh oil.

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>**8.** Diffundebant autem se populus, et
colligebant, et molebant in mola aut terebant in mortario, coquebantque
in olla, faciebantque ex eo placentas, quarum sapor erat sicut sapor
recentis olei:

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span>**9.** And when the dew fell upon the camp in
the night, the manna fell upon it.

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span>**9.** Quum vero descenderat ros super
castra, descendebat man super ipsum.

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span>**10.** Then Moses heard the people weep
throughout their families, every man in the door of his tent: and the
anger of the Lord was kindled greatly; Moses was also displeased.

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span>**10.** Audivit itaque Moses populum flentem
per familias: quemque ad ostium tabernaculi sui: unde iratus est furor
Jehovae valde, ipsi quoque Mosi displicuit.

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span>**11.** And Moses said unto the Lord,
Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore have I not
found favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people
upon me?

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span>**11.** Et dixit Moses ad Jehovam, Ut quid
malefecisti servo tuo? et quare non inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, ut
imponeres onus universi populi hujus super me?

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span>**12.** Have I conceived all this people?
have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto me, Carry them in thy
bosom (as a nursing-father beareth the sucking child) unto the land
which thou sworest unto their fathers?

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span>**12.** An ego concepi universum populum
istum? et an ego genui eum, quod dicis mihi, Porta eum in sinu tuo,
quemadmodum ferre solet nutritius infantem, in terram de qua jurasti
patribus ejus?

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span>**13.** Whence should I have flesh to give
unto all this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that
we may eat.

<span id="ii.v-p28"></span>**13.** Unde mihi caro ut dem universo populo
huic? Flent enim adversum me, dicendo, Da nobis carnes, ut comedamus.

<span id="ii.v-p29"></span>**14.** I am not able to bear all this people
alone, because it is too heavy for me.

<span id="ii.v-p30"></span>**14.** Non possem ego solus ferre universum
populum hunc: quia supra vires meas est.

<span id="ii.v-p31"></span>**15.** And if thou deal thus with me, kill
me, I pray thee, out of hand; if I have found favor in thy sight; and
let me not see my wretchedness.

<span id="ii.v-p32"></span>**15.** Quod si ita tu facis mihi, occide me
quaeso occidendo, si inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, et ne videam malum
meum.

<span id="ii.v-p33"></span>**16.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather
unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the
elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the
tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

<span id="ii.v-p34"></span>**16.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Congrega
mihi septuaginta viros e senioribus conventionis, ut adstent ibi tecum.

<span id="ii.v-p35"></span>**17.** And I will come down and talk with
thee there: and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will
put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with
thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone.

<span id="ii.v-p36"></span>**17.** Tunc descendam, et loquar tecum ibi,
et separabo de spiritu qui est in te, et ponam in eis: ut sustineant
tecum onus populi: et non sustineas tu solus.

<span id="ii.v-p37"></span>**18.** And say thou unto the people,
Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow, and ye shall eat flesh: (for ye
have wept in the ears of the Lord, saying, Who shall give us flesh to
eat? for it was well with us in Egypt;) therefore the Lord will give you
flesh, and ye shall eat.

<span id="ii.v-p38"></span>**18.** Ad populum autem dices,
Sanctificamini in crastinum, et comedetis carnes: flevistis enim in
auribus Jehovae, dicendo, Quiscomedere faciet nos carnes? certe melius
erat nobis in AEgypto: dedit enim Jehova vobis carnes, et comedetis.

<span id="ii.v-p39"></span>**19.** Ye shall not eat one day, nor two
days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days:

<span id="ii.v-p40"></span>**19.** Non una die comedetis, neque duobus
diebus, neque quinque diebus, neque decem diebus, neque viginti diebus
tantum:

<span id="ii.v-p41"></span>**20.** But even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye have
despised the Lord which is among you, and have wept before him, saying,
Why came we forth out of Egypt?

<span id="ii.v-p42"></span>**20.** Sed usque ad mensem dierum, donec
egrediatur e naribus vestris, et sit vobis in abominationem: propterea
quod contempsistis Jehovam, qui est in medio vestri, et flevistis coram
eo, dicendo, Ut quid egressi sumus ex AEgypto?

<span id="ii.v-p43"></span>**21.** And Moses said, The people, among
whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou hast said, I will
give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.

<span id="ii.v-p44"></span>**21.** Et dixit Moses, Sexcentorum millium
peditum est populus in cujus medio ego sum: et tu dicis, Carnem dabo
eis: et comedent mensem dierum.

<span id="ii.v-p45"></span>**22.** Shall the flocks and the herds be
slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be
gathered together for them, to suffice them?

<span id="ii.v-p46"></span>**22.** Nunquid oves et boves ingulabuntur
eis, et sufficient illis? an omnes pisces maris congregabuntur illis, et
sufficient eis?

<span id="ii.v-p47"></span>**23.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the
Lord’s hand waxed short? Thou shalt see now whether my word shall come
to pass unto thee, or not.

<span id="ii.v-p48"></span>**23.** Tum dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Nunquid
manus Jehovae abbreviabitur? Nunc videbis utrum eveniat tibi verbum
meum, annon.

<span id="ii.v-p49"></span>**24.** And Moses went out, and told the
people the words of the Lord, and gathered the seventy men of the elders
of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle.

<span id="ii.v-p50"></span>**24.** Egressus est autem Moses, et retulit
ad populum verba Jehovae: congregavitque septuaginta viros e senioribus
populi, quos statuit in circuitu tabernaculi.

<span id="ii.v-p51"></span>**25.** And the Lord came down in a cloud,
and spoke unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and gave
it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit
rested upon them, they prophesied, red did not cease.

<span id="ii.v-p52"></span>**25.** Tunc descendit Jehova in nube, et
loquutus est ad eum: et seorsum accepit de Spiritu qui erat super eum,
posuitque super septuaginta viros seniores: et fuit ut requiescente in
eis Spiritu prophetaverint: et non addiderunt.

<span id="ii.v-p53"></span>**26.** But there remained two of the men in
the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other
Medad: and the spirit rested Upon them, (and they were of them that were
written, but went not out unto the tabernacle,) and they prophesied in
the camp.

<span id="ii.v-p54"></span>**26.** Remanserunt autem duo viri in
castris, nomen unius Eldad, et nomen alterius Medad: super quos etiam
requievit Spiritus (erant vero inter scriptos, sed non egressi fuerant
ad tabernaculum) et prophetare eoeperunt in castris.

<span id="ii.v-p55"></span>**27.** And there ran a young man, and told
Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.

<span id="ii.v-p56"></span>**27.** Et cucurrit puer quidam, et nuntiavit
Mosi, dixitque: Eldad et Medad prophetant in castris.

<span id="ii.v-p57"></span>**28.** And Joshua the son of Nun, the
servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lord
Moses, forbid them.

<span id="ii.v-p58"></span>**28.** Tunc respondit Jehosua filius Nun
minister Mosis ex juvenibus ejus, et dixit, Domine mi Moses probibe eos.

<span id="ii.v-p59"></span>**29.** And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou
for my sake? Would God that all the Lord’s people were prophets, and
that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them!

<span id="ii.v-p60"></span>**29.** Cut respondit Moses, Nunquid
aemularis tu propter me? et utinam universus populus Jehovae prophetae
essent! atque ut daret Jehova Spiritum suum super eos.

<span id="ii.v-p61"></span>**30.** And Moses gat him into the camp, he
and the elders of Israel.

<span id="ii.v-p62"></span>**30.** Recepit autem se Moses ad castra,
ipse et seniores Israel.

<span id="ii.v-p63"></span>**31.** And there went forth a wind from the
Lord, and brought quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as
it were a day’s journey on this side, and as it were a day’s journey on
the other side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high
upon the face of the earth.

<span id="ii.v-p64"></span>**31.** Et ventus egressus est a Jehova,
adduxitque coturnices e mari, et demisit ad castra: quasi itinere diei
hinc, et itinere diei illinc, per circuitum castrorum, et fere ad duos
cubitos per faciem terrae.

<span id="ii.v-p65"></span>**32.** And the people stood up all that day,
and all that night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails:
he that gathered least gathered ten homers; and they spread them all
abroad for themselves round about the camp.

<span id="ii.v-p66"></span>**32.** Tunc surrexit populus toto die illo,
et tota nocte, totoque die sequenti, et collegerunt sibi coturnices: qui
pauciores collegit, collegit decem cumulos: et expanderunt sibi
expandendo per circuitus castrorum.

<span id="ii.v-p67"></span>**33.** And while the flesh was yet between
their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kin-died
against the people; and the Lord smote the people with a very great
plague.

<span id="ii.v-p68"></span>**33.** Caro adhuc erat inter dentes eorum
antequam concisa esset: tum furor Jehovae exarsit in populum,
percussitque Jehova populum plaga magna admodum.

<span id="ii.v-p69"></span>**34.** And he called the name of that place
Kibroth. hattaavah: because there they buried the people that lusted.

<span id="ii.v-p70"></span>**34.** Et vocatum est nomen loci illius
Cibroth-hathaavah: quia ibi sepelierunt populum concupiscentem.

<span id="ii.v-p71"></span>**35.** And the people journeyed from
Kibroth-hattaavah unto Hazeroth; and abode at Hazeroth.

<span id="ii.v-p72"></span>**35.** De Cibroth-hathaavah profecti sunt
populus in Haseroth, et substiterunt in eo loco.

<span id="ii.v-p73"></span><span id="ii.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p74"></span>**1.** *And when the people complained, it
displeased the Lord.*  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) The
ambiguous signification of the participle  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) causes the translators to twist this
passage into a variety of meanings. Since the Hebrew root <span
id="ii.v-p76.9"></span>און, *aven,* is sometimes trouble and labor,
sometimes fatigue, sometimes iniquity, sometimes falsehood, some
translate it, “The people were, as it were, complaining or murmuring.”
Others (though this seems to be more beside the mark) insert the adverb
*unjustly;* as if Moses said, that their complaint was unjust, when they
expostulated with God. Others render it, “being sick, (*nauseantes,*”)
but this savors too much of affectation; others, “lying, or dealing
treacherously.” Some derive it from the root <span
id="ii.v-p76.10"></span>תואנה, *thonah,* and thus explain it, “seeking
occasion,” which I reject as far fetched. To me the word fainting
*(fatiscendi)* seems to suit best; for they failed, as if broken down
with weariness. It is probable that no other crime is alleged against
them than that, abandoning the desire to proceed, they fell into
supineness and inactivity, which was to turn their back upon God, and
repudiate the promised inheritance. This sense will suit very well, and
thus the proper meaning of the word will be retained. Thus, Ezekiel
calls by the name <span id="ii.v-p76.11"></span>תאנים, *theunim,* those
fatigues, whereby men destroy and overwhelm themselves through
undertaking too much work. Still, I do not deny that, when they lay in a
state of despondency, they uttered words of reproach against God;
especially since Moses says that this displeased the ears of God, and
not His eyes; yet the origin of the evil was, as I have stated, that
they fainted with weariness, so as to refuse to follow God any further.

<span id="ii.v-p77"></span>*And the Lord heard it.* He more plainly
declares that the people broke forth into open complaints; and it is
probable that they even east reproaches upon God, as we infer from the
heaviness of this punishment. Although some understand the word *fire*
metaphorically for vengeance, it is more correct to take it simply
according to the natural meaning of the word, *i.e.,* that a part of the
camp burnt with a conflagration sent from God. Still a question arises,
what was that part or extremity of the camp which the fire seized upon?
for some think that the punishment began with the leaders themselves,
whose crime was the more atrocious. Others suppose that the fire raged
among the common people, from the midst of whom the murmuring arose. But
I rather conjecture, as in a matter of uncertainty, that God kindled the
fire in some extreme part, so as to awaken their terror, in order that
there might be room for pardon; since it is presently added, that tie
was content with the punishment of a few. It must, however, be remarked,
that because the people were conscious of their sin, the door was shut
against their prayers. Hence it is, that they cry to Moses rather than
to God; and we may infer that, being devoid of repentance and faith,
they dreaded to look upon God. This is the reward of a bad conscience,
to seek for rest in our disquietude, and still to fly from God, who
alone can allay our trouble and alarm. From the fact that God is
appeased at the intercession of Moses, we gather that temporal
punishment is often remitted to the wicked, although they still remain
exposed to the judgment of God. When he says that the fire of the Lord
was sunk down,  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) for this is the
proper signification of the word <span id="ii.v-p78.2"></span>שקע,
*shakang,* he designates the way in which it was put out, and in which
God’s mercy openly manifested itself; as also, on the other hand. it is
called the fire of God, as having been plainly kindled by Him, lest any
should suppose that it was an accidental conflagration. A name also was
imposed on the place, which might be a memorial to posterity both of the
crime and its punishment; for *Tabera* is a burning, or combustion.

<span id="ii.v-p79"></span><span id="ii.v-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p80"></span>**4.** *And the mixed multitude that was
among them. A* new murmuring of the people is here recorded: for we
gather from many circumstances that this relation is different from that
which precedes: although, as evil begets evil, it is probable that after
they had begun to be affected by the disease of impatience, they
spitefully invented grounds for increased tedium and annoyance. Yet
there was something monstrous in this madness, that, when they had just
been so severely chastised, and part of’ the camp was even yet almost
smoking, and when God was hardly appeased, they should have given way to
the indulgence of lust, whereby they brought upon themselves a still
more severe punishment. Unquestionably, when they again provoked God by
their iniquity, the remains of the fire were still before their eyes;
whence it appears how greatly they were blinded by their obstinate
wickedness. He states, indeed, that the murmuring first began among the
strangers, or mixed multitude, who had mingled themselves with the
Israelites, as we have seen elsewhere; but he adds that the whole people
also were led into imitation of their ungodly complainings. Hence we are
taught, that the wicked and sinful should be avoided, lest they should
corrupt us by their bad example; since the contagion of vice easily
spreads. At the same time also, we are warned, that it does not at all
avail to excuse us, that others are the instigators of our sin; since it
by no means profited the Israelites, that they fell through the
influence of others, inasmuch as it was their own lust; which carried
them away. In the first place, therefore, we must beware that our
corrupt desires do not tempt us, and we must put a restraint upon
ourselves; and then that the profane despisers of God do not add fuel to
the fire.

<span id="ii.v-p81"></span>A question here occurs, whether it is sinful
to long for flesh; for if so, all our appetites must. likewise be
condemned. I answer, that God was not wroth because the desire of flesh
affected the Israelites; but, first, their disobedience displeased Him,
because they longed to eat; flesh, as it were, against His will, when He
would have them content with the manna alone; and then their
intemperance and violent passion. For this reason Moses says that they
“lusted a lust,”  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) indicating that
they abandoned all self-control, so as to go beyond all bounds. In the
third place, their ingratitude displeased Him, which is here adverted
to, but openly condemned in the Psalm, where the Prophet reproves them,
for that God “had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors
of heaven,” so as to supply them with the *“corn* of heaven,” and the
bread “of angels,” (<span id="ii.v-p82.1"></span>[Ps
78:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023)<span
id="ii.v-p82.1"></span>;) and yet, even so they were not restrained from
despising so excellent a benefit, and abandoning themselves to lawless
intemperance. The rule of moderation, and of a sober and frugal life,
which Paul prescribes, is well known; that we should

<span id="ii.v-p83"></span>“know both how to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and to suffer need.” (<span id="ii.v-p83.1"></span>[Php
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span id="ii.v-p83.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p84"></span>Well known, too, is his admonition, that we
should

<span id="ii.v-p85"></span>“make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil
the lusts thereof.” (<span id="ii.v-p85.1"></span>[Ro
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="ii.v-p85.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p86"></span>All improper longing is, therefore, to be
repressed, so that we should desire nothing which is not lawful; and,
secondly, that our appetites should not be excessive. Hence, when he
refers elsewhere to this occurrence, (<span id="ii.v-p86.1"></span>[1Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006)<span id="ii.v-p86.1"></span>,)he
warns us to fear the judgment of God; “to the intent we should not lust
after evil things,” thus distinguishing wild and uncontrolled appetites
from such as are moderate and well regulated.

<span id="ii.v-p87"></span>When they ask, “Who shall give us flesh to
eat?” they seek to have it elsewhere than from God, who abundantly
supplied them with food, though it was of a different kind. We see,
then, that they rebelled with a brutal and blind impetuosity; for
necessity was laid upon them by God, that they should eat nothing but
manna; against this they struggled like fierce and stubborn beasts, as
if they would make God the servant of their lust.

<span id="ii.v-p88"></span><span id="ii.v-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p89"></span>**5.** *We remember the fish which we did eat
in Egypt.* By this comparison with the former mode of living, they
depreciate the present grace of God: and yet they enumerate no
delicacies, when they speak of leeks, and onions, and garlic. Some,
therefore, thus explain it, When such great abundance and variety was
commonly to be met with, how painful and grievous must it be to us to be
deprived of greater delicacies! My own opinion is, that these lowly
people, who had been used to live on humble fare, praised their
accustomed food, as if they had been the greatest luxuries. Surely
rustics and artisans value as much their pork and beef, their cheese and
curds, their onions and cabbage, as most of the rich do their sumptuous
fare. Scornfully, therefore, do the Israelites magnify things which, in
themselves, are but of little value, in order the more to stimulate
their depraved appetite, already sufficiently excited. Still there is no
doubt but that those who had been accustomed to a diet of herbs and
fish, would think themselves happy with that kind of food. Moreover, to
make the matter more invidious, they say in general, that they ate
*gratis*  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) of that, which cost them
but little: although such a phrase is common in all languages. For even
profane writers testify that all that sea-shore abounds with fish.
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) The fisheries of the Nile also are
very productive, and a part: of the wealth of Egypt: whilst the country
is so well watered, that it produces abundance of vegetables and fruits.
 <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="ii.v-p93"></span><span id="ii.v-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p94"></span>**6.** *But now our soul is dried away.* They
complain that they are almost wasted away with famine and hunger, whilst
they are abundantly supplied with manna; in the same way as they had
just been loudly declaring that they had lived in Egypt for a very
little money; as if they were affected by a great dearth of provisions,
when, by the pure liberality of God, a kind of food was provided for
them, more easy to prepare than any other, and so actually prepared
without trouble or cost. But such is the malignity and ingratitude of
men, that they count all God’s bounty for nothing, whilst they are
brooding over their own importunate lusts. Many in their gluttony
consume, and bring to naught whatever God bestows upon them: others, in
their avarice, dry up the fountain of His liberality, which else would
be inexhaustible. But these, in the midst of their abundance, say that
they are dry, because insatiable cupidity inflames them, so that God’s
blessing, however ample, cannot satisfy them. Thus the rain, washing the
hard rock, wets it not within, neither tempers its dryness by its
moisture. Since, therefore, a contempt of God’s blessings withers them
all, like a hot blast, let us learn to assign them their due honor, that
they may be supplied to us in sufficiency. Thus will be fulfilled in our
ease:

<span id="ii.v-p95"></span>“The righteous shall flourish like the
palm-tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted
in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God. They
shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and
flourishing.”  
(<span id="ii.v-p95.2"></span>[Ps
92:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)<span
id="ii.v-p95.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p96"></span>For Scripture does not so often declare in
vain that God satisfies the longing souls, and filleth the hungry with
food. They complain that there is nothing before their eyes but manna:
as if their loathing of this one excellent and abundant kind of food was
actual famine.

<span id="ii.v-p97"></span><span id="ii.v-p97.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p98"></span>**7.** *And the manna was as coriander seed.*
Moses had already adverted to this in <span
id="ii.v-p98.1"></span>[Exodus 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#000)<span
id="ii.v-p98.1"></span>;  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) but he
now repeats it, in order more fully to condemn their perverse desire;
for what could be more unseemly and intolerable than thus to eschew a
food delightful both in appearance and taste v. For the same reason the
Prophet, in <span id="ii.v-p99.2"></span>[Psalm
78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#000)<span id="ii.v-p99.2"></span>,
records that men were not satisfied with “angels’ food,” and “corn from
heaven.” Here, instead of saying that it was white, he calls it the
color of *Bedola,*  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) a precious
stone, whether a pearl, or some other kind. Its very appearance, then,
was calculated to give them pleasure; and, since without much labor,
either by grinding or crushing it, they might make it into various sorts
of food, and all of a sweet and pleasant taste;. the baser was their
ingratitude in complaining, as if God treated them with but little
liberality as to their food.

<span id="ii.v-p101"></span><span id="ii.v-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p102"></span>**10.** *Then Moses heard the people weep.*
Wonderful indeed, and almost prodigious was the madness of the people,
thus all of them to mourn as if reduced to the extremity of despair.
What would they have done in actual famine? what if they had to gnaw
bitter roots, almost without any juice in them? What if they had had to
live on tasteless and unwholesome bread? We see, therefore, how by the
indulgence of their depraved lusts men make themselves wretched in the
very midst of prosperity. Let us, then, learn to bridle our excessive
passions, that we may not bring upon ourselves troubles and
inconveniences, and all sorts of painful feelings; for if the cause be
duly weighed, when men afflict themselves with sorrow and lamentation,
we shall generally find that, whereas the evil might be lightened by
endurance, its pain is increased by preposterous imaginations. But here
a gross instance of luxury is set before us, when, in their satiety,
they weep as if long abstinence threatened them with death. It was an
effect of holy and praiseworthy zeal, that this great perverseness
should displease Moses; but he was not without error in carrying it to
excess; for he unjustly expostulates with God, complaining that He had
laid too heavy a burden upon him, when tie knew all the time that he was
sustained by His power. His charge was indeed difficult and laborious;
but in that he had experienced God’s wondrous aid, whenever he had
groaned beneath his burden, there was no room for complaint; besides,
since he had been dignified by a peculiar honor, it was ungrateful to
brand with disgrace the good gift of God. He reputes it his greatest
evil that the charge of governing the people had been intrusted to him;
whereas all his senses ought rather to have been ravished with
astonishment, that God had condescended to choose him to be the redeemer
of His people, and the minister of His wondrous power. This, too, was
very inconsiderate, to ask whether he had begotten or brought forth the
people; as if his calling by God did not lay him sufficiently under
obligation, or as if there were no other ties than those of nature. God,
indeed, has inspired parents with such love towards their offspring,
that they willingly undergo incredible troubles on their account; but
Moses was bound by another kind of piety, for by God’s command he was
father of the people. Wherefore he ought not to have only regarded
nature, but the obligation of his office also.

<span id="ii.v-p103"></span><span id="ii.v-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p104"></span>**13.** *Whence should I have flesh to give
to all this people?* Justly, indeed, does he accuse the people, and deny
that he is possessed of flesh wherewith to satisfy so great a multitude;
but he is wrong in expostulating with God, as if he were burdened beyond
his strength; for, since God knew that he was unequal to so many
difficulties, He supported him by the influence of His Spirit. But he
sinned most grossly in the conclusion of his complaint, requesting God
to kill him. In these words we see how far even the best of God’s
servants may be carried, when they give too great indulgence to their
passions. For it is the longing of despair to seek that we may be
removed from the world, so that death may bring our troubles to an end.
Since the impetuosity of his grief hurried away Moses God’s most chosen
servant to this, what might not happen to us, if impatience should hold
dominion over our hearts? Let us, then, learn to put a stop to this
disease in good time.

<span id="ii.v-p105"></span><span id="ii.v-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p106"></span>**16.** *And the Lord said unto Moses,
Gather unto me seventy men.* God complies with the request of Moses, by
associating with him seventy companions, by whose care and assistance he
may be relieved from some part of his labor; yet not without some signs
of indignation, for, by taking from him some portion of His Spirit to
distribute amongst the others, He inflicts upon him that mark of
disgrace which he deserved. I know that some  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) regard it differently, and think that
nothing was taken away from Moses, but that the others were endued with
new grace, such as Moses had been preeminent for possessing alone
before. But, since the words expressly declare that God will make them
partakers of that grace which He will take from Moses himself, I by no
means admit the truth of this subtle exposition. The passage in <span
id="ii.v-p107.4"></span>[Ge 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036)<span
id="ii.v-p107.4"></span> is quoted, in which it is said, “Hast thou not
reserved a blessing for me?” but, when God expressly says, “I will
separate  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) of the Spirit which is
upon thee,” there can be no question but that a diminution is indicated.
For, as long as Moses alone was appointed to rule the people, he was so
supplied with the necessary gifts of the Spirit, as that his ability
should not be inferior to the greatness of the labor. God now promises
that the others shall be his companions in such sort, as that He divides
His gifts among them all. I have no doubt, then, but that this division
comprehends punishment in it; and from hence we may gather a useful
piece of instruction, viz., that the greater the difficulty is which God
imposes upon any one, the greater is the liberality with which He treats
him, in order that he may be sufficient for his charge. Thus it is in
His power to work with equal efficiency by one man, as by a hundred, or
a thousand; for He has no need of a multitude (of agents,) but, as He
pleases, He executes His works sometimes without the aid of men,
sometimes by their hands. In sum, God indirectly reproves the gross
ingratitude of Moses, whereby he depreciated that marvelous grace which
had hitherto shone forth in him; and He declares that he shall not be
hereafter so great as he was, in regard to the *excellency* he derived
from the Spirit; inasmuch as he had in a manner thrown away the gifts of
the Spirit, by refusing to bear the trouble imposed upon him. Our
modesty, indeed, is praiseworthy, if through consciousness of our own
weakness we recoil from arduous charges; but it is too absurd for us to
withdraw ourselves under this pretext from our duty, and, despising the
calling of God, to shake off the yoke.

<span id="ii.v-p109"></span>The word Spirit is here, as frequently
elsewhere, applied to the gifts themselves; as if He had said, I had
deposited with thee gifts sufficing for the government of the people;
but now, since thou refusest, I will distribute his due measure to each
of the seventy, so that the grace of the Spirit, which dwelt in thee
alone, shall be manifestly dispersed among many. It is now asked how
Moses separated the seventy, whether according to his own judgment only,
or by the election of the people. It is generally agreed that six were
chosen from each tribe, and thus that they were seventy-two; but that
for the sake of brevity two were omitted, as amongst the Romans,  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) they spoke of the *Centumviri,* although
they were a hundred and five; for they appointed three for each of the
thirty-five tribes. Since the opinion is probable, I leave it undecided;
but at the same time I retain the conjecture which I have elsewhere
made,  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) viz., that, since the race
of Abraham had been increased in an incredible manner in two hundred and
twenty years, lest so astonishing a miracle should ever be forgotten,
the seventy were elected in accordance with the number of the fathers
who had gone down into Egypt with Jacob. And, in fact, this seems to
have been with them, as it were, a sacred number; as recalling to their
memory that little band from which they had derived their origin. For,
before the Law was promulgated, Moses was commanded to take with him
seventy to accompany him to the mount, and to be eye-witnesses of God’s
glory. Meanwhile, I do not deny that there were two more than the number
seventy; but I only point out why God fixed upon this number, viz., to
equalize the leaders and heads of the people with the family of Jacob,
which was the source of their race and name. In truth, from the fact
that, when Hoses went up into Mount Sinai to receive the Tables from the
hand of God, he took with him seventy officers, we infer that *the*
number of those who should excel in honor, was already fixed at this,
although the charge of governing, which is here spoken of, was not yet
committed to them. And it is probable that these same persons who had
been appointed leaders, were called to this new and unwonted office, as
the words themselves imply. It is indeed certain, that when the Jews
returned from the Babylonish captivity, because they were not permitted
to appoint a king, they followed the example here set them in the
establishment of their Sanhedrim; only this honor was paid to the memory
of David and their rings, that from their race they chose their seventy
rulers in whom the supreme power was vested. And this form of government
continued down to Herod,  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) who
abolished the whole council by which he had been condemned, and
destroyed the lives of them all. Still, I think that he was not impelled
to commit the massacre only out of vengeance, but also lest the dignity
of the royal race should be an obstacle to his tyranny.

<span id="ii.v-p113"></span>It must, however, be observed that, although
God promises new grace to the seventy men, he would not have them taken
indiscriminately from the people in general, but expressly commands them
to be chosen from the order of the elders, and heads of the people,
being such as were already possessed of authority, and had given proofs
of their diligence and virtue. Thus, also, now-a-days, when he calls
both the pastors of the Church and magistrates to their office, although
He furnishes them with new gifts, still He would not have them raised to
their honorable stations promiscuously as they may come first, but
chooses rather with reference to their spiritual endowments, wherewith
He distinguishes, and commends those whom He has destined to any exalted
office. In short, He commands the most fitting to be chosen; but, after
they have been elected, tie promises that He will add what is wanting.
For this reason He commands that they should station themselves at the
door of the tabernacle, that He may there display His grace. Although I
think that two other reasons were likewise taken into consideration,
viz., that they might know that the office was intrusted to them by God,
and might always be mindful of the heavenly tribunal, before which they
must be accountable: and also that they might be held in additional
reverence by the very associations of the place, and that the people
might submit to them as the ministers of God. Now, although God does not
at present dwell in a visible tabernacle, yet are we reminded by this
example that pastors and magistrates are not duly ordained, unless they
are placed in the presence of God; nor rightly inaugurated in their
offices, unless when they consecrate themselves to God Himself, and when
His majesty, on the other hand, acquires their reverence. Cyprian  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) twists this passage further, but I know
not whether on sufficiently firm grounds, to prove that bishops are not
to be elected, except with the consent of the whole people.

<span id="ii.v-p116"></span><span id="ii.v-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p117"></span>**18.** *And say thou unto the people,
Sanctify yourselves.* This is another part of the answer, which is given
respecting the matter in consideration, viz., that the people should
prepare themselves to satiate their greediness. Although the word <span
id="ii.v-p117.1"></span>קדש  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)
*kadesh,* signifies to *prepare,* yet its literal meaning seems to be
most appropriate here; I have therefore retained the word *sanctify,*
which is, however, here used ironically, for Moses does not exhort: them
to purge themselves from all defilement’s, and piously and sincerely to
receive the grace of God, but he chastises their profane and brutal
gluttony. Others translate it simply, as if it were said, Whet your
teeth, and make ready your bellies: but, in my judgment, there is a
reproof implied, because they are polluted by a foul and wicked desire,
so as to be incapable of receiving God’s paternal favor: for “ye shall
eat flesh” follows, “because your weeping and complaining has reached
the ears of God;” by which words he signifies that by their importunate
cries they had provoked God’s anger, so that they should devour none but
deadly food. And soon afterwards it is stated more clearly that by their
insolence they had deserved to be destroyed by the bounty of God. For “a
whole month,” he says, ye shall gormandize, “till it come out of your
nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you.” Thus he compares them to those
guttlers who so overwhelm themselves with gluttony, that they are
obliged soon afterwards to vomit what they have eaten too greedily, or
who abominate the taste of their superfluous luxuries, as if they were
something filthy. This is what is meant by to “come out,” or to be blown
out, “at the nostrils.” <span id="ii.v-p118.2"></span>זרא  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) *tzara,* which we have translated
*abomination,* properly means *dispersion;* but Moses indicates by it
that they shall vomit, or spit it out, like something unfit to be
swallowed. If any should object that it is said in <span
id="ii.v-p119.4"></span>[Ps 78:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030)<span
id="ii.v-p119.4"></span>, “They were not yet estranged from their lust:”
this is easily solved by understanding that their unrestrained gluttony
is there rebuked,  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) as if he called
them guttlers *(gurgites,)* whom no abundance can suffice to satisfy.
Therefore the Prophet says, that although they were bursting with
excess, they were not satiated; but were so inflamed by their boundless
voracity, that God’s vengeance could alone repress it. But the reason
alleged for this is especially to be observed, “because they had
rejected God, who was in the midst of them.” By these words, the excuse
of error or inadvertency is barred; for if, for the purpose of proving
their patience God had withdrawn His power, the terror which they
conceived at His absence might, perhaps, have been excusable; but now,
when they knew by sure experience that their means of subsistence were
supplied by Him, they betray their deliberate wickedness by despising
His present beneficence. For that God was in the midst of them is
equivalent to His giving manifest tokens both of His infinite power and
His paternal favor. These words show us that the more immediately God
manifests His grace to us, the more inexcusable we are, if we disparage
it when it is thus liberally offered to us. What follows might appear
not to deserve severe reproof, viz., that they “wept before God;” but
the enormity of the sin is specified directly afterwards, *i.e.* that
they were vexed by their departure from Egypt: for this was not merely
to repudiate the deliverance, which they had so greatly longed for, but
to quarrel with God, because He had listened to their cry, and had
condescended to redeem them from their wretched and lost estate.

<span id="ii.v-p121"></span><span id="ii.v-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p122"></span>**21.** *And Moses said, The people among
whom I am, are six hundred thousand.* Although Moses’ object was right,
yet he fell into unbelief, and thus stumbled at the very threshold. His
pious solicitude indeed impelled him to doubt; because he feared that
God’s holy name would be exposed to derision and contumely, if he should
send away empty those to whom he had promised food. But it seemed to him
incredible that so mighty a multitude should be sufficiently supplied
with flesh. When he calls them “six hundred thousand,” he either does
not calculate their numbers exactly, or indicates that some had died
since their departure, when he had numbered the people. (<span
id="ii.v-p122.1"></span>[Ex 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#000)<span
id="ii.v-p122.1"></span>.) Yet it is probable that he referred to the
recent *census,* in which they were found to be 603,550, (<span
id="ii.v-p122.2"></span>[Nu 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#046)<span
id="ii.v-p122.2"></span>;) but for the sake of brevity he put the sum in
the gross, as he does elsewhere, omitting the 3550. (<span
id="ii.v-p122.3"></span>[Ex 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)<span
id="ii.v-p122.3"></span>.) By speaking of foot-*men,* he means the men,
and thus excepts the women and. children. Assuredly such a multitude
might astonish him, or, at any rate, might inspire him with alarm, so
that he should mistrust the promise. His doubt, however, was wrong in
two respects; first, because he did not simply trust, as if he were not
assured that God was true in all His words; and, secondly, because he
improperly allowed his mind to measure God’s inestimable power by his
own senses. Let us learn, therefore, that, as soon as God has spoken, we
should embrace, without discussion, whatever has proceeded out of His
mouth; and so likewise let us learn to humble ourselves, and our own
minds, and at the same time to rise by faith above the world, and our
natural reason; so that no absurdity, which the flesh may suggest to us,
should prevent us from certainly concluding that whatever God has
promised He will, by His might, perform. For it is a most incorrect
calculation to bind down God’s doings to ordinary standards; as if His
power were not more extensive than our minds can reach. We must,
therefore, carefully take notice of the rebuke, whereby God so corrected
Moses at once, that it ought to prevent and to *cure* all diseases of
distrust in us. For the immensity of God’s hand convicts the folly of
those who would subject it to their own imaginations and rules. For,
even although God should not stretch forth His hand, He holds heaven and
earth in its “hollow,” as it is said in <span
id="ii.v-p122.4"></span>[Isa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="ii.v-p122.4"></span>.
What madness, then, is it to seek to grasp by our own senses, and, as it
were, to imprison that hand which is greater than a hundred worlds! As
soon, therefore, as distrust on the score of difficulties begins to take
possession of our minds, let this conclusion be remembered, that the
promises of God do not exceed the measure of His power to accomplish
effectually whatever He has declared. This question, however, “Is the
Lord’s hand waxed short?” may be explained in two ways: for the old
interpreter  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) has rendered it, “Is
God’s hand weak?” But God seems to adduce the proof, whereby He had
borne witness to His power, not only in the creation of heaven and
earth, but also in so many recent miracles; as if to rebuke the
ingratitude of Moses, who had profited so little by these most striking
lessons: for Isaiah uses the same word in this sense, where he says:
“Behold, the Lord’s hand is not shortened.” (<span
id="ii.v-p123.1"></span>[Isa 59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v-p123.1"></span>.) Moses is unquestionably exalting the
blessings received on former occasions, wherein the people had
experienced the saving power of God. I have retained the future tense of
the verb,  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) since it does not injure
the sense. What is said amounts to this, Will God’s hand be weaker than
usual, so as not to put forth its power already known?

<span id="ii.v-p125"></span><span id="ii.v-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p126"></span>**24.** *And Moses went out and told the
people the words.* We here see how greatly Moses profited by his brief
rebuke, for he now actively sets about what he was commanded. Doubt had
given him a check, so that he stopped in the middle of his course;
whereas he now testifies by the promptitude of his obedience that his
distrust is overcome. For just as unbelief discourages men, so that they
sink down into inactivity, so faith inspires both body and mind with
rigor for the effectual discharge of their duties.

<span id="ii.v-p127"></span>Although the narrative does not expressly
state that he spoke to them respecting the flesh, it declares in general
terms that he omitted nothing; and, indeed, it would have been very
inappropriate to speak only of the Seventy Elders, when the origin of
all the evil had been the craving for flesh. Briefly stating, then, that
he had reported the commands of God to the people, he includes both
parts of the matter, the second of which he then follows up. And, first,
he says that the elders were called to the Tabernacle, that they might
there be appointed rulers and officers. When be states that they were
“set round about,” I do not interpret the words so precisely as to
suppose that eighteen were ranged on each side, and, of the rest, half
were placed before the court, and half behind the Tabernacle; but that
they were so arranged, as to surround some part of the Tabernacle. Now,
this was equivalent to their being set before God, so that they might
hereafter exercise their office with more authority, as being sent by
Him; and at the same time that they might devote themselves to God, and
dedicate themselves to His service; and also, that being invested with
the necessary endowments, they might bear the tokens of their calling.
For this reason, it is soon afterwards added, that enough of the spirit
of Moses was given them for the discharge of their official duties; for,
although Moses by God’s command had chosen men of approved virtue and
experience, yet He would have them prepared anew, in order that their
call might be effectual. When they are said to have “prophesied,” this
was a visible sign of the gift of the Spirit, which, nevertheless, had
reference to a different object; for they were not appointed to be.
prophets, though God would testify by this outward mark that they were
new men, in order that the people might receive them with greater
reverence. In my opinion, however, prophecy here is equivalent to a
special faculty of discoursing magnificently of *secret* things or
mysteries. We know that poets were called prophets by profane writers,
 <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) because poetry itself savors of
inspiration (<span id="ii.v-p128.2"></span>ἐνθουσιασμὸν); in the same
way that extraordinary ability,  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) in
which the *afflatus* of the Spirit shone forth, obtained the name of
prophecy. Thus, the gift of prophecy in Saul was a kind of mark of
royalty; so that he might not ascend the throne without credentials.
(<span id="ii.v-p129.1"></span>[1Sa
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010)<span id="ii.v-p129.1"></span>.)
Thus, then, this Spirit of Prophecy was only accorded to these persons
for a short time; since it was sufficient that they should be once
marked out by God: for so I understand what Moses says afterwards, “and
they added not.”  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) it is too forced
an interpretation to refer it, as some do, to the past. I confess,
indeed, that they were not previously prophets; but I have no doubt but
that Moses here indicates that the gift was a temporary one: as we are
also told in the case of Saul: for, as soon as this token of God’s grace
had manifested itself in him,  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) he
ceased to prophesy. The meaning, therefore, is that their call was thus
substantiated for a short period, so that this unusual circumstance
should awaken the more admiration.

<span id="ii.v-p132"></span><span id="ii.v-p132.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p133"></span>**26.** *But there remained two of the men
in the camp.* It is not certain why they had not appeared amongst the
others. I do not at all doubt but that they were called for by Moses;
nor would they have been endued with the same grace of the Spirit as the
others, if through idleness or contempt they had not come at the time
appointed. We may, therefore, probably infer that they did not actually
receive the invitation, because they could not be found; and hence it
arose that God excused their ignorance. Still, however, it must be
observed that they were kept back by the secret counsel of God, that His
grace might be made known by this illustrious proof amongst the common
people in general, when they were not all eye-witnesses of it: for the
greater portion of them had not assembled at the Tabernacle. In order,
therefore, that its fame might spread more widely, and might reach even
to the most lowly, God chose that this new and extraordinary gift of His
Spirit should be conspicuous in the midst of the camp, lest any of the
dullest and grossest among them should pretend to be ignorant of it. In
fact, it is plain that they were all aroused by the miracle; for the
“young man,” who is spoken of, would not have run to bear the incredible
news to Moses, unless struck by the novelty of the case.

<span id="ii.v-p134"></span><span id="ii.v-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p135"></span>**28.** *And Joshua the son of Nun, the
servant of Moses.* It is obvious that this foolish and preposterous
jealousy arose from a good source. Joshua saw that Moses was so
preeminent above all others, as to be justly deemed, after God, the head
of the people; he feared, therefore, lest, if any portion of his
superiority should be withdrawn, the grace of God would be dispelled and
lost. We know, too, that almost every change is injurious, and apt to
give a shock to public affairs. In asserting, then, the rights of Moses,
he desired, as far as he could, to consult the welfare of all; but the
excess of his zeal had some alloy in it, in consequence of the
immoderate affection and love which he bore to Moses; just as it often
happens to ourselves, that although our desires have a right object,
they still go astray into erroneous feelings. So, then, let us learn to
revere the most illustrious servants of Christ, as that God alone should
be supreme; and that He, who is far above all, should still maintain His
pre-eminence. And this will be the case, if we hold fast to the
principle, that although “there are diversities of gifts,” yet there is
but one Spirit from whom they flow; and although there are “differences
of administrations,” yet but one Lord who must be served, (<span
id="ii.v-p135.1"></span>[1 Cor. 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005)<span id="ii.v-p135.1"></span>;)
which also Paul confirms elsewhere, where he teaches us that the gifts
are so distributed as that no individual should have all, but each

<span id="ii.v-p136"></span>“according to the measure of the gift of
Christ.”  
(<span id="ii.v-p136.2"></span>[Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="ii.v-p136.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p137"></span><span id="ii.v-p137.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p138"></span>**29.** *And Moses said unto him, Enviest
thou for my sake?* This may be understood in two different ways. Some
take it, as if Moses had said, It is no business of yours, if I have
suffered any loss: and if anything is taken from me, it would be mine
and not yours to grieve and grudge; but I think Moses spoke more simply,
as if he had said, Behold, how differently I feel from you; for I, whose
cause you suppose yourselves to be promoting, should desire that all
were endowed with the spirit of prophecy. So was that foolish jealousy
admirably rebuked, which would put a restraint upon God’s blessing, so
greatly to be desired by every pious mind. At the same time, we fully
perceive the gentleness and humility of Moses, whom no ambition, nor
consideration of his personal dignity, prevents from willingly admitting
the very lowliest into companionship with himself. If any should object
that it is God’s pleasure, in order to enhance the excellency of the
gift, that there should be but few prophets in the Church, and
consequently that Moses inconsiderately sought for that, which is in
repugnance to God’s counsel in this matter, the reply is easy, that, al
— though the saints acquiesce in His ordinary dispensations, and are
persuaded that the arrangement, which He makes, is the best, yet that it
is an act of piety in them to desire to communicate with all others what
is given to themselves, so as to be anxious rather to be last of all,
than to begrudge perfection to their brethren. In sum, Moses declares
that nothing would be more gratifying to him, than that God should
diffuse the grace of the spirit of prophecy amongst the whole people, so
that all should be partakers of it, from the least to the greatest.

<span id="ii.v-p139"></span><span id="ii.v-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p140"></span>**30.** *And Moses gat him into the camp.*
Although, after the appointment of the Seventy, all betook themselves to
their own stations and dwelling-places, yet there is no doubt but that
they were all forewarned of the approaching miracle, so as to be
universally attentive to the event, which is presently related. When it
is said that it was “a wind of the Lord” which brought the quails, there
was no other reason for this than that God might openly manifest that
all things under heaven are subject to His dominion, and are ready to
obey Him. He might, indeed, have created the quails at will *(nutu,)*
just as He rained the manna from heaven; nor was it natural that by the
force of the winds such an abundance of birds should be east, and heaped
together in one place; but by using the aid of the wind He confirmed
what is written in <span id="ii.v-p140.1"></span>[Ps.
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)<span id="ii.v-p140.1"></span>, that
“He maketh the winds his messengers  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) and they bear him on their wings;”
because in their swiftness they rapidly bear His commandments from the
east to the west. Now, although it is true in the abstract that the
winds come from Him, so that they are only His breath, and that the air
cannot be stirred in the slightest degree except at His will, still an
extraordinary miracle is here specified, as before in the passage of the
Red Sea. The Prophet in the Psalm goes further:

<span id="ii.v-p142"></span>“He caused an east wind to blow in the
heaven; and by his power he brought in the south wind,” (<span
id="ii.v-p142.1"></span>[Ps 78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026)<span
id="ii.v-p142.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.v-p143"></span>in which words He signifies that the whole
air was shaken, since the winds suddenly arose from different quarters,
which covered the earth in all directions with an immense multitude of
the birds.

<span id="ii.v-p144"></span>When he says that the earth was filled “as
it were a day’s journey,” I do not understand it as if the dead birds
lay at so great a distance, but that they occupied such a space of
ground in thick heaps, and, in fact, continuously. And this also we
gather from the Psalm, where the Prophet says, that they fell “in the
midst of their camp,” and were carried to their tents round about.
(<span id="ii.v-p144.1"></span>[Ps
78:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#028)<span id="ii.v-p144.1"></span>.)
What is added, as to their being “two cubits high,” I do not interpret,
as some do,  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) that they did not fly
above two cubits from the ground, so as to be more easily taken with the
hand; but that there was such a mass of them, that every one might carry
away as much as he would. For to this also do those magnificent
descriptions in the Psalm relate, whereby the miracle is extolled:

<span id="ii.v-p146"></span>“He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and
leathered fowls, like as the sand of the sea.” (<span
id="ii.v-p146.1"></span>[Ps 78:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#027)<span
id="ii.v-p146.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p147"></span>But how “they spread them abroad — round
about,”  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) is not very clear to me;
unless, perhaps, they were placed in cages or coops, and daily taken out
for food.

<span id="ii.v-p149"></span><span id="ii.v-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p150"></span>**33.** *And while the flesh was yet between
their teeth.* Moses does not specify any particular day; but only that
God did not wait till satiety had produced disgust, but inflicted the
punishment in the midst of their greediness. We may, however, conjecture
from what precedes, that time was given them to gorge themselves. From
whence their insatiable voracity may *be* gathered, which prevailed for
so many continuous days, and could not be appeased by any quantity of
food. God, therefore, allowed them time abundantly sufficient for them
to gorge themselves, unless their gluttony was prodigious: and yet
punished their intemperance, while the meat was *yet* in their mouths.
They were, then, suddenly surprised in the midst of their guttling; and
hence it is said in the Psalm, (<span id="ii.v-p150.1"></span>[Ps
78:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030)<span id="ii.v-p150.1"></span>,)
“they were not *yet* estranged from their lust;” just as any glutton
might choke himself, by devouring more than his throat could hold. Nor
is that at variance with their repletion, of which mention was lately
made; for, however the belly may swell with the quantity of its
contents, the furious lust of eating is never appeased. But, in order
that their punishment might be more manifest, God inflicted it in the
very act; nor could any better opportunity have been chosen.

<span id="ii.v-p151"></span><span id="ii.v-p151.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p152"></span>**34.** *And he called the name of that
place Kibroth-hattaavah.* It was requisite that some memorial of so
great a sin should exist, that the sons might not imitate their fathers.
Heretofore God had sustained them with a food both agreeable and
wholesome: by longing for unlawful nourishment they were their own
poisoners and murderers. Now, such ingratitude was deservedly to be
detested by their posterity; and therefore the name was given to the
place, not without the inspiration of the Spirit of God. So Paul reminds
us, that in this narrative God’s judgment against corrupt and vicious
lusts was portrayed, that we might ourselves learn not to lust. (<span
id="ii.v-p152.1"></span>[1Co 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006)<span
id="ii.v-p152.1"></span>.) I have already briefly explained how far our
appetites are to be restrained, and what intemperance, properly
speaking, is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc06006.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p75"></span> *Lat.,* “And the people was, as it were,
fainting *(fatiscentes,)* if, was displeasing in the ears of Jehovah.”
*Fr.* “Apres il adveint que le peuple fut comme gens discouragez,
*(margin,* despitez,) ce que despleut aux aureilles de l’Eternel;”
afterwards it came to pass that the people were as persons discouraged
(or fretted) which displeased the ears of God.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc06006.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.v-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p76"></span> <span id="ii.v-p76.1"></span>מתאננים. Prof.
Robertson and Simon agree in referring this participle Hithpahel to the
root <span id="ii.v-p76.2"></span>אנן *he groaned heavily,* rather than
to <span id="ii.v-p76.3"></span>און *C.,* as usual, has given some of
the Rabbinical expositions which he saw in *S.M.* <span
id="ii.v-p76.4"></span>תאנה occurs in <span id="ii.v-p76.5"></span>[Jud
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#004)<span id="ii.v-p76.5"></span>.,
where A.V. has *occasion;* <span id="ii.v-p76.6"></span>תאנים in <span
id="ii.v-p76.7"></span>[Eze 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#012)<span
id="ii.v-p76.7"></span>, where Simon’s Lexicon notices it as meaning
*wearinesses,* placing this word under the root <span
id="ii.v-p76.8"></span>און. — W.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc06006.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p78"></span> *Lat.,* “fuisse demersum.” A.V. “quenched.”
*Margin,* “Heb. sunk.” “<span id="ii.v-p78.1"></span>שקע, *Submergi; In
profundum deprimi, comprimi, reprimi.”* — *Buxtorf.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc06006.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.v-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p82"></span> See Margin A.V.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc06006.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.v-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p90"></span> *A. V.*, “freely.” Ainsworth, “for nought;”
this (he adds) may be referred to the fish which they had for nought,
without price, getting them out of the rivers freely; or for nought,
that is, for very little, very cheap. It may also have reference to the
former, *We remember for nought, i.e.,* in vain; so the Hebrew
*Chinnam,* and the Greek <span id="ii.v-p90.1"></span>δωρεὰν, sometimes
signifieth a thing done or spoken in vain, and without effect; as <span
id="ii.v-p90.2"></span>[Pr 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017)<span
id="ii.v-p90.2"></span>; <span id="ii.v-p90.3"></span>[Eze
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#010)<span id="ii.v-p90.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.v-p90.4"></span>[Ga
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)<span id="ii.v-p90.4"></span>.”
Geneva Version, “for nought, *i.e.,* for a small price, or good cheep.”

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc06006.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.v-p90.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p91"></span> Herod., 2:93, describes the abundance of the
fish in Egypt, and their migrations for the deposition of their spawn:
and states that the inhabitants of the marshes, some of them, “live on
nothing but fish.” — *Ibid.* 92.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc06006.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.v-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p92"></span> Raphelius has a striking note on this
passage from Herod. “The herbs (onions and garlic) were ordinarily given
to laborers in Egypt. Whence also this was the food of the Israelites,
whose labors the Egyptians used, or rather abused, in making bricks.
Herod. 2:125. “It is declared by certain Egyptian inscriptions on the
Pyramid itself, how much was paid to the workmen, <span
id="ii.v-p92.1"></span>ἔς τε συρμαίην, καὶ κρόμμυα καὶ σκόροδα, for
radishes, onions, and garlic.” — Raphel., *in loco.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc06006.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.v-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p99"></span> See *ante,* vol. 1:275.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc06006.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.v-p99.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p100"></span> A. V., “bdellium;” Hebrew <span
id="ii.v-p100.1"></span> בדלה*bedolach,.* “The bdellium of the sacred
writer was in all probability the pearl, as the Arabic version has
rendered it.” — Illustr. Comment. on <span id="ii.v-p100.2"></span>[Ge
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#012)<span id="ii.v-p100.2"></span>

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc06006.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.v-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p107"></span> Thus, De Lyra; “It is not to be understood
that anything was taken away from Moses and given to the others, but
they were illuminated without any- diminution of the grace of Moses;
thus, by the light of one candle others are lighted, without any
diminution of its own light.” Ainsworth thus traces the gloss of De Lyra
to its source: “Neither was Moses’ spirit hereby diminished; for as Sol.
Jarchi says, ‘Moses in that hour was like unto the lamp that was left
(burning) in the candlestick (in the Sanctuary) from which all the other
lamps were lighted, yet the light thereof was not lessened any whit.’”
So also St. Augustine, “We understand that God would signify nothing
more than that they also would have assistance from the same Spirit of
grace, as Moses had; that they also should have as much as God pleased,
not that Moses would therefore have less. Quest. in <span
id="ii.v-p107.1"></span>[Numbers
18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#000)<span id="ii.v-p107.1"></span>.
*Edit. Bened., tom.* 3. P. 1, p. 535. *C.,* indeed, here, seems to have
but few followers. The gloss in the Geneva version is; “I will
distribute my Spirit among them, as I have done to thee;” and Attersoll
says, “It it true he doth sometimes punish in this manner, sometimes by
lessening, and sometimes by taking away, what he had formerly bestowed.
<span id="ii.v-p107.2"></span>[Zec
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)<span id="ii.v-p107.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.v-p107.3"></span>[Mt
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span id="ii.v-p107.3"></span>.
But we do not read or find that he dealt so with Moses, or that he was
less fit for government than he was before,” etc.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc06006.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.v-p107.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p108"></span> A. V., “I will take;” or “will separate.” —
Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc06006.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.v-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p110"></span> “*Centumviri* were judges chosen from the
thirty-five tribes, three from each, so that properly there were 105,
but they were always named by a round number, Centumviri. *Eestus*.” —
Adam’s Rom. Antiq.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc06006.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.v-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p111"></span> See *ante,* on <span
id="ii.v-p111.1"></span>[Exodus
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)<span id="ii.v-p111.1"></span>,
vol. 3, p. 316.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc06006.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.v-p111.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p112"></span> Josephus, Antiq., 14:9. Section 4.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc06006.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.v-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p114"></span> “Wherefore a people which obeyeth the
precepts of the Lord, and feareth God, ought to separate itself from a
Prelate who is a sinner, nor mingle itself up with the sacrifices of a
sacrilegious priest, especially since it has itself the power either of
choosing worthy priests, or rejecting the unworthy. This, too, we see to
be derived from divine authority, that a priest should be chosen in
presence of the people, in sight of all, and be approved worthy and fit
by public sentence and testimony; as in Numbers, the Lord commanded
Moses, saying, *Take Aaron thy brother, and Eleazar his son, and bring
them up into the mount, before all the congregation: and strip Aaron of
his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son, and Aaron shall be
gathered unto his people, and shall die there.* (<span
id="ii.v-p114.1"></span>[Num. 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#026)<span id="ii.v-p114.1"></span>.)
God commands a priest to be appointed before all the congregation, that
is, He instructs and shows us, that the ordinations of priests ought
only to be solemnized with the knowledge of the people standing by, that
so by their presence either the crimes of the wicked may be detected, or
the merits of the good proclaimed, and so the ordination be right and
lawful, as having been examined with the suffrage and judgment of all.”
— Epistles of S. Cyprian. Oxford Transl. 1844, pp. 211, 212.

<span id="ii.v-p115"></span>The above quotation is from a letter written
in the names of Cyprian and thirty-six of his brethren, as a reply to
inquiries made by the presbyter and people of Leon and Astorga, and the
deacons and faithful people in Merida. Cyprian has not cited <span
id="ii.v-p115.1"></span>[Nu 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016)<span
id="ii.v-p115.1"></span>, in any of the works now acknowledged as his,
though the argument thus drawn from <span id="ii.v-p115.2"></span>[Num.
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#025),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#028)<span id="ii.v-p115.2"></span>,
would have been more reasonably collected from the text, to which
*Calvin* has assumed that he referred.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc06006.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.v-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p118"></span> If <span id="ii.v-p118.1"></span>קדש may be
said to signify to prepare, it can only be so rendered when the
preparation is by sanctifying. — W.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc06006.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.v-p118.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p119"></span> <span id="ii.v-p119.1"></span>זרא
(loathsomeness) is said by S. M. to be an irregular form of <span
id="ii.v-p119.2"></span>זרה; and he renders it dispersion, agreeably
with the acknowledged meaning of the root <span
id="ii.v-p119.3"></span>זרה. This account of the word has the sanction
of modern lexicographers. — W.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc06006.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.v-p119.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p120"></span> Que la le Sainct Esprit deteste leur
gourmandise desbordee;” that there the Holy Spirit marks His detestation
of their unbridled gluttony. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc06006.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.v-p122.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p123"></span> That is, the *V.* “Numquid manus Domini
invalida est?”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc06006.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.v-p123.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p124"></span> In this *C.* follows the *LXX* <span
id="ii.v-p124.1"></span>Μὴ χεὶρ Κυρίου οὐκ ἐξαρκέσει; “Shall not the
Lord’s hand suffice?” and most of the versions, according to Poole, in
which it is rendered “abbreviabitur?”

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc06006.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.v-p127.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p128"></span> *Vates* is a name commonly applied by
classical writers to poets. “Quare sue jure noster ille Ennius *sanctos*
appellat poetas, quod quasi deorum aliquo dono, atque munere commendati
nobis videantur.” — Cicero pro Archia Poeta, 8. “De versibus, quos tibi
a me scribi vis, deest mihi quidem opera, quae non modo tempus, sed
etiam animum vacuum ab omni cura desiderat; sed abest etiam <span
id="ii.v-p128.1"></span>ἐνθουσιασμὸς” — *Ibid.* Epist. ad Quint. Frat
3:4.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc06006.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.v-p128.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p129"></span> *Fr.* “La grace de parler authentiquement
de choses hautes;” the grace to speak authentically of high things.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc06006.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.v-p129.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p130"></span> “These words are commonly rendered, ‘and
did not cease (to prophesy,)’ as in our public version; or ‘and did not
add,’ as they are rendered by Ainsworth and Purver, neither of which
renderings is to me intelligible. By adopting the Sam. reading with
Houbigant, Dathe, and Rosenmiiller, and placing <span
id="ii.v-p130.1"></span>ולא יאספי at the head of <span
id="ii.v-p130.2"></span>[Nu 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#026)<span
id="ii.v-p130.2"></span>, the text will be rectified, and the sense
clear: At non congregati sunt, sed remanserant in castris viri duo,
quorum nomen unius Eldad, et nomen alterius Medad, tamen requievit super
eos spiritus ille (nam ipsi ex conscriptis, atsi non egressi erant ad
tentorium) et prophetabant in castris.” — Boothroyd *in* *loco.* Thus,
Eldad and Medad will be the nominative case to the verb, and its meaning
“were not assembled.”

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc06006.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.v-p130.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p131"></span> The *Fr.* applies this sentence to the
elders, “ils ont cesse de prophetizer;” *they* ceased to prophesy.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc06006.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.v-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p141"></span> *A.V.*, “Who maketh his angels spirits.”
See *C.’s* own translation and comment. — Cal. Soc. Edit., vol. 4:144,
and 147.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc06006.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.v-p144.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p145"></span> So the *V.,* “Volabantque in aere duobus
cubitis altitudine super terram.” “Sol. Jarchi saith, They flew so high
as a man’s heart, that he was not toiled in getting them, either by
reaching high, or by stooping low.” — Ainsworth *in loco*. Kitto,
Illustr. Com. *in loco,* prefers this view.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc06006.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.v-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p148"></span> “We are disposed to conclude with Calmer
(in his note on this place) that the Hebrews salted their quails before
they dried them. We have here, then, the earliest indication of
processes, the benefits resulting from which have become so diffused and
familiar, that it costs an effort of recollection to recognize them as
benefits. Yet many centuries have not elapsed since the Emperor Charles
V. thought it became him to erect a statue to the man (G. Bukel) who
found the secret of salting and barrelling herrings.” — Illustr. Com.
*in loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 12:1-16](cc06007)
