[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06034)  [Next](cc06036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
3:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p3"></span>**1.** Then we turned, and went up the way
to Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his
people, to battle at Edrei.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p4"></span>**1.** Conversi autem aseendimus per viam
Basan et egressus est Og rex Basan nobis in occursum, ipse et universus
populus ejus ad praelium in Edrei.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p5"></span>**2.** And the Lord said unto me, Fear him
not: for I will deliver him, and all his people, and his land, into thy
hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the
Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p6"></span>**2.** Et dixit Jehova ad me, ne timeas
illum, nam in manu tua dedi eum, et universum populum ejus, ac terram
ejus: faeiesque ei quemadmodum fecisti Sihon regi AEmorrhaeorum qui
habitabat in Hesbon.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p7"></span>**3.** So the Lord our God delivered into
our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote
him, until none was left to him remaining.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p8"></span>**3.** Tradidit itaque Jehova Deus noster
etiam Og regem Basan, et universum populum ejus: percussimus eum, ut non
reliquerimus ei superstitem.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p9"></span>**4.** And we took all his cities at that
time; there was not a city which we took not from them, threescore
cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p10"></span>**4.** Cepimus quoque omnes urbes ejus eo
tempore: non fuit urbs ulla quam non ceperimus ab eis, nempe sexaginta
urbes, omnem regionem Argob regni Og, in Basan.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p11"></span>**5.** All these dries were fenced with
high walls, gates, and bars; besides unwalled towns a great many.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p12"></span>**5.** Omnes autem istae urbes erant
munitae muris altis, portis et vectibus: praeter urbes non muratas
multas valde.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p13"></span>**6.** And we utterly destroyed them, as
we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women,
and children, of every city.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p14"></span>**6.** Quas vastavimus, quemadmodum
fecimus Sihon regi Hesbon, vastando omnem urbem, viros, mulieres, et
parvulos.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p15"></span>**7.** But all the cattle, and the spoil
of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p16"></span>**7.** Omnia autem jumenta et spolia
urbium praedati sumus nobis.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p17"></span>**8.** And we took at that time, out of
the hand of the two kings of the Amorites, the land that was on this
side Jordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermen;

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p18"></span>**8.** Tulimus itaque eo tempore terram;
e manu duorum regum AEmorrhaeorum quae erat trans Jordanem a torrente
Arnon usque ad montem Hermon.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19"></span>**9.** (Which Hermon the Sidonians call
Sirion, and the Amorites call it Shenir;)

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p20"></span>**9.** (Sidonii vocant Hermon, Sirion, et
Emorrhaei vocant eum Senir.)

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p21"></span>**10.** All the cities of the plain, and
all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah, and Edrei, cities of the
kingdom of Og in Bashan:

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p22"></span>**10.** Onmes urbes planitiei, et totum
Gilad, et omnem Basan usque ad Salchah, et Edrei, urbes regni Og in
Basan.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p23"></span>**11.** For only Og king of Bashan
remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead
of iron: is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was
the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit
of a man.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p24"></span>**11.** Solus quippe Og rex Basan
remanserat ex reliquis gigantibus: ecce Iectus ejus, lectus ferreus,
nonne est in Rabbath filiorum Ammon? novem cubitorum longitudo ejus, et
quatuor cubitorum latitudo ejus ad cubitum hominis.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p25"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p26"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p27"></span>**4.** *And we took all the cities.* He
here more fully relates what He had brieflytouched upon in Numbers. He
says that sixty, *well-fortified cities* were taken, besides the
villages. Hence we infer both the extent of the country, and also the
special power of God in the aid He afforded them, in that they took, in
so short a time, so many cities well closed in, and begirt with high
walls; as if they were merely travelling, through a peaceful land in
security, and with nothing to do.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p28"></span>After the eighth verse, lie repeats
connectedly what he had separately related respecting the two kingdoms;
and in order that the places might be more certainly identified, he
mentions two other names for mount Hermon, stating that it was called
Sirion by the Sidonians, and Shenir by the Amorites. Finally, he adds
that Og, king of Bashan, was a giant, and the only survivorof that race.
As a memorialof his lofty stature, he alleges his iron bedstead, the
length of which was as much as nine cubits, according to the common
measure of that period. By this circumstance he again magnifies the
marvellous help of God, in that he was overcome by the children of
Israel, who might, by his stature, have singly terrified a whole army.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p29"></span>The enormous stature of the giants is
apparent from this passage. Herodotus records,  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) that the body of Orestes, disinterred
by command of the oracle, was seven cubits in length. Pliny,  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) although he does not cite his
authority, subscribes to this testimony. Gellius  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) thinks that this was fabulous, as also
what Homer  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) writes with respect
to the diminution of men’s height in process of time; but his erroneous
view is confuted by almost universal consent. What Pliny  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) himself relates is indeed incredible,
that in Crete a body was discovered, by an opening of the earth,
forty-six cubits long, which some thought to be the body of Orion, and
others of Etion. But if we believe that there were giants, (which is not
only affirmd by the sacred Scriptures, but also recorded by almost all
ancient writers,) we need not be surprised if they were more than eight
cubits in height. Although, however, the race of giants began to
disappear in the time of Moses, still, in after ages, there existed
persons who approached to this ancient stature,  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) as in the time of Augustus and
Claudius there was one man about ten feet in height, and another nine
feet nine inches. Moses, therefore, intimates nothing more than that
this monstrous race of men gradually died out, so that the enormous
height of Og, king of Bashan, was an unusual sight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc06035.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p30"></span> Herod, Clio, Section 68.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc06035.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p31"></span> Pliny, 7:16.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc06035.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p32"></span> Gellius, lib. 3:10.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc06035.htm#fr_138) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p33"></span> Homer, *I1.* lib. 12:381-3, 446-9; lib.
20:286, 7.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc06035.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p34"></span> Pliny, lib. 7:16.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc06035.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p35"></span> *Fr.* “Comme sous l’empire d’Auguste il
y avoit un homme haut de dix pieds, et sous l’empire de Claude un un peu
moindre;” as under the empire of Augustus there was a man ten feet high,
and, under that of Claudius, one somewhat shorter. Pliny, *loc. cit.,*
records the exhibition at Rome, by the Emperor Claudius, of an Arab
named Gabbara, whose height was nine feet nine inches; and adds, that in
the reign of Augustus, there lived *two* persons, Posio and Secundilla,
who were half a foot higher than Gabbara, and who, on account of their
wonderful size, were buried in the cemetery of the Sallustian gardens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 22:1-41](cc06036)
