[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06013)  [Next](cc06015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#000)<span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
14:39-45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p3"></span>**39.** And Moses told these sayings unto
all the children of Israel: and the people mourned greatly.

<span id="ii.xiii-p4"></span>**39.** Loquutus est igitur Moses verba
ista omnibus filiis Israel, et luxerunt populus valde.

<span id="ii.xiii-p5"></span>**40.** And they rose up early in the
morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be
here, and will go up unto the place which the Lord hath promised: for we
have sinned.

<span id="ii.xiii-p6"></span>**40.** Surrexeruntque mane, et ascenderunt
in verticem montis, dicendo: Ecce nos, ut ascendamus ad locum de quo
loquutus est Jehova: quia peccavimus.

<span id="ii.xiii-p7"></span>**41.** And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye
transgress the commandment of the Lord? but it shall not prosper.

<span id="ii.xiii-p8"></span>**41.** Et dixit Moses, Ut quid
transgredimini sermonem Jehovae? Et (vel, quando) hoc non prospere
cedet.

<span id="ii.xiii-p9"></span>**42.** Go not up, for the Lord is not
among you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies.

<span id="ii.xiii-p10"></span>**42.** Ne ascendatis: quia non est Jehova
in medio vestri: ne percutiamini coram inimicis vestris.

<span id="ii.xiii-p11"></span>**43.** For the Amalekites and the
Canaanites are there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword: because
ye are turned away from the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be with
you.

<span id="ii.xiii-p12"></span>**43.** Amalec enim et Chananaeus ibi est
ante vos, et cadetis gladio. Nam propterea quod aversi estis a sequendo
Jehova, neque erit Jehova vobiscum.

<span id="ii.xiii-p13"></span>**44.** But they presumed to go up unto
the hill-top: nevertheless, the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and
Moses, departed not out of the camp.

<span id="ii.xiii-p14"></span>**44.** Sumpserunt tamen animos ut
ascenderent in verticem montis. Area autem foederis Jehovae et Moses non
recesserunt e medio castrorum.

<span id="ii.xiii-p15"></span>**45.** Then the Amalekites came down, and
the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and discomfited
them, even unto Hormah.

<span id="ii.xiii-p16"></span>**45.** Descendit itaque Amalec et
Chananaeus, qui habitabant in monte illo, percusseruntque eos, et
contuderunt usque Horma.

<span id="ii.xiii-p17"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p18"></span>**39.** *And Moses told all these
sayings.* It was, indeed, a just cause for mourning, when they heard
that God, whose longsuffering they had so wantonly abused, would
hereafter be inexorable. Yet here we have set before our eyes that
“sorrow of the world which worketh death,” as Paul says, (<span
id="ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>[2Co
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>,)
when the wicked, as they weep and complain, cease not to murmur against
God; nay, when they gnaw the bit with greater obstinacy, and thus, like
savage and untamable beasts, rush forward to their destruction in blind
desperation. The temporal punishment could not, indeed, be redeemed by
any tears; but, if there had been the disposition to repent, their only
remedy would have been voluntarily to submit themselves, and calmly to
undergo whatever chastisement God might be pleased to inflict. First of
all, however, they proudly struggle to shake off the punishment awarded
to them, and whilst they pretended penitence, increasingly kick against
God. There is no doubt but that it was under the pretence of submission
that they prepared themselves on the morrow to advance; but wherefore
was this, except that they may overturn God’s inviolable decree!
Nevertheless, they sought, as if against His. will, to make a way for
themselves, though He forbade. “Behold us, (they said,) we are ready;”
but it was too late; for the opportunity had fled. For, as the Prophet
exhorts us to “seek the Lord while he may be found,” (<span
id="ii.xiii-p18.2"></span>[Isa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006)<span id="ii.xiii-p18.2"></span>,)
so also we ought to follow Him when He calls us. But of what avail was
this unseasonable alacrity of the people? When God wishes them to retire
into the desert, they affect a desire to obey Him by advancing further;
and still would have their confession of sin accepted as a sufficient
satisfaction.

<span id="ii.xiii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p20"></span>**41.** *And Moses said, Wherefore do ye
now transgress?* He rejects this feigned penitence, whereby the sinner
tries all sorts of shifts,  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) so as
not to submit himself to God. “If thou wilt return, O Israel, return
unto me,” saith the Lord by Jeremiah, (<span
id="ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>[Jer
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)<span id="ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>.)
The first thing, therefore, which we must consider is, what God requires
of us; so that it may plainly appear that we truly submit ourselves to
His power.

<span id="ii.xiii-p22"></span>In order to restrain their temerity, Moses
reminds them that they will seek in vain for success, when they depart
from God’s command. And this is a very useful piece of instruction, that
His grace will never be wanting to us, if we simply obey His word; but
when, in contempt and neglect of His precepts, we are carried away by
our own feelings, the event will never be prosperous. If any should
object that the wretched people had no other remedy, I have already
stated, that they ought to have been contented with this consolation,
viz., that banishment from the land of Canaan was not disinheritance
from the hope of eternal life. Nay, if they had humbled themselves
before God, they might expect that their punishment would have been a
profitable help to them. By their misdirected activity they double the
evil. After having pointed out their danger, Moses again impresses upon
them that God is not with them, because they had deserted Him: and that
His blessing was withheld, because they had refused to follow Him at the
proper time.

<span id="ii.xiii-p23"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p24"></span>**44.** *But they presumed to go up unto
the hill-top.* It was not, indeed, their intention deliberately to array
themselves against God, but rather did they endeavor to appease Him by
this means of propitiation. Nor was their self-deceit devoid of a
colorable pretext, inasmuch as they were ready cheerfully to welcome
death, so as to offer their lives in sacrifice, and thus to compensate
for their previous hesitation and inertness. It is thus that the zeal of
the wicked is fervent, when it ought to be still; whereas, when God
commands, coldness and apathy possess their minds, so that they are no
more aroused by His voice, than as if they were stones. In a word, when
it ought to be quiet, unbelief is always active, prompt, and bold; but
when God would have it advance, it is timid, slow, and dead.

<span id="ii.xiii-p25"></span>In conclusion, Moses adds, that their
foolish enterprise was punished; for they were not merely routed and put
to flight by their enemies, but utterly destroyed.  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) Hence we gather, that their audacity
failed them in the trial, and was deficient in true courage. At the same
time he recounts another sign of their senselessness, in that they left
behind the ark of God, as well as Moses, and rushed forward, like doomed
persons, to be slaughtered. Hence it appears that unbelievers, when
carried away by the blind impulse of their zeal, are as much destitute
of reason and discretion as if they deliberately conspired for their own
destruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc06014.htm#fr_77) <span
id="ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p21"></span> “En laquelle les pecheurs tournent a
l’entour du pot;” whereby sinners twist round the pot. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc06014.htm#fr_78) <span
id="ii.xiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p26"></span> “Sed etiam contriti.” — *Lat.*
“Discomfited them.” — *A.V.* The Geneva version renders the word
“consumed.” — Hebr. <span id="ii.xiii-p26.1"></span>ויכתום, from <span
id="ii.xiii-p26.2"></span>כחת, which Taylor renders, *“contundere,
conterere.* To beat, to crush, to knock, and mash all to pieces.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 1:41-46](cc06015)
