<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/012.md)  [Palmer
Part I (SBE06)](../sbe06/012)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/01201.md) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq012)  [Rodwell](../qr/012.md)   
[Previous](011)  [Next](013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 12. Yusuf: Joseph

<span id="an_012_001">1</span> Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verse of the
Scripture that maketh plain.

<span id="an_012_002">2</span> Lo! We have revealed it, a Lecture in
Arabic, that ye may understand.

<span id="an_012_003">3</span> We narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best
of narratives in that We have inspired in thee this Qur'an, though
aforetime thou wast of the heedless.

<span id="an_012_004">4</span> When Joseph said unto his father: O my
father! Lo! I saw in a dream eleven planets and the sun and the moon, I
saw them prostrating themselves unto me.

<span id="an_012_005">5</span> He said: O my dear son! Tell not thy
brethren of thy vision, lest they plot a plot against thee. Lo! Satan is
for man an open foe.

<span id="an_012_006">6</span> Thus thy Lord will prefer thee and will
teach thee the interpretation of events, and will perfect His grace upon
thee and upon the family of Jacob as He perfected it upon thy
forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Lo! thy Lord is Knower, Wise.

<span id="an_012_007">7</span> Verily in Joseph and his brethren are
signs (of Allah's Sovereignty) for the inquiring.

<span id="an_012_008">8</span> When they said: Verily Joseph and his
brother are dearer to our father than we are, many though we be. Lo! our
father is in plain aberration.

<span id="an_012_009">9</span> (One said): Kill Joseph or cast him to
some (other) land, so that your father's favour may be all for you, and
(that) ye may afterward be righteous folk.

<span id="an_012_010">10</span> One among them said: Kill not Joseph
but, if ye must be doing, fling him into the depth of the pit; some
caravan will find him.

<span id="an_012_011">11</span> They said: O our father! Why wilt thou
not trust us with Joseph, when lo! we are good friends to him ?

<span id="an_012_012">12</span> Send him with us to-morrow that he may
enjoy himself and play. And lo! we shall take good care of him.

<span id="an_012_013">13</span> He said: Lo! in truth it saddens me that
ye should take him with you, and I fear less the wolf devour him while
ye are heedless of him.

<span id="an_012_014">14</span> They said: If the wolf should devour him
when we are (so strong) a band, then surely we should have already
perished.

<span id="an_012_015">15</span> Then, when they led him off, and were of
one mind that they should place him in the depth of the pit, We inspired
in him: Thou wilt tell them of this deed of theirs when they know (thee)
not.

<span id="an_012_016">16</span> And they came weeping to their father in
the evening.

<span id="an_012_017">17</span> Saying: O our father! We went racing one
with another, and left Joseph by our things, and the wolf devoured him,
and thou believest not our saying even when we speak the truth.

<span id="an_012_018">18</span> And they came with false blood on his
shirt. He said: Nay, but your minds have beguiled you into something.
(My course is) comely patience. And Allah it is Whose help is to be
sought in that (predicament) which ye describe.

<span id="an_012_019">19</span> And there came a caravan, and they sent
their waterdrawer. He let down his pail (into the pit). He said: Good
luck! Here is a youth. And they hid him as a treasure, and Allah was
Aware of what they did.

<span id="an_012_020">20</span> And they sold him for a low price, a
number of silver coins; and they attached no value to him.

<span id="an_012_021">21</span> And he of Egypt who purchased him said
unto his wife: Receive him honourably. Perchance he may prove useful to
us or we may adopt him as a son. Thus we established Joseph in the land
that We might teach him the interpretation of events. And Allah was
predominant in His career, but most of mankind know not.

<span id="an_012_022">22</span> And And when he reached his prime We
gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus We reward the good.

<span id="an_012_023">23</span> And she, in whose house he was, asked of
him an evil act. She bolted the doors and said: Come! He said: I seek
refuge in Allah! Lo! he is my lord, who hath treated me honourably. Lo!
wrong-doers never prosper.

<span id="an_012_024">24</span> She verily desired him, and he would
have desired her if it had not been that he saw the argument of his
Lord. Thus it was, that We might ward off from him evil and lewdness.
Lo! he was of Our chosen slaves.

<span id="an_012_025">25</span> And they raced with one another to the
door, and she tore his shirt from behind, and they met her lord and
master at the door. She said: What shall be his reward, who wisheth evil
to thy folk, save prison or a painful doom ?

<span id="an_012_026">26</span> (Joseph) said: She it was who asked of
me an evil act. And a witness of her own folk testified: If his shirt is
torn from before, then she speaketh truth and he is of the liars.

<span id="an_012_027">27</span> And if his shirt is torn from behind,
then she hath lied and he is of the truthful.

<span id="an_012_028">28</span> So when he saw his shirt torn from
behind, he said: Lo! this is of the guile of you women. Lo! the guile of
you is very great.

<span id="an_012_029">29</span> O Joseph! Turn away from this, and thou,
(O woman), ask forgiveness for thy sin. Lo! thou art of the faulty.

<span id="an_012_030">30</span> And women in the city said: The ruler's
wife is asking of her slave-boy an ill- deed. Indeed he has smitten her
to the heart with love. We behold her in plain aberration.

<span id="an_012_031">31</span> And when she heard of their sly talk,
she sent to them and prepared for them a cushioned couch (to lie on at
the feast) and gave to every one of them a knife and said (to Joseph):
Come out unto them! And when they saw him they exalted him and cut their
hands, exclaiming: Allah Blameless! This is no a human being. This is
not other than some gracious angel.

<span id="an_012_032">32</span> She said: This is he on whose account ye
blamed me. I asked of him an evil act, but he proved continent, but if
he do not my behest he verily shall be imprisoned, and verily shall be
of those brought low.

<span id="an_012_033">33</span> He said: O my Lord! Prison is more dear
than that unto which they urge me, and if Thou fend not off their wiles
from me I shall incline unto them and become of the foolish.

<span id="an_012_034">34</span> So his Lord heard his prayer and fended
off their wiles from him. Lo! He is Hearer, Knower.

<span id="an_012_035">35</span> And it seemed good to them (the
men-folk) after they had seen the signs (of his innocence) to imprison
him for a time.

<span id="an_012_036">36</span> And two young men went to prison with
him. One of them said: I dreamed that I was pressing wine. The other
said: I dreamed that I was carrying upon my head bread whereof the birds
were eating. Announce unto us the interpretation, for we see thee of
those good (at interpretation).

<span id="an_012_037">37</span> He said: The food which ye are given
(daily) shall not come unto you but I shall tell you the interpretation
ere it cometh unto you. This is of that which my Lord hath taught me.
Lo! I have forsaken the religion of folk who believe not in Allah and
are disbelievers in the Hereafter.

<span id="an_012_038">38</span> And I have followed the religion of my
fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. It never was for us to attribute
aught as partner to Allah. This is of the bounty of Allah unto us (the
seed of Abraham) and unto mankind; but most men give not thanks.

<span id="an_012_039">39</span> O my fellow-prisoners! Are divers lords
better, or Allah the One, Almighty ?

<span id="an_012_040">40</span> Those whom ye worship beside Him are but
names which ye have named, ye and your fathers. Allah hath revealed no
sanction for them. The decision rests with Allah only, Who hath
commanded you that ye worship none save Him. This is the right religion,
but most men know not.

<span id="an_012_041">41</span> O my two fellow-prisoners! As for one of
you, he will pour out wine for his lord to drink; and as for the other,
he will be crucified so that the birds will eat from his head. Thus is
the case judged concerning which ye did inquire.

<span id="an_012_042">42</span> And he said unto him of the twain who he
knew would be released: Mention me in the presence of thy lord. But
Satan caused him to forget to mention it to his lord, so he (Joseph)
stayed in prison for some years.

<span id="an_012_043">43</span> And the king said: Lo! I saw in a dream
seven fat kine which seven lean were eating, and seven green ears of
corn and other (seven) dry. O notables! Expound for me my vision, if ye
can interpret dreams.

<span id="an_012_044">44</span> They answered: Jumbled dreams! And we
are not knowing in the interpretation of dreams.

<span id="an_012_045">45</span> And he of the two who was released, and
(now) at length remembered, said: I am going to announce unto you the
interpretation, therefore send me forth.

<span id="an_012_046">46</span> (And when he came to Joseph in the
prison, he exclaimed): Joseph! O thou truthful one! Expound for us the
seven fat kine which seven lean were eating and the seven green ears of
corn and other (seven) dry, that I may return unto the people, so that
they may know.

<span id="an_012_047">47</span> He said: Ye shall sow seven years as
usual, but that which ye reap, leave it in the ear, all save a little
which ye eat.

<span id="an_012_048">48</span> Then after that will come seven hard
years which will devour all that ye have prepared for them, save a
little of that which ye have stored.

<span id="an_012_049">49</span> Then, after that, will come a year when
the people will have plenteous crops and when they will press (wine and
oil).

<span id="an_012_050">50</span> And the king said: Bring him unto me.
And when the messenger came unto him, he (Joseph) said: Return unto thy
lord and ask him what was the case of the women who cut their hands. Lo!
my Lord knoweth their guile.

<span id="an_012_051">51</span> He (the king) (then sent for those women
and) said: What happened when ye asked an evil act of Joseph ? They
answered: Allah Blameless! We know no evil of him. Said the wife of the
ruler: Now the truth is out. I asked of him an evil act, and he is
surely of the truthful.

<span id="an_012_052">52</span> (Then Joseph said: I asked for) this,
that he (my lord) may know that I betrayed him not in secret, and that
surely Allah guideth not the snare of the betrayers.

<span id="an_012_053">53</span> I do not exculpate myself. Lo! the
(human) soul enjoineth unto evil, save that whereon my Lord hath mercy.
Lo! my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_012_054">54</span> And the king said: Bring him unto me
that I may attach him to my person. And when he had talked with him he
said: Lo! thou art to-day in our presence established and trusted.

<span id="an_012_055">55</span> He said: Set me over the storehouses of
the land. Lo! I am a skilled custodian.

<span id="an_012_056">56</span> Thus gave We power to Joseph in the
land. He was the owner of it where he pleased. We reach with Our mercy
whom We will. We lose not the reward of the good.

<span id="an_012_057">57</span> And the reward of the Hereafter is
better, for those who believe and ward off (evil).

<span id="an_012_058">58</span> And Joseph's brethren came and presented
themselves before him, and he knew them but they knew him not.

<span id="an_012_059">59</span> And when he provided them with their
provision he said: Bring unto me a brother of yours from your father.
See ye not that I fill up the measure and I am the best of hosts ?

<span id="an_012_060">60</span> And if ye bring him not unto me, then
there shall be no measure for you with me, nor shall ye draw near.

<span id="an_012_061">61</span> They said: We will try to win him from
his father: that we will surely do.

<span id="an_012_062">62</span> He said unto his young men: Place their
merchandise in their saddlebags, so that they may know it when they go
back to their folk, and so will come again.

<span id="an_012_063">63</span> So when they went back to their father
they said: O our father! The measure is denied us, so send with us our
brother that we may obtain the measure, surely we will guard him well.

<span id="an_012_064">64</span> He said: Can I entrust him to you save
as I entrusted his brother to you aforetime ? Allah is better at
guarding, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy.

<span id="an_012_065">65</span> And when they opened their belongings
they discovered that their merchandise had been returned to them. They
said: O our father! What (more) can we ask ? Here is our merchandise
returned to us. We shall get provision for our folk and guard our
brother, and we shall have the extra measure of a camel (load). This
(that we bring now) is a light measure.

<span id="an_012_066">66</span> He said: I will not send him with you
till ye give me an undertaking in the name of Allah that ye will bring
him back to me, unless ye are surrounded. And when they gave him their
undertaking he said: Allah is the Warden over what we say.

<span id="an_012_067">67</span> And he said: O my sons! Go not in by one
gate; go in by different gates. I can naught avail you as against Allah.
Lo! the decision rests with Allah only. In Him do I put my trust, and in
Him let all the trusting put their trust.

<span id="an_012_068">68</span> And when they entered in the manner
which their father had enjoined, it would have naught availed them as
against Allah; it was but a need of Jacob's soul which he thus
satisfied; and lo! he was a lord of knowledge because We had taught him;
but most of mankind know not.

<span id="an_012_069">69</span> And when they went in before Joseph, he
took his brother unto him, saying: Lo! I, even I, am thy brother,
therefore sorrow not for what they did.

<span id="an_012_070">70</span> And when he provided them with their
provision, he put the drinking-cup in his brother's saddlebag, and then
a crier cried: O camel-riders! Lo! ye are surely thieves!

<span id="an_012_071">71</span> They cried, coming toward them: What is
it ye have lost ?

<span id="an_012_072">72</span> They said: We have lost the king's cup,
and he who bringeth it shall have a camel-load, and I (said Joseph) am
answerable for it.

<span id="an_012_073">73</span> They said: By Allah, well ye know we
came not to do evil in the land, and are no thieves.

<span id="an_012_074">74</span> They said: And what shall be the penalty
for it, if ye prove liars ?

<span id="an_012_075">75</span> They said: The penalty for it! He in
whose bag (the cup) is found, he is the penalty for it. Thus we requite
wrong-doers.

<span id="an_012_076">76</span> Then he (Joseph) began the search with
their bags before his brother's bag, then he produced it from his
brother's bag. Thus did We contrive for Joseph. He could not have taken
his brother according to the king's law unless Allah willed. We raise by
grades (of mercy) whom We will, and over every lord of knowledge there
is one more knowing.

<span id="an_012_077">77</span> They said: If he stealeth, a brother of
his stole before. But Joseph kept it secret in his soul and revealed it
not unto them. He said (within himself): Ye are in worse case, and Allah
knoweth best (the truth of) that which ye allege.

<span id="an_012_078">78</span> They said: O ruler of the land! Lo! he
hath a very aged father, so take one of us instead of him. Lo! we behold
thee of those who do kindness.

<span id="an_012_079">79</span> He said: Allah forbid that we should
seize save him with whom we found our property; then truly we should be
wrong-doers.

<span id="an_012_080">80</span> So, When they despaired of (moving) him,
they conferred together apart. The eldest of them said: Know ye not how
your father took an undertaking from you in Allah's name and how ye
failed in the case of Joseph aforetime ? Therefore I shall not go forth
from the land until my father giveth leave or Allah judgeth for me. He
is the Best of Judges.

<span id="an_012_081">81</span> Return unto your father and say: O our
father! Lo! thy son hath stolen. We testify only to that which we know;
we are not guardians of the Unseen.

<span id="an_012_082">82</span> Ask the township where we were, and the
caravan with which we travelled hither. Lo! we speak the truth.

<span id="an_012_083">83</span> (And when they came unto their father
and had spoken thus to him) he said: Nay, but your minds have beguiled
you into something. (My course is) comely patience! It may be that Allah
will bring them all unto me. Lo! He, only He, is the Knower, the Wise.

<span id="an_012_084">84</span> And he turned away from them and said:
Alas, my grief for Joseph! And his eyes were whitened with the sorrow
that he was suppressing.

<span id="an_012_085">85</span> They said: By Allah, thou wilt never
cease remembering Joseph till thy health is ruined or thou art of those
who perish!

<span id="an_012_086">86</span> He said: I expose my distress and
anguish only unto Allah, and I know from Allah that which ye know not.

<span id="an_012_087">87</span> Go, O my sons, and ascertain concerning
Joseph and his brother, and despair not of the Spirit of Allah. Lo! none
despaireth of the Spirit of Allah save disbelieving folk.

<span id="an_012_088">88</span> And when they came (again) before him
(Joseph) they said: O ruler! Misfortune hath touched us and our folk,
and we bring but poor merchandise, so fill for us the measure and be
charitable unto us. Lo! Allah will requite the charitable,

<span id="an_012_089">89</span> He said: Know ye what ye did unto Joseph
and his brother in your ignorance ?

<span id="an_012_090">90</span> They said: Is it indeed thou who art
Joseph ? He said: I am Joseph and this is my brother. Allah hath shown
us favour. Lo! he who wardeth off (evil) and endureth (findeth favour);
for lo! Allah loseth not the wages of the kindly.

<span id="an_012_091">91</span> They said: By Allah, verily Allah hath
preferred thee above us, and we were indeed sinful.

<span id="an_012_092">92</span> He said: Have no fear this day! May
Allah forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy.

<span id="an_012_093">93</span> Go with this shirt of mine and lay it on
my father's face, he will become (again) a seer; and come to me with all
your folk.

<span id="an_012_094">94</span> When the caravan departed their father
had said: Truly I am conscious of the breath of Joseph, though ye call
me dotard.

<span id="an_012_095">95</span> (Those around him) said: By Allah, lo!
thou art in thine old aberration.

<span id="an_012_096">96</span> Then, when the bearer of glad tidings
came, he laid it on his face and he became a seer once more. He said:
Said I not unto you that I know from Allah that which ye know not ?

<span id="an_012_097">97</span> They said: O our father! Ask forgiveness
of our sins for us, for lo! we were sinful.

<span id="an_012_098">98</span> He said: I shall ask forgiveness for you
of my Lord. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

<span id="an_012_099">99</span> And when they came in before Joseph, he
took his parents unto him, and said: Come into Egypt safe, if Allah
will!

<span id="an_012_100">100</span> And he placed his parents on the dais
and they fell down before him prostrate, and he said: O my father! This
is the interpretation of my dream of old. My Lord hath made it true, and
He hath shown me kindness, since He took me out of the prison and hath
brought you from the desert after Satan had made strife between me and
my brethren. Lo! my Lord is tender unto whom He will. He is the Knower,
the Wise.

<span id="an_012_101">101</span> O my Lord! Thou hast given me
(something) of sovereignty and hast taught me (something) of the
interpretation of events - Creator of the heavens and the earth! Thou
art my Protecting Guardian in the world and the Hereafter. Make me to
die muslim (unto Thee), and join me to the righteous.

<span id="an_012_102">102</span> This is of the tidings of the Unseen
which We inspire in thee (Muhammad). Thou wast not present with them
when they fixed their plan and they were scheming.

<span id="an_012_103">103</span> And though thou try much, most men will
not believe.

<span id="an_012_104">104</span> Thou askest them no fee for it. It is
naught else than a reminder unto the peoples.

<span id="an_012_105">105</span> How many a portent is there in the
heavens and the earth which they pass by with face averted!

<span id="an_012_106">106</span> And most of them believe not in Allah
except that they attribute partners (unto Him).

<span id="an_012_107">107</span> Deem they themselves secure from the
coming on them of a pall of Allah's punishment, or the coming of the
Hour suddenly while they are unaware ?

<span id="an_012_108">108</span> Say: This is my Way: I call on Allah
with sure knowledge. I and whosoever followeth me - Glory be to Allah! -
and I am not of the idolaters.

<span id="an_012_109">109</span> We sent not before thee (any
messengers) save men whom We inspired from among the folk of the
townships - Have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of
the consequence for those who were before them ? And verily the abode of
the Hereafter, for those who ward off (evil), is best. Have ye then no
sense ? -

<span id="an_012_110">110</span> Till, when the messengers despaired and
thought that they were denied, then came unto them Our help, and whom We
would was saved. And Our wrath cannot be warded from the guilty.

<span id="an_012_111">111</span> In their history verily there is a
lesson for men of understanding. It is no invented story but a
confirmation of the existing (Scripture) and a detailed explanation of
everything, and a guidance and a mercy for folk who believe.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. ar-Ra\`d: The Thunder](013.md)

</div>
