<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/019.md)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/019)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/01901.md) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq019)  [Rodwell](../qr/019.md)   
[Previous](018)  [Next](020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 19. Maryam: Mary

<span id="an_019_001">1</span> Kaf. Ha. Ya. A'in. Sad.

<span id="an_019_002">2</span> A mention of the mercy of thy Lord unto
His servant Zachariah.

<span id="an_019_003">3</span> When he cried unto his Lord a cry in
secret,

<span id="an_019_004">4</span> Saying: My Lord! Lo! the bones of me wax
feeble and my head is shining with grey hair, and I have never been
unblest in prayer to Thee, my Lord.

<span id="an_019_005">5</span> Lo! I fear my kinsfolk after me, since my
wife is barren. Oh, give me from Thy presence a successor

<span id="an_019_006">6</span> Who shall inherit of me and inherit
(also) of the house of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, acceptable (unto
Thee).

<span id="an_019_007">7</span> (It was said unto him): O Zachariah! Lo!
We bring thee tidings of a son whose name is John; we have given the
same name to none before (him).

<span id="an_019_008">8</span> He said: My Lord! How can I have a son
when my wife is barren and I have reached infirm old age ?

<span id="an_019_009">9</span> He said: So (it will be). Thy Lord saith:
It is easy for Me, even as I created thee before, when thou wast naught.

<span id="an_019_010">10</span> He said: My Lord! Appoint for me some
token. He said: Thy token is that thou, with no bodily defect, shalt not
speak unto mankind three nights.

<span id="an_019_011">11</span> Then he came forth unto his people from
the sanctuary, and signified to them: Glorify your Lord at break of day
and fall of night.

<span id="an_019_012">12</span> (And it was said unto his son): O John!
Hold fast the Scripture. And we gave him wisdom when a child,

<span id="an_019_013">13</span> And compassion from Our presence, and
purity; and he was devout,

<span id="an_019_014">14</span> And dutiful toward his parents. And he
was not arrogant, rebellious.

<span id="an_019_015">15</span> Peace on him the day he was born, and
the day he dieth and the day he shall be raised alive!

<span id="an_019_016">16</span> And make mention of Mary in the
Scripture, when she had withdrawn from her people to a chamber looking
East,

<span id="an_019_017">17</span> And had chosen seclusion from them. Then
We sent unto her Our Spirit and it assumed for her the likeness of a
perfect man.

<span id="an_019_018">18</span> She said: Lo! I seek refuge in the
Beneficent One from thee, if thou art God- fearing.

<span id="an_019_019">19</span> He said: I am only a messenger of thy
Lord, that I may bestow on thee a faultless son.

<span id="an_019_020">20</span> She said: How can I have a son when no
mortal hath touched me, neither have I been unchaste ?

<span id="an_019_021">21</span> He said: So (it will be). Thy Lord
saith: It is easy for Me. And (it will be) that We may make of him a
revelation for mankind and a mercy from Us, and it is a thing ordained.

<span id="an_019_022">22</span> And she conceived him, and she withdrew
with him to a far place.

<span id="an_019_023">23</span> And the pangs of childbirth drove her
unto the trunk of the palm-tree. She said: Oh, would that I had died ere
this and had become a thing of naught, forgotten!

<span id="an_019_024">24</span> Then (one) cried unto her from below
her, saying: Grieve not! Thy Lord hath placed a rivulet beneath thee,

<span id="an_019_025">25</span> And shake the trunk of the palm-tree
toward thee, thou wilt cause ripe dates to fall upon thee.

<span id="an_019_026">26</span> So eat and drink and be consoled. And if
thou meetest any mortal, say: Lo! I have vowed a fast unto the
Beneficent, and may not speak this day to any mortal.

<span id="an_019_027">27</span> Then she brought him to her own folk,
carrying him. They said: O Mary! Thou hast come with an amazing thing.

<span id="an_019_028">28</span> O sister of Aaron! Thy father was not a
wicked man nor was thy mother a harlot.

<span id="an_019_029">29</span> Then she pointed to him. They said: How
can we talk to one who is in the cradle, a young boy ?

<span id="an_019_030">30</span> He spake: Lo! I am the slave of Allah.
He hath given me the Scripture and hath appointed me a Prophet,

<span id="an_019_031">31</span> And hath made me blessed wheresoever I
may be, and hath enjoined upon me prayer and almsgiving so long as I
remain alive,

<span id="an_019_032">32</span> And (hath made me) dutiful toward her
who bore me, and hath not made me arrogant, unblest.

<span id="an_019_033">33</span> Peace on me the day I was born, and the
day I die, and the day I shall be raised alive!

<span id="an_019_034">34</span> Such was Jesus, son of Mary: (this is) a
statement of the truth concerning which they doubt.

<span id="an_019_035">35</span> It befitteth not (the Majesty of) Allah
that He should take unto Himself a son. Glory be to Him! When He
decreeth a thing, He saith unto it only: Be! and it is.

<span id="an_019_036">36</span> And lo! Allah is my Lord and your Lord.
So serve Him. That is the right path.

<span id="an_019_037">37</span> The sects among them differ: but woe
unto the disbelievers from the meeting of an awful Day.

<span id="an_019_038">38</span> See and hear them on the Day they come
unto Us! yet the evil-doers are to- day in error manifest.

<span id="an_019_039">39</span> And warn them of the Day of anguish when
the case hath been decided. Now they are in a state of carelessness, and
they believe not.

<span id="an_019_040">40</span> Lo! We, only We, inherit the earth and
all who are thereon, and unto Us they are returned.

<span id="an_019_041">41</span> And make mention (O Muhammad) in the
Scripture of Abraham. Lo! he was a saint, a prophet.

<span id="an_019_042">42</span> When he said unto his father: O my
father! Why worshippest thou that which heareth not nor seeth, nor can
in aught avail thee ?

<span id="an_019_043">43</span> O my father! Lo! there hath come unto me
of knowledge that which came not unto thee. So follow me, and I will
lead thee on a right path.

<span id="an_019_044">44</span> O my father! Serve not the devil. Lo!
the devil is a rebel unto the Beneficent.

<span id="an_019_045">45</span> O my father! Lo! I fear lest a
punishment from the Beneficent overtake thee so that thou become a
comrade of the devil.

<span id="an_019_046">46</span> He said: Rejectest thou my gods, O
Abraham ? If thou cease not, I shall surely stone thee. Depart from me a
long while!

<span id="an_019_047">47</span> He said: Peace be unto thee! I shall ask
forgiveness of my Lord for thee. Lo! He was ever gracious unto me.

<span id="an_019_048">48</span> I shall withdraw from you and that unto
which ye pray beside Allah, and I shall pray unto my Lord. It may be
that, in prayer unto my Lord, I shall not be unblest.

<span id="an_019_049">49</span> So, when he had withdrawn from them and
that which they were worshipping beside Allah, We gave him Isaac and
Jacob. Each of them We made a prophet.

<span id="an_019_050">50</span> And we gave them of Our mercy, and
assigned to them a high and true renown.

<span id="an_019_051">51</span> And make mention in the Scripture of
Moses. Lo! he was chosen, and he was a messenger (of Allah), a prophet.

<span id="an_019_052">52</span> We called him from the right slope of
the Mount, and brought him nigh in communion.

<span id="an_019_053">53</span> And We bestowed upon him of Our mercy
his brother Aaron, a prophet (likewise).

<span id="an_019_054">54</span> And make mention in the Scripture of
Ishmael. Lo! he was a keeper of his promise, and he was a messenger (of
Allah), a prophet.

<span id="an_019_055">55</span> He enjoined upon his people worship and
almsgiving, and was acceptable in the sight of his Lord.

<span id="an_019_056">56</span> And make mention in the Scripture of
Idris. Lo! he was a saint, a prophet;

<span id="an_019_057">57</span> And We raised him to high station.

<span id="an_019_058">58</span> These are they unto whom Allah showed
favour from among the prophets, of the seed of Adam and of those whom We
carried (in the ship) with Noah, and of the seed of Abraham and Israel,
and from among those whom We guided and chose. When the revelations of
the Beneficent were recited unto them, they fell down, adoring and
weeping.

<span id="an_019_059">59</span> Now there hath succeeded them a later
generation whom have ruined worship and have followed lusts. But they
will meet deception.

<span id="an_019_060">60</span> Save him who shall repent and believe
and do right. Such will enter the Garden, and they will not be wronged
in aught -

<span id="an_019_061">61</span> Gardens of Eden, which the Beneficent
hath promised to His slaves in the unseen. Lo! His promise is ever sure
of fulfilment -

<span id="an_019_062">62</span> They hear therein no idle talk, but only
Peace; and therein they have food for morn and evening.

<span id="an_019_063">63</span> Such is the Garden which We cause the
devout among Our bondmen to inherit.

<span id="an_019_064">64</span> We (angels) come not down save by
commandment of thy Lord. Unto Him belongeth all that is before us and
all that is behind us and all that is between those two, and thy Lord
was never forgetful -

<span id="an_019_065">65</span> Lord of the heavens and the earth and
all that is between them! Therefor, worship thou Him and be thou
steadfast in His service. Knowest thou one that can be named along with
Him ?

<span id="an_019_066">66</span> And man saith: When I am dead, shall I
forsooth be brought forth alive ?

<span id="an_019_067">67</span> Doth not man remember that We created
him before, when he was naught ?

<span id="an_019_068">68</span> And, by thy Lord, verily We shall
assemble them and the devils, then We shall bring them, crouching,
around hell.

<span id="an_019_069">69</span> Then We shall pluck out from every sect
whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion to the Beneficent.

<span id="an_019_070">70</span> And surely We are Best Aware of those
most worthy to be burned therein.

<span id="an_019_071">71</span> There is not one of you but shall
approach it. That is a fixed ordinance of thy Lord.

<span id="an_019_072">72</span> Then We shall rescue those who kept from
evil, and leave the evil-doers crouching there.

<span id="an_019_073">73</span> And when Our clear revelations are
recited unto them, those who disbelieve say unto those who believe:
Which of the two parties (yours or ours) is better in position, and more
imposing as an army ?

<span id="an_019_074">74</span> How many a generation have We destroyed
before them, who were more imposing in respect of gear and outward
seeming!

<span id="an_019_075">75</span> Say: As for him who is in error, the
Beneficent will verily prolong his span of life until, when they behold
that which they were promised, whether it be punishment (in the world),
or the Hour (of doom), they will know who is worse in position and who
is weaker as an army.

<span id="an_019_076">76</span> Allah increaseth in right guidance those
who walk aright, and the good deeds which endure are better in thy
Lord's sight for reward, and better for resort.

<span id="an_019_077">77</span> Hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in
Our revelations and saith: Assuredly I shall be given wealth and
children ?

<span id="an_019_078">78</span> Hath he perused the Unseen, or hath he
made a pact with the Beneficent ?

<span id="an_019_079">79</span> Nay, but We shall record that which he
saith and prolong for him a span of torment.

<span id="an_019_080">80</span> And We shall inherit from him that
whereof he spake, and he will come unto Us, alone (without his wealth
and children).

<span id="an_019_081">81</span> And they have chosen (other) gods beside
Allah that they may be a power for them.

<span id="an_019_082">82</span> Nay, but they will deny their worship of
them, and become opponents unto them.

<span id="an_019_083">83</span> Seest thou not that We have set the
devils on the disbelievers to confound them with confusion ?

<span id="an_019_084">84</span> So make no haste against them (O
Muhammad). We do but number unto them a sum (of days).

<span id="an_019_085">85</span> On the day when We shall gather the
righteous unto the Beneficent, a goodly company.

<span id="an_019_086">86</span> And drive the guilty unto hell, a weary
herd,

<span id="an_019_087">87</span> They will have no power of intercession,
save him who hath made a covenant with his Lord.

<span id="an_019_088">88</span> And they say: The Beneficent hath taken
unto Himself a son.

<span id="an_019_089">89</span> Assuredly ye utter a disastrous thing

<span id="an_019_090">90</span> Whereby almost the heavens are torn, and
the earth is split asunder and the mountains fall in ruins,

<span id="an_019_091">91</span> That ye ascribe unto the Beneficent a
son,

<span id="an_019_092">92</span> When it is not meet for (the Majesty of)
the Beneficent that He should choose a son.

<span id="an_019_093">93</span> There is none in the heavens and the
earth but cometh unto the Beneficent as a slave.

<span id="an_019_094">94</span> Verily He knoweth them and numbereth
them with (right) numbering.

<span id="an_019_095">95</span> And each one of them will come unto Him
on the Day of Resurrection, alone.

<span id="an_019_096">96</span> Lo! those who believe and do good works,
the Beneficent will appoint for them love.

<span id="an_019_097">97</span> And We make (this Scripture) easy in thy
tongue, (O Muhammad) only that thou mayst bear good tidings therewith
unto those who ward off (evil), and warn therewith the froward folk.

<span id="an_019_098">98</span> And how many a generation before them
have We destroyed! Canst thou (Muhammad) see a single man of them, or
hear from them the slightest sound ?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. Ta Ha: Ta Ha](020.md)

</div>
