<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/025.md)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/025)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/02501.md) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq025)  [Rodwell](../qr/025.md)   
[Previous](024)  [Next](026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 25. al-Furqan: The Criterion

<span id="an_025_001">1</span> Blessed is He Who hath revealed unto His
slave the Criterion (of right and wrong), that he may be a warner to the
peoples.

<span id="an_025_002">2</span> He unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of
the heavens and the earth, He hath chosen no son nor hath He any partner
in the Sovereignty. He hath created everything and hath meted out for it
a measure.

<span id="an_025_003">3</span> Yet they choose beside Him other gods who
create naught but are themselves created, and possess not hurt nor
profit for themselves, and possess not death nor life, nor power to
raise the dead.

<span id="an_025_004">4</span> Those who disbelieve say: This is naught
but a lie that he hath invented, and other folk have helped him with it,
so that they have produced a slander and a lie.

<span id="an_025_005">5</span> And they say: Fables of the men of old
which he hath had written down so that they are dictated to him morn and
evening.

<span id="an_025_006">6</span> Say (unto them, O Muhammad): He who
knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth hath revealed it. Lo! He
ever is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_025_007">7</span> And they say: What aileth this messenger
(of Allah) that he eateth food and walketh in the markets ? Why is not
an angel sent down unto him, to be a warner with him.

<span id="an_025_008">8</span> Or (why is not) treasure thrown down unto
him, or why hath he not a paradise from whence to eat ? And the
evil-doers say: Ye are but following a man bewitched.

<span id="an_025_009">9</span> See how they coin similitudes for thee,
so that they are all astray and cannot find a road!

<span id="an_025_010">10</span> Blessed is He Who, if He will, will
assign thee better than (all) that - Gardens underneath which rivers
flow - and will assign thee mansions.

<span id="an_025_011">11</span> Nay, but they deny (the coming of) the
Hour, and for those who deny (the coming of) the Hour We have prepared a
flame.

<span id="an_025_012">12</span> When it seeth them from afar, they hear
the crackling and the roar thereof.

<span id="an_025_013">13</span> And when they are flung into a narrow
place thereof, chained together, they pray for destruction there.

<span id="an_025_014">14</span> Pray not that day for one destruction,
but pray for many destructions!

<span id="an_025_015">15</span> Say: Is that (doom) better or the Garden
of Immortality which is promised unto those who ward off (evil) ? It
will be their reward and journey's end.

<span id="an_025_016">16</span> Therein abiding, they have all that they
desire. It is for thy Lord a promise that must be fulfilled.

<span id="an_025_017">17</span> And on the day when He will assemble
them and that which they worship instead of Allah and will say: Was it
ye who misled these my slaves or did they (themselves) wander from the
way ?

<span id="an_025_018">18</span> They will say: Be Thou Glorified! it was
not for us to choose any protecting friends beside thee; but Thou didst
give them and their fathers ease till they forgot the warning and became
lost folk.

<span id="an_025_019">19</span> Thus they will give you the lie
regarding what ye say, then ye can neither avert (the doom) nor obtain
help. And whoso among you doeth wrong, We shall make him taste great
torment.

<span id="an_025_020">20</span> We never sent before thee any messengers
but lo! they verily ate food and walked in the markets. And We have
appointed some of you a test for others: Will ye be steadfast ? And thy
Lord is ever Seer.

<span id="an_025_021">21</span> And those who look not for a meeting
with Us say: Why are angels not sent down unto us and (Why) do we not
see our Lord! Assuredly they think too highly of themselves and are
scornful with great pride.

<span id="an_025_022">22</span> On the day when they behold the angels,
on that day there will be no good tidings for the guilty; and they will
cry: A forbidding ban!

<span id="an_025_023">23</span> And We shall turn unto the work they did
and make it scattered motes.

<span id="an_025_024">24</span> Those who have earned the Garden on that
day will be better in their home and happier in their place of noonday
rest;

<span id="an_025_025">25</span> A day when the heaven with the clouds
will be rent asunder and the angels will be sent down, a grand descent.

<span id="an_025_026">26</span> The Sovereignty on that day will be the
True (Sovereignty) belonging to the Beneficent One, and it will be a
hard day for disbelievers.

<span id="an_025_027">27</span> On the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth
his hands, he will say: Ah, would that I had chosen a way together with
the messenger (of Allah)!

<span id="an_025_028">28</span> Alas for me! Ah, would that I had never
taken such an one for friend!

<span id="an_025_029">29</span> He verily led me astray from the
Reminder after it had reached me. Satan was ever man's deserter in the
hour of need.

<span id="an_025_030">30</span> And the messenger saith: O my Lord! Lo!
mine own folk make this Qur'an of no account.

<span id="an_025_031">31</span> Even so have We appointed unto every
prophet an opponent from among the guilty; but Allah sufficeth for a
Guide and Helper.

<span id="an_025_032">32</span> And those who disbelieve say: Why is the
Qur'an not revealed unto him all at once ? (It is revealed) thus that We
may strengthen thy heart therewith; and We have arranged it in right
order.

<span id="an_025_033">33</span> And they bring thee no similitude but We
bring thee the Truth (as against it), and better (than their similitude)
as argument.

<span id="an_025_034">34</span> Those who will be gathered on their
faces unto hell: such are worse in plight and further from the right
road.

<span id="an_025_035">35</span> We verily gave Moses the Scripture and
placed with him his brother Aaron as henchman.

<span id="an_025_036">36</span> Then We said: Go together unto the folk
who have denied Our revelations. Then We destroyed them, a complete
destruction.

<span id="an_025_037">37</span> And Noah's folk, when they denied the
messengers, We drowned them and made of them a portent for mankind. We
have prepared a painful doom for evil-doers.

<span id="an_025_038">38</span> And (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, and
the dwellers in Ar-Rass, and many generations in between.

<span id="an_025_039">39</span> Each (of them) We warned by examples,
and each (of them) We brought to utter ruin.

<span id="an_025_040">40</span> And indeed they have passed by the
township whereon was rained the fatal rain. Can it be that they have not
seen it ? Nay, but they hope for no resurrection.

<span id="an_025_041">41</span> And when they see thee (O Muhammad) they
treat thee only as a jest (saying): Is this he whom Allah sendeth as a
messenger ?

<span id="an_025_042">42</span> He would have led us far away from our
gods if we had not been staunch to them. They will know, when they
behold the doom, who is more astray as to the road.

<span id="an_025_043">43</span> Hast thou seen him who chooseth for his
god his own lust ? Wouldst thou then be guardian over him ?

<span id="an_025_044">44</span> Or deemest thou that most of them hear
or understand ? They are but as the cattle - nay, but they are farther
astray ?

<span id="an_025_045">45</span> Hast thou not seen how thy Lord hath
spread the shade - And if He willed He could have made it still - then
We have made the sun its pilot;

<span id="an_025_046">46</span> Then We withdraw it unto Us, a gradual
withdrawal ?

<span id="an_025_047">47</span> And He it is Who maketh night a covering
for you, and sleep repose, and maketh day a resurrection.

<span id="an_025_048">48</span> And He it is Who sendeth the winds, glad
tidings heralding His mercy, and We send down purifying water from the
sky,

<span id="an_025_049">49</span> That We may give life thereby to a dead
land, and We give many beasts and men that We have created to drink
thereof.

<span id="an_025_050">50</span> And verily We have repeated it among
them that they may remember, but most of mankind begrudge aught save
ingratitude.

<span id="an_025_051">51</span> If We willed, We could raise up a warner
in every village.

<span id="an_025_052">52</span> So obey not the disbelievers, but strive
against them herewith with a great endeavour.

<span id="an_025_053">53</span> And He it is Who hath given independence
to the two seas (though they meet); one palatable, sweet, and the other
saltish, bitter; and hath set a bar and a forbidding ban between them.

<span id="an_025_054">54</span> And He it is Who hath created man from
water, and hath appointed for him kindred by blood and kindred by
marriage; for thy Lord is ever Powerful.

<span id="an_025_055">55</span> Yet they worship instead of Allah that
which can neither benefit them nor hurt them. The disbeliever was ever a
partisan against his Lord.

<span id="an_025_056">56</span> And We have sent thee (O Muhammad) only
as a bearer of good tidings and a warner.

<span id="an_025_057">57</span> Say: I ask of you no reward for this,
save that whoso will may choose a way unto his Lord.

<span id="an_025_058">58</span> And trust thou in the Living One Who
dieth not, and hymn His praise. He sufficeth as the Knower of His
bondmen's sins,

<span id="an_025_059">59</span> Who created the heavens and the earth
and all that is between them in six Days, then He mounted the Throne.
The Beneficent! Ask anyone informed concerning Him!

<span id="an_025_060">60</span> And when it is said unto them: Adore the
Beneficent! they say: And what is the Beneficent ? Are we to adore
whatever thou (Muhammad) biddest us ? And it increaseth aversion in
them.

<span id="an_025_061">61</span> Blessed be He Who hath placed in the
heaven mansions of the stars, and hath placed therein a great lamp and a
moon giving light!

<span id="an_025_062">62</span> And He it is Who hath appointed night
and day in succession, for him who desireth to remember, or desireth
thankfulness.

<span id="an_025_063">63</span> The (faithful) slaves of the Beneficent
are they who walk upon the earth modestly, and when the foolish ones
address them answer: Peace;

<span id="an_025_064">64</span> And who spend the night before their
Lord, prostrate and standing,

<span id="an_025_065">65</span> And who say: Our Lord! Avert from us the
doom of hell; lo! the doom thereof is anguish;

<span id="an_025_066">66</span> Lo! it is wretched as abode and station;

<span id="an_025_067">67</span> And those who, when they spend, are
neither prodigal nor grudging; and there is ever a firm station between
the two;

<span id="an_025_068">68</span> And those who cry not unto any other god
along with Allah, nor take the life which Allah hath forbidden save in
(course of) justice, nor commit adultery - and whoso doeth this shall
pay the penalty;

<span id="an_025_069">69</span> The doom will be doubled for him on the
Day of Resurrection, and he will abide therein disdained for ever;

<span id="an_025_070">70</span> Save him who repenteth and believeth and
doth righteous work; as for such, Allah will change their evil deeds to
good deeds. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_025_071">71</span> And whosoever repenteth and doeth good,
he verily repenteth toward Allah with true repentance -

<span id="an_025_072">72</span> And those who will not witness vanity,
but when they pass near senseless play, pass by with dignity.

<span id="an_025_073">73</span> And those who, when they are reminded of
the revelations of their Lord, fall not deaf and blind thereat.

<span id="an_025_074">74</span> And who say: Our Lord! Vouchsafe us
comfort of our wives and of our offspring, and make us patterns for
(all) those who ward off (evil).

<span id="an_025_075">75</span> They will be awarded the high place
forasmuch as they were steadfast, and they will meet therein with
welcome and the ward of peace,

<span id="an_025_076">76</span> Abiding there for ever. Happy is it as
abode and station!

<span id="an_025_077">77</span> Say (O Muhammad, unto the disbelievers):
My Lord would not concern Himself with you but for your prayer. But now
ye have denied (the Truth), therefor there will be judgment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. ash-Shu\`ara': The Poets](026.md)

</div>
