<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/029)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/029)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/02901) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq029)  [Rodwell](../qr/029)   
[Previous](028)  [Next](030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 29. al-\`Ankabut: The Spider

<span id="an_029_001">1</span> Alif. Lam. Mim.

<span id="an_029_002">2</span> Do men imagine that they will be left (at
ease) because they say, We believe, and will not be tested with
affliction ?

<span id="an_029_003">3</span> Lo! We tested those who were before you.
Thus Allah knoweth those who are sincere, and knoweth those who feign.

<span id="an_029_004">4</span> Or do those who do ill-deeds imagine that
they can outstrip Us ? Evil (for them) is that which they decide.

<span id="an_029_005">5</span> Whoso looketh forward to the meeting with
Allah (let him know that) Allah's reckoning is surely nigh, and He is
the Hearer, the Knower.

<span id="an_029_006">6</span> And whosoever striveth, striveth only for
himself, for lo! Allah is altogether Independent of (His) creatures.

<span id="an_029_007">7</span> And as for those who believe and do good
works, We shall remit from them their evil deeds and shall repay them
the best that they did.

<span id="an_029_008">8</span> We have enjoined on man kindness to
parents; but if they strive to make thee join with Me that of which thou
hast no knowledge, then obey them not. Unto Me is your return and I
shall tell you what ye used to do.

<span id="an_029_009">9</span> And as for those who believe and do good
works, We verily shall make them enter in among the righteous.

<span id="an_029_010">10</span> Of mankind is he who saith: We believe
in Allah, but, if he be made to suffer for the sake of Allah, he
mistaketh the persecution of mankind for Allah's punishment; and then,
if victory cometh from thy Lord, will say: Lo! we were with you (all the
while). Is not Allah Best Aware of what is in the bosoms of (His)
creatures ?

<span id="an_029_011">11</span> Verily Allah knoweth those who believe,
and verily He knoweth the hypocrites.

<span id="an_029_012">12</span> Those who disbelieve say unto those who
believe: Follow our way (of religion) and we verily will bear your sins
(for you). They cannot bear aught of their sins. Lo! they verily are
liars.

<span id="an_029_013">13</span> But they verily will bear their own
loads and other loads beside their own, and they verily will be
questioned on the Day of Resurrection concerning that which they
invented.

<span id="an_029_014">14</span> And verily we sent Noah (as Our
messenger) unto his folk, and he continued with them for a thousand
years save fifty years; and the flood engulfed them, for they were
wrong-doers.

<span id="an_029_015">15</span> And We rescued him and those with him in
the ship, and made of it a portent for the peoples.

<span id="an_029_016">16</span> And Abraham! (Remember) when he said
unto his folk: Serve Allah, and keep your duty unto Him; that is better
for you if ye did but know.

<span id="an_029_017">17</span> Ye serve instead of Allah only idols,
and ye only invent a lie. Lo! those whom ye serve instead of Allah own
no provision for you. So seek your provision from Allah, and serve Him,
and give thanks unto Him, (for) unto Him ye will be brought back.

<span id="an_029_018">18</span> But if ye deny, then nations have denied
before you. The messenger is only to convey (the message) plainly.

<span id="an_029_019">19</span> See they not how Allah produceth
creation, then reproduceth it ? Lo! for Allah that is easy.

<span id="an_029_020">20</span> Say (O Muhammad): Travel in the land and
see how He originated creation, then Allah bringeth forth the later
growth. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things.

<span id="an_029_021">21</span> He punisheth whom He will and showeth
mercy unto whom He will, and unto Him ye will be turned.

<span id="an_029_022">22</span> Ye cannot escape (from Him) in the earth
or in the sky, and beside Allah there is for you no friend or helper.

<span id="an_029_023">23</span> Those who disbelieve in the revelations
of Allah and in (their) Meeting with Him, such have no hope of My mercy.
For such there is a painful doom.

<span id="an_029_024">24</span> But the answer of his folk was only that
they said: "Kill him" or "Burn him." Then Allah saved him from the Fire.
Lo! herein verily are portents for folk who believe.

<span id="an_029_025">25</span> He said: Ye have chosen only idols
instead of Allah. The love between you is only in the life of the world.
Then on the Day of Resurrection ye will deny each other and curse each
other, and your abode will be the Fire, and ye will have no helpers.

<span id="an_029_026">26</span> And Lot believed him, and said: Lo! I am
a fugitive unto my Lord. Lo! He, only He, is the Mighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_029_027">27</span> And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob,
and We established the prophethood and the Scripture among his seed, and
We gave him his reward in the world, and lo! in the Hereafter he verily
is among the righteous.

<span id="an_029_028">28</span> And Lot! (Remember) when he said unto
his folk: Lo! ye commit lewdness such as no creature did before you.

<span id="an_029_029">29</span> For come ye not in unto males, and cut
ye not the road (for travellers), and commit ye not abomination in your
meetings ? But the answer of his folk was only that they said: Bring
Allah's doom upon us if thou art a truthteller!

<span id="an_029_030">30</span> He said: My Lord! Give me victory over
folk who work corruption.

<span id="an_029_031">31</span> And when Our messengers brought Abraham
the good news, they said: Lo! we are about to destroy the people of that
township, for its people are wrong-doers.

<span id="an_029_032">32</span> He said: Lo! Lot is there. They said: We
are best aware of who is there. We are to deliver him and his household,
all save his wife, who is of those who stay behind.

<span id="an_029_033">33</span> And when Our messengers came unto Lot,
he was troubled upon their account, for he could not protect them; but
they said: Fear not, nor grieve! Lo! we are to deliver thee and thy
household, (all) save thy wife, who is of those who stay behind.

<span id="an_029_034">34</span> Lo! We are about to bring down upon the
folk of this township a fury from the sky because they are evil-livers.

<span id="an_029_035">35</span> And verily of that We have left a clear
sign for people who have sense.

<span id="an_029_036">36</span> And unto Midian We sent Shu'eyb, their
brother. He said: O my people! Serve Allah, and look forward to the Last
Day, and do not evil, making mischief, in the earth.

<span id="an_029_037">37</span> But they denied him, and the dreadful
earthquake took them, and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling
place.

<span id="an_029_038">38</span> And (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud!
(Their fate) is manifest unto you from their (ruined and deserted)
dwellings. Satan made their deeds seem fair unto them and so debarred
them from the Way, though they were keen observers.

<span id="an_029_039">39</span> And Korah, Pharaoh and Haman! Moses came
unto them with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), but they were
boastful in the land. And they were not winners (in the race).

<span id="an_029_040">40</span> So We took each one in his sin; of them
was he on whom We sent a hurricane, and of them was he who was overtaken
by the (Awful) Cry, and of them was he whom We caused the earth to
swallow, and of them was he whom We drowned. It was not for Allah to
wrong them, but they wronged themselves.

<span id="an_029_041">41</span> The likeness of those who choose other
patrons than Allah is as the likeness of the spider when she taketh unto
herself a house, and lo! the frailest of all houses is the spider's
house, if they but knew.

<span id="an_029_042">42</span> Lo! Allah knoweth what thing they invoke
instead of Him. He is the Mighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_029_043">43</span> As for these similitudes, We coin them
for mankind, but none will grasp their meaning save the wise.

<span id="an_029_044">44</span> Allah created the heavens and the earth
with truth. Lo! therein is indeed a portent for believers.

<span id="an_029_045">45</span> Recite that which hath been inspired in
thee of the Scripture, and establish worship. Lo! worship preserveth
from lewdness and iniquity, but verily remembrance of Allah is more
important. And Allah knoweth what ye do.

<span id="an_029_046">46</span> And argue not with the People of the
Scripture unless it be in (a way) that is better, save with such of them
as do wrong; and say: We believe in that which hath been revealed unto
us and revealed unto you; our God and your God is One, and unto Him we
surrender.

<span id="an_029_047">47</span> In like manner We have revealed unto
thee the Scripture, and those unto whom We gave the Scripture aforetime
will believe therein; and of these (also) there are some who believe
therein. And none deny Our revelations save the disbelievers.

<span id="an_029_048">48</span> And thou (O Muhammad) wast not a reader
of any scripture before it, nor didst thou write it with thy right hand,
for then might those have doubted, who follow falsehood.

<span id="an_029_049">49</span> But it is clear revelations in the
hearts of those who have been given knowledge, and none deny Our
revelations save wrong-doers.

<span id="an_029_050">50</span> And they say: Why are not portents sent
down upon him from his Lord ? Say: Portents are with Allah only, and I
am but a plain warner.

<span id="an_029_051">51</span> Is it not enough for them that We have
sent down unto thee the Scripture which is read unto them ? Lo! herein
verily is mercy, and a reminder for folk who believe.

<span id="an_029_052">52</span> Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Allah
sufficeth for witness between me and you. He knoweth whatsoever is in
the heavens and the earth. And those who believe in vanity and
disbelieve in Allah, they it is who are the losers.

<span id="an_029_053">53</span> They bid thee hasten on the doom (of
Allah). And if a term had not been appointed, the doom would assuredly
have come unto them (ere now). And verily it will come upon them
suddenly when they perceive not.

<span id="an_029_054">54</span> They bid thee hasten on the doom, when
lo! hell verily will encompass the disbelievers

<span id="an_029_055">55</span> On the day when the doom will overwhelm
them from above them and from underneath their feet, and He will say:
Taste what ye used to do!

<span id="an_029_056">56</span> O my bondmen who believe! Lo! My earth
is spacious. Therefor serve Me only.

<span id="an_029_057">57</span> Every soul will taste of death. Then
unto Us ye will be returned.

<span id="an_029_058">58</span> Those who believe and do good works,
them verily We shall house in lofty dwellings of the Garden underneath
which rivers flow. There they will dwell secure. How sweet the guerdon
of the toilers,

<span id="an_029_059">59</span> Who persevere, and put their trust in
their Lord!

<span id="an_029_060">60</span> And how many an animal there is that
beareth not its own provision! Allah provideth for it and for you. He is
the Hearer, the Knower.

<span id="an_029_061">61</span> And if thou wert to ask them: Who
created the heavens and the earth, and constrained the sun and the moon
(to their appointed work) ? they would say: Allah. How then are they
turned away ?

<span id="an_029_062">62</span> Allah maketh the provision wide for whom
He will of His bondmen, and straiteneth it for whom (He will). Lo! Allah
is Aware of all things.

<span id="an_029_063">63</span> And if thou wert to ask them: Who
causeth water to come down from the sky, and therewith reviveth the
earth after its death ? they verily would say: Allah. Say: Praise be to
Allah! But most of them have no sense.

<span id="an_029_064">64</span> This life of the world is but a pastime
and a game. Lo! the home of the Hereafter - that is Life, if they but
knew.

<span id="an_029_065">65</span> And when they mount upon the ships they
pray to Allah, making their faith pure for Him only, but when He
bringeth them safe to land, behold! they ascribe partners (unto Him),

<span id="an_029_066">66</span> That they may disbelieve in that which
We have given them, and that they may take their ease. But they will
come to know.

<span id="an_029_067">67</span> Have they not seen that We have
appointed a sanctuary immune (from violence), while mankind are ravaged
all around them ? Do they then believe in falsehood and disbelieve in
the bounty of Allah ?

<span id="an_029_068">68</span> Who doeth greater wrong than he who
inventeth a lie concerning Allah, or denieth the truth when it cometh
unto him ? Is not there a home in hell for disbelievers ?

<span id="an_029_069">69</span> As for those who strive in Us, We surely
guide them to Our paths, and lo! Allah is with the good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. ar-Rum: The Romans](030)

</div>
