<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/032)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/032)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/03201) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq032)  [Rodwell](../qr/032)   
[Previous](031)  [Next](033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 32. as-Sajdah: The Adoration

<span id="an_032_001">1</span> Alif. Lam. Mim

<span id="an_032_002">2</span> The revelation of the Scripture whereof
there is no doubt is from the Lord of the Worlds.

<span id="an_032_003">3</span> Or say they: He hath invented it ? Nay,
but it is the Truth from thy Lord, that thou mayst warn a folk to whom
no warner came before thee, that haply they may walk aright.

<span id="an_032_004">4</span> Allah it is Who created the heavens and
the earth, and that which is between them, in six Days. Then He mounted
the Throne. Ye have not, beside Him, a protecting friend or mediator.
Will ye not then remember ?

<span id="an_032_005">5</span> He directeth the ordinance from the
heaven unto the earth; then it ascendeth unto Him in a Day, whereof the
measure is a thousand years of that ye reckon.

<span id="an_032_006">6</span> Such is the Knower of the Invisible and
the Visible, the Mighty, the Merciful,

<span id="an_032_007">7</span> Who made all things good which He
created, and He began the creation of man from clay;

<span id="an_032_008">8</span> Then He made his seed from a draught of
despised fluid;

<span id="an_032_009">9</span> Then He fashioned him and breathed into
him of His Spirit; and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts.
Small thanks give ye!

<span id="an_032_010">10</span> And they say: When we are lost in the
earth, how can we then be re-created ? Nay but they are disbelievers in
the meeting with their Lord.

<span id="an_032_011">11</span> Say: The angel of death, who hath charge
concerning you, will gather you, and afterward unto your Lord ye will be
returned.

<span id="an_032_012">12</span> Couldst thou but see when the guilty
hang their heads before their Lord, (and say): Our Lord! We have now
seen and heard, so send us back; we will do right, now we are sure.

<span id="an_032_013">13</span> And if We had so willed, We could have
given every soul its guidance, but the word from Me concerning evildoers
took effect: that I will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together.

<span id="an_032_014">14</span> So taste (the evil of your deeds).
Forasmuch as ye forgot the meeting of this your day, lo! We forget you.
Taste the doom of immortality because of what ye used to do.

<span id="an_032_015">15</span> Only those believe in Our revelations
who, when they are reminded of them, fall down prostrate and hymn the
praise of their Lord, and they are not scornful,

<span id="an_032_016">16</span> Who forsake their beds to cry unto their
Lord in fear and hope, and spend of that We have bestowed on them.

<span id="an_032_017">17</span> No soul knoweth what is kept hid for
them of joy, as a reward for what they used to do.

<span id="an_032_018">18</span> Is he who is a believer like unto him
who is an evil-liver ? They are not alike.

<span id="an_032_019">19</span> But as for those who believe and do good
works, for them are the Gardens of Retreat - a welcome (in reward) for
what they used to do.

<span id="an_032_020">20</span> And as for those who do evil, their
retreat is the Fire. Whenever they desire to issue forth from thence,
they are brought back thither. Unto them it is said: Taste the torment
of the Fire which ye used to deny.

<span id="an_032_021">21</span> And verily We make them taste the lower
punishment before the greater, that haply they may return.

<span id="an_032_022">22</span> And who doth greater wrong than he who
is reminded of the revelations of his Lord, then turneth from them. Lo!
We shall requite the guilty.

<span id="an_032_023">23</span> We verily gave Moses the Scripture; so
be not ye in doubt of his receiving it; and We appointed it a guidance
for the Children of Israel.

<span id="an_032_024">24</span> And when they became steadfast and
believed firmly in Our revelations, We appointed from among them leaders
who guided by Our command.

<span id="an_032_025">25</span> Lo! thy Lord will judge between them on
the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ.

<span id="an_032_026">26</span> Is it not a guidance for them (to
observe) how many generations We destroyed before them, amid whose
dwelling places they do walk ? Lo! therein verily are portents! Will
they not then heed ?

<span id="an_032_027">27</span> Have they not seen how We lead the water
to the barren land and therewith bring forth crops whereof their cattle
eat, and they themselves ? Will they not then see ?

<span id="an_032_028">28</span> And they say: When cometh this victory
(of yours) if ye are truthful ?

<span id="an_032_029">29</span> Say (unto them): On the day of the
victory the faith of those who disbelieve (and who then will believe)
will not avail them, neither will they be reprieved.

<span id="an_032_030">30</span> So withdraw from them (O Muhammad), and
await (the event). Lo! they (also) are awaiting (it).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. al-Ahzab: The Allies](033)

</div>
