<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/034.md)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/034)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/03401.md) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq034)  [Rodwell](../qr/034.md)   
[Previous](033)  [Next](035.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 34. Saba': Sheba

<span id="an_034_001">1</span> Praise be to Allah, unto Whom belongeth
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. His is the
praise in the Hereafter, and He is the Wise, the Aware.

<span id="an_034_002">2</span> He knoweth that which goeth into the
earth and that which cometh forth from it, and that descendeth from the
heaven and that which ascendeth into it. He is the Merciful, the
Forgiving.

<span id="an_034_003">3</span> Those who disbelieve say: The Hour will
never come unto us. Say: Nay, by my Lord, but it is coming unto you
surely. (He is) the Knower of the Unseen. Not an atom's weight, or less
than that or greater, escapeth Him in the heavens or in the earth, but
it is in a clear Record,

<span id="an_034_004">4</span> That He may reward those who believe and
do good works. For them is pardon and a rich provision.

<span id="an_034_005">5</span> But those who strive against Our
revelations, challenging (Us), theirs will be a painful doom of wrath.

<span id="an_034_006">6</span> Those who have been given knowledge see
that what is revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the truth and leadeth
unto the path of the Mighty, the Owner of Praise.

<span id="an_034_007">7</span> Those who disbelieve say: Shall we show
you a man who will tell you (that) when ye have become dispersed in dust
with most complete dispersal still, even then, ye will be created anew ?

<span id="an_034_008">8</span> Hath he invented a lie concerning Allah,
or is there in him a madness ? Nay, but those who disbelieve in the
Hereafter are in torment and far error.

<span id="an_034_009">9</span> Have they not observed what is before
them and what is behind them of the sky and the earth ? If We will, We
can make the earth swallow them, or cause obliteration from the sky to
fall on them. Lo! herein surely is a portent for every slave who turneth
(to Allah) repentant.

<span id="an_034_010">10</span> And assuredly We gave David grace from
Us, (saying): O ye hills and birds, echo his psalms of praise! And We
made the iron supple unto him,

<span id="an_034_011">11</span> Saying: Make thou long coats of mail and
measure the links (thereof). And do ye right. Lo! I am Seer of what ye
do.

<span id="an_034_012">12</span> And unto Solomon (We gave) the wind,
whereof the morning course was a month's journey and the evening course
a month's journey, and We caused the fount of copper to gush forth for
him, and (We gave him) certain of the jinn who worked before him by
permission of his Lord. And such of them as deviated from Our command,
them We caused to taste the punishment of flaming Fire.

<span id="an_034_013">13</span> They made for him what he willed:
synagogues and statues, basins like wells and boilers built into the
ground. Give thanks, O House of David! Few of My bondmen are thankful.

<span id="an_034_014">14</span> And when We decreed death for him,
nothing showed his death to them save a creeping creature of the earth
which gnawed away his staff. And when he fell the jinn saw clearly how,
if they had known the Unseen, they would not have continued in despised
toil.

<span id="an_034_015">15</span> There was indeed a sign for Sheba in
their dwelling-place: Two gardens on the right hand and the left (as who
should say): Eat of the provision of your Lord and render thanks to Him.
A fair land and an indulgent Lord!

<span id="an_034_016">16</span> But they were froward, so We sent on
them the flood of 'Iram, and in exchange for their two gardens gave them
two gardens bearing bitter fruit, the tamarisk and here and there a
lote-tree.

<span id="an_034_017">17</span> This We awarded them because of their
ingratitude. Punish We ever any save the ingrates ?

<span id="an_034_018">18</span> And We set, between them and the towns
which We had blessed, towns easy to be seen, and We made the stage
between them easy, (saying): Travel in them safely both by night and
day.

<span id="an_034_019">19</span> But they said: Our Lord! Make the stage
between our journeys longer. And they wronged themselves, therefore We
made them bywords (in the land) and scattered them abroad, a total
scattering. Lo! herein verily are portents for each steadfast, grateful
(heart).

<span id="an_034_020">20</span> And Satan indeed found his calculation
true concerning them, for they follow him, all save a group of true
believers.

<span id="an_034_021">21</span> And he had no warrant whatsoever against
them, save that We would know him who believeth in the Hereafter from
him who is in doubt thereof; and thy Lord (O Muhammad) taketh note of
all things.

<span id="an_034_022">22</span> Say (O Muhammad): Call upon those whom
ye set up beside Allah! They possess not an atom's weight either in the
heavens or in the earth, nor have they any share in either, nor hath He
an auxiliary among them.

<span id="an_034_023">23</span> No intercession availeth with Him save
for him whom He permitteth. Yet, when fear is banished from their
hearts, they say: What was it that your Lord said ? They say: The Truth.
And He is the Sublime, the Great.

<span id="an_034_024">24</span> Say: Who giveth you provision from the
sky and the earth ? Say: Allah, Lo! we or you assuredly are rightly
guided or in error manifest.

<span id="an_034_025">25</span> Say: Ye will not be asked of what we
committed, nor shall we be asked of what ye do.

<span id="an_034_026">26</span> Say: Our Lord will bring us all
together, then He will judge between us with truth. He is the
All-knowing Judge.

<span id="an_034_027">27</span> Say: Show me those whom ye have joined
unto Him as partners. Nay (ye dare not)! For He is Allah, the Mighty,
the Wise.

<span id="an_034_028">28</span> And We have not sent thee (O Muhammad)
save as a bringer of good tidings and a warner unto all mankind; but
most of mankind know not.

<span id="an_034_029">29</span> And they say: When is this promise (to
be fulfilled) if ye are truthful ?

<span id="an_034_030">30</span> Say (O Muhammad): Yours is the promise
of a Day which ye cannot postpone nor hasten by an hour.

<span id="an_034_031">31</span> And those who disbelieve say: We believe
not in this Qur'an nor in that which was before it; but oh, if thou
couldst see, when the wrong-doers are brought up before their Lord, how
they cast the blame one to another; how those who were despised (in the
earth) say unto those who were proud: But for you, we should have been
believers.

<span id="an_034_032">32</span> Those who were proud say unto those who
were despised: Did we drive you away from the guidance after it had come
unto you ? Nay, but ye were guilty.

<span id="an_034_033">33</span> Those who were despised say unto those
who were proud: Nay but (it was your) scheming night and day, when ye
commanded us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals unto Him. And they
are filled with remorse when they behold the doom; and We place carcans
on the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited aught save what
they used to do ?

<span id="an_034_034">34</span> And We sent not unto any township a
warner, but its pampered ones declared: Lo! we are disbelievers in that
wherewith ye have been sent.

<span id="an_034_035">35</span> And they say: We are more (than you) in
wealth and children. We are not the punished!

<span id="an_034_036">36</span> Say (O Muhammad): Lo! my Lord enlargeth
the provision for whom He will and narroweth it (for whom He will). But
most of mankind know not.

<span id="an_034_037">37</span> And it is not your wealth nor your
children that will bring you near unto Us, but he who believeth and
doeth good (he draweth near). As for such, theirs will be twofold reward
for what they did and they will dwell secure in lofty halls.

<span id="an_034_038">38</span> And as for those who strive against Our
revelations, challenging, they will be brought to the doom.

<span id="an_034_039">39</span> Say: Lo! my Lord enlargeth the provision
for whom He will of His bondmen, and narroweth (it) for him. And
whatsoever ye spend (for good) He replaceth it. And He is the Best of
Providers.

<span id="an_034_040">40</span> And on the day when He will gather them
all together, He will say unto the angels: Did these worship you ?

<span id="an_034_041">41</span> They will say: Be Thou Glorified. Thou
(alone) art our Guardian, not them! Nay, but they worshipped the jinn;
most of them were believers in them.

<span id="an_034_042">42</span> That day ye will possess no use nor hurt
one for another. And We shall say unto those who did wrong: Taste the
doom of the Fire which ye used to deny.

<span id="an_034_043">43</span> And if Our revelations are recited unto
them in plain terms, they say: This is naught else than a man who would
turn you away from what your fathers used to worship; and they say: This
is naught else than an invented lie. Those who disbelieve say of the
truth when it reacheth them: This is naught else than mere magic.

<span id="an_034_044">44</span> And We have given them no scriptures
which they study, nor sent We unto them, before thee, any warner.

<span id="an_034_045">45</span> Those before them denied, and these have
not attained a tithe of that which We bestowed on them (of old); yet
they denied My messengers. How intense then was My abhorrence (of them)!

<span id="an_034_046">46</span> Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I exhort
you unto one thing only: that ye awake, for Allah's sake, by twos and
singly, and then reflect: There is no madness in your comrade. He is
naught else than a warner unto you in face of a terrific doom.

<span id="an_034_047">47</span> Say: Whatever reward I might have asked
of you is yours. My reward is the affair of Allah only. He is Witness
over all things.

<span id="an_034_048">48</span> Say: Lo! my Lord hurleth the truth. (He
is) the Knower of Things Hidden.

<span id="an_034_049">49</span> Say: The Truth hath come, and falsehood
showeth not its face and will not return.

<span id="an_034_050">50</span> Say: If I err, I err only to my own
loss, and if I am rightly guided it is because of that which my Lord
hath revealed unto me. Lo! He is Hearer, Nigh.

<span id="an_034_051">51</span> Couldst thou but see when they are
terrified with no escape, and are seized from near at hand,

<span id="an_034_052">52</span> And say: We (now) believe therein. But
how can they reach (faith) from afar off,

<span id="an_034_053">53</span> When they disbelieved in it of yore.
They aim at the unseen from afar off.

<span id="an_034_054">54</span> And a gulf is set between them and that
which they desire, as was done for people of their kind of old. Lo! they
were in hopeless doubt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. al-Fatir: The Creator](035.md)

</div>
