<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/035)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/035)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/03501) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq035)  [Rodwell](../qr/035)   
[Previous](034)  [Next](036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 35. al-Fatir: The Creator

<span id="an_035_001">1</span> Praise be to Allah, the Creator of the
heavens and the earth, Who appointeth the angels messengers having wings
two, three and four. He multiplieth in creation what He will. Lo! Allah
is Able to do all things.

<span id="an_035_002">2</span> That which Allah openeth unto mankind of
mercy none can withhold it; and that which He withholdeth none can
release thereafter. He is the Mighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_035_003">3</span> O mankind! Remember Allah's grace toward
you! Is there any creator other than Allah who provideth for you from
the sky and the earth ? There is no God save Him. Whither then are ye
turned ?

<span id="an_035_004">4</span> And if they deny thee, (O Muhammad),
messengers (of Allah) were denied before thee. Unto Allah all things are
brought back.

<span id="an_035_005">5</span> O mankind! Lo! the promise of Allah is
true. So let not the life of the world beguile you, and let not the
(avowed) beguiler beguile you with regard to Allah.

<span id="an_035_006">6</span> Lo! the devil is an enemy for you, so
treat him as an enemy. He only summoneth his faction to be owners of the
flaming Fire.

<span id="an_035_007">7</span> Those who disbelieve, theirs will be an
awful doom; and those who believe and do good works, theirs will be
forgiveness and a great reward.

<span id="an_035_008">8</span> Is he, the evil of whose deeds is made
fairseeming unto him so that he deemeth it good, (other than Satan's
dupe) ? Allah verily sendeth whom He will astray, and guideth whom He
will; so let not thy soul expire in sighings for them. Lo! Allah is
Aware of what they do!

<span id="an_035_009">9</span> And Allah it is Who sendeth the winds and
they raise a cloud; then We lead it unto a dead land and revive
therewith the earth after its death. Such is the Resurrection.

<span id="an_035_010">10</span> Whoso desireth power (should know that)
all power belongeth to Allah. Unto Him good words ascend, and the pious
deed doth He exalt; but those who plot iniquities, theirs will be an
awful doom; and the plotting of such (folk) will come to naught.

<span id="an_035_011">11</span> Allah created you from dust, then from a
little fluid, then He made you pairs (the male and female). No female
beareth or bringeth forth save with His knowledge. And no-one groweth
old who groweth old, nor is aught lessened of his life, but it is
recorded in a Book, Lo! that is easy for Allah.

<span id="an_035_012">12</span> And the two seas are not alike: this,
fresh, sweet, good to drink, this (other) bitter, salt. And from them
both ye eat fresh meat and derive the ornament that ye wear. And thou
seest the ship cleaving them with its prow that ye may seek of His
bounty, and that haply ye may give thanks.

<span id="an_035_013">13</span> He maketh the night to pass into the day
and He maketh the day to pass into the night. He hath subdued the sun
and moon to service. Each runneth unto an appointed term. Such is Allah,
your Lord; His is the Sovereignty; and those unto whom ye pray instead
of Him own not so much as the white spot on a date-stone.

<span id="an_035_014">14</span> If ye pray unto them they hear not your
prayer, and if they heard they could not grant it you. On the Day of
Resurrection they will disown association with you. None can inform you
like Him Who is Aware.

<span id="an_035_015">15</span> O mankind! Ye are the poor in your
relation to Allah. And Allah! He is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.

<span id="an_035_016">16</span> If He will, He can be rid of you and
bring (instead of you) some new creation.

<span id="an_035_017">17</span> That is not a hard thing for Allah.

<span id="an_035_018">18</span> And no burdened soul can bear another's
burden, and if one heavy laden crieth for (help with) his load, naught
of it will be lifted even though he (unto whom he crieth) be of kin.
Thou warnest only those who fear their Lord in secret, and have
established worship. He who groweth (in goodness), groweth only for
himself, (he cannot by his merit redeem others). Unto Allah is the
journeying.

<span id="an_035_019">19</span> The blind man is not equal with the
seer;

<span id="an_035_020">20</span> Nor is darkness (tantamount to) light;

<span id="an_035_021">21</span> Nor is the shadow equal with the sun's
full heat;

<span id="an_035_022">22</span> Nor are the living equal with the dead.
Lo! Allah maketh whom He will to hear. Thou canst not reach those who
are in the graves.

<span id="an_035_023">23</span> Thou art but a warner.

<span id="an_035_024">24</span> Lo! We have sent thee with the Truth, a
bearer of glad tidings and a warner; and there is not a nation but a
warner hath passed among them.

<span id="an_035_025">25</span> And if they deny thee, those before them
also denied. Their messengers came unto them with clear proofs (of
Allah's Sovereignty), and with the Psalms and the Scripture giving
light.

<span id="an_035_026">26</span> Then seized I those who disbelieved, and
how intense was My abhorrence!

<span id="an_035_027">27</span> Hast thou not seen that Allah causeth
water to fall from the sky, and We produce therewith fruit of divers
hues; and among the hills are streaks white and red, of divers hues, and
(others) raven-black;

<span id="an_035_028">28</span> And of men and beasts and cattle, in
like manner, divers hues ? The erudite among His bondmen fear Allah
alone. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.

<span id="an_035_029">29</span> Lo! those who read the Scripture of
Allah, and establish worship, and spend of that which We have bestowed
on them secretly and openly, they look forward to imperishable gain,

<span id="an_035_030">30</span> That He will pay them their wages and
increase them of His grace. Lo! He is Forgiving, Responsive.

<span id="an_035_031">31</span> As for that which We inspire in thee of
the Scripture, it is the Truth confirming that which was (revealed)
before it. Lo! Allah is indeed Observer, Seer of His slaves.

<span id="an_035_032">32</span> Then We gave the Scripture as
inheritance unto those whom We elected of Our bondmen. But of them are
some who wrong themselves and of them are some who are lukewarm, and of
them are some who outstrip (others) through good deeds, by Allah's
leave. That is the great favour!

<span id="an_035_033">33</span> Gardens of Eden! They enter them wearing
armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk.

<span id="an_035_034">34</span> And they say: Praise be to Allah Who
hath put grief away from us. Lo! Our Lord is Forgiving, Bountiful,

<span id="an_035_035">35</span> Who, of His grace, hath installed us in
the mansion of eternity, where toil toucheth us not nor can weariness
affect us.

<span id="an_035_036">36</span> But as for those who disbelieve, for
them is fire of hell; it taketh not complete effect upon them so that
they can die, nor is its torment lightened for them. Thus We punish
every ingrate.

<span id="an_035_037">37</span> And they cry for help there, (saying):
Our Lord! Release us; we will do right, not (the wrong) that we used to
do. Did not We grant you a life long enough for him who reflected to
reflect therein ? And the warner came unto you. Now taste (the flavour
of your deeds), for evil-doers have no helper.

<span id="an_035_038">38</span> Lo! Allah is the Knower of the Unseen of
the heavens and the earth. Lo! He is Aware of the secret of (men's)
breasts.

<span id="an_035_039">39</span> He it is Who hath made you regents in
the earth; so he who disbelieveth, his disbelief be on his own head.
Their disbelief increaseth for the disbelievers, in their Lord's sight,
naught save abhorrence. Their disbelief increaseth for the disbelievers
naught save loss.

<span id="an_035_040">40</span> Say: Have ye seen your partner-gods to
whom ye pray beside Allah ? Show me what they created of the earth! Or
have they any portion in the heavens ? Or have We given them a scripture
so they act on clear proof therefrom ? Nay, the evil-doers promise one
another only to deceive.

<span id="an_035_041">41</span> Lo! Allah graspeth the heavens and the
earth that they deviate not, and if they were to deviate there is not
one that could grasp them after Him. Lo! He is ever Clement, Forgiving.

<span id="an_035_042">42</span> And they swore by Allah, their most
binding oath, that if a warner came unto them they would be more
tractable than any of the nations; yet, when a warner came unto them it
aroused in them naught save repugnance,

<span id="an_035_043">43</span> (Shown in their) behaving arrogantly in
the land and plotting evil; and the evil plot encloseth but the men who
make it. Then, can they expect aught save the treatment of the folk of
old ? Thou wilt not find for Allah's way of treatment any substitute,
nor wilt thou find for Allah's way of treatment aught of power to
change.

<span id="an_035_044">44</span> Have they not travelled in the land and
seen the nature of the consequence for those who were before them, and
they were mightier than these in power ? Allah is not such that aught in
the heavens or in the earth escapeth Him. Lo! He is the Wise, the
Mighty.

<span id="an_035_045">45</span> If Allah took mankind to task by that
which they deserve, He would not leave a living creature on the surface
of the earth; but He reprieveth them unto an appointed term, and when
their term cometh - then verily (they will know that) Allah is ever Seer
of His slaves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 36. Ya Sin: Ya Sin](036)

</div>
