<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/046.md)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/046)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/04601.md) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq046)  [Rodwell](../qr/046.md)   
[Previous](045)  [Next](047.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 46. al-Ahqaf: The Sandhills

<span id="an_046_001">1</span> Ha. Mim.

<span id="an_046_002">2</span> The revelation of the Scripture is from
Allah the Mighty, the Wise.

<span id="an_046_003">3</span> We created not the heavens and the earth
and all that is between them save with truth, and for a term appointed.
But those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned.

<span id="an_046_004">4</span> Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Have ye
thought on all that ye invoke beside Allah ? Show me what they have
created of the earth. Or have they any portion in the heavens ? Bring me
a scripture before this (Scripture), or some vestige of knowledge (in
support of what ye say), if ye are truthful.

<span id="an_046_005">5</span> And who is further astray than those who,
instead of Allah, pray unto such as hear not their prayer until the Day
of Resurrection, and are unconscious of their prayer,

<span id="an_046_006">6</span> And when mankind are gathered (to the
Judgment) will become enemies for them, and will become deniers of
having been worshipped.

<span id="an_046_007">7</span> And when Our clear revelations are
recited unto them, those who disbelieve say of the Truth when it
reacheth them: This is mere magic.

<span id="an_046_008">8</span> Or say they: He hath invented it ? Say (O
Muhammad): If I have invented it, still ye have no power to support me
against Allah. He is Best Aware of what ye say among yourselves
concerning it. He sufficeth for a witness between me and you. And He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful.

<span id="an_046_009">9</span> Say: I am no new thing among the
messengers (of Allah), nor know I what will be done with me or with you.
I do but follow that which is inspired in me, and I am but a plain
warner.

<span id="an_046_010">10</span> Bethink you: If it is from Allah and ye
disbelieve therein, and a witness of the Children of Israel hath already
testified to the like thereof and hath believed, and ye are too proud
(what plight is yours) ? Lo! Allah guideth not wrong-doing folk.

<span id="an_046_011">11</span> And those who disbelieve say of those
who believe: If it had been (any) good, they would not have been before
us in attaining it. And since they will not be guided by it, they say:
This is an ancient lie;

<span id="an_046_012">12</span> When before it there was the Scripture
of Moses, an example and a mercy; and this is a confirming Scripture in
the Arabic language, that it may warn those who do wrong and bring good
tidings for the righteous.

<span id="an_046_013">13</span> Lo! those who say: Our Lord is Allah,
and thereafter walk aright, there shall no fear come upon them neither
shall they grieve.

<span id="an_046_014">14</span> Such are rightful owners of the Garden,
immortal therein, as a reward for what they used to do.

<span id="an_046_015">15</span> And We have commended unto man kindness
toward parents. His mother beareth him with reluctance, and bringeth him
forth with reluctance, and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is
thirty months, till, when he attaineth full strength and reacheth forty
years, he saith: My Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for the
favour wherewith Thou hast favoured me and my parents, and that I may do
right acceptable unto Thee. And be gracious unto me in the matter of my
seed. Lo! I have turned unto Thee repentant, and lo! I am of those who
surrender (unto Thee).

<span id="an_046_016">16</span> Those are they from whom We accept the
best of what they do, and overlook their evil deeds. (They are) among
the owners of the Garden. This is the true promise which they were
promised (in the world).

<span id="an_046_017">17</span> And whoso saith unto his parents: Fie
upon you both! Do ye threaten me that I shall be brought forth (again)
when generations before me have passed away ? And they twain cry unto
Allah for help (and say): Woe unto thee! Believe! Lo! the promise of
Allah is true. But he saith: This is naught save fables of the men of
old:

<span id="an_046_018">18</span> Such are those on whom the Word
concerning nations of the jinn and mankind which have passed away before
them hath effect. Lo! they are the losers.

<span id="an_046_019">19</span> And for all there will be ranks from
what they do, that He may pay them for their deeds; and they will not be
wronged.

<span id="an_046_020">20</span> And on the day when those who disbelieve
are exposed to the Fire (it will be said): Ye squandered your good
things in the life of the world and sought comfort therein. Now this day
ye are rewarded with the doom of ignominy because ye were disdainful in
the land without a right, and because ye used to transgress.

<span id="an_046_021">21</span> And make mention (O Muhammad) of the
brother of A'ad when he warned his folk among the wind-curved sandhills
- and verily warners came and went before and after him - saying: Serve
none but Allah. Lo! I fear for you the doom of a tremendous Day.

<span id="an_046_022">22</span> They said: Hast come to turn us away
from our gods ? Then bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us,
if thou art of the truthful.

<span id="an_046_023">23</span> He said: The knowledge is with Allah
only. I convey unto you that wherewith I have been sent, but I see you
are a folk that know not.

<span id="an_046_024">24</span> Then, when they beheld it as a dense
cloud coming toward their valleys, they said: Here is a cloud bringing
us rain. Nay, but it is that which ye did seek to hasten, a wind wherein
is painful torment,

<span id="an_046_025">25</span> Destroying all things by commandment of
its Lord. And morning found them so that naught could be seen save their
dwellings. Thus do We reward the guilty folk.

<span id="an_046_026">26</span> And verily We had empowered them with
that wherewith We have not empowered you, and had assigned them ears and
eyes and hearts; but their ears and eyes and hearts availed them naught
since they denied the revelations of Allah; and what they used to mock
befell them.

<span id="an_046_027">27</span> And verily We have destroyed townships
round about you, and displayed (for them) Our revelation, that haply
they might return.

<span id="an_046_028">28</span> Then why did those whom they had chosen
for gods as a way of approach (unto Allah) not help them ? Nay, but they
did fail them utterly. And (all) that was their lie, and what they used
to invent.

<span id="an_046_029">29</span> And when We inclined toward thee
(Muhammad) certain of the jinn, who wished to hear the Qur'an and, when
they were in its presence, said: Give ear! and, when it was finished,
turned back to their people, warning.

<span id="an_046_030">30</span> They said: O our people! Lo! we have
heard a scripture which hath been revealed after Moses, confirming that
which was before it, guiding unto the truth and a right road.

<span id="an_046_031">31</span> O our people! respond to Allah's
summoner and believe in Him. He will forgive you some of your sins and
guard you from a painful doom.

<span id="an_046_032">32</span> And whoso respondeth not to Allah's
summoner he can nowise escape in the earth, and he hath no protecting
friends instead of Him. Such are in error manifest.

<span id="an_046_033">33</span> Have they not seen that Allah, Who
created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation,
is Able to give life to the dead ? Aye, He verily is Able to do all
things.

<span id="an_046_034">34</span> And on the day when those who disbelieve
are exposed to the Fire (they will be asked): Is not this real ? They
will say: Yea, by our Lord. He will say: Then taste the doom for that ye
disbelieved.

<span id="an_046_035">35</span> Then have patience (O Muhammad) even as
the stout of heart among the messengers (of old) had patience, and seek
not to hasten on (the doom) for them. On the day when they see that
which they are promised (it will seem to them) as though they had
tarried but an hour of daylight. A clear message. Shall any be destroyed
save evil-living folk ?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 47. Muhammad: Muhammad](047.md)

</div>
