<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/066)  [Palmer
Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/066)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/06601) 
[Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq066)  [Rodwell](../qr/066)   
[Previous](065)  [Next](067) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'ân, by M.M. Pickthall, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 66. at-Tahrim: The Prohibition

<span id="an_066_001">1</span> O Prophet! Why bannest thou that which
Allah hath made lawful for thee, seeking to please thy wives ? And Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.

<span id="an_066_002">2</span> Allah hath made lawful for you (Muslims)
absolution from your oaths (of such a kind), and Allah is your
Protector. He is the Knower, the Wise.

<span id="an_066_003">3</span> When the Prophet confided a fact unto one
of his wives and when she afterward divulged it and Allah apprised him
thereof, he made known (to her) part thereof and passed over part. And
when he told it her she said: Who hath told thee ? He said: The Knower,
the Aware hath told me.

<span id="an_066_004">4</span> If ye twain turn unto Allah repentant,
(ye have cause to do so) for your hearts desired (the ban); and if ye
aid one another against him (Muhammad) then lo! Allah, even He, is his
Protecting Friend, and Gabriel and the righteous among the believers;
and furthermore the angels are his helpers.

<span id="an_066_005">5</span> It may happen that his Lord, if he
divorce you, will give him in your stead wives better than you,
submissive (to Allah), believing, pious, penitent, devout, inclined to
fasting, widows and maids.

<span id="an_066_006">6</span> O ye who believe! Ward off from
yourselves and your families a Fire whereof the fuel is men and stones,
over which are set angels strong, severe, who resist not Allah in that
which He commandeth them, but do that which they are commanded.

<span id="an_066_007">7</span> (Then it will be said): O ye who
disbelieve! Make no excuses for yourselves this day. Ye are only being
paid for what ye used to do.

<span id="an_066_008">8</span> O ye who believe! Turn unto Allah in
sincere repentance! It may be that your Lord will remit from you your
evil deeds and bring you into Gardens underneath which rivers flow, on
the day when Allah will not abase the Prophet and those who believe with
him. Their light will run before them and on their right hands; they
will say: Our Lord! Perfect our light for us, and forgive us! Lo! Thou
art Able to do all things.

<span id="an_066_009">9</span> O Prophet! Strive against the
disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern with them. Hell will be
their home, a hapless journey's end.

<span id="an_066_010">10</span> Allah citeth an example for those who
disbelieve: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot, who were under two of
Our righteous slaves yet betrayed them so that they (the husbands)
availed them naught against Allah and it was said (unto them): Enter the
Fire along with those who enter.

<span id="an_066_011">11</span> And Allah citeth an example for those
who believe: the wife of Pharaoh when she said: My Lord! Build for me a
home with thee in the Garden, and deliver me from Pharaoh and his work,
and deliver me from evil-doing folk;

<span id="an_066_012">12</span> And Mary, daughter of 'Imran, whose body
was chaste, therefor We breathed therein something of Our Spirit. And
she put faith in the words of her Lord and His scriptures, and was of
the obedient.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 67. al-Mulk: The Kingdom](067)

</div>
