[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai09) 
[Next](phai11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### *JUDGES, SAMUEL, AND KINGS*.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the history of Hebrew literature, so
full as it is of unfortunate accidents, one lucky circumstance at least
requires to be specially mentioned. Chronicles did not succeed in
superseding the historical books upon which it was founded; the older
and the newer version have been preserved together. But in Judges,
Samuel, and Kings even, we are not presented with tradition purely in
its original condition; already it is overgrown with later accretions.
Alongside of an older narrative a new one has sprung up, formerly
independent, and intelligible in itself, though in many instances of
course adapting itself to the former. More frequently the new forces
have not caused the old root to send forth a new stock, or even so much
as a complete branch; they have only nourished parasitic growths; the
earlier narrative has become clothed with minor and dependent additions.
To vary the metaphor, the whole area of tradition has finally been
uniformly covered with an alluvial deposit by which the configuration of
the surface has been determined. It is with this last that we have to
deal in the first instance; to ascertain its character, to find out what
the active forces were by which it was produced. Only afterwards are we
in a position to attempt to discern in the earlier underlying formation
the changing spirit of each successive period.

#### I.

1\. The following prologue supplies us with the point of view from which
the period of the judges is estimated. "After the death of Joshua, the
children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord and forsook the
Lord God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt,
and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about
them, the Baals and Astartes. And the anger of the Lord was hot against
Israel, and He delivered them into the hands of

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

spoilers, that spoiled them and sold them into the hand of their enemies
round about; whithersoever they went out the hand of the Lord was
against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn
unto them; and they were greatly distressed. Nevertheless the Lord
raised up unto them judges, and was with the judge, and delivered them
out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge, for it
repented the Lord because of their groanings, by reason of them that
oppressed them and vexed them. And it came to pass when the judge was
dead that they returned and corrupted themselves more than their
fathers, in following other gods to serve them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way. And the anger of the Lord
was hot against Israel," &c. &c. (Judges ii.).

Such is the text, afterwards come the examples. "And the children of
Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forget the Lord their God,
and served the Baals and Astartes. Therefore the anger of the Lord was
hot against Israel, and He sold them into the hand of
Chushan-Rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia, and they served him eight
years. And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord
raised up to them a helper, Othniel b. Kenaz, and delivered the king of
Mesopotamia into his hand, and the land had rest forty years. And
Othniel b. Kenaz died." The same points of view and also for the most
part the same expressions as those which in the case of Othniel fill up
the entire cadre, recur in the cases of Ehud, Deborah, Gideon, Jephthah,
and Samson, but there form only at the beginning and at the end of the
narratives a frame which encloses more copious and richer contents,
occasionally they expand into more exhaustive disquisitions, as in vi.
7, x. 6. It is in this way that Judges ii.-xvi. has been constructed
with the workman-like regularity it displays. Only the six great judges,
however are included within the scheme; the six small ones stand in an
external relation to it, and have a special scheme to themselves,
doubtless having been first added by way of appendix to complete the
number twelve.

The features which characterise this method of historical work are few
and strongly distinctive. A continuous chronology connects the times of
rest and their separating intervals, and thereby the continuity of the
periods is secured. In order justly to estimate this chronology, it is
necessary to travel somewhat beyond the limits of Judges. The key to it
is to be found in 1 Kings vi. 1. "In the four hundred and eightieth year
after the children of Israel were come out of the land of

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

Egypt, in the fourth year of the reign of Solomon, he began to build the
house of the Lord." As observed by Bertheau, and afterwards by Nöldeke,
who has still farther pursued the subject, these 480 years correspond to
12 generations of 40 years each. Analogously in 1 Chron. v. 29-34 \[vi.
2-8\], 12 high priests from Aaron to Ahimaaz are assumed for the same
period of time, and the attempt was made to make their successions
determine those of the generations (Num. xxxv. 28). Now it is certainly
by no means at once clear how this total is to be brought into accord
with the individual entries. Yet even these make it abundantly plain
that 40 is the fundamental number of the reckoning. The wandering in the
wilderness, during which the generation born in Egypt dies out, lasts
for 40 years; the land has 40 years of rest under Othniel, Deborah, and
again under Gideon; it has 80 under Ehud; the domination of the
Philistines lasts for 40 years, the duration also of David's reign. On
the necessary assumption that the period of the Philistines (Judges
xiii. 1), which far exceeds the ordinary duration of the foreign
dominations, coincides with that of Eli (1 Sam. iv. 18), and at the same
time includes the 20 years of Samson (Judges xvi. 31), and the 20 of the
interregnum before Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 2), we have already 8 × 40
accounted for, while 4 × 40 still remain. For these we must take into
account first the years of the two generations for which no numbers are
given, namely, the generation of Joshua and his surviving contemporaries
(Judges ii. 7), and that of Samuel to Saul, each, it may be conjectured,
having the normal 40, and the two together certainly reckoning 80 years.
For the remaining 80 the most disputable elements are the 71 years of
interregna or of foreign dominations, and the 70 of the minor judges.
One perceives that these two figures cannot both be counted in,—they are
mutually exclusive equivalents. For my own part, I prefer to retain the
interregna; they alone, so far as we can see at present, being
appropriate to the peculiar scheme of the Book of Judges. The balance of
9 or 10 years still remaining to be applied are distributed between
Jephthah (6 years), and Solomon (down to the building of the temple),
who claims 3 or 4 years, or, if these are left out of account, 3 years
may be given to Abimelech.

The main thing, however, is not the chronology, but the religious
connection of the events. The two are intimately associated, not only
formally, as can be gathered from the scheme, but also by a real inner
connection. For what is aimed at in both alike is a connected view of

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

large periods of time, a continuous survey of the connection and
succession of race after race, the detailed particulars of the
occurrences being disregarded; the historical factors with which the
religious pragmatism here has to do are so uniform that the individual
periods in reality need only to be filled up with the numbers of the
years. One is reminded of the "Satz," "Gegensatz," and "Vermittelung" of
the Hegelian philosophy when one's ear has once been caught by the
monotonous beat with which the history here advances, or rather moves in
a circle. Rebellion, affliction, conversion, peace; rebellion,
affliction, conversion, peace. The sole subjects of all that is said are
Jehovah and Israel; their mutual relation alone it is that keeps the
course of things in motion, and that too in opposite directions, so that
in the end matters always return to their original position.

"They did what was evil in the sight of Jehovah, they went a-whoring
after strange gods,"—such is the uninterrupted key-note. Although
Jehovistic monolatry is so potently recommended from without, it yet
takes no firm root, never becomes natural to the people, always remains
a precept above and beyond their powers. For decennia on end indeed they
hold fast to it, but soon their idolatrous tendency, which has only been
repressed by fear of the judge during his lifetime, again finds
expression; they must have a change. Now this rebellion is indeed quite
indispensable for the pragmatism, because otherwise there would be
nothing at all to tell; it is on the unrest in the clock that the whole
movement depends. But at the same time this is of course no extenuation;
the conduct of the people is manifestly totally inexcusable, the main
actions, the deeds of the judges, are for this manner of historical
treatment always only proofs of Israel's sin and of the unmerited grace
of Jehovah that puts them to shame.

That all this is no part of the original contents of the tradition, but
merely a uniform in which it is clothed, is admitted. *Numero Deus
impare gaudet*. It is usual to call this later revision Deuteronomistic.
The law which Jehovah has enjoined upon the fathers, and the breach of
which He has threatened severely to punish (ii. 15, 21), is not indeed
more definitely characterised, but it is impossible to doubt that its
quintessence is the injunction to worship Jehovah alone and no other
God. Now in this connection it is impossible to think of the Priestly
Code, for in that document such a command is nowhere expressly enjoined,
but, on the contrary, is assumed as a matter of course.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deuteronomy, on
the other hand, has in fact no precept on which it lays greater emphasis
than the "Hear, O Israel"—that Jehovah is the only God, and the worship
of strange gods the sin of sins. This precept was apprehended much more
clearly by contemporaries than the moral demands in the interest of
humanity and kindness which are also insisted on in Deuteronomy, but are
not new, being derived from older collections; on this side alone, in so
far as it follows up the monotheism of the prophets into its practical
consequences within the sphere of worship, has Josiah's law-book had
historical importance, on this side alone has it continued to act upon
Ezekiel and those who came after him. If, then, the norm of the
theocratic relationship assumed in the redaction of the Book of Judges
is to be sought in a written Torah, this can indubitably only be that of
Deuteronomy. The decisive settlement of the question depends in a
comparison with the Book of Kings, and must accordingly be postponed
until then.

2\. As for the relation between this superstructure and that on which it
rests, there is a striking difference between the two styles. The
revised form in which the Book of Judges found its way into the canon is
unquestionably of Judæan origin, but the histories themselves are not
such,—nay, in the song of Deborah, Judah is not reckoned at all as
belonging to Israel. The one judge who belongs to the tribe of Judah is
Othniel, who however is not a person, but only a clan. What is said of
him is quite void of contents, and is made up merely of the schematic
devices of the redactor, who has set himself to work here, so as to make
the series open with a man of Judah; the selection of Othniel was
readily suggested by Judges i. 12-15. Here again we have an exception
which proves the rule. More important are the inner differences which
reveal themselves. To begin with the most general,—the historical
continuity on which so much stress is laid by the scheme, is in no way
shown in the individual narratives of the Book of Judges. These stand
beside one another unconnectedly and without any regard to order or
sequence, like isolated points of light which emerge here and there out
of the darkness of forgetfulness. They make no presence of actually
filling up any considerable space of time; they afford no points of
attachment whereon to fasten a chronology. In truth, it is hardly the
dim semblance of a continuity that is imparted to the tradition by the
empty framework of the scheme. The conception of a period of the judges
between Joshua and Saul, during which judges ruled over Israel

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

and succeeded one another almost as regularly as did the kings at a
later period, is quite foreign to that tradition. It is impossible to
doubt that Judges i., xvii., xviii. have the best right to be reckoned
as belonging to the original stock; but these portions are excluded from
reception within the scheme, because they have nothing to say about any
judges, and give a picture of the general state of affairs which accords
but ill with that plan. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124)

At the bottom of the spurious continuity lies an erroneous widening of
the areas in which the judges exerted their influence. Out of local
contiguity has arisen succession in time, what was true of the part
having been transferred to the whole; it is always the children of
Israel in a body who come upon the scene, are oppressed by the enemy,
and ruled by the judges. In reality it is only the individual tribes
that come into the action; the judges are tribal heroes,—Ehud of
Benjamin, Barak and Deborah of Issachar, Gideon of Joseph, Jephthah of
Gilead, Samson of Dan. It was only for the struggle against Sisera that
a number of tribes were united, receiving on that account extraordinary
praise in the song of Deborah. It is nowhere said "at the time when the
judges ruled," but "at the time when there was yet no king over Israel,
and every man did what was right in his own eyes;" the regular
constitution of the period is the patriarchal anarchy of the system of
families and septs. And in chap. i, division and isolation are made to
appear not unclearly as the reason why the Canaanites were so long of
being driven out from the greater cities; matters did not change until
Israel became strong, that is to say, until his forces were welded into
one by means of the monarchy.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

But the unity of Israel is the presupposition upon which rests the
theocratic relation, the reciprocal attitude between Israel and Jehovah,
whereby according to the scheme the course of the history is solely
conditioned. In the genuine tradition the presupposition disappears, and
in connection with this the whole historical process assumes an
essentially different, not to say a more natural aspect. The people are
no longer as a body driven hither and thither by the same internal and
external impulses, and everything that happens is no longer made to
depend on the attraction and repulsion exercised by Jehovah. Instead of
the alternating see-saw of absolute peace and absolute affliction, there
prevails throughout the whole period a relative unrest; here peace,
there struggle and conflict. Failure and success alternate, but not as
the uniform consequences of loyalty or disobedience to the covenant.
When the anonymous prophet who, in the insertion in the last redaction
(chap. vi. 7-10), makes his appearance as suddenly as his withdrawal is
abrupt, improves the visitation of the Midianites as the text for a
penitential discourse, the matter is nevertheless looked at immediately
thereafter with quite different eyes. For to the greeting of the angel,
"Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of velour," Gideon answers, "If
Jehovah be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all
His miracles, of which our fathers told us? "He knows nothing about any
guilt on the part of *Israel*. Similarly the heroic figures of the
judges refuse to fit in with the story of sin and rebellion: they are
the pride of their countrymen, and not humiliating reminders that
Jehovah had undeservedly again and again made good that which men had
destroyed. Finally, with what artificiality the sins which appear to be
called for are produced, is incidentally made very clear. After the
death of Gideon we read in chap. viii. 33, "the children of Israel went
a-whoring after the Baals, and made Baal Berith their god." But from the
following chapter it appears that Baal or El Berith was only the patron
god of Shechem and some other cities belonging to the Canaanites; the
redactor transforms the local worship of the Canaanites into an
idolatrous worship on the part of all Israel. In other cases his
procedure is still more simple,—for example, in x. 6 seq., where the
number seven in the case of the deities corresponds with the number
seven of the nations mentioned in that connection. Ordinarily he is
content with "Baals" or "Astartes" or "Asheras," where the plural number
is enough to show how little of what is individual or positive

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

underlies the idea, not to mention that Asheras are no divinities at
all, but only sacred trees or poles.

In short, what is usually given out as the peculiar theocratic element
in the history of Israel is the element which has been introduced by the
redaction. There sin and grace are introduced as forces into the order
of events in the most mechanical way, the course of events is
systematically withdrawn from all analogy, miracles are nothing
extraordinary, but are the regular form in which things occur, are
matters of course, and produce absolutely no impression. This pedantic
supra-naturalism, "sacred history" according to the approved recipe, is
not to be found in the original accounts. In these Israel is a people
just like other people, nor is even his relationship to Jehovah
otherwise conceived of than is for example that of Moab to Chemosh
(chap. xi. 24). Of theophanies and manifestations of the Godhead there
is no lack, but the wonders are such as to make one really wonder. Once
and again they interrupt the earthly nexus, but at the same time they
form no connected system; they are poetry, not prose and dogma. But on
the whole the process of history, although to appearance rougher and
more perplexed, is nevertheless in reality much more intelligible, and
though seemingly more broken up, actually advances more continuously.
There is an ascent upward to the monarchy, not a descent from the
splendid times of Moses and Joshua (Judges i. 28-35, xiii. 5, xviii. 1).

One narrative, it is true, apart from that relating to Othniel, which is
not to be reckoned here, is exactly what sacred history ought to be in
order to fit into the theoretical scheme,—I mean Judges xix.-xxi. To
appreciate it rightly it will be well first of all to cast a glance upon
the preceding narrative relating to the migration of the tribe of Dan to
the north. The Danites, 600 strong, fall upon the Canaanite town of
Laish not because it lies within the limits assigned to the people of
God, and because its conquest is a duty—though they inquire of the
oracle, they are nevertheless far from relying on the divine right so
plainly made known in the Book of Joshua—but because it is inhabited by
a peaceable and unsuspecting people, which is quite defenceless against
such a band of desperadoes; and they have as little scruple in
practicing the same treachery to Israelites such as Micah. They take it
that might is right, and recognise no restraining consideration; their
conduct is natural to the verge of absolute shamelessness. And

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

yet they are pious in their way; how highly they value Jehovah they show
by this, that they steal His image out of the house of God, and the
priest who keeps it into the bargain. As for the religious usages
mentioned in the two chapters, hardly an abomination forbidden by the
Law is wanting: the private sanctuary in the possession of the
Ephraimite Micah, the grandson of Moses as priest in his service and
pay, ephod and teraphim as the requisite necessaries in the worship of
Jehovah; and yet all this is so recounted by the narrator as if it were
all quite regular and void of offence, although his purpose in doing so
is not to narrate temporary departures from rule, but the origin of
permanent institutions at a chief sanctuary of ancient Israel. One is
translated into another world on passing from this to the narrative
immediately following, about the shameful deed of the Benjamites and
their exemplary punishment; a greater or more instructive contrast as
regards religious history is hardly to be found in all the Old
Testament. In Judges xx.-xxi. it is not as invariably elsewhere the
individual tribes which act, not even the people Israel, but the
congregation of the covenant, which has its basis in the unity of
worship. The occasion of their action is a sin committed in their midst
which must be done away; it is the sanctity of the theocracy which
brings these 400,000 men to arms and fills them at once with unction and
with sanguinary zeal. The clerical instincts have entirely taken
possession of this uniform mass, have passed into their flesh and blood,
and moulded them into a single automaton, so that all that takes place
is invariably done by all at once. No individuals come to the front, not
even by name, still less by deeds of velour; the moral tone is anything
but heroic. When the godless reprobates of Gibeah seek to assail the
person of the Levite who is passing the night there, he hands over to
them his wife in order to save himself, and all Israel finds nothing
objectionable in this revolting act of cowardice, the opinion probably
being that by his conduct the holy man had kept the sinners from still
graver guilt. "Of the Mosaic law not a word is said in these chapters,
but who could fail to perceive that the spirit which finds its
expression in the law pervaded the community which acted thus? Had we
more narratives of similar contents we should be able to solve many a
riddle of the Pentateuch. Where under the monarchy could we find an
Israel so united, vigorous, earnest, so willing to enter upon the
severest conflict for the sake of the highest ends? "Thus Bertheau,
rightly feeling that this story has a quite

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

exceptional position, and contradicts all that we learn from other
quarters of the period of the judges or even the kings. Only we cannot
reckon it a proof of the historic value of the story, that it gives the
lie to the rest of the tradition in the Books of Judges, Samuel, and
Kings, and is homogeneous not with these books but with the Law. On the
other hand, the writer betrays himself with a self-contradiction, when,
unconsciously remembering the preceding chapters, he laments the
disorganisation of the time he is dealing with (xix. 1, xxi. 25), and
yet describes Israel to us as existing in a religious centralisation,
such as demonstrably was never attained in the earlier life of the
nation, but only came about as a consequence of the exile, and is the
distinctive mark of Judaism.

As this narrative is not one of those included in the Deuteronomistic
scheme of the Book of Judges, there may be a question whether it
presupposes the Deuteronomic law only, or the priestly law as well. Its
language has most points of contact with Deuteronomy; but one extremely
important expression and notion, that of "the congregation of the
children of Israel," points rather to the Priestly Code. The same may be
said of Phinehas ben Eleazar ben Aaron (xx. 28). The latter, however,
occurs but once, and that in a gloss which forms a very awkward
interruption between "and the children of Israel inquired of Jehovah,"
and the word "saying" which belongs to that phrase. We have also to
remark that there is no mention of the tabernacle, for which there is no
room in addition to Mizpeh (p. 256), so that the principal mark of the
Priestly Code is wanting. It is only in preparation, it has not yet
appeared: we are still standing on the ground of Deuteronomy, but the
way is being prepared for the transition.

3\. Going a step further back from the last revision we meet with an
earlier effort in the same direction, which, however, is less
systematically worked out, in certain supplements and emendations, which
have here and there been patched on to the original narratives. These
may be due in part to the mere love of amplification or of talking for
talking's sake, and in so far we have no further business with them
here. But they originated partly in the difficulty felt by a later age
in sympathising with the religious usages and ideas of older times. Two
instances of this kind occur in the history of Gideon. We read (vi.
25-32), that in the night after his call Gideon destroyed, at the
commandment of Jehovah, the altar of Baal in Ophra, his native town, as
well as the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ashera which stood
beside it; and that in place of it he built an altar to Jehovah, and
burned on it a yearling bullock, with the wood of the Ashera for fuel.
The next morning the people of Ophra were full of indignation, and
demanded that the author of the outrage should be given up to them to be
put to death; his father, however, withstood them, saying, "Will ye
contend for Baal? Will ye save him? If he be a god, let Baal contend
(Heb. Jareb Baal) for himself." In consequence of this speech Gideon
received his second name of Jerubbaal. This conflicts with what is said
in an earlier part of the chapter. There Gideon has already made an
altar of the great stone under the oak of Ophra, where he saw Jehovah
sitting, and has offered upon it the first sacrifice, which was devoured
by flames breaking out of themselves, the Deity Himself ascending in the
flames to heaven. Why the two altars and the two stories of their
inauguration, both tracing their origin to the patron of Ophra? They do
not agree together, and the reason is plain why the second was added.
The altar of a single stone, the flames bursting out of it, the
evergreen tree, the very name of which, Ela, seems to indicate a natural
connection with El, <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125)—all this was
in the eyes of a later generation far from correct, indeed it was
Baal-work. A desire that the piety of Gideon should be above suspicion
gave rise to the second story, in which he erects an altar of Jehovah in
place of the former altar of Baal. How far this desire attained its end
we may best judge from the kindred effort to remove another ground of
offence, which lies in the name Jerubbaal. In accordance with the
occasion out of which the name is said to have arisen it is said to
mean, "Let Baal contend." Etymologically this derivation is extremely
far-fetched, and from every point of view impossible: the name of a god
is only assumed by those who are his worshippers. In Hebrew antiquity
Baal and El are interchangeable and used indifferently; Jehovah Himself
is spoken of up to the times of the prophet Hosea as the Baal, *i.e.*,
the lord. This is distinctly proved by a series of proper names in the
families of Saul and David, Ishbaal, Meribaal, Baaljada, to which we may
now add the name Jerubbaal given to the conqueror of Midian.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If then even in
the time of the kings Baal was by no means simply the antipode of
Jehovah, whence the hostile relation of the two deities, which Jerubbaal
displays by the acts he does, although he praises the great Baal by
wearing his name? The view, also, that the Ashera was incompatible with
the worship of Jehovah, does not agree with the belief of the earlier
age; according to Deut. xvi. 21, these artificial trees must have stood
often enough beside the altars of Jehovah. The inserted passage itself
betrays in a remarkable manner that its writer felt this sort of zeal
for the legitimate worship to be above the level of the age in question.
We receive the impression that the inhabitants of Ophra do not know
their worship of Baal to be illegitimate, that Gideon also had taken
part in it in good faith, and that there had never been an altar of
Jehovah in the place before.

Of a somewhat different form is a correction which is to be found at the
close of the history of Gideon (viii. 22 seq.). After the victory over
the Midianites the Israelites are said to have asked Gideon to be king
over them. This he declined out of regard to Jehovah the sole ruler of
Israel, but he asked for the gold nose-rings which had been taken from
the enemy, and made of them an image of Jehovah, an ephod, which he set
up in Ophra to be worshipped. "And all Israel went thither a-whoring
after it, and it became a snare to Gideon and to his house." Now the way
in which such a man acts in such a moment is good authority for the
state of the worship of Israel at the time, and not only so, but we
cannot impute it to the original narrator that he chose to represent his
hero as showing his thankfulness to the Deity by the most gratuitous
declension from His worship, as in fact crowning His victory with an act
of idolatry. This is seen to be the more impossible when we consider
that according to the testimony of Hosea, Isaiah, and Micah, such images
were even in the Assyrian period a regular part of the belongings of the
"houses of God" not only in Samaria but in Judah as well. We have also
to remember that the contradiction between a human kingship and the
kingship of Jehovah, such as is spoken of in these verses, rests upon
theories which arose later, and of which we shall have more to
say. <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) Studer will thus be correct
in his assertion that the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

old tradition could not see anything in Gideon's refusing the gold for
himself and dedicating it to God but a fine proof of his unselfishness
and piety, and that in viii. 22-27 we have a secondary product, in which
the original features of the story are distorted so as to make them suit
later tastes. The second hand has unfortunately supplanted in this
instance the work of the first. The older narrative breaks off (viii.
21) with the words: "Gideon took away the ornaments that were on the
necks of the camels of the kings." What he did with them we do not
learn, but naturally we must suppose that it was of them that he made
the ephod. According to the secondary passage, which begins immediately
after viii. 21, he used for this purpose the nose-rings which the whole
of Israel had taken from all the Midianites, amounting in weight to 1700
shekels, besides the ornaments of the kings and of their camels. The
proportion is similar to that between the 600 Danites in chap. xviii.
and the 25,700 Benjamites in chap. xx., or between the 40,000 men of
Israel in v. 8, and the 400,000 in xx. 2.

4\. In the last place it is possible to trace even in the original
narratives themselves certain differences of religious attitude which
indicate to us unobtrusively and yet clearly that tendency in the
development of the tradition which reached its end in the revision and
ornamentation of which we have hitherto been speaking. This is
especially the case with regard to those narratives which are preserved
to us in a double form. These are not frequent in Judges, but they do
occur. A very simple case of the kind is seen on comparing chap. iv.
with chap. v.

The Canaanites again lift their heads under their great king Sisera, and
from their towns in the plains harass the hill villages of the new
settlers. Deborah unites the Hebrew tribes for the contest. From the
North and from the South the hosts of Jehovah descend before our eyes
towards Jezreel, the prophetess Deborah at their head, the warrior Barak
at her side. The conflict takes place at the brook Kishon, and ends with
the defeat of the kings of Canaan. Sisera himself is killed in the
flight by Jael, the wife of a nomad Kenite. Such are the contents of the
song in chap. v. In the preceding narrative (chap. iv.) we should expect
to find a historical commentary on the song, but we find a mere
reproduction in which the special features of the story are blurred and
falsified. Instead of the kings of Canaan we have the king of Canaan, as
if Canaan had been a kingdom. Sisera, the head of the Canaanite kings,
is transformed into a mere general; the oppression of

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

the Hebrews is made general and indefinite. Jael murders Sisera when he
is lying in a deep sleep by driving a tent-peg into the ground through
his temples. There is nothing of this in the song: there he is drinking
when she strikes the blow, and is conceived as standing at the time,
else he could not bow down at her feet and fall, and lie struck dead
where he fell (ver. 27).

In the song the campaign is prepared with human means. Negotiations are
carried on among the tribes, and in the course of these differences crop
up. The lukewarmness or the swelling words of some tribes are reproved,
the energetic public spirit and warlike courage of others praised. In
the narrative, on the contrary, the deliverance is the work of Jehovah
alone; the men of Israel are mere dummies, who show no merit and deserve
no praise. To make up for this, interest is concentrated on the act of
Jael, which instead of being an episode becomes the central point of the
whole narrative. Indeed it is announced as being so, for Deborah
prophesies to Barak that the glory of the conflict will not be his but a
woman's, into whose hand the enemy is to be sold; it is not the hero,
not human strength, that accomplishes what is done: Jehovah shows His
strength in man's weakness. And Barak's part in the work is depreciated
in yet another way. Deborah summons him to go not to the battle, but to
the holy hill of Tabor, where Jehovah will bring about what is further
to happen; he, however, objects to this, and insists that the prophetess
herself shall go with him. This is regarded as a caprice of unbelief,
because the prophetess is thought to have exhausted her mission when she
transmitted the command of the Deity to His instrument: she has appeared
for no end but to make it known through her prophecy that Jehovah alone
brings everything to pass. In the song this is different. There Barak is
not summoned against his will; on the contrary, he has a personal motive
for taking up arms: "Arise, Barak; take captive thy captors, thou son of
Ahinoam." And the prophetess has not only to prophesy; she works in a
more psychological manner; she is part of the battle, and inflames with
her song the courage of the fighting battalions: "Awake, Deborah, awake,
sing the song!" <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127) Throughout these
variations of the prose reproduction we feel that the rich colour of the
events as they occurred is bleached

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

out of them by the one universal first cause, Jehovah. The presence and
energy of Jehovah are not wanting in the song; they are felt in the
enthusiasm which fills the Hebrew warriors, and in the terror and panic
which confound the prancing vigour of the foe. But in the prose
narrative, the Divine action is stripped of all mystery, and mechanic
prophecy finds no difficulty in showing distinctly and with sober
accuracy what the part of the Deity in the history has been. But the
more special the intervention of Deity, the further is it from us; the
more precise the statements about it, the less do we feel it to be
there.

There is another instance in the Book of Judges of the occurrence of the
same historical material in two different forms; it is the story of
Gideon of the Manassite house of Abiezer. Studer saw that there is a
break between viii. 3 and viii. 4, and that the two stories, from the
one of which we pass to the other at that point, have to be understood
separately; viii. 1-3 is the conclusion of the first story. We have been
told how, after the success of the first attack on the Midianites,
Gideon raised the levy of all Israel for the pursuit, and how then the
Ephraimites seized the fords of the Jordan before the arrival of the
flying nomads and got the two leaders of the Midianites into their
hands. Now we hear in conclusion that the Ephraimites, elated by their
success began to find fault with Gideon, but that he pacified their
wrath by saying, "What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the
gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
God hath delivered into your hand the princes of Midian, and what was I
able to do in comparison of you?" A domestic contention like this about
the respective shares in the victory could only arise when the victory
had been gained, when the strife with the enemy was fought out; the
metaphor of harvest and gleaning shows that the victory was complete and
all the fruits of it gathered in. Chapter viii. 1-3 concludes the
business, and the following narrative is not a continuation of what has
gone before, but a second version of the story in which many of the
circumstances are quite different. According to vii. 23 seq. there was a
great army on foot, but in viii. 4 seq. Gideon has only his own three
hundred men with him. In viii. 1-3 the vintage and the gleaning are over
and the object of the fighting is attained; but in viii. 4 seq. Gideon
pursues the enemy without any interruption, and when he asks the men of
Succoth and Penuel for bread for his wearied and hungry troops, they
inquire sarcastically whether he is already certain of success, so that

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

it should be necessary for them to espouse his cause. The two chiefs who
in the former account are called the princes Oreb and Zeeb, and are
already taken, are here called the kings Zebah and Zalmunna, and are not
taken yet. Unfortunately the beginning of viii. 4 seq. is not preserved,
and we cannot make out whether the pursuit in which we find Gideon here
engaged was preceded by an action. Such a supposition is not exactly
impossible, yet the distance to which the nomads had carried their
booty, and their carelessness in camp, make it more likely that the
occurrence was like that in 1 Sam. xxx. This, however, makes no
difference as to the particulars with regard to which the two narratives
conflict with each other.

But how did the difference arise? This we shall best learn by comparing
the beginnings of the two stories. We remarked that the second, as it
stands, wanted a beginning, but what is wanting may be to some extent
supplied from what follows. According to viii. 4 seq., Gideon's aim is
to get hold of the two kings of the Midianites: these appear all through
as the particular enemies whom he is pursuing: as to the rest of the
Midianites he is more or less indifferent. And the reason, as we learn
from viii. 18 seq., is that the two kings had slain his brothers at
Tabor; it is to take vengeance for them that he sets out to pursue the
slayers, and does not rest till they are in his hand. It is the duty of
blood-revenge which causes him to take the war-path with his household,
unconcerned by the disproportion in numbers between his followers and
theirs: it is the powerful sentiment of family which sets him in motion
and causes him to become, as it were incidentally, the liberator of
Israel from the spoilers. In the first account (vi. 11-viii. 3) these
natural motives have completely disappeared, and others have taken their
place which are almost of an opposite character. Before anything has
happened, before the Midianites have made their yearly incursion,
Gideon, who expects nothing of the kind, is summoned by a theophany to
battle against them. When they arrive he is seized by the Spirit and
sets out against them. What is human in him has no part in the act he is
called to do; flesh and blood set themselves against it. He is impelled
by the direct impulse of Jehovah, and here, of course, he goes forth in
behalf of the public interests of Israel, against the Midianites, not
against their princes personally. And accordingly everything possible is
done to cast the man into the shade behind the Deity. Gideon, according
to the second account a distinguished and

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

royal man, is in the first of a poor house and family; in the second
story he is remarkable for irrepressible energy, but here he is timid
and shrinking up to the last moment, and new miracles have constantly to
be wrought to encourage and strengthen him. The 32,000 men with whom he
takes the field he is ordered by Jehovah to send away all but l,000 and
again all but 300, "lest Israel vaunt themselves against Me, and say,
Mine own hand hath saved me." The weapons with which the nocturnal
attack of the 300 is made are torches, pitchers, and trumpets; the men
have not a hand left to hold swords (vii. 20); and the hostile army has
accordingly to do itself the work of its own destruction (vii. 22).

Few of the deviations of the religious version from the natural one are
not transparent; one of these few is the removal of the scene to this
side of the Jordan. Most of them are at once recognisable as due to the
process of glorification, illumination, and religious inflation, by
which the body of the tradition is etherealised and the story lifted up
into the region of the air. For example, the company of Gideon at the
main action, the attack on the hostile camp, consists of 300 men in
chap. vii. as well as in chap viii.; but in chap. vii., to draw out the
significance of the small number, they are treated as the last residuum
of what was at first quite a considerable army; and this gives rise to a
long story. We may also remark that chap. vi. begins with the relation
in which the judge stood to the sanctuary of his native town, while
chap. viii. closes with this. In the one case he discovers by a
theophany, like the patriarchs in Genesis, the sacredness of the
altar-stone under the oak; in the other he sets up, in far more
realistic fashion, the plated image (ephod) he has made of the golden
ornaments of the Midianite kings. History has to take account
principally, if not exclusively, of the natural version, which is dry in
tone and lets things speak for themselves, not overlaying the simple
story with the significance of its consequences. The relation, however,
is somewhat different from that which we found existing between Judges
iv. and v. Chap. vi. seq. is not based directly on chap. viii., but was
probably formed from independent oral material Though the local colour
is lively, the historical reminiscences are extremely vague, and there
has been a much freer growth of legend than in Jud. iv., producing
pictures of greater art and more naïveté. But in the field of miracle
poetry is manifestly earlier than prose.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

In the case of those narratives which have come down to us in double
form, the difference of standpoint is unmistakable; but it may also be
perceived in cases where we have no direct parallels to compare. How
noticeably does the story of Abimelech differ, say from that of Jephthah
which follows it, in the rich detail of its facts, and in the
spontaneous interest it shows in the secondary and subordinate links in
the chain of events! There is no gilding with a supernatural nimbus;
facts are simply and plainly set down such as they are; the moral is
left to speak for itself as the story goes on. In the Samson legends
again we find two souls united, as it were, in one body. Traits
belonging to the rough life and spirit of the people are wrought,
especially at the beginning and end of the narrative, into a religious
national form; yet the two stand in an inner contrast to each other, and
it is scarcely probable that the exploits of this grotesque religious
hero were at first conceived in the Spirit of Jehovah, of which, in the
story as we have it, they are the product. More probably the religious
way of telling the story was preceded by a way considerably more
profane; but we cannot now separate the older stage from that which is
more recent. We may also remark that the contrast of historical and
unhistorical is obviously inapplicable to this case, and, moreover, is
unessential for the end we have in view. Only it may stand as a general
principle, that the nearer history is to its origin the more profane it
is. In the pre-Deuteronomic narratives, the difference is to be
recognised less in the *kind* of piety than in the *degree* of it.

#### II.

1\. The comprehensive revision which we noticed in the Book of Judges
has left its mark on the Books of Samuel too. As, however, in this case
the period is short, and extremely rich in incident, and really forms a
connected whole, the artificial frame- and net-work does not make itself
so much felt. Yet it is by no means wanting, as the dates of themselves
indicate, whose place in the chronological system was shown above. It is
worthy of notice how very loosely these are fitted into their context.
In 1 Samuel iv. 18 seq. we read: "And when the messenger made mention of
the ark of God, Eli fell backwards off his seat, and his neck brake, and
he died, for he was an old man and heavy, *and he judged Israel forty
years;* and when his daughter-in-law,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

the wife of Phinehas, who was with child, heard the tidings," etc. The
statement of the date is not altogether inappropriately dragged in,
indeed, yet it is easy to see that it is dragged in. In 2 Sam. ii. 8-13
we read: "Abner, the captain of Saul's host, took Ishbaal the son of
Saul, and brought him over the Jordan to Mahanaim, and made him king
over Gilead and Geshur, and Jezreel, and Ephraim, and Benjamin, and all
Israel. *Ishbaal was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel,
and he reigned two years*. But the house of Judah followed David. *And
the time that David was king in Hebron was seven years and six months*.
And Abner and the servants of Ishbaal went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon,
and Joab with the servants of David went out to meet him." The words in
italics manifestly interrupt the connection; and with regard to
Ishbaal's dates we have also to remark that from what we learn of him
elsewhere he was, in the first place, still in the years of pupilage,
and in the next must have reigned as long in Mahanaim as David in
Hebron. The number two connected with his reign is to be explained as in
the case of Saul (1 Sam. xiii. 1): *Saul was. . . years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned two years over Israel*. In this verse,
which is not found in the LXX, the number for the years of his life is
wanting; and originally the number for the years of his reign was left
out too: the *two* is quite absurd, and has grown out of the following
word for year, which in Hebrew has a somewhat similar appearance.

In company with the chronological formulas, we find also the religious
(1 Sam. vii. 2-4). "While the ark abode in Kirjath-jearim, it was twenty
years; and all the house of Israel came together after Jehovah. And
Samuel spake unto the whole house of Israel, saying: 'If ye do return to
Jehovah with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and the
Astartes from among you, and prepare your hearts unto Jehovah, and serve
Him only; and He will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.'
And the children of Israel did put away the Baals and Astartes, and
served Jehovah only." We are not told, in what precedes this passage, of
any act of declension from Jehovah, and according to chap. iv. the
Israelites showed no want of faith in Jehovah in the unfortunate battle
with the Philistines. This taking for granted that the yoke of a foreign
rule was laid on them as a punishment for their sins is characteristic.
A further example occurs in the speech of Samuel (1 Sam. xii.), which,
as the introduction to the time of the kings,

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

may be compared with Judges ii., the introduction to the time of the
judges. "Stand still that I may reason with you before Jehovah of all
the righteous acts of Jehovah with which He did right to you and to your
fathers! When Jacob was come into Egypt, your fathers cried to Jehovah,
and He sent Moses and Aaron and brought your fathers out of Egypt and
made them dwell in this land. And when they forget Jehovah their God, He
sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and
into the hand of the Philistines, and the Moabites, and they fought
against them. And they cried unto Jehovah, and said, We have sinned,
because we have forsaken Jehovah and have served Baal and Astarte, but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies and we will serve Thee.
And Jehovah sent Jerubbaal, and Barak, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and
delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye
dwelled safe. And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of
Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay, but a king shall reign
over us, when Jehovah your God is your king. Now therefore behold the
king whom ye have desired; behold, Jehovah has set a king over you. If
ye will hear Jehovah and serve Him and obey His voice, and not rebel
against the commandment of Jehovah, good: but if ye rebel against the
commandment of Jehovah, then shall the hand of Jehovah be against you as
it was against your fathers." It is the familiar strain: rebellion,
affliction, conversion, peace, Jehovah the keynote, and the first word
and the last. The eye does not dwell on the details of the story; the
gaps in the tradition are turned to account as well as its contents,
which are concentrated at so few points. Details are regarded only as
they bear on the whole; the periods are passed in review in a broad and
general style, and the law enunciated which connects them with one
another. In doing this Samuel seems to presuppose in his hearers a
knowledge of the biblical history in a distinct form; and he even speaks
without hesitation of his own historical significance. The hearers are
bidden to look back upon a period in the living movement of which they
themselves are standing, as if it were a dead past. As they are thus
lifted up to the height of an objective contemplation of themselves and
their fathers, in the end the result which was to be expected takes
place: they become conscious of their grievous sin. Confronted with the
Deity they have always an uneasy feeling that they deserve to be
punished.

2\. The Deuteronomist revision asserts itself, it is true, only in these

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

two places, or rather this one place; but this is the principal epoch in
the book—the transition to the monarchy which is associated with the
name of Samuel. And on this account the revision here acts the more
trenchantly; it is not only an addition to give a new flavour to the
older tradition; it changes the nature of the tradition entirely. For
the passages we have just quoted from it are merely fragments of a
considerable connected historical scheme. The first piece of this
scheme, vii. 2-17, first claims our attention. After summoning the
children of Israel to repentance (vii. 2-4), Samuel convokes an assembly
of them at Mizpeh, near Jerusalem, in order to entreat for them that the
Philistine affliction may be turned away. This measure is of course
closely connected with the previously-mentioned abolition of idolatry:
for, after the guilt has ceased, the punishment also must be removed.
They assemble, draw water to pour it out before Jehovah, fast, and
confess their sins, at Mizpeh. When the Philistines hear this, they are
on the spot the very same day and fall upon the assembly at its prayers.
Samuel, however, sacrifices a sucking lamb and cries for help to
Jehovah, and the engagement takes place while he is so occupied. Jehovah
thunders terribly against the Philistines and throws them into disorder,
so that they are forced to yield, and are pursued to a great distance.
And the Philistines, this is the end of the narrative, were humbled and
came no more into the coasts of Israel; and the hand of Jehovah was
against the Philistines all the days of Samuel, and the cities which the
Philistines had taken from Israel were recovered; Ekron and Gath and
their coasts did Israel take from the Philistines, and there was peace
between Israel and the Amorites.

The mere recapitulation of the contents of this narrative makes us feel
at once what a pious make-up it is and how full of inherent
impossibilities: to think of all that is compressed into the space of
this one day! But we have also to remark the utter contradiction of the
whole of the rest of the tradition. In the history which follows we find
the domination of the Philistines by no means at an end; not only do
they invade the Israelite territory several times in Samuel's lifetime,
they are in possession of the land of Israel, and one of their governors
lives at Gibeah in the midst of Benjamin. The struggle with them is the
true and real origin and task of the monarchy. The writer had no idea
that Samuel had discharged this labour and won this victory already, and
had even "restored" Ekron and Gath. On the contrary,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

the yoke of the Philistines lay most heavily on Israel just in his days.

There cannot be a word of truth in the whole narrative. Its motives,
however, are easily seen. Samuel is a saint of the first degree (Jer.
xv. 1), and in the theocracy, *i.e.*, in the religious community such as
ancient Israel is represented to have been, cut to the pattern of
Judaism, such a man must take his place at the head of the whole. His
influence must have prevailed to exclude idolatry and unfaithfulness to
Jehovah on the part of the people; and the general character of the time
must on the whole have answered to the type he set before it. But here a
very unpleasant difficulty suggests itself. If the fact of Samuel being
at the head is sufficient guarantee that all was as it should be within
the state, how can there have been such great pressure externally, so as
to endanger the very existence of the people? If men do their part, how
can Jehovah fail to do His? On the contrary, it must be believed that
the righteousness which prevailed within had its counterpart in the
external vindication of His people by Jehovah. Even under Samuel the
Philistines were with God's help driven across the border, and as long
as he lived they were not seen within it again. The piety of a praying
assembly was suitably acknowledged by Jehovah, who dropped into its lap
a success such as in after times the sword of warlike kings sought long
and in vain to achieve.

But this example of history corrected does not stand alone, and becomes
completely intelligible only when taken in connection with the similar
pieces which belong to it. 1 Sam. vii. is continued in chap. viii., and
chap. viii. again in x. 17-xii. 25. Samuel, after setting the land free
from foreign tyranny, conducts a quiet and successful reign till old age
comes upon him. His sons, however, whom he has made his assessors, do
not walk in his steps; and the elders of Israel make this the occasion
to ask him to give them a king. But this is a mere pretext for their
sinful desire to shake off the divine rule and to be like the heathen
round about them. Samuel is extremely indignant at their ingratitude,
but is directed by Jehovah to comply with their request. "They have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected Me, that I should not reign over
them; according to all the works that they have done since the day that
I brought them up out of Egypt, wherewith they have forsaken Me and
served other gods. so do they also unto thee." It is in vain that Samuel
exhibits to them an alarming catalogue of the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

rights of the king: they are not to be moved from their determination,
and he accordingly summons a general convention of the people at Mizpeh
(viii. 22, x. 17). There, after the opening lecture, lots are drawn for
the king, and Saul is chosen, whereupon Samuel has still to write down
the law of the kingdom and lay it up before Jehovah. The people are then
dismissed; "and Saul also went home to Gibeah, and with him the warriors
whose heart God had touched, but the children of Belial despised him,
and said 'How shall this man save us!'"

But Saul is at this point only king *de jure;* he does not become king
*de facto* until after he has proved himself, chap. xi. After an
interval of a month (x. 27 LXX) the men of Jabesh, besieged by the
Ammonites and in great straits, send messengers throughout Israel to
implore speedy assistance, since in seven days they have to surrender to
their enemies and each of them to lose his right eye. The messengers
come to the town of Saul, Gibeah in Benjamin, and tell their message
before the people; the people lift up their voices and weep. Saul
meanwhile comes from the field with a yoke of oxen, and, observing the
general weeping, asks what has happened. The story is told him, and at
once the Spirit of God comes upon him and his anger is kindled greatly;
he hews in pieces his oxen and sends the pieces throughout Israel with
the summons: Whoever does not come forth to the battle, so shall it be
done to his oxen! And the fear of Jehovah falls on the people, and they
go out as one man and relieve the besieged town. Hereupon "the kingdom
is renewed" for Saul at Gilgal, and only now does Samuel abdicate his
government, in the long speech (chap. xii.) a considerable portion of
which was given above.

That chap. xi. is now an integral part of this version of the history is
clear from xii. 12, and also from xi. 12-14. But it was not originally
designed for this connection. For we hear nothing of the warriors who
according to x. 26 were in company with Saul; it is not on his account
that the messengers of Jabesh came to Gibeah. When the supposed king
comes home from ploughing, nothing is done to indicate that the news
concerns him specially: no one tells him what has happened, he has to
ask the reason of the general weeping. He summons the levy of Israel not
in virtue of his office as king, but in the authority of the Spirit, and
it is owing to the Spirit acting on the people that he is obeyed. Only
after he has showed his power and defeated the Ammonites do the people
make him king (xi. 15); the "renewal" of the kingdom (xi. 14), after

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

a month's interval, is a transparent artifice of the author of viii. 10,
1) seq. to incorporate in his own narrative the piece which he had
borrowed from some other quarter: the verses xi. 12-14 are due to him.

Chapter xi. stood originally in connection with the other narrative of
the elevation of Saul (ix. 1-X. 16). Hero Saul first appears engaged in
searching for strayed she-asses. After a vain search of several days he
arrives in the neighbourhood of Ramah, and at the suggestion of his
servant applies for information as to the asses to a seer there, to
Samuel. His approach has been announced to the seer by Jehovah the day
before: "To-morrow I will send to thee a man out of the land of
Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be ruler over My people Israel;
he shall save them from the Philistines." He was accordingly expecting
him, and had instituted a sacrificial feast on the bamah for him even
before he arrived. At this moment Samuel has gone down to the town
between the sacrificial act and the meal which followed it, and just as
he is going back to his guests he meets in the gate Saul, who is asking
for him, and at a whisper from Jehovah he recognises in him his man. He
takes him up with him to the bamah, reassures him about the asses, and
then at once tells him to what high things he is called, and gives him
convincing proofs that he had reckoned on his presence at the feast as
the guest of the occasion. He then gives him lodgings for the night, and
accompanies him on his way next morning. The servant is sent on a little
way before, Samuel stands still and anoints Saul, for a sign that he is
chosen by Jehovah to be the king and deliverer of Israel, and in
conclusion instructs him that, when the opportunity for action comes, he
is to use it, in the consciousness that God is with him. On his way home
three signs come to pass which the seer had announced to him. He is thus
assured that all that was said to him was true; his heart is changed by
degrees till he cannot contain himself; on his arrival at Gibeah his
acquaintances are struck with his strange demeanour, but he does not
disclose even to his most intimate friend at home what Samuel had said
to him, but waits for the things that shall come to pass.

This is the point arrived at in x. 16. It is clear that thus far no
conclusion has yet been reached: the seed that is sown must spring up,
the changed spirit must produce its effects. And this requirement is
abundantly satisfied if chap. xi. is regarded as immediately continuing
the story from x. 16. After about a month, the opportunity presents

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

itself for Saul to act, which Samuel had bidden him to look for. While
others are weeping at the disgrace which threatens an Israelite town at
the hands of the Ammonites, he is filled with the Spirit and with rage,
the arrow is still in his heart from that conversation, and he now does
"what his hand finds to do." The result is a great success; the word of
the seer finds its fulfilment in the most natural way in the world.

If chap. xi. belongs originally to the narrative of ix. 1.-x. 16, it
follows at once that the other sections are dependent and later. But
what is the inner relation of the one version to the other? They
coincide in their ideas here and there. In the one story Saul seeks the
asses and finds the crown, in the other he hides himself among the stuff
and is drawn forth king. In the one he is called by the seer, in the
other he is chosen by lot—the divine causality operative in both cases.
But how the idea is exaggerated at the later stage, and how nakedly it
is put forward! And if there is this similarity of view, yet the
deviation of the secondary version from the original is much more
striking than the resemblance. For its tendency we are prepared by
chapter vii. Samuel has set his countrymen free from their enemies, and
ruled over them afterwards in righteousness and prosperity; why then
should they desire a change in the form of government? They have just as
much and as little reason for desiring this as for the falling away from
Jehovah, which also is a periodical craving on their part, whenever they
have had some years' rest: it is the expression of the deep-seated
heathenism of their nature. That is the account of chapter viii. with
what belongs to it. Chapter ix. seq., however, gives quite a different
account. Here, at the end of the period of the judges, Israel is not at
the summit of power and prosperity, but in a state of the deepest
humiliation and the means of saving the people from this state is seen
in the monarchy alone. And this difference is closely connected with
another as to the view taken of the authority of Samuel. In chap. viii.
as in chap. vii. he is the vicegerent of Jehovah, with unlimited
authority. He feels the institution of the monarchy to be his own
deposition, yet the children of Israel by no means rebel against him;
they come to him to ask him for a king. He might have refused the
request; he might also have given them a ruler according to his own good
pleasure, but as a correct theocrat he leaves the decision to Jehovah.
At the end he solemnly lays down the government he has hitherto carried
on, and hands it over to his successor. The latter is superior to him in
point of title, but not

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

in point of power: indeed in the latter respect he is rather inferior to
Samuel, being a mere earthly prince (xii. 23 seq.). But how do matters
stand in chap. ix. seq.? Here Samuel is quite a stranger to Saul, who
knows neither his name nor his residence. Only his servant has heard of
Samuel, who enjoys a high reputation as a seer in his own neighbourhood.
What we are to think of when we read of a seer of that period, we are
clearly and circumstantially informed: for Samuel is consulted as to the
whereabouts of strayed she-asses, and a fee of a quarter of a silver
shekel is tendered to him for his advice. This seer stands, it is clear,
above the average of those who practiced the same calling; yet his
action on the history is quite within the limits of what was possible,
say to Calchas: it exhibits not a trace of the legislative and executive
power of a regent of the theocracy. He does not bring help; he only
descries help and the helper. The very event which, according to chap.
viii. seq., involved the removal of Samuel from his place and his
withdrawal to the background of the history, is here the sole basis of
his reputation: the monarchy of Saul, if not his work, is his idea. He
announces to the Benjamite his high calling, interpreting in this the
thoughts of the man's own heart (ix. 19). With this his work is done; he
has no commission and no power to nominate his successor in the
government. Everything else he leaves to the course of events and to the
Spirit of Jehovah which will place Saul on his own feet.

In the great difference which separates these two narratives we
recognise the mental interval between two different ages. In the eyes of
Israel before the exile the monarchy is the culminating point of the
history, and the greatest blessing of Jehovah. It was preceded by a
period of unrest and affliction, when every man did what was right in
his own eyes, and the enemies of Israel accordingly got everything their
own way. Under it the people dwell securely and respected by those round
about; guarded by the shelter of civil order, the citizen can sit under
his own vine and his own fig-tree. That is the work of the first two
kings, who saved Israel from his spoilers, and gave him power and rest.
No difference is made between them in this respect: the one commenced
the work which the other completed (1 Sam. ix. 16, xiv. 48; 2 Sam. iii.
18, xix. 9). Before them there was no breathing space left in the hard
work of fighting, but now there is time to think of other things. Even
Deuteronomy, which was written not long before the exile, regards the
period before the monarchy as a time of preparation

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

and transition, not to be counted complete in itself: Israel must first
acquire fixed seats and a settled way of living, and then Jehovah also
will choose a seat for Himself and make known His desires with regard to
the cultus. David brought things so far that the people had room and
struck firm roots into the ground, and ceased to tremble before their
enemies, who had kept them on the strain from the beginning, and all the
days of the judges; and under his successor the time came when the
temple could be built and higher interests receive attention. That
Hebrew antiquity knew nothing of any hostility or incompatibility
between the heavenly and the earthly ruler is plain from the title
Anointed of Jehovah, and from the hope of the prophets, whose ideal
future would be incomplete without a human king. The ancient Israelites
were as fully conscious as any other people of the gratitude they owed
to the men and to the institutions by whose aid they had been lifted out
of anarchy and oppression, and formed into an orderly community, capable
of self-defence. Of this the Books of Samuel afford the most eloquent
testimony. <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128)

The position taken up in the version of 1 Sam. vii. viii. x. 17 seq.
xii., presents the greatest possible contrast to this way of thinking.
There, the erection of the monarchy only forms a worse stage of
backsliding from Jehovah. There can be no progress beyond the Mosaic
ideal; the greater the departure from it the greater the declension. The
capital sin of placing a human ruler on the throne of Jehovah makes even
the period of the judges appear not quite black. Dark as the colours are
with which that period is generally painted, it held fast to the
original form of the theocracy, and so appears somewhat brighter: at
last indeed, to heighten the contrast, it is represented as a splendid
age. Under the rule of Samuel, everything was as it should be. Should we
ask, *how* were things then? what was exactly the nature of the
theocratic constitution? we receive, it is true, no satisfactory answer
to the question.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We might draw
conclusions with regard to the body from the head: but what sort of an
idea can we form of the position of Samuel? As he appears in these
chapters, we entirely fail to dispose of him in any of the categories
applicable to the subject; he is not a judge, not a priest, not a
prophet,—if at least we use these words with their true historical
meaning. He is a second Moses? Yes, but that does not tell us much. So
much only is clear, that the theocracy is arranged on quite a different
footing from the kingdoms of this world, and that it amounts to a
falling away into heathenism when the Israelites place a king at their
head like other nations, and he keeps courtiers and ministers, officers
and soldiers, horses and chariots. It is accordingly a spiritual
community: the spiritual character of the regent places this beyond
doubt. Samuel admonishes the people to give up idolatry; he presides at
the great day of repentance at Mizpeh, which forms an epoch in the
sacred history; and Jehovah can refuse nothing to his prayers and cries
(xii. 1 7). "God forbid," he says in taking leave of them (xii. 23),
"that I should cease to pray for you and teach you the good way." Such
is his position: and the citizens of the theocracy have the
corresponding duty of cultivating the worship of Jehovah, and not
withdrawing themselves from the guidance of the representative of Deity.
They do not need to trouble themselves about means for warding off the
attacks of their enemies; if they fast and pray, and give up their sins,
Jehovah hurls back the foe with His thunder and lightning, and so long
as they are pious He will not allow their land to be invaded. All the
expenses are then naturally superfluous by which a people usually
safeguards it own existence. That this view is unhistorical is
self-evident; and that it contradicts the genuine tradition we have
seen. The ancient Israelites did not build a church first of all: what
they built first was a house to live in, and they rejoiced not a little
when they got it happily roofed over (xi. 15). But we have still to add,
in conclusion, that the idea here before us can only have arisen in an
age which had no knowledge of Israel as a people and a state, and which
had no experience of the real conditions of existence in these forms; in
other words. It is the offspring of exilic or post-exilic Judaism. At
that time the nation was transformed into a religious community, whose
members were at liberty to concentrate themselves on what they held to
be the great business of life, worship and religiousness, because the
Chaldeans or the Persians had relieved them of all care for worldly
concerns. At that time, accordingly, the theocracy *existed*, and it is
from

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

that time that it is transported in an idealised form to early times.
The material basis on which the theocracy rested in fact, namely, the
foreign domination, is put out of sight, and it is counted heathenism in
the old Israelites that they cared for the external conditions of their
national existence, that they are a people in the full sense of the
word, and seek to maintain themselves as such with the weapons which are
found necessary in the work-a-day world. It naturally never came into
the heads of these epigoni to conceive that the political organisation
and centralisation which the monarchy called into being provided the
basis for the organisation and centralisation of the worship, and that
their church was merely a spiritualised survival of the nation. What is
added to Moses is taken away from the monarchy.

One more point has to be noticed. The chapters vii. viii. x. 17 seq.
xii. betray a close relationship with Judges xix.-xxi., not only by
their general tendency, but by a geographical detail in which the two
passages agree. It is only here that Mizpeh, near Jerusalem, occurs as
the place of meeting of all Israel; we find no further mention of the
place in the whole period of the judges and the kings. Only after the
destruction of Jerusalem is it mentioned, and there as the centre of the
new Jewish community instituted by the Chaldeans (Jer. xl. seq.) as the
substitute of the old capital. It appears once more, and in a similar
character, in 1 Macc. iii. 46 seq. at a time when the temple of
Jerusalem was in the hands of the Syrians, and the Jews could not get to
it. The Mizpeh of Judges xx., 1 Sam. vii. 10, is probably the same as
that of Jer. xl. seq., and intended to be, like these, in place of
Jerusalem, the only legitimate sanctuary, which, however, did not exist
at that early time. This is a further proof of the post-Deuteronomic and
Jewish origin of these narratives, but at the same time an indication
that, with every inclination to the views of the Priestly Code, the
writer yet had not that code before him. For in that work the projection
of Jerusalem into the period before Solomon is carried out in quite a
different way: the tabernacle renders Mizpeh superfluous. It has also to
be remarked that the rite of pouring out water (1 Sam. vii.) is foreign
to the Priestly Code.

3\. The relation of Saul to Samuel is a subject which lends itself
readily to general views, and the development of the tradition is
visible in it in other particulars besides those we have mentioned.
Taking the view of 1 Samuel vii. viii. xii. as the lower limit, the
narrative nearest in character is the story about Samuel contained in an
insertion in chap. xiii.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After Saul is made
king at Gilgal by the levy with which he relieved Jabesh, he selects
from it a body of men who camp with him and Jonathan at Gibeah and the
neighbouring Michmash: and Jonathan, by killing the officer at Gibeah,
gives the signal for battle with the old enemy of his race. The
Philistines advance, and take up a position to the north of Gibeah, with
only a deep valley between them and the Israelites. But Saul, we hear
all at once, xiii. 7 (cf. ver. 4) was yet in Gilgal, and waited seven
days for Samuel, according to the set time the latter had appointed; but
Samuel did not come, and the warriors began to scatter. As he was
himself offering the sacrifice without which no campaign could be
commenced, Samuel arrived, and at once opened upon him. Saul defended
his act with great force: the people were scattering, and Samuel had not
come at the appointed time, and as the Philistines had advanced close up
to Gibeah, he had found it impossible to delay longer, and had offered
the sacrifice in order to advance against them. To all this Samuel's
only answer was: "Thou hast done foolishly; if thou hadst kept the
commandment of Jehovah, He would have established thy kingdom for ever,
but now thy kingdom shall not continue; Jehovah has sought Him a man
after His own heart, and appointed him to be ruler over His people,
because thou hast not kept that which Jehovah commanded thee." So he
said, and walked off; but Saul went with the army from Gilgal to Gibeah.
At Gibeah, the following verse (xiii. 16) goes on, abode Saul and
Jonathan, and their men, when the Philistines encamped in Michmash.

The change of place distinctly shows the whole passage about the meeting
of the king with the prophet at Gilgal (xiii. 7-15) to be an insertion
by a later hand. At the beginning of the narrative Saul is at Gibeah
(ver. 2, 3), and the Philistines seek him there, and halt before the
place because they meet with resistance. All at once, at ver. 7, it is
assumed without being stated, that Saul had stayed at Gilgal since he
was chosen king till now, and had only now advanced from there against
the Philistines who were waiting for him before Gibeah. Verse 16,
however, gives us the impression that Saul had been posted at Gibeah
with his men for some time, when the Philistines took up their camp over
against them. Only in this way is justice done to the contrasted
participle of state (*sedentes*) and inchoative perfect (*castrametati
sunt*). And in the sequel the triumphant continuation of the story,
especially in chap. xiv., shows no indication that the ominous scene in
Gilgal weighed on the mind of Saul, or of the people, or of the
historian.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

According to xiii. 7-15, Saul is to wait seven days for Samuel at
Gilgal. Here there is a reference to x. 8, where the seer says to the
future king, "Thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal, and I will come
after thee there to offer sacrifices; seven days shalt thou tarry till I
come and show thee what thou shalt do." This verse is condemned by other
arguments than its connection with xii. 7-15. Samuel's object at this
point, according to x. 1-7, is to overcome the reluctance of the
Benjamite who had gone forth to seek his asses, to undertake the high
calling announced to him, and to inspire him with faith and
confidence,—not to give him unintelligible directions as to what he is
to do first when he has actually become king, and how long he has to
wait for the seer at Gilgal. The schoolmaster tone of x. 8 is
particularly out of place after the preceding words of ver. 7, that,
when the three signs have come to pass, Saul is to do what his hand
finds, because God is with him. This is surely giving him perfect
freedom of action, and for the reason that God's Spirit is working in
him, which "bloweth where it listeth," and suffers no interference from
any authority. <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129)

This insertion is based on an older account of the breach between Samuel
and Saul in 1 Sam. xv. Here also the matter of dispute is a sacrifice,
and Gilgal is the scene; and this alone serves to explain how Gilgal is
adhered to in xiii. 7-15 in spite of all impossibility, as being the
right and necessary place for the occurrence. Jehovah, by the mouth of
Samuel, commands the king to devote the Amalekites to destruction
because of an act of treachery they had committed against Israel in
ancient times, and to spare no living thing. Saul accordingly makes war
on the Amalekites and defeats them; but he does not carry out the
proscription entirely, as he spares the best of their cattle and their
king Agag, whom he takes prisoner. At Gilgal, where the victory is
celebrated before Jehovah, he is called to account for this by Samuel,
and states that he intended the booty for a sacrifice to Jehovah. His
statement, however, makes no impression. "Behold, to obey is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams: behold, rebellion is as
the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

idolatry and teraphim. Because thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah,
He also hath rejected thee." The king acknowledges his guilt, and tries
to pacify Samuel; but the latter turns from him in anger, and when Saul
lays hold of him, his mantle tears. "Jehovah hath torn the kingdom of
Israel from thee this day, and given it to one better than thee; and the
Truthful One of Israel will not lie nor repent; for He is not a man,
that He should repent." Yet at Saul's entreaty that he would at least
not refuse to honour him before the people, Samuel takes part in the
sacrifice, and even begins it by hewing Agag in pieces before Jehovah.
Then they part, never to see each other again; but Samuel mourns for
Saul, that Jehovah had repented of having made him king over Israel.
There is another narrative intimately connected with this one in subject
and treatment, thought and expression, namely, that of the witch of
Endor. When Saul, shortly before the battle in which he fell, surveyed
the hostile army, he was seized with anxiety and terror. He inquired of
Jehovah, but received no answer, neither by dreams, nor by the ephod,
nor by prophets. In his extremity he was driven into the arms of a black
art which he had formerly persecuted and sought to extirpate. By night
and in disguise, with two companions, he sought out a woman at Endor who
practiced the raising of the dead, and after reassuring her with regard
to the mortal danger connected with the practice of her art, he bade her
call up Samuel. She, on seeing the spirit ascending, at once perceives
that the man he had come up to converse with is the king himself; she
cries out loud, but allows herself to be reassured, and describes the
appearance of the dead person. Saul does not see him, only hears him
speak. "Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? Jehovah doeth to
thee as He spake by me: He rends the kingdom out of thy hand, and gives
it to another, because thou obeyedst not the voice of Jehovah, nor
executedst His fierce wrath upon Amalek; to-morrow shalt thou and thy
sons be with me, and Jehovah also shall deliver the host of Israel into
the hands of the Philistines." At these words Saul falls all his length
on the ground. He had eaten nothing all the day before and all night; he
is with difficulty induced to take some food: then he rises up with his
men to go and meet his fate (1 Sam. xxviii. 3-25).

Comparing with this original the copy in xiii. 7-15, we are struck, in
the first place, with the placing of the rupture so much earlier.
Scarcely is Saul made king when he is deposed, on the spot, at Gilgal.
And for

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

what reason? Samuel has fixed, in a purely arbitrary fashion, the time
he is to wait, and Saul waits, and makes arrangements for departure only
when the time has run out, although the need is pressing; and for this
he is rejected! It is clear that Samuel has from the first felt towards
him as a legitimate prince feels to a usurper; he has arranged so as to
find an occasion to show unmistakably where they both stand. Strictly
speaking he did not find the occasion, Saul having observed the
appointed time; but the opinion is present, though unexpressed, that the
king was not entitled to sacrifice, either before the expiry of the
seven days or at any time: his sacrificing is regarded as sacrilege. And
thus the autonomous theocracy stands all at once before our eyes, which
no one thought of before Ezekiel. We are reminded of the stories of
Joash and Uzziah in the Chronicles. The incidents in 1 Sam. xv. xxviii.
are similar, but the spirit of the narrative is different and more
antique. The rejection does not come here with such mad haste, and we do
not get the impression that Samuel is glad of the opportunity to wash
his hands of the king. On the contrary, he honours him before the
people, he mourns that Jehovah has rejected him; and Saul, who never
again sees him alive, turns to him dead in the hour of his extremity,
and does not regard him as his implacable enemy. Again, in the former
case the king's offence is that he has too low an estimate of the
sacredness of sacrifice, and fails to regard the altar as unapproachable
to the laity: while in the latter case he is reproached with attaching.
to sacrifice far too high a value. In the former case, in fine, the
Deity and the representative of the Deity act with absolute caprice,
confront men stiffly with commands of incredible smallness, and
challenge them to opposition; in the latter, the conduct of Samuel is
not (supposing it to have been the custom to devote enemies to
destruction) unintelligible, nor his demeanour devoid of natural spirit;
he appeals not to an irresponsible position, but to the manifest truth
that obedience is better than the fat of rams.

Not that chapters xv. and xxviii. belong to the original growth of the
tradition. In the case of xxviii. 3-25 it is easy to show the insertion:
the thread of xxviii. 1, 2, coming from chapter xxvii. is continued at
xxix. 1. According to xxviii. 4 the Philistines have advanced as far as
Shunem in Jezreel; in xxix. 1 they are only at Aphek in Sharon, and they
do not go on to Jezreel till xxix. 11. To prove an insertion in the case
of chap. xv. we might point to the fact that there is a direct
connection

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

between xiv. 52 and xvi. 14; but this must be proved somewhat
circumstantially. Let it suffice, then, to say that in the preceding
narrative of Saul's history, the war with the Amalekites appears in
quite a different light (ix. 1-x. 16, xi. xiii. xiv.; cf. also Num.
xxiv. 7). The occasion of it, according to xiv. 48, lay in the needs of
the time, and the object was the very practical one of "saving Israel
out of the hands of them that spoiled them." There is nothing here to
suggest that the campaign was undertaken in consequence of a religious
command, to punish the Amalekites for an offence over which long ages
had passed, and information about which could only be gathered from
historical books dealing with the age of Moses. Both the narratives,
chap. xv. as well as chap. xxviii, are preludes of events afterwards to
happen. At chap. xvi. David appears upon the scene; he is thenceforth
the principal person of the story, and thrusts Saul on one side. Chapter
xv. is the prophetic introduction to this change. The fact had been
handed down that Saul was chosen by Jehovah to be king. How was it
possible that in spite of this his rule had no continuance? Jehovah, who
as a rule does not change His mind, was mistaken in him; and Samuel, who
called the king, had now to his great sorrow to pronounce the sentence
of rejection against him. The occasion on which he does this is
evidently historical, namely, the festival of victory at Gilgal, at
which the captured leader of the Amalekites was offered up as the
principal victim. The sacrifice of Agag being quite repugnant to later
custom, it was sought to account for it by saying that Saul spared the
king, but Jehovah required his death, and caused him to be hewn in
pieces at the altar by Samuel. The rest could easily be spun out of
this; it is superfluous to discuss how. Chapter xxviii., again, is
related to chap. xv. as the second step to the first. No proof is wanted
to show that this is the prophetic shadow cast before the fall of Saul
in his last fight with the Philistines. His turning to the witch to call
up to him the departed Samuel suggests in the most powerful way his
condition of God-forsakenness since Samuel turned away from him. And, to
conclude—the general colouring of the hostile relation between Saul and
Samuel is borrowed from the actual relations which must have come to
subsist between the prophets and the kings, particularly in the kingdom
of Samaria (1 Kings xiv. 7). In their treatment of this relation our
narratives manifestly take up the prophetic position;

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

and the doctrinal ideas of which they are made the vehicles clearly show
them to be prophetic conceptions.

4\. David is the first hero of Judah whom we meet with; and he at once
throws all others into the shade. His acts are narrated to us in two
detailed and connected works which are mutually complementary. The first
of these is contained in 1 Sam. xiv. 52-2 Sam. viii 18, and in it we are
circumstantially informed how David rose to the throne. There follows
his principal achievement as king, the humiliation of the Philistines
and the foundation of Jerusalem, the work concluding with a short notice
of other remarkable circumstances. This narrative is preserved to us
complete, only not in the earliest form, but with many interruptions and
alterations. The second work, 2 Sam. ix.-2 Kings ii. is mutilated at its
commencement, but otherwise almost completely intact, if 2 Sam.
xxi.-xxiv. be removed. It tells chiefly of the occurrences at the court
of Jerusalem in the later years of the king, and carefully traces the
steps by which Solomon, whose birth, with its attendant circumstances,
is narrated at the outset, reached the throne over the heads of his
brothers Amnon, Absalom, and Adonijah, who stood before him. Both works
are marked by an essentially historical character. The treatment is much
more detailed, while not nearly so poetical as in the history of Saul (1
Sam. ix. seq.). There are no exaggerations, such as xiv. 46 seq. The
second is the better work of the two, and frequently affords us a glance
into the very heart of events, showing us the natural occasions and
human motives which gave rise to the different actions. The point of
view is, however, the narrow one of Jerusalem; for example, the real
reasons of the revolt of the men of Judah under Absalom are scarcely
even hinted at. The leading sentiment of the writer, there can be no
doubt, is enthusiasm for David, but his weaknesses are not concealed;
the relations prevailing at his court, far from edifying as they are,
are faithfully reported, and the palace intrigue which placed Solomon
upon the throne is narrated with a naïveté which is almost malicious.
The first work (1 Sam. xvi.-2 Sam. viii.) gives a less circumstantial
narrative, but follows the thread of events not less conscientiously,
and is based on information little inferior to that of the second. The
author's partisanship is more noticeable, as he follows the style of a
biographer, and makes David the hero of the history from his very first
appearance, although king Saul is the ruling and motive power in it. But
Judaistic leanings were unavoidable, and they

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

have not gone so far as to transform the facts, nor indeed operated in a
different way or to a greater degree here than local interest in the
tribal hero, which is always the earliest motive for narration, has done
in other cases. This praise applies to 1 Sam. xvi. seq., however, only
so far as its original form goes. It is different with the insertions,
here very numerous, which have crept into the older connection, or
replaced a genuine piece of the old story with a newer edition of it. In
these the tendency to idealise the founder of the dynasty of Judah has
worked creatively, and here we find rich materials for the history of
the tradition, in the rude style in which alone it is possible as yet to
construct that history. The beginning of the first work especially is
overgrown with later legendary formations.

David, known as a man of courage and prudence, and of a skilful tongue,
and recommended, moreover, by his skill on the harp, came to the king's
court and became his armour-bearer (xvi. 14-23). He so approved himself
in the war with the Philistines that Saul advanced him step after step,
and gave him his daughter in marriage (xviii. 6 seq.). But the success
and fame of the man of Judah filled Saul with jealousy, and in one of
his fits of frenzy (to which x. 10 also shows him to have been subject)
he threw his javelin at David, who was seeking to drive away the evil
spirit by his playing (xix. 8-10). David agreed with Jonathan that it
was advisable for him to absent himself, but this only confirmed the
king's suspicions, which prompted him to destroy the priests of Nob,
because their head had provided David with food and consulted the oracle
for him (xxi 2-7, xxii. 6-23). The fugitive himself Saul failed to lay
hands on; he gathered round him his own family and other desperate men,
and became their leader in the wilderness of Judah (xxii. 1-5, xxiii.
1-13, xxv. 2 seq.). To escape the repeated persecutions of Saul, he at
length passed over to the country of the Philistines, and received the
town of Ziklag in Judah as a fief from the hands of the prince Achish
(xxvii. 1 seq.).

Such is the beginning of the history of David according to the simple
thread of the old narrative. The first accretion we notice is the legend
of the encounter of the shepherd boy with Goliath (xvii. 1-xviii. 5),
which is involved in contradiction both with what goes before and with
what follows it. According to xvi. 14-23, David, when he first came in
contact with Saul, was no raw lad, ignorant of the arts of war, but "a
mighty valiant man, skilful in speech, and of a goodly

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

presence;" and according to xviii. 6 the women sang at the victorious
return of the army, "Saul has slain his thousands of the Philistines,
and David his tens of thousands," so that the latter was the leader of
Israel beside the king, and a proved and well-known man. Evidently
something of a different nature must originally have stood between xvi.
23 and xviii. 6. Now the fate of the story of Goliath (xvii. 1-xviii. 5)
involves that of the story of the anointing of David (xvi. 1-13), which
is dependent on it (xvi. 12, xvii. 42); and, as we have already decided
that chapter xv. is a secondary production, xiv. 52 joins on at once to
xvi. 14. In xviii. 6 seq., where we are told of the origin of Saul's
jealousy, several of the worst additions and interruptions are wanting
in the LXX, especially the first throwing of the javelin (xviii. 9-11)
and the betrothal to Merab (xviii. 17-19). The insertions are most
varied and confusing in the account of the outbreak of the hostility of
Saul and of David's flight (chapters xix. xx). Chapter xix. 1-7, a
pointless and artificial passage, betrays its later origin by its
acquaintance with chapter xvii.; xviii. 29*a* (LXX) is continued at xix.
8. After Saul's spear-cast David takes flight for the first time, but at
verse 11 he is still at home, and makes his escape the second time with
the aid of feminine artifice, going to Samuel at Ramah, but to appear in
chap. xx. at Gibeah as before. The king remarks his absence from table;
Jonathan assures him of his father's favour, which, however, David
doubts, though he has no distinct evidence to the contrary. When quite
certain of the deadly hatred of the king, David takes flight in earnest;
in chapter xxi. seq. we find him at Nob on his way to Judah, but at xxi.
10 he goes away afresh from the face of Saul. It is evident that in
reality and in the original narrative the flight took place only once,
and that it must from the first have been directed to the place of
refuge, *i.e.*, to Judah. This is enough to dispose of xix. 11-24: the
twentieth chapter is impossible in the connection, at least in its
present form, and in chapter xxi. verses 8-10 and 11-16 must be left
out. In the section which deals with the freebooter life of David,
chaps. xxiii-xxvii., considerable pieces have been added; xxvii. 7-12 of
course is one; but also the encounters of David with his pursuers. There
are two versions: the one, xxvi. 1-25, is placed before chapter xxvii.
on account of verse 19; the other, xxiii. 14-xxiv. 22, is placed before
chapter xxv. to avoid too near a contact. There is a good deal of verbal
coincidence between the two, and we are entitled to regard the shorter
and more pointed version (chapter xxvi.)

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

as the basis. But the sequence (xxvi. 25, xxvii. 1) shows beyond a doubt
that chapter xxvi. does not belong to the original tradition. The
process of inserting the additions naturally was not completed without
all sorts of editorial changes in the older materials, *e.g.*, xvi. 14.

Though proceeding from the same root, these offshoots are by no means of
the same nature, nor do they all belong to the same stage of the
process. Some of them are popular legends and unconscious fictions. Of
this nature is the story of Michal, who takes the part of her husband
against her father, lets him down in the evening with a rope through the
window, detains the spies for a time by saying that David is sick, and
then shows them the household god which she has arranged on the bed and
covered with the counterpane (xix. 11-17). The scenes in which Saul and
David meet are of a somewhat different colour, yet we notice that the
conviction that the latter is the king of the future does not interfere
with the recognition of the former as the king *de facto* and the
anointed of Jehovah; Saul too appears not wicked, but blinded. The
secondary version (xxiii. 14 seq.) contains (not to speak of the
distinctly later insertion between verse 15 and 19), in addition to the
touching features of the story, a good-natured jest, telling how the two
played hide-and-seek round a hill, which took its name from the
circumstance. These stories present certain marks which serve to fix
their date in the history of the religion: one is, that the image in
David's house is spoken of quite simply; another, the expression in
xxvi. 19, "If Jehovah have stirred thee up against me, let Him accept an
offering, but if it be men, cursed be they before Jehovah, because they
have driven me out this day from the fellowship in the land of Jehovah,
and obliged me to serve other gods." It is perhaps not by mere chance
that this speech is wanting in the parallel version, and that there is
added in place of it a formal act of recognition which Saul pays at the
end to his destined successor. As for the story of Goliath, it is also
quite artless, but its religious colouring is much more marked. The
speech with which David goes to meet the giant is characteristic on this
side (xvii. 4 seq.): "Thou comest to me with a sword and with a spear,
but I come unto thee in the name of Jehovah of hosts, whom thou hast
defied. This day will He deliver thee into mine hand, that all the earth
may know that there is a God in Israel, and that this assembly (‏הקהל‎ =
Israel) may know that Jehovah saveth not with sword and spear, for the
battle is His."

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This approaches to
the religious language of the post-Deuteronomic time. According to 2
Samuel xxi. 19, Goliath of Gath, whose spear-shaft was as thick as a
weaver's beam, <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130) fought in the wars,
not in Saul's time, but in that of his successor, and was killed, not by
a shepherd boy but by a warrior of Bethlehem named Elhanan.

The theme of David and Jonathan has no doubt a historical basis, but for
us it is found only in second-hand versions. The story of the farewell
(chapter xx.) must be placed in this category. Yet it appears to point
back to an earlier basis, and the earlier story may very possibly have
belonged to the connection of the original work. For the shooting of the
arrow could only have a meaning if it was impossible for the two friends
to have an interview. But as the story goes, they come together and
speak out freely what they have in their hearts, and so the dumb signal
is not only superfluous, but unintelligible and meaningless. But if the
most characteristic trait of the whole story does not fit into it as it
now stands, that is just saying that the story has not come down to us
in its true form. Originally Jonathan only discharged the arrow, and
called to his boy where it lay; and David, hid in the neighbourhood of
the shooting range, heard in the call to the boy the preconcerted
signal. In calling that the arrow was nearer him or beyond him, Jonathan
was apparently telling the boy, but in reality telling his friend, to
come towards him or go farther away from him. The latter was the case,
and if so, the friends could not enter into conversation; the tearful
farewell then disappears, and the sentimental speeches spoken before it
in the same style, in which Jonathan virtually admits that his father is
right, and yet decidedly espouses David's cause, disregarding the fact
that David will deprive him of his inheritance. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131)

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

Chapter xviii. 6 seq. manifests tendency in a bad sense, even apart from
the additions of the Masoretic text. Here Saul's enmity against David is
carried back to the very beginning of their relations together, and even
his friendship is represented as dissembled hatred. All the honours with
which the king covers his armour-bearer are interpreted as practices to
get rid of him. He makes him his son-in-law in order to expose him to
deadly danger in his efforts to procure the hundred foreskins of the
Philistines which were the price of the daughter. The connection cannot
dispense with xviii. 6 seq., but at the same time it is beyond doubt
that the venomous way of interpreting the facts is a mark of later
revision. For Saul here practices his perfidies with the cognisance of
his servants, who must therefore have been well aware of his disposition
towards David; but the old narrator proceeds on the opposite assumption,
that his hatred appeared all at once, and that David had been held by
all up to that time to be one of the king's favourite servants: cf. xxi.
2-xxii. 14 seq., not to speak of chapter xx. And this alone agrees with
the nature of Saul as it is everywhere described to us.

It is a characteristic circumstance that the corruption of the tradition
is greatest in those narratives in which Samuel enters into the history
of David. There are two insertions of this kind. According to xix. 18-24
David flees to the old man at Ramah, where the school of the prophets
is; Saul sends messengers to take him, but these, when they come near
Samuel and see him in command of a troop of ecstatic enthusiasts, are
seized by the frenzy like the rest. The second set of messengers whom
Saul sends, and the third, fare no better; and Saul has at last to come
himself. But he also is drawn into the vortex, tears off his clothes and
dances before Samuel and David, the only self-possessed spectators of
the bacchantic company, till he falls down; and he lies naked as he is a
whole day and a whole night upon the ground—whence the proverb, "Is Saul
also among the prophets?" But that David when he fled, fled in earnest
and went in the direction of Judah, instead of amusing himself by going
first towards the north, is perfectly evident, as much so as that it is
a serious abuse of the spirit of prophecy to make it serve ends which
are foreign to its nature, and turn it into a mere instrument for the
personal safety of David, who had

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

no need whatever to wait for Saul at Ramah to play him a trick there.
The narrative, which is unknown to the author of xv. 35, arose out of
the proverb which is quoted in it, but this receives elsewhere (x. 12) a
much more worthy interpretation. We can scarcely avoid the suspicion
that what we have before us here is a pious caricature; the point can be
nothing but Samuel's and David's enjoyment of the disgrace of the naked
king. For the general history of the tradition the most interesting
circumstance is that Samuel has here become the head of a school of
prophets and the leader of their exercises. In the original view of the
matter (chaps. ix. x.) he appears alone and independent, and has nothing
to do with the companies of the ecstatics, the Nebiim. He is a *Rōeh* or
seer, not a *Nabi* or prophet. True, it is asserted in the gloss, ix. 9,
that the two words mean the same thing, that what is now called *Nabi*
was formerly called *Rōeh*. But that is scarcely quite correct. The
author of ix. x. knows the name *Nabi* very well too, but he never
applies it to Samuel; he only uses it, in the plural, of the troops of
Jehovah—intoxicated dervishes. He gives it quite a different meaning
from *Rōeh*, and also quite a different meaning from that in which
Isaiah and Jeremiah use the word *Nabi*. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) We cannot doubt that these distinctions
rest on a historical basis, and only gradually melted away in later
times: so that Samuel the seer need not be degraded into one of the
flagellants.

David's flight to Samuel presupposes some previous relation to him, and
xix. 18 seq. seems to point back to xvi. 1-13. In this piece David's
career begins with his being anointed king in Saul's place at Jehovah's
command, when a mere shepherd boy, who was not even counted in the
family he belonged to. But in the sequel no one knows anything about
this. Even in the story of Goliath (which in other respects harmonizes
better with xvi. 1-13 than any other piece) the older brothers, here
three, not seven, know nothing of the anointing of the youngest,
although they were present and heard their own claims discussed (xvii.
28). In the stories of David's persecution also, chapter xxiv. xxvi.,
Saul alone is the sacred person, the anointed of Jehovah, not David. A
belief that David is chosen for high things by God is quite a different
matter from an anointing which has already taken place in fact. And if
consequent and antecedent be inseparable,

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

we must remember how, according to xv. 35, Samuel not only withdraws
himself from Saul till his death, but also feels grieved for him till
his death. It is a harsh transition from xv. 35: "Samuel came no more to
see Saul till the day of his death, because he mourned over him," to
xvi. 1: "and Jehovah spake to him, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him?" But it appears clearly that the appointment
of the successor was connected with, and a consequence of, the
deposition of the predecessor.

The anointing of David by Samuel is at the same time the set-off to the
anointing of Saul by Samuel. This is clearly seen on comparing x. 6, xi.
6, "and the Spirit of God leapt upon Saul," with xvi. 13, 14, "and the
Spirit of Jehovah leapt upon David, and it departed from Saul." In the
former case the inspiration is a momentary foaming over, in the latter
(the leaping notwithstanding) it is a permanent property; and this
difference alone leaves no doubt as to where the original is to be
looked for, and where the imitation. Saul alone, according to the old
tradition, was made king in a divine, *i.e.* an overpowering and ideal
manner: David was made king in a tedious human way, and after many
intermediate stages. Of Saul alone was it originally told that the
sudden outbreak of the spirit with which he, unelected as he was,
summoned the levy of Israel, placed himself at its head, defeated the
Ammonites, and became king, was quietly prepared by an old seer, who
pointed out to him his great calling, and filled him with confidence in
himself by secretly anointing him in the name of Jehovah. All that was
known of David was how by his own energy he raised himself from a
soldier to be the leader of a band, from that to be the vassal prince,
under the Philistines, of Ziklag and Judah, and from a vassal prince to
be the independent and powerful king of Israel. He also was anointed,
not, however, beforehand by God, but after his elevation, by the elders
of Judah and Israel. But this human origin and this inferiority in point
of divine consecration to a predecessor whose kingdom, as it turned out,
Jehovah had not made to stand, was found by a later age to be unworthy
of him: he must at least have received his anointing from Samuel as well
as Saul. And this was accordingly made good by the legend (xvi. 1-13).
It is a step further on this downward path that in the Judaistic version
(x. 17 seq.) all mention is omitted of the anointing of Saul.

We return to Samuel. The Books of Samuel take their name from

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

him, and he is a figure of great importance, if not for the history
itself, yet for the history of the tradition, the progress of which may
be measured by the change of view about his person. In the views taken
about him we may distinguish four stages. Originally (ix. 1-x. 16) he is
simply a seer, but at the same time a patriotic Israelite, who feels
deeply the need of his country, and uses his authority as seer to
suggest to the ear and to the mind of one whom he recognises as fit for
the purpose, his destination to be Israel's deliverer and leader. This
relation between seer and warrior must be held fast and regarded as
historical if Samuel is to mean anything at all. Similar instances are
those of Deborah and Barak in earlier times, and later, that of Elisha
and Hazael, and still more, that of Elisha and Jehu. Samuel's greatness
consists in this, that he rouses to activity the man who comes after
him, and is greater than he: after kindling the light which now burns in
its full brightness, he himself disappears. But his meteoric appearance
and disappearance excited wonder, and this in early times produced a
story of his youth, in which, while still a boy, he predicts the ruin of
pre-monarchical Israel (1 Sam. i.-iii.). After he has done this,
darkness closes completely around him. Even in chapter iv. he has
completely disappeared, and when we meet him again he is an old man. On
the other side the circumstance that we hear nothing more of the seer
after his meeting with Saul, caused it to be believed that a rupture
very soon took place between the two.

This belief we meet with at the second stage of the tradition which is
represented by the prophetical narratives recorded in chaps. xvi. and
xxviii. It arose out of the inconsistency involved in the fact that
Jehovah did not afterwards confirm in his reign the man whom He had
chosen to be king, but overthrew his dynasty. Thus it becomes necessary
that Samuel, who anointed Saul, should afterwards sorrowfully reject
him. Even here he appears no longer as the simple seer, but as a prophet
in the style of Elijah and Elisha who regards the Lord's anointed as his
own handiwork, and lays on him despotic commands (xv. 1), though
according to x. 7 he had expressly left him to be guided by his own
inspiration.

The transition from the second to the third stage is easy. Here Samuel,
after withdrawing the unction from Saul, at once transfers it to David,
and sets him up against his rejected predecessor as being now *de jure*
king by the grace of God. The respect with which he is regarded

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

has meanwhile increased still further; when he comes to Bethlehem the
elders tremble at his approach (xvi. 4 seq.); and in xix. 18 seq. he has
a magical power over men. Up to this stage, however, he has always been
regarded as intellectually the author of the monarchy. It is reserved
for the last (exilian or post-exilian) stage of the development of the
tradition to place him in the opposite position of one who resists to
the uttermost the desire of the people to have a king. Here
pre-monarchical Israel is advanced to a theocracy, and Samuel is the
head of the theocracy, which accounts for the feelings aroused in him by
their demand.

The modern judgment has been prejudiced in Saul's favour by Samuel's
curse, and to David's disadvantage by Samuel's blessing; the picture of
the one has not suffered from the blackening so much as that of the
other from the glorification. <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) Some
critics, who are unencumbered either by prejudice or by knowledge of the
subject, regard Saul as the antagonist and David as the creature of the
clerical lust of rule, of which they see the embodiment in Samuel. But
this view gives Samuel a powerful position over against the king such as
he cannot have possessed unless he had broad ground under his feet and
an influence well and extensively organised. Did he find support in the
Nebiim? These were only then rising into view out of an irregular
enthusiasm which was not yet confined to any definite circle or school;
and besides, the old tradition speaks of a close connection between them
and the king, but not between them and the seer. The belief that the
latter was the founder and president of their guild is based on the
worthless anachronistic anecdote, 1 Sam. xix. 18 seq. Or was Samuel in
conspiracy with the priests against Saul? This is inferred from 1 Sam.
xxi.-xxii. where Abimelech of Nob provides David with bread on his
wanderings, and expiates this offence with his own death and that of the
whole race of Eli. But in the first place these priests

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

have no connection with Samuel. In the second place there is nothing to
make it probable that they had an understanding with David, or were
acquainted with his ambitious plans if he had then begun to cherish
them. In the third place, it is positively certain that they represented
no distinct power in the state as against the king, but on the contrary
were entirely the creatures of his smile or frown; on the occurrence of
a faint suspicion they were put to death to a man without a dog barking
to remonstrate. The liberal view we are discussing of Samuel's relation
to Saul and David is based on the erroneous assumption that Samuel had
the *hierocracy* to rest on in his acts of opposition to the monarchy.
But the student who carries back the hierocracy to these early times has
still to learn the very elements of what is necessary to a true
historical appreciation of Hebrew antiquity.

#### III.

It is in the Book of Kings that the last revision works most
unrestrictedly. Here also chronological and religious elements combine
to the building up of the framework, and we begin with examining the
chronological system.

From the exodus from Egypt to the beginning of the building of the
temple was a period of 430 years; and from the latter to the destruction
of Jerusalem, a period, according to the numbers of the kings of Judah,
of 430 years, or reckoning the exile, of 480 years, as before. In
Chronicles, the succession from Azariah ben Ahimaaz, who was, according
to the correct reading, the first to officiate in the temple of Solomon,
to Jozadak, who was carried away in the captivity, consists of eleven
high priests; thus, reckoning the exile, we have again twelve
generations of 40 years each. The detailed figures which compose the
total are here more complicated, which is no doubt partly due to the
fact that some of them are dates which the reviser found given. Yet in
this instance also the number 40 is the basis of calculation, as we see
in the reigns of the kings of Judah. From the division of the kingdom to
the destruction of Samaria in the 6th year of Hezekiah, the numbers are
as follows: Rehoboam and Abijam, 20; Asa, 41; Jehoshaphat, Joram,
Ahaziah, Athaliah, 40; Joash, 40; Amaziah and Uzziah, 81; Jotham, Ahaz,
Hezekiah, 38. From the destruction of Samaria to the last date in Kings
(2 Kings xxv. 27), Hezekiah, Manasseh, Amon, have 80; Josiah,

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jehoahaz,
Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, 79 ¼. Let him believe who can that it is a mere
chance that the figures 41 + 81 + 38 make up exactly 40 + 80 + 40.

The series of the kings of Israel is in point of chronology dependent on
the series of Judah. According to the numbers of the latter, 393 years
elapsed from the division of the kingdom to the Babylonian captivity;
and if we assume with Ezekiel (iv. 4) that Samaria fell 150 years
earlier than Judah, 243 years remain for the duration of the northern
kingdom. The figures given amount in fact to 242 years. These 150
Israelite years, from the destruction of Samaria to the destruction of
Jerusalem, exceed, it is true, by 17 the sum of the parallel years of
Judah; and the Israelite years from 1 Jeroboam to 9 Hosea fall short of
the years in Judah from 1 Rehoboam to 6 Hezekiah by about the same
number. This shows that no effort was made at first to synchronise the
individual reigns in the two series. The 242 years of the northern
kingdom are divided, by the epoch of 1 Jehu, into 98 and 144. If we take
them at 240, the half of 480, the 98 must be changed into 96, which then
agree with the contemporary 96 Jewish years. The deduction must be made
at the reign of Baasha. Then we get the following play of figures:
Jeroboam 22, Nadab 2, Baasha 22, Elah 2, Omri 12, Ahab 22, Ahaziah 2,
Joram 12. That is to say, the eight kings have together 96 years, the
first four and the last four 48 each. Two have the average number 12;
the other 6 consists of three pairs of father and son; and the twice 12
years belonging to each pair are divided so that the father gets 12 +
10, and the son 12 - 10, obviously because the father was considered
much more important than the son. <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134)

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

The great period thus marked off and artificially divided into
sub-periods, is surveyed and appraised at every important epoch in
sermon-like discourses. These are much more frequent in Kings than in
Judges and Samuel. It makes no difference whether the writer speaks in
his own person, or by the mouth of another; in reviews of the past he
speaks himself, 2 Kings xvii.; in anticipations of the future he makes
another speak (1 Kings viii. ix.). A few examples must be cited to show
what we mean.

The great epoch of the work is the building of the temple. On this
occasion Solomon makes a great dedicatory oration, in which he entreats
Jehovah to hear from heaven the prayer of those who shall seek Him in
this place. He concludes as follows: "If they sin against Thee (for
there is no man that sinneth not) and Thou be angry with them and
deliver them to be carried away captive into the land of the enemy, far
or near, if they then bethink themselves and make supplication to Thee,
saying, We have sinned and have done perversely and are guilty, and so
return unto Thee with all their heart and all their soul in the land of
the enemies which led them away captive, and pray unto Thee toward their
land which Thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which Thou hast
chosen, and the house which Thou hast built for Thy name, then hear Thou
in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause,
and forgive thy people their unfaithfulness, and give them compassion
before them that carried them away captive, that they may have
compassion upon them. For they be Thy people and Thine inheritance,
which Thou broughtest forth out of Egypt from the midst of the furnace
of iron, and didst separate them to Thyself from among all the people of
the earth, as Thou spakest by Moses thy servant." What Jehovah answered
to this we learn in chapter ix. "I have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication which thou hast made before me; I have hallowed this house,
to put my name there for ever, and mine eyes and

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

my heart shall be there perpetually. If thou wilt walk before me, as did
David thy father, in integrity of heart and in uprightness, to do all
that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments,
I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I
promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man
upon the throne of Israel. But if *ye* or *your children* turn away from
me, and will not keep my statutes and my judgments which I have set
before you, but worship other gods, then will I cut off Israel out of
the land which I have given them, and this house which I have hallowed
for my name I will cast out of my sight, and Israel shall be a proverb
and a byword among all people, and this house a ruin. And when they ask:
Why hath Jehovah done thus to this land and to this house? the answer
shall be: Because they forsook Jehovah their God, who brought forth
their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other
gods, and have worshipped them and served them."

The division of the kingdom is also a very marked era in the history. It
is introduced by a prophecy of Abijah to the first Jeroboam. "Behold, I
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to
thee; but he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for
Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen; because he has forsaken
me, and worshipped Astarte of Sidon, and Chemosh of Moab, and Milcom of
Ammon, and has not walked in my ways to do that which is right in my
eyes, my statutes, and my judgments, like David his father. And it shall
be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in
my ways, and do what is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my
commandments as David my servant did, that I will be with thee and build
thee a sure house as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.
And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever."

We pass over a series of prophecies in a similar strain which occur
regularly at the changes of dynasty in the northern kingdom, and cite
only the concluding words which accompany the fall of the kingdom of the
ten tribes (2 Kings xvii.). This fall came about "because the children
of Israel sinned against Jehovah their God, which brought them up out of
the land of Egypt, and feared other gods, and walked in the statutes of
the heathen whom they had driven out, and in the innovations of the
kings of Israel; and because the children of Israel

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

imputed to Jehovah their God things which are not so, and built them
high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchman to the
fenced city; and they set up pillars and Asheras on every high hill and
under every green tree, and there they sacrificed in all the high
places, as did the people whom Jehovah had driven out before them: and
wrought wicked things to provoke Jehovah to anger, and served the
abominations which Jehovah had forbidden. Yet Jehovah testified to them
by all the prophets and seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and
keep my commandments and my statutes according to all the torah which I
commanded your fathers, and which I sent unto you by my servants the
prophets; but they would not hear, but hardened their necks like their
fathers, that they did not believe in Jehovah their God; and they
rejected His statutes and His covenant that He made with their fathers,
and His testimonies with which He warned them, and they followed vanity
and became vain, and went after the heathen that were round about them,
concerning whom Jehovah had charged them that they should not do like
them. And they left all the commandments of Jehovah their God, and made
them molten images and an Asherah, and worshipped the whole host of
heaven, and served Baal; and they caused their children to pass through
the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to
do evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke Him to anger. And Jehovah
was very wroth with Israel, and removed them out of His sight; there was
none left but the men of Judah only. But they of Judah also kept not the
commandment of their God, but walked in the manner of Israel: and
Jehovah rejected the whole race of Israel, and humbled them, and
delivered them unto the hand of spoilers, until He had cast them out of
His sight." No special concluding discourse is given for Judah, but that
for Israel applies to Judah as well. This we see both directly from the
last words of the passage cited, and from the circumstance that two very
characteristic abominations in the foregoing catalogue, the worship of
the host of heaven and the sacrifice of children, were introduced,
according to the testimony of the prophets, which alone can determine
the point, not in the eighth but only in the seventh century, under
Manasseh, and accordingly are not chargeable on Israel, but only on
Judah.

The water accumulates, so to speak, at these gathering places of the
more important historical epochs: but from these reservoirs it finds its

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

way in smaller channels on all sides. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) The first question asked with regard to
each ruler is, what position he took up to the pure religion—whether he
did what was right or what was evil in the sight of Jehovah. Even in the
case of those who only reigned a week, this question receives an answer.
In general it has to be stated that they did evil. All except David and
Hezekiah and Josiah, were defective, says Jesus Sirach (xlix. 4),—not
quite accurately perhaps, but yet truly in so far as there is always
some objection even to the good kings. But the sin here reproved is no
longer, at least not principally, the worship of strange gods; it is the
perverted worship of Jehovah. A more special standard, and therefore a
stricter one, is now employed, and we know the reason of this: the
temple having once been built in the place which Jehovah has chosen for
Himself, the kindly naturalness hitherto belonging to His worship comes
to an end (Deut. xii. 8): and in particular the prohibition of the
bamoth comes into force (1 Kings iii. 2). That these continued to exist
is the special sin of the period, a sin widespread and persistent. It is
aggravated by the fact, that with the bamoth all kinds of unlawful
abuses crept into the worship of Jehovah, Maççebas and Asheras,
evergreen trees, and prostitutes of both sexes. Israel, continually
compared with Judah in the matter, is further charged with a second
great sin, the sin of Jeroboam, *i.e.*, the golden calves at Bethel and
at Dan. The religious estimate combines with the chronological facts to
form that scheme in which every single reign of the kings of Israel and
Judah is uniformly framed. Sometimes the frame is well filled in with
interesting matter, but in not a few cases historical matter is almost
entirely absent. The scheme appears most nakedly in such chapters as 1
Kings xv. xvi., 2 Kings xiii. xiv. xv.

That this redaction of our book is essentially uniform with that of the
two historical books which precede it, requires no proof. Only it has
here a warmer and more lively tone, and a much closer relation to the
facts. In consequence of this we find it much easier to determine the
point of view from which it proceeds. The mere fact that the

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

narrative extends to the destruction of Jerusalem, nay, to the death of
the captive king Jehoiachin, shows that we must place the date of the
work not earlier than the Babylonian exile, and, indeed, the second part
of the exile. The chronology reckons the exile in the period of 480
years, giving 50 years to it; and this would bring us still lower down;
but it is open to us to assume that this is a later modification, which
has not further affected the general character of the work. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) The writer looks back on the time of the
kings as a period past and closed, on which judgment has already been
declared. Even at the consecration of the temple the thought of its
destruction is not to be restrained; and throughout the book the ruin of
the nation and its two kingdoms is present to the writer's mind. This is
the light in which the work is to be read; it shows why the catastrophe
was unavoidable. It was so because of unfaithfulness to Jehovah, because
of the utterly perverted tendency obstinately followed by the people in
spite of the Torah of Jehovah and His prophets. The narrative becomes,
as it were, a great confession—of sins of the exiled nation looking back
on its history. Not only the existing generation, but the whole previous
historical development is condemned—a fashion which we meet with first
in Jeremiah (ii. 1 seq., iv. 3), who was actually confronted with the
question as to the cause of the calamity. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137) Ezekiel carried out this negative
criticism of the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

past to greater lengths, with particular reference to the abominations
of the older worship (chapter xvi., xx., xxiii.); and it is also to be
found in Isa. xl.-xlvi. (xlii. 24, xliii. 27), though here it is
supplemented by a positive and greatly more suggestive view; we find it
also in Deut. xxviii.-xxx., and in Lev. xxvi. The whole of the past is
regarded as one enormous sin, which is to be expiated in the exile (Jer.
xxxii. 30; Ezek. xviii. 2, xxxiii. 10; Isa. xl. 1); the duration of the
punishment is even calculated from that of the sin (Leviticus xxvi. 34).
The same attitude towards old times is continued after the return (Zech.
viii. 13 seq., ix. 7 seq.; Nehem. ix. 7 seq.).

The treatment is naturally from a Judæan point of view. Outside of
Jerusalem the worship of Jehovah is heretical, so that the political
revolt of the Northern Israelites was at the same time an ecclesiastical
schism. Yet they are not excluded in consequence from community with the
people of God, as in the Chronicles: the old traditions are not thrown
so completely overboard as yet: only after the destruction of Samaria by
the Assyrians does Judah continue the history alone. Almost the same
reverence is paid to David and his house as to the city and the temple.
His house has the promise of eternal continuance, with regard to which
the writer likes to make use of the words of Jer. xxxiii. 17. The book
closes, doubtless not by chance, with the liberation from prison of the
Davidide Jehoiachin; this is the earnest of greater things yet in store.
In the words of Abijah to Jeroboam, also, when he says that the
humiliation of the house of David and the revolt from it of the ten
tribes will not last for ever, we see the Messianic hope appear, which,
as we learn from Haggai and Zechariah, largely occupied the minds of the
Jews at the time of the exile and after it.

In the case of the books of Judges and Samuel it is not perhaps possible
to decide with perfect certainty what was the norm applied by the last
reviser in forming his estimates of the past. In the Books of Kings
there can be no doubt on this point. The writer deals not only in
indefinite references to the will of Jehovah, which Israel ought to

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

obey, but resists; he speaks now and again (1 K. ii. 3, 2 K. xiv. 6,
xvii. 37) of the written Torah in which the judgments and statutes of
Jehovah are contained, a difference which indicates, one must allow, a
historical feeling. Now the code which is implicitly regarded as the
standard is that the discovery of which under Josiah is circumstantially
narrated in 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., viz., Deuteronomy. We are led to this
conclusion, it is allowed on all hands, both by the phraseology of the
reviser and by the spirit of his judgments. He condemns those sins
specially against which Deuteronomy and the reformation of King Josiah
were directed. And the one verbal quotation made from the book of the
Torah is from Deuteronomy (2 Kings xiv. 6; Deut. xxiv. 16). On the other
hand, there are clear signs that the author of the revision was not
acquainted with the Priestly Code. Nowhere is any distinction drawn
between priests and Levites; the sons of Aaron are never mentioned. The
idea of a central sanctuary before Solomon is contradicted by 1 Kings
iii. 2. In one section only, a section which has been greatly exposed to
corrections and interpolations of all kinds, namely, the description of
the temple and its consecration, 1 K. vi.-viii., do we meet with signs
of the influence of the Priestly Code, especially in the Massoretic
text; in the Septuagint this is not so much the case. The most important
example of this has already been investigated, p. 43, 44.

If, accordingly, we are fully justified in calling the revision
Deuteronomistic, this means no more than that it came into existence
under the influence of Deuteronomy, which pervaded the whole century of
the exile. The difference between Deuteronomistic and Deuteronomic is
one not of time only but of matter as well: <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) Deuteronomy itself has not yet come to
regard the cultus in this way as the chief end of Israel, and is much
closer to the realism of the actual life of the people. A difference in
detail which allows of easy demonstration is connected with the mode of
dating. The last reviser distinguishes the months not by their old
Hebrew names, Zif, Bul, Ethanim, but by numbers, commencing with spring
as the beginning of the year. In this he differs not only from his older
sources (1 Kings vi. 37, 38, viii. 2), but also from Deuteronomy.

2\. This revision is, as we expect to find, alien to the materials it
found to work on, so that it does violence to them. They have been

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

altered in particular by a very one-sided selection, which is determined
by certain religious views. In these views an interest in the prophets
mingles with the interest in worship. It is not meant that the selection
is due entirely to the last reviser, though it is thoroughly according
to his taste; others had probably worked before him in this direction.
But for us it is neither possible nor important to distinguish the
different steps in the process of sifting through which the traditions
of the time of the kings had to pass.

The culminating point of the whole book is the building of the temple;
almost all that is told about Solomon has reference to it. This at once
indicates to us the point of view; it is one which dominates all
Judaistic history: the history is that of the temple rather than of the
kingdom. The fortunes of the sanctuary and its treasures, the
institution and arrangements of the kings with reference to worship—we
are kept *au courant* about these, but about hardly anything else. The
few detailed narratives given (2 Kings xi seq. xvi. xxii. seq.) have the
temple for their scene, and turn on the temple. Only in xviii. seq. does
the prophetical interest predominate.

As for the kingdom of Israel, the statements about the cultus of that
state are very scanty and for the most part rather vague. Here the
prophetical narratives come to the front, generally such as are told
from the prophetic point of view, or at least tell of the public
appearances and acts of the prophets. Here and there we are told of
occasions on which the Northern kingdom came in contact with Judah; here
the Jewish feeling appears which dictated the selection. What is merely
historical, purely secular, is communicated only in the scantiest
measure: often there is nothing but the names and succession of the
kings. We learn hardly anything about King Omri, the founder of the town
of Samaria and re-founder of the kingdom, who seems to have reduced
Judah also to the position of a dependent ally, nor do we learn more
about Jeroboam II., the last great ruler of Israel; while the conflict
with the Assyrians and the fall of Samaria are despatched in a couple of
verses which tell us scarcely anything at all. Sometimes a brilliant
breaks in on the surrounding night (2 Kings ix. x.), but after it we
grope in the dark again. Only so much of the old tradition has been
preserved as those of a later age held to be of religious value: it has
lost its original centre of gravity, and assumed an attitude which it
certainly had not at first. It may have been the case in Judah that the

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

temple was of more importance than the kingdom, but there can be no
doubt that the history of Israel was not entirely, not even principally,
the history of prophecy. The losses we have to deplore must have
affected the Israelitish tradition most seriously.

The damage done by the revision by its *positive* meddling with the
materials as found in the sources, is not so irreparable; yet it is
considerable enough. The change of colour which was effected may be best
seen and characterised in the far-reaching observations which introduce
the Israelite series of kings; "Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall
the kingdom return to the house of David; if this people go up to do
sacrifice in the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of
this people turn again to their rightful lord, and they will kill me,
and become subject again to Rehoboam king of Judah. Whereupon the king
took counsel and made two calves of gold, and said unto them, Cease to
go up to Jerusalem; behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out
of the land of Egypt. And he set the one in Bethel and the other in Dan.
And this thing became a sin; for the people went as one man, even unto
Dan. And he made temples of high places, and took priests from the midst
of the people which were not of the house of Levi; whomsoever he would
he installed as priest of the high places" (1 K. xii. 26-30, xiii. 33).
The perversion is scarcely so great as in Chronicles, but the
anachronism is sufficiently glaring in the mode of view discernible in
these reflections of Jeroboam, who appears to feel that the Ephraimite
kingdom was illegitimate in its origin and could only be kept separate
from the south by artificial means. The blessing of Jacob and the
blessing of Moses show us what the sentiment of Northern Israel actually
was. In the former Joseph is called the crowned of his brethren, in the
second we read "His first-born bullock, full of majesty (the king), has
the horns of a buffalo, with which he thrusts down the peoples; these
are the ten thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh." Whence
came the charm of the name of Ephraim but from its being the royal
tribe, and the most distinguished representative of the proud name of
Israel? Of Judah we read in the same chapter, "Hear, Jehovah, the voice
of Judah, and bring him back to his people." There can be no doubt what
the people is to which Judah belongs: we cannot but agree with Graf,
that this tribe is here regarded as the alienated member, and its
reunion with the greater kingdom spoken of as the desire of Judah
itself, and this is not so remarkable

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

when we reflect that the part belongs to the whole and not the whole to
the part. Only by long experience did Judah learn the blessing of a
settled dynasty, and Ephraim the curse of perpetual changes on the
throne.

Judah's power of attraction for the inhabitants of the Northern Kingdom
is thought to lie in the cultus of the Solomonic temple; and Jeroboam is
said to have tried to meet this by creating new sanctuaries, a new form
of the worship of Jehovah, and a new order of priesthood. The features
in which the Samaritan worship differed from the Jewish pattern are
represented as intentional innovations of the first king, in whose sin
posterity persisted. But in making Bethel and Dan temples of the
kingdom—that he set up high places, is a statement which need not be
considered—Jeroboam did nothing more than Solomon had done before him;
only he had firmer ground under his feet than Solomon, Bethel and Dan
being old sanctuaries, which Jerusalem was not. The golden calves,
again, which he set up, differed in their gold but not in their object
from the ephods and idols of other kinds which were everywhere to be
found in the older "houses of God"; *e.g.* from the brazen serpent at
Jerusalem. <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139) Even Eichhorn remarked
with force and point, that though Elijah and Elisha protested against
the imported worship of Baal of Tyre, they were the actual champions of
the Jehovah of Bethel and Dan, and did not think of protesting against
His pictorial representation; even Amos makes no such protest, Hosea is
the first who does so. As for the non-Levitical priests whom the king is
said to have installed, all that is necessary has been said on this
subject above (p. 138 seq.).

A remarkable criticism on this estimate of the Samaritan worship follows
immediately afterwards in the avowal that that of Judah was not
different at the time, at any rate not better. In the report of
Rehoboam's reign we read (1 Kings xiv. 22 seq.): "They of Judah also set
up high places and pillars on every high hill, and under every green
tree, and whoredom at sacred places was practiced in the land." This
state of things continued to exist, with some fluctuations, till near
the time of

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

the exile. If then the standard according to which Samaria is judged
never attained to reality in Judah either, it never existed in ancient
Israel at all. We know the standard is the book of the law of Josiah:
but we see how the facts were not merely judged, but also framed, in
accordance with it.

One more instance is worthy of mention in this connection. King Solomon,
we are told, had, besides the daughter of Pharaoh, many foreign wives,
from Moab, Ammon, and other peoples, intermarriage with whom Jehovah had
forbidden (Deut. xvii 17). And when he was old, they seduced him to the
worship of their gods, and he erected on the Mount of Olives at
Jerusalem high places for Chemosh of Moab, and for Milcom of Ammon, and
for the gods of his other wives. As a punishment for this Jehovah
announced to him that his kingdom should be torn from him after his
death and given to his servant, and also raised up adversaries to him,
in Hadad the Edomite, who freed Edom, and in the Syrian Rezon teen
Eliadah, who made Damascus independent. And by the prophet Abijah of
Shiloh, he caused the Ephraimite Jeroboam, who then had the supervision
of the forced labour of the house of Joseph in the fortification of the
city of David, to be nominated as the future king of the ten tribes. So
we read in 1 Kings xi. But Edom, and, as it appears, Damascus as well,
broke away from the kingdom of David immediately after his death (xi. 21
seq., 25); and the fortification of the citadel, in which Jeroboam was
employed when incited to revolt by Abijah, though it falls somewhat
later, yet belongs to the first half of Solomon's reign, since it is
connected with the rest of his buildings (ix. 15, 24). Now Solomon
cannot have been punished by anticipation, in his youth, for an offence
which he only committed in his old age, and the moral connected with
these events is contradicted by chronology and cannot possibly be
ascribed to the original narrator. The Deuteronomistic revision betrays
itself, in fact, in every word of xi. 1-13. To the original tradition
belongs only the mention of the many wives—without the reprobation
attached to it,—and the statement about the building of the altars of
Chemosh and Milcom and perhaps Astarte, on the Mount of Olives, where
they stood till the time of Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 13). The connection
of the two events, in the relation of cause and effect, belongs to the
last editor, as well as the general statement that the king erected
altars of the gods of all the nationalities represented by his wives.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

In the Books of Kings, it is true, the tradition is not systematically
translated into the mode of view of the Law, as is the case in
Chronicles. What reminds us most strongly of Chronicles is the
introduction from time to time of a prophet who expresses himself in the
spirit of Deuteronomy and in the language of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and
then disappears. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) In this way the
Law is introduced into the history in a living way; the prophets keep it
effective and see it applied, according to the principle stated, 2 Kings
xvii. 13, which is founded on Jer. vii. 25; Deut. xviii. 18: "Jehovah
testified to them by all the prophets and seers saying, Turn ye from
your evil ways and keep my commandments and statutes, according to all
the Torah which I commanded your fathers and which I sent unto you by my
servants the prophets." The most unblushing example of this kind, a
piece which, for historical worthlessness may compare with Judges
xix.-xxi. or 1 Sam. vii. seq., or even stands a step lower, is 1 Kings
xiii. A man of God from Judah here denounces the altar of Bethel, at
which King Jeroboam is in the act of offering sacrifice, in these terms:
"O altar, altar, behold a son shall be born to the house of David,
Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high
places, that burn incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burned
upon thee." And to guarantee the truth of this prophecy, to be fulfilled
three hundred years afterwards, he gives the sign that the altar shall
burst asunder, and the ashes of the sacrifice upon it be poured
out—which at once takes place. This legend, however, does not really
belong to the Deuteronomist, but is a still later addition, as is easily
to be seen from the fact that the sentence xii. 31 is only completed at
xiii. 34. It deserves remark that in the two verses which introduce the
thirteenth chapter, xii. 32 seq., the feast of tabernacles is fixed, in
accordance with the Priestly Code, as the 15th of the 7th month.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

3\. In this case also we are able to discern considerable shades and
gradations in the sources the reviser had at command. In the Books of
Kings for the first time we meet with a series of short notices which
arrest attention, in the surroundings they are in, by their brevity and
directness of statement and the terseness of their form, and have the
semblance of contemporary records. In spite of their looseness of
arrangement these form the real basis of our connected knowledge of the
period; and the religious chronological framework is regularly filled in
with them (*e.g.* 1 Kings xiv.-xvi.); their loose connection and neutral
tone made it specially easy for later editors to interweave with them
additions of their own, as has actually been done to no small
extent. <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141) These valuable notes
commence even with Solomon, though here they are largely mixed with
anecdotic chaff. They are afterwards found principally, almost
exclusively, in the series of Judah. Several precise dates point to
something of the nature of annals, <span id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_142)
and with these the characteristic then might be thought to be connected,
which frequently introduces the short sentences, and as it now stands is
generally meaningless. In what circles these records were made, we can
scarcely even surmise. Could we be certain that the reference to the
royal temple of Judah, which is a prevailing feature of them, is due not
to selection at a later time but to the interest of the first hands, we
should be led to think of the priesthood at Jerusalem. The loyalist,
perfectly official tone would agree very well with this theory, for the
sons of Zadok were, down to Josiah's time, nothing else than the
obedient servants of the successors of David, and regarded the
unconditional authority claimed by these kings over their sanctuary as a
matter of course (2 K. xvi. 10 seq., xii. 18). These notices, however,
as we have them, are not drawn from the documents

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

themselves, but from a secondary compilation, perhaps from the two sets
of chronicles cited at the end of each reign of the kings of Israel and
those of Judah, from which at all events the succession of the rulers
appears to the drawn. These chronicles are not to be identified, it is
clear, with the original annals. The *book* of the annals must be
distinguished from the Dibre-hajamim themselves. Whether the chronicle
of Israel—hardly anything out of which is communicated to us—was
composed much earlier than the chronicle of Judah (which seems to close
with Jehoiachim), and whether it and the chronicle of Solomon (1 K. xi.
41) are a quite independent work, I am inclined to consider doubtful.

The excerpts from the annals are interrupted by more extensive episodes
which are interwoven with them, and are also embraced in the
Deuteronomistic scheme. Of these the Jewish ones are the minority, the
greater part are Samaritan, but they all belong to a very limited period
of time. I select the miraculous history of Elijah as an example of
these, to show the sentiment and the change of sentiment in this
instance also.

The prophet Elijah, from Tishbeh in Gilead, appears before King Ahab of
Samaria, and says, "By the life of Jehovah the God of Israel, whom I
serve, there shall not be dew nor rain these years but according to my
word." The story begins abruptly; we require to know that Ahab, stirred
up by Jezebel, has been propagating in Israel the worship of the Tyrian
Baal, and has killed the prophets of Jehovah by hundreds: this is the
reason of the punishment which comes on him and his land (xviii. 13,
22). Elijah vanishes as suddenly as he appeared. We find him again at
the brook Cherith, which flows into the Jordan; then in the land of Baal
with a widow at Zarepta; while following his fortunes we are made to
feel in a simple and beautiful way the severity of the famine. Ahab in
the meantime had sent out messengers to take him, and had required of
every state to which the vain search had extended, an oath that he was
not to be found there. Now, however, necessity obliged him to think of
other things; he had to go out himself with his minister Obadiah to seek
fodder for the still remaining war-horses (Amos vii. 1). In this
humiliating situation he all at once met the banished man. He did not
believe his eyes. "Is it thou, O troubler of Israel?" "I have not
troubled Israel, but thou and thy father's house!" After this greeting
Elijah challenged the king to institute a

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

contest between the 450 prophets of Baal, and him, the only prophet of
Jehovah left remaining. A trial by sacrifice took place on Mount Carmel
before the whole people. Each party was to prepare a bullock and lay it
on the altar without setting fire to the wood; and the divinity who
should answer by fire was the true God. The prophets of Baal came first
and sought after their own manner to influence their deity. They shouted
and leapt wildly, wounded themselves with swords and lances till they
were covered with blood, and kept up their raving ecstasy from morning
till mid-day, and from mid-day till evening. During this time Elijah
looked at them and mocked them, saying, "Cry louder, for he is a god;
either he is talking, or he is somehow engaged, or he is asleep and must
be awaked." At last his turn came; he repaired the altar of Jehovah,
which was broken down, spread the pieces of the sacrifice upon it, and,
to make the miracle still more miraculous, caused them to be flooded two
or three times with water. Then he prayed to Jehovah, and fire fell from
heaven, and consumed the sacrifice. The people, up to this point divided
in their mind, now took the side of the zealot for Jehovah, laid hold of
the prophets of Baal, and slaughtered them down below at the brook. A
great storm of rain at once came to refresh the land.

This triumph of Elijah was only a prelude. When Jezebel heard what had
happened she swore vengeance against him, and he fled for his life to
Beersheba in Judah, the sanctuary of Isaac. Wearied to death he lay down
under a juniper-bush in the wilderness, and with the prayer, It is
enough: now, O Jehovah, take away my life, he fell asleep. Then he was
strengthened with miraculous food by a heavenly messenger, and bidden to
go to Horeb, the mount of God. He arrived there after a long journey,
and withdrew into a cave; a rushing wind sweeps past; the wind and the
earthquake and the lightning are the forerunners of Jehovah; and after
them He comes Himself in the low whispering that follows the storm. His
head covered, Elijah steps out of the cave and hears a voice ask what
ails him. Having poured out his heart, he receives the divine
consolation that his cause is by no means lost; that the direst
vengeance, the instruments of which he is himself to summon to their
task, is to go forth on all the worshippers of Baal, and that those 7000
who have not bowed their knee to Baal shall gain the day—"Thou shalt
anoint Hazael to be King over Damascus, and Jehu ben Nimshi shalt thou
anoint to be

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

king over Israel, and Elisha ben Shaphat to be prophet in thy room; and
him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay, and him that
escapeth the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay." The account of the
execution of these commands by Elijah is at present wanting; we shall
soon see why it was omitted. The conclusion of chapter xix. only tells
us that he called Elisha from the plough to follow him. Of the account
of the judgment which overtook the worshippers of Baal, this group of
narratives contains only the beginning, in chapter xxi. Ahab wanted to
have a vineyard which was situated beside his palace in Jezreel, his
favourite residence: but Naboth, the owner, was unwilling to enter on a
sale or an exchange. The king was angry, yet thought he could do no more
in the matter; but Jezebel of Tyre had other notions of might and right
and said to him, "Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? be of good
courage; I will get thee the vineyard." She wrote a letter to the
authorities of the town, and got Naboth put out of the way by means of
corrupt judges. As Ahab was just going to take possession of the
vineyard which had fallen into his hands, his enemy came upon him. The
prophet Elijah, always on the spot at the right moment, hurled the word
at him, "Hast thou killed and also taken possession? Behold, in the
place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood
also." Here this story breaks off. What follows is not the true
continuation.

The thread of the narrative xvii.-xix. xxi. is also broken off here,
without reaching its proper conclusion. The victory of Jehovah over
Baal, of the prophet over the king, is wanting; the story of Naboth is,
as we said, only the introduction to it. We are sufficiently informed
about the facts, but in form the narratives do not answer to the
announcement in chapter xix. and xxi.; they are drawn from other
sources. According to xix. 1 7 the Syrian wars ought to result in
vengeance on the worshippers of Baal, and specially on the idolatrous
royal house; but in the narrative of the wars (1 Kings xx. xxii. 2 Kings
vii. ix.) this point of view does not prevail. On the contrary, Ahab and
Joram there maintain themselves in a manly and honourable way against
the superior power of Damascus it is *only after* the extirpation of
Baal worship under Jehu that affairs took an unfortunate turn, and
Hazael, who brought about this change, was not anointed by Elijah

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

but by Elisha (2 K. viii. 7 seq.) <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143)
The massacre at Jezreel, too, which is predicted in the threat of 1 K.
xxi. 19, would need to be told otherwise than in 2 K. ix. x., to form a
proper literary sequel to the story of Naboth. According to 1 K. xxi. 19
the blood of Ahab is to be shed at Jezreel; according to 2 K. ix. 25 his
son's blood was shed there, to avenge Naboth. It is true, the
explanation is appended in xxi. 27-29, that, as the king took to heart
the threats of Elijah, Jehovah made a supplementary communication to the
prophet that the threat against Ahab's house would only be fulfilled in
the days of his son; but who does not see in this an attempt to
harmonise conflicting narratives? <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144)
A whole series of subordinate discrepancies might be mentioned, which
prove that 2 K. ix. x. does not look back to the story of the murder of
Naboth as told in 1 K. xxi. According to ix. 25, 26, the dispute was not
about the vineyard, but about the field of Naboth, which lay some
distance from the town. His family was put to death along with him, and
on the following day, when Ahab rode out *in company with* Jehu and Ben
Deker to take possession of the field, the word of the prophet (not
framed so specially against him personally) met him: "Surely I have seen
yesterday the blood of Naboth and of his sons, and I will requite it in
this plat."

With the help of these other accounts, among which there is a
considerable group of uniform character (1 K. xx. xxii. 2 K. iii. vi.
24-xii. 20. ix. 1-x. 27) favourably distinguished from the rest, we are
placed in a position to criticise the history of Elijah, and to reach a
result which is very instructive for the history of the tradition,
namely that the influence of the mighty prophet on his age has after all
been appraised much too highly. His reputation could not be what it is
but for the wide diffusion of Baal worship in Israel: and this is not a
little exaggerated.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Anything like a
suppression of the national religion at the time of Elijah is quite out
of the question, and there is no truth in the statement that the
prophets of Jehovah were entirely extirpated at the time and Elijah
alone left surviving. The prophetic guilds at Bethel, Jericho, and
Gilgal continued without any interruption. In the Syrian wars prophets
of Jehovah stand by the side of Ahab; before his last campaign there are
four hundred of them collected in his capital, one of them at least long
known to the king as a prophet of evil, but left alive before and left
alive now, though he persisted in his disagreeable practices. Of the
sons whom Jezebel bore him, Ahab called one Ahaziah, *i.e.* Jehovah
holds, and another Jehoram, *i.e.* Jehovah is exalted: he adhered to
Jehovah as the god of Israel, though to please his wife he founded at
Samaria a temple and a cultus of the Syrian goddess. This being so,
Elijah's contest with Baal cannot have possessed the importance
attributed to it from the point of view of a later time. In the group of
popular narratives above referred to, there is no trace of a religious
commotion that tore Israel asunder: the whole strength of the people is
absorbed in the Syrian wars. The kings are the prominent figures, and do
well and according to their office in battle: Elijah stands in the
background. From several indications, though from no direct statements,
we learn of the high esteem which Ahab enjoyed from friend and foe alike
(xx. 31, xxii. 32-34 seq.). Joram also, and even Jezebel, are drawn not
without sympathy (2 K. vi. 30, ix. 31). We can scarcely say the same of
Jehu, the murderer, instigated by the prophets, of the house of Ahab (2
K. ix. 10).

It is the fact, certainly, that the prophets’ hatred of Baal succeeded
at last in overturning the dynasty of Omri. But in what manner was this
done? At a time when King Joram was prevented by a wound he had received
from being with his army in the field, a messenger of Elisha went to the
camp, called the captain apart from a banquet at which he found him, to
a secret interview, and anointed him king. When Jehu returned to his
comrades at their wine, they asked him what that mad fellow had wanted,
and, his evasive answers failing to satisfy them, he told them the
truth. They at once raised him on an improvised throne, and caused the
trumpets to proclaim him king: they were quite ready for such an
exploit, not that they cared in the least for "that mad fellow." Jehu
justified their confidence by his astounding mastery in treachery and
bloodshed, but he placed his reliance entirely on

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

the resources of his own talent for murder. He was not borne along by
any general movement against the dynasty; the people, which he despised
(x. 9), stood motionless and horrified at the sight of the crimes which
came so quickly one after another; even a hundred years afterwards the
horror at the massacre of Jezreel still lived (Hosea i. 4). The crown
once gained, the reckless player showed his gratitude to the fanatics,
and sent the priests and worshippers of Baal after the priests of
Jehovah whom he had slaughtered along with all belonging to the royal
house (x. 11). The manner in which he led them into the snare (x. 18
seq.) shows that no one had thought before this of regarding him as the
champion of Jehovah; and even at this time his zeal was manifestly only
ostensible: he was not fighting for an idea (x. 15. seq.). Thus we see
that Baal did not bring about the fall of the house of Ahab, but common
treason; the zealots employed for their purposes a most unholy
instrument, which employed them in turn as a holy instrument for its
purposes; they did not succeed in rousing the people to a storm against
Baal, far from it. The execution of Naboth seems to have excited greater
indignation: it was a crime against morals, not against religion. Even
in the history of Elijah the admission is made that this struggle
against Baal, in spite of his sacrificial victory on Carmel, was in the
end without result, and that only the judicial murder of Naboth brought
about a change in the popular sentiment. But according to 2 K. ix. 25,
this murder proved a momentous event, not because it led, as we should
expect, to a popular agitation, but from the fortuitous circumstance
that Jehu was a witness of the never-to-be-forgotten scene between Ahab
and Elijah, and seemed therefore to the prophets to be a fit person to
carry out his threatenings.

It is certainly the case that the grand figure of Elijah could not have
been drawn as we have it except from the impression produced by a real
character. <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) But it is too much torn
away from the historical position it belongs to, and is thereby
magnified to colossal proportions.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It may be said of
this class of narratives generally, that the prophets are brought too
much into the foreground in them, as if they had been even in their
lifetime the principal force of Israelite history, and as if the
influence which moved them had ruled and pervaded their age as well.
That was not the case; in the eyes of their contemporaries they were
completely overshadowed by the kings; only to later generations did they
become the principal personages. They were important ideally, and
influenced the future rather than the present; but this was not enough,
a real tangible importance is attributed to them. In the time of Ahab
and Jehu the Nebiim were a widespread body, and organised in orders of
their own, but were not highly respected; the average of them were
miserable fellows, who ate out of the king's hand and were treated with
disdain by members of the leading classes. Amos of Tekoa, who, it is
true, belonged to a younger generation, felt it an insult to be counted
one of them. Elijah and Elisha rose certainly above the level of their
order; but the first, whose hands remained pure, while he no doubt
produced a great impression at the time by his fearless words, effected
nothing against the king, and quite failed to draw the people over to
his side: while Elisha, who did effect something, made use of means
which could not bear the light, and which attest rather the weakness
than the strength of prophecy in Israel.

4\. Let us conclude by summing up the results to which we have been led
by our eclectic pilgrimage through the historical books. What in the
common view appears to be the specific character of Israelite history,
and has chiefly led to its being called *sacred* history, rests for the
most part on a later re-painting of the original picture. The
discolouring influences begin early. I do not reckon among these the
entrance of mythical elements, such as are not wanting even in the first
beginnings to which we can trace the course of the tradition, nor the
inevitable local colour, which is quite a different thing from tendency.
I think only of that uniform stamp impressed on the tradition by men who
regarded history exclusively from the point of view of their own
principles. Here we observe first a religious influence, which in the
Books of Samuel and Kings turns out to be the prophetical one. The view
appears to me erroneous that it is to the prophets that the Hebrew
people owe their history as a whole. The song, Judges v., though perhaps
the oldest historical monument in the Old Testament, cannot be cited in
support of that view, for even if it were actually composed

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

by Deborah, the seer stands in no connection with the prophets. Least of
all can the colleges of the B’ne Nebiim at Gilgal and other places be
regarded as nurseries of historic tradition: the products which are to
be traced to these circles betray a somewhat narrow field of vision (2
Kings ii., iv. 1-6, 23). The prophets did not form the tradition at
first, but came after, shedding upon it their peculiar light. Their
interest in history was not so great that they felt it necessary to
write it down; they only infused their own spirit into it subsequently.

But the systematic recoining of the tradition was only effected when a
firmer stamp had become available than the free ideas of the prophets,
the will of God having been formulated in writing. When this point was
reached, no one could fail to see the discrepancy between the ideal
commencement, which was now sought to be restored as it stood in the
book, and the succeeding development. The old books of the people, which
spoke in the most innocent way of the most objectionable practices and
institutions, had to be thoroughly remodelled according to the Mosaic
form, in order to make them valuable, digestible, and edifying, for the
new generation. A continuous revision of them was made, not only in the
Chronicles, at the beginning of the Greek domination, but, as we have
seen in this chapter, even in the Babylonian exile. The style of the
latter revision differed from that of the former. In Chronicles the past
is remodelled on the basis of the law: transgressions take place now and
then, but as exceptions from the rule. In the Books of Judges, Samuel,
and Kings, the fact of the radical difference of the old practice from
the law is not disputed. In these works also the past is in some cases
remodelled on the basis of the ideal, but as a rule it is simply
condemned. That is one difference; another has to be added which is of
far greater importance. In the Chronicles the pattern according to which
the history of ancient Israel is represented is the Pentateuch, *i.e.*
the Priestly Code. In the source of Chronicles, in the older historical
books, the revision does not proceed upon the basis of the Priestly
Code, which indeed is completely unknown to them, but on the basis of
Deuteronomy. Thus in the question of the order of sequence of the two
great bodies of laws, the history of the tradition leads us to the same
conclusion as the history of the cultus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[233:1](phai10.htm#fr_124) The redaction, as is
well knows, extends only from ii. 6 xvi. 31, thus excluding both i.
1-ii. 5, and xvii. 1-xxi. 24. But it is easy to perceive how excellently
the first portion fits into its place as a general introduction to the
period between Moses and the monarchy, and how much more informing and
instructive it is in this respect than the section which follows. There
exists besides a formal connection between i. 16 and iv. 11. As regards
chaps. xvii., xviii., this story relating to the migration of Dan
northwards is plainly connected with that immediately preceding where
the tribe still finds itself "in the camp of Dan," but is hard pressed
and obtains no relief even with the aid of Samson. In the case of chaps.
xix.-xxi., indeed, it admits of doubt whether they were excluded from
the redaction, or whether they were not extant as yet; but it is worth
noticing that here also chaps. xvii., xviii. are assumed as having gone
before. The Levite of Bethlehem-Judah testifies to this, and especially
the reminiscence contained in xix. 1, which, as we shall see, has
nothing to rest on in chaps. xix.-xxi. Compare further xx. 19 with i. 1
seq.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[238:1](phai10.htm#fr_125) ‏אלה‎, ‏אלון‎, in
Aramaic simply tree, in Hebrew the evergreen, and in general the holy
tree (Isaiah i. 29 seq.) mostly without distinguishing the species. Not
only are oaks and terebinths included, but also palms. For the ‏אלון
דבורה‎ at Bethel is elsewhere called ‏תמר‎; Elim derives its names from
the 70 palms, and the same may be the case with Elath on the Red sea.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[239:1](phai10.htm#fr_126) "The words of Gideon
are only intelligible on the presupposition that the rule of Jehovah had
a visible representative prophet or priest. But this was not the case in
the period of the judges, as Gideon's own history shows us." Vatke, p.
263. We see besides from ix. 1 seq. that Gideon really was the ruler of
Ephraim and Manasseh.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[241:1](phai10.htm#fr_127) Ver. 12 is a summons
to begin the battle, and Deborah cannot here be singing the song of
triumph which celebrates its happy issue. For a similar reason the
translation given above, "take captive thy captors," is the more natural
and correct.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[254:1](phai10.htm#fr_128) In Balaam's view of
the happy future of Israel (Numbers xxiii. seq.), the monarchy is spoken
of as one of Israel's chief blessings. Generally (xxiii. 21): "Jehovah
his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them." With
reference to Saul (xxiv. 7): "And his king triumphs over Agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted." To David (xxiv. 17): "I see him, though not
now; I behold him, though not nigh: there rises (‏זרח‎) a star out of
Jacob and a rod out of Israel, and smites in pieces the temples of Moab
and the skull of all the sons of Seth: and Edom also becomes a
conquest." According to Deuteronomy xxxiii. 4, 5, the monarchy and the
Torah are the two great gifts of God's grace to Israel.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[258:1](phai10.htm#fr_129) It is also clear
that the writer of x. 8, xiii. 7-15 cannot possibly have found Samuel in
Gilgal in chap. xi. before making him go there in chap. xiii. We have
already seen xi. 12-14 to be a later addition; the name of Samuel must
be interpolated in xi. 7, too. In fact in xi. 15 the people, *i.e.*, the
army, acts quite of itself even in our present text. Hence it follows
also, that x. 8, xiii. 7-15 are older than vii. viii. x. 17 seq. xii.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[266:1](phai10.htm#fr_130) This expression
occurs in 1 Sam. xvii., and shows this legend to be dependent on 2 Sam.
xxi. xxiii., a collection of anecdotes about heroes from the Philistine
wars of David in the genuine short popular style. Cf., on 1 Chron. xii.,
supra, p. 173.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[266:2](phai10.htm#fr_131) Only in one
direction does he set limits to his self-denial: he makes the future
king solemnly promise to spare his family. Here manifests itself an
interest belonging to the time of the narrator. The oriental custom
according to which the new ruler extirpates the preceding dynasty, was
not systematically carried out by David, and a special exception was
made in favour of a son left by Jonathan. "All my father's house," says
Meribaal (2 Sam. xix. 28), "were dead men before my lord the king yet
thou didst set me at thy table: what right have I therefore yet to
complain unto the king (even about injustice)?" Now this son of Jonathan
was the ancestor of a Jerusalem family which flourished till after the
exile. Older traits in 1 Sam. xx. are the importance attached to the new
moon, the family sacrifice at Bethlehem, perhaps <span id="page_267">p.
267</span> the stone ‏אבן אצל‎ which appears to have implied something
inconsistent with later orthodoxy, the name being in two passages so
singularly corrupted.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[268:1](phai10.htm#fr_132) As the words are
used in 1 Samuel ix., Isaiah and Jeremiah would rather be called Rōeh;
and this is the justification of the gloss, ix. 9.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[271:1](phai10.htm#fr_133) The efforts of later
writers to glorify David are at their worst in their account of his last
testament (1 Kings ii. 1-12). Even the language betrays this piece as a
post-Deuteronomic insertion (v. 2-4); the contents are borrowed from the
succeeding narrative. But in the narrative Solomon's conduct towards
Adonijah, Abiathar, Joab, and Shimei is not dictated by any means by the
testament, but by other considerations; and it is the declared object of
the narrator to show how Solomon's throne was established by the removal
of the elements of danger. Nor do the acute calculations of the weak old
king agree very well with the general impression given of him at this
time by 1 Kings i. ii.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[273:1](phai10.htm#fr_134) Numbers of the kings
of Judah from Solomon: 37+ 17+ 3 + 41 + 25 + 8 + 1 + 6 + 40 + 29 + 52 +
16 + 29 + 55 + 2 + 31 + 11 + 11=430 years. Jehoahaz and Jechoiachin are
not counted; if they are included and a year allowed for them, we must
say 36 for Solomon. Numbers of the kings of Israel from 1 Jeroboam: 22 +
2 + 24 +2+ 12 + 22 + 2+ 12 + 28 + 17 + 16 + 41 + 1 + 10 + 2 + 20 + 9.
The artificial relations of the numbers, as explained above, were
communicated to me by Ernst Krey. On the point that the synchronisms do
not belong to the original arrangement, see *Jahrb. für Deutsche
Theol.*, 1875, p. 607 seq. The correct view of Ezekiel iv. was first
published by Bernhard Duhm (*Theol. dir Proph.*, p. 253). The number
390, given in the Massoretic text in verse 5 for the duration of the
captivity of the northern Israelites, is impossible. For Ezekiel cannot
mean that they have been 350 years in exile already, and on the other
hand he cannot reckon the remaining period of their punishment at more
than 40 years, because 40 years is his calculation of the period of
exile of Judah, and the restitution of Israel and that of Judah are in
his view to <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> take place at the same
time; and indeed that of Egypt as well, obviously because brought about
by the same cause (xxix. 1 1-16), the fall of the Chaldeans, which may
be expected to take place in 40 years. The number 390 has got into verse
5 by mistake from verse 9, where it is used of a quite different
subject, not the years of the exile, but the days of the last siege of
Jerusalem. The gloss verse 13 rests on a similar confusion. The
Septuagint correctly gives for the Israelite exile the number of 150
years, or 190, according as the last 40 years in which their punishment
continued, along with that of Judah, were included or omitted. It may be
remarked that 390 = 240 + 150. Compare further Robertson Smith, in the
*Journal of Philology*, vol. x., p. 209-213.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[277:1](phai10.htm#fr_135) Such additions as
‏מצות יהוה‎, 1 Kings xviii. 18 \[LXX has correctly ‏יהוה‎, without
‏מצות‎\] ‏עזבו בריתך‎ \[LXX correctly ‏עזבו‎ without ‏בריתך‎\] and more
extensive ones, as 1 Kings xviii. 31, 32<sup>a</sup>; 2 Sam. vii.
2<sup>b</sup> (‏אשר נקרא ונו‎) I do not reckon because they proceed from
various periods, and are mostly younger than the Deuteronomic revision,
and belong rather to textual than to literary criticism. It is certainly
in itself very important to detect and remove these re-touchings. The
whole old tradition is covered with them.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[278:1](phai10.htm#fr_136) Krey surmises that
the last date mentioned, the liberation from prison of, Jehoiachin in
the 37th year after his accession to the throne, was originally intended
to form the lower limit of the chronology, especially as the periods of
40 years under which, as we have seen, the Jewish figures naturally
fall, come exactly to this date. But if this be the case, we cannot
regard the 4th or 5th year of Solomon as the era started from, for then
there is no room for the 36 or 37 remaining years of Solomon's reign.
But such a starting-point is entirely unnatural; Solomon's 40 years
cannot be torn up in this way: if we are to make a division at all in
that period, it must be at the disruption of the monarchy, the natural
point of departure for the series of kings of Israel and of Judah. It
deserves remark, that the 37 years of Jehoiachin, at the close of the
older mode of calculation, which perhaps only tried to bring out
generations of 40 years, but also perhaps a period of 500 years from
David (40 + 40 + 20 + 41 + 40 + 40 + 81 + 38 + 80 + 79¼), answer to the
37 years of Solomon at the beginning of the method now carried through.
That a process of alteration and improvement of the chronology was
busily carried on in later times, we see from the added synchronisms of
the kings of Israel and Judah, from the uncertain statements in the Book
of Judges, some of them parallel with each other (*e.g.*, the interregna
and minor judges, and the threefold counting of the time of the
Philistines) and even from the variants of the LXX.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[278:2](phai10.htm#fr_137) The fall of Samaria
suggested similar reflections to the earlier prophets with reference to
the northern kingdom, but their views are, as a rule (Amos v., Isa.
ix.), <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> not nearly so radical nor so
far-fetched. Hosea does certainly trace the guilt of the present up to
the commencement, but he exemplifies the principle (like Micah, chapter
vi.) chiefly from the early history of Jacob and Moses: as for the
really historical period he belongs to it too much himself to survey it
from so high a point of view. In this also he is a precursor of later
writers, that he regards the human monarchy as one of the great evils of
Israel: he certainly had very great occasion for this in the
circumstances of the time he lived in.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[280:1](phai10.htm#fr_138) Post-deuteronomic,
but still from the time of the kings, are 1 Sam. ii. 27 seq.; 2 Sam.
vii, 1 seq.; 2 Kings xviii. 13, 17 seq., xix. 1 seq.; chaps. xi. xii.
xxi. xxiii.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[283:1](phai10.htm#fr_139) "Although Jeroboam
had lived in Egypt, it would he wrong to say that he brought animal
worship with him from that country, as wrong as to regard Aaron's golden
calf as a copy of Apis. The peculiarity of the animal-worship of Egypt,
and of its bull-worship in particular, was that sanctity was attributed
to *living* animals." Vatke, p. 398. Egyptian gods cannot help against
Egypt, Exod. xxxii. 4; 1 Kings xii. 28.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[285:1](phai10.htm#fr_140) Cf. Kuenen,
*Profeten onder Israël* (1875), ii. p. 143; English translation (1877),
p 398. One of these Deuteronomistic prophecies is cited above, p. 275.
They are in part anonymous, *e.g.*, 2 Kings x. 30, xxi. 10 seq., in part
connected with old names, *e.g.*, 1 Kings xvi. 1 seq. In many instances
no doubt the reviser found flints in his sources and worked them out in
his own style; thus, 1 Kings xiv. 7 seq., xxi 21 seq. 2 Kings ix. 7 seq.
In these passages the Deuteronomistic ideas and the phraseology of
Jeremiah and Ezekiel are distinctly present (‏הנני מביא רעה‎), but
detached expressions of an original type also occur,—which, it is true,
are then constantly repeated, *e.g.*, ‏עצור ועזוב‎. Names, too, like
Jehu ben Hanani, are certainly not fictitious: we are not so far
advanced as in Chronicles. Cf. 1 Sam. ii. 27 seq.; 2 Sam. vii. 1 seq.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[286:1](phai10.htm#fr_141) The passage
discussed above, 1 Kings xi. 1 seq., gives a good example of this; we at
once pick out the terse ‏אז יבנה ונו‎ from the barren diffuseness
surrounding it.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[286:2](phai10.htm#fr_142) 5th of Rehoboam (1
K.s xiv. 25); 23rd of Jehoash (2 K. xii, 6); 14th of Hezekiah (2 K.
xviii. 13); 18th of Josiah (2 K. xxii. 3); 4th and 5th of Solomon (1 K.
vi. 37, 38). These dates occur, it is true, partly in circumstantial
Jewish narratives, but these are intimately related to the brief notices
spoken of above, and appear to be based on them. It may be surmised that
such definite numbers, existing at one time in much greater abundance,
afforded the data for an approximate calculation of the figures on which
the systematic chronology is built up. These single dates at any rate
are not themselves parts of the system. The same is true of the
statements of the age of the Jewish kings when they ascended the throne.
These also perhaps go back to the "Annals." The ‏אז‎ is found 1 K. iii.
16, viii. 1, 12, ix. 11, xi. 7, xvi. 21, xxii. 50; 2 K. viii. 22, xii.
18, xiv. 8, xv. 16, xvi. 5.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[290:1](phai10.htm#fr_143) The same applies to
Jehu (2 K. ix. 1 seq.). This is the reason of the above remarked
omission after 1 K. xix. 21: cf. Thenius's commentary.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[290:2](phai10.htm#fr_144) In spite of xxi.
27-29, an attempt is made at xxii. 38 to show that the threat was
fulfilled in Ahab himself. We are told that Ahab was shot in his chariot
and that his servants brought his body from Ramoth-Gilead to bury it
there. Then we read xxii. 38 "and they washed the chariot in the pool of
Samaria, and the dogs licked up his blood, and the harlots bathed in it,
according to the word of Jehovah." Thus it is explained how the dogs
were able to lick his blood in Samaria, though it had had plenty of time
to dry up after the battle! The fact was unfortunately over-looked that
according to xxi. 19 the dogs were to lick the blood of Ahab not at
Samaria but at Jezreel, the place of Naboth. The verse xxii. 38 is an
interpolation which does credit to Jewish acuteness.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[292:1](phai10.htm#fr_145) The distance of the
narrator is not so very great in point of time from the events he deals
with. He is a North-Israelite, as the ‏אשר ליהודה‎ of xix. 3 shows: this
may also be gathered from xix. 8 compared with Deut. i. 2. A man of
Judah could not easily make so considerable a mistake about the
distance, though we have to remember that with this narrator the
situation of Horeb can scarcely have been that which we have long been
accustomed to assume. Another sign of antiquity is the way in which
Elijah is represented as combating Baal in Israel, and in the land of
Sidon associating with the worshippers of Baal on the most friendly
terms (Luke iv. 25 seq.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Narrative of the Hexateuch.](phai11)
