[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai21) 
[Next](phai23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. *THE PROPHETIC REFORMATION*.

<span class="smallcaps">Isaiah</span> was so completely a prophet that
even his wife was called the prophetess after him. No such title could
have been bestowed on the wife of either Amos or Hosea. But what
distinguished him more than anything else from those predecessors was
that his position was not, like theirs, apart from the government; he
sat close to the helm, and took a very real part in directing the course
of the vessel. He was more positive and practical than they; he wished
to make his influence felt, and when for the moment he was unsuccessful
in this so far as the great whole of the state was concerned, he busied
himself in gathering round him a small circle of like-minded persons on
whom his hope for the future rested. Now that Israel had been destroyed,
he wished at all events to save Judah. The lofty ideality of his faith
(ii. 1 seq.) did not hinder him from calling in the aid of practical
means for this end. But the current of his activities was by the
circumstances of the case directed into a channel in which after his
death they continued to flow towards a goal which had hardly been
contemplated by himself.

The political importance of the people of Jehovah was reduced to a
minimum when Judah only was left. Already at an earlier period in that
kingdom the sacred had come to be of more importance than the secular;
much more was this the case under the suzerainty of Assyria. The
circumstances of the time themselves urged that the religion of Israel
should divest itself of all politico-national character; but Isaiah also
did his best to further this end. It was his most zealous endeavour to
hold king and people aloof from every patriotic movement; to him the
true religious attitude was one of quietness and sitting still,
non-intervention in political affairs, concentration on the problems of
internal government. But he was compelled to leave over for the coming
Messiah (xi. 1 seq.) that reformation in legal and social matters which
seemed to him so necessary; all that he could bring the secular rulers
of his country to undertake was a reform in worship. This was the most
easily solved of the problems alluded to above, and it was also that
which most closely corresponded to the character of the kingdom of
Judah. Thus it came about that the reform of the theocracy which

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

had been contemplated by Isaiah led to its transformation into an
ecclesiastical state. No less influential in effecting a radical change
in the old popular religion was Isaiah's doctrine which identified the
true Israel with the holy remnant which alone should emerge from the
crisis unconsumed. For that remnant was more than a mere object of hope;
it actually stood before him in the persons of that little group of
pious individuals gathered around him. Isaiah founded no "ecclesiola in
ecclesia" indeed, but certainly an "ecclesia in civitate Dei." Now began
that distinction between the true Israel and the Israel according to the
flesh, that bipartite division of the nation which became so important
in later times. As head and founder of the prophetic party in Judah,
Isaiah was, involuntarily, the man who took the first steps towards the
institution of the church.

The catastrophe which befell the army of Sennacherib had no very great
effect upon the external affairs of Judah. Sennacherib indeed, being
busy in the east, was unable to retrieve the loss he had sustained, but
his son Esarhaddon, who succeeded him in 681, resumed the Egyptian war
with better success. He made himself master of the Nile valley, and
brought the Ethiopians into submission. That the petty kingdoms of
Palestine returned to the old relations of dependence is to be taken as
a matter of course. Judah appears to have resumed the yoke voluntarily,
but the Samaritans only after force had been applied; they were
afterwards deported, whereupon the deserted country was occupied by
foreign colonists, who, however, accepted the cultus of the god of the
land.

That Manasseh ben Hezekiah should have again come under Assyrian
suzerainty appears at that time to have made but little impression;
since the time of Ahaz Judah had been accustomed to this relation. The
Book of Kings speaks only of internal affairs under the reign of
Manasseh. According to it, he was a bad ruler, who permitted, and even
caused, innocent blood to flow like water. But what was of greater
consequence for the future, he took up an attitude of hostility towards
the prophetic party of reform, and put himself on the side of the
reaction which would fain bring back to the place of honour the old
popular half-pagan conception of Jehovah, as against the pure and holy
God whom the prophets worshipped. The revulsion manifested itself as the
reform had done, chiefly in matters of worship. The old idolatrous
furniture of the sanctuaries was reinstated in its place, and new

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

frippery was imported from all quarters, especially from Assyria and
Babylon, to renovate the old religion; with Jehovah was now associated a
"queen of heaven." Yet, as usual, the restoration did more than merely
bring back the old order of things. What at an earlier period had been
mere naïveté now became superstition, and could hold its ground only by
having imparted to it artificially a deeper meaning which was itself
borrowed from the prophetical circle of ideas. Again, earnestness
superseded the old joyousness of the cultus; this now had reference
principally to sin and its atonement. Value was attached to services
rendered to the Deity, just in proportion to their hardness and
unnaturalness; at this period it was that the old precept to sacrifice
to Jehovah the male that opens the matrix was extended to children. The
counter-reformation was far from being unaffected by the preceding
reformation, although it understood religious earnestness in quite
another sense, and sought, not to eliminate heathenism from the cultus,
but to animate it with new life. On the other hand, the reaction was, in
the end, found to have left distinct traces of its influence in the
ultimate issue of the reformation.

We possess one document dating from Manasseh's time in Micah vi. 1-vii.
6. Here, where the lawlessness and utter disregard of every moral
restraint in Judah are set in a hideous light, the prophetic point of
view, as contrasted with the new refinements in worship, attains also
its simplest and purest expression. Perhaps to this period the Decalogue
also, which is so eloquently silent in regard to cultus, is to be
assigned. Jehovah demands nothing for Himself, all that He asks is only
for men; this is here the fundamental law of the theocracy.

Manasseh's life was a long one, and his son Amon walked in his ways. The
latter died after a brief reign, and with his death a new era for Judah
began. It was introduced by the great catastrophe in which the Assyrian
empire came to an end. The sovereignty of the world was beginning to
pass out of the hands of the Semites into those of the Aryans. Phraortes
of Media indeed was unsuccessful in his attempt against the Assyrians,
but Cyaxares beat them and proceeded to besiege their capital. The
Scythian invasion of Media and Western Asia (c. 630) at this juncture
gave them another respite of more than twenty years; but even it tended
to break in pieces the great, loosely-compacted monarchy.

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The provinces
became gradually disintegrated, and the kingdom shrivelled up till it
covered no more than the land of Asshur. <span
id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262)

The inroad of the Scythians aroused to energy again the voice of
prophecy which had been dumb during the very sinful but not very
animated period of Manasseh's reign. Zephaniah and Jeremiah threatened
with the mysterious northern foe, just as Amos and Hosea had formerly
done with the Assyrians. The Scythians actually did invade Palestine in
626 (the 13th year of Josiah), and penetrated as far as to Egypt; but
their course lay along the shore line, and they left Judah untouched.
This danger that had come so near and yet passed them by, this instance
of a prophetic threatening that had come to pass and yet been mercifully
averted, made a powerful impression upon the people of Judah; public
opinion went through a revolution in favour of the reforming party which
was able to gain for itself the support also of the young king Josiah
ben Amon. The circumstances were favourable for coming forward with a
comprehensive programme for a reconstruction of the theocracy. In the
year 621 (the eighteenth of Josiah) Deuteronomy was discovered,
accepted, and carried into effect.

The Deuteronomic legislation is designed for the reformation, by no
means of the cultus alone, but at least quite as much of the civil
relations of life. The social interest is placed above the cultus,
inasmuch as everywhere humane ends are assigned for the rites and
offerings. In this it is plainly seen that Deuteronomy is the progeny of
the prophetic spirit. Still more plainly does this appear in the
*motifs* of the legislation; according to these, Jehovah is the only
God, whose service demands the whole heart and every energy; He has
entered into a covenant with Israel, but upon fundamental conditions
that, as contained in the Decalogue, are purely moral and of absolute
universality. Nowhere does the fundamental religious thought of prophecy
find clearer expression than in Deuteronomy,—the thought that Jehovah

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

asks nothing for Himself, but asks it as a religious duty that man
should render to man what is right, that His will lies not in any
unknown height, but in the moral sphere which is known and understood by
all. <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263)

But the result of the innovation did not correspond exactly to its
prophetic origin. Prophecy died when its precepts attained to the force
of laws; the prophetic ideas lost their purity when they became
practical. Whatever may have been contemplated, only provisional
regulations actually admitted of being carried, and even these only in
co-operation with the king and the priests, and with due regard to the
capacity of the masses. The final outcome of the Deuteronomic
reformation was principally that the cultus of Jehovah was limited to
Jerusalem and abolished everywhere else,—such was the popular and
practical form of prophetic monotheism. The importance of the Salomonic
temple was thereby increased in the highest degree, and so also the
influence of the priests of Jerusalem, the sons of Zadok, who now in
point of fact got rid entirely of their rivals, the priests of the
country districts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[487:1](phai22.htm#fr_262) Our knowledge of the
events of the second half of the 7th century has remained singularly
imperfect hitherto, notwithstanding the importance of the changes they
wrought on the face of the ancient world. The account given above is
that of Herodotus (i. 103-106), and there the matter must rest until
really authentic sources shall have been brought to light. With regard
to the final siege of Nineveh, our chief informant is Ctesias as quoted
by Diodorus (ii. 26, 27). Whether the prophecy of Nahum relates to the
*last* siege is doubtful (in spite of ii. 7, and the oracle given in
Diodorus, ὅτι τὴν Νῖνον οὐδεὶς ἑλεῖ κατὰ κράτος ἐὰν μὴ πρότερον ὁ
ποταμὸς τῇ πόλει γένηται πολέμιος, inasmuch as Nahum (i. 9) expressly
speaks of the siege alluded to by him as the first, saying, "the trouble
shall not rise up the second time."

<span id="fn_263"></span>[488:1](phai22.htm#fr_263) The commandments
which I command thee are not unattainable for thee, neither are they far
off; not in heaven so that one might say, Who can climb up into heaven
and bring them down, and tell us them that we might do them! not beyond
the sea so that one might say, Who shall go over the sea, and fetch
them, and tell us them that we might do them!—but the matter lies very
near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, so that thou canst do it
(Deut. xxx. 11-14).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. Jeremiah and the Destruction of Jerusalem.](phai23)
