[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai07) 
[Next](phai09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### *THE ENDOWMENT OF THE CLERGY*.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> power and independence of the clergy
run parallel with its material endowment, which accordingly passes
through the same course of development. Its successive steps are
reflected even in the language that is employed, in the gradual loss of
point sustained by the phrase "to fill the hand," at all times used to
denote ordination. Originally it cannot have had any other meaning than
that of filling the hand with money or its equivalent; we have seen that
at one time the priest was appointed by the owner of a sanctuary for a
salary, and that, without being thus dependent upon a particular
employer, he could not then live on the income derived from those who
might employ him sacrificially. But when the Levitical hereditary
priesthood arose in the later kingdom of Judah the hands of the priests
were no longer filled by another who had the right to appoint and to
dismiss, but they themselves at God's command "filled their own hand,"
or rather they had done so in the days of Moses once for all, as is said
in Exod. xxxii. 26-29, an insertion corresponding with the position of
Deuteronomy. It is obvious that such a statement, when carefully looked
at, is absurd, but is to be explained by the desire to protest against
outside interference. Even here the etymological sense is still
sufficiently felt to create an involuntary jar and leads to a change of
the construction; but finally all sense of it is lost, and the
expression becomes quite colourless: "to fill the hand" means simply "to
consecrate." In Ezekiel not only the priest but also the altar has its
"hand filled" (xliii. 26); in the Priestly Code the abstract *milluim*
\["consecrations"\] is chiefly used, with subject and object left out,
as the name of a mere inaugural ceremony which lasts for several days
(Leviticus viii. 33; Exod. xxix. 34), essentially consists in the
bringing of an offering on the part of the person to be consecrated, and
has no longer even the remotest connection with actual filling of the
hand (2 Chron. xiii. 7; comp.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

xxix\. 31). The verb, therefore, now means simply the performance of
this ceremony, and the subject is quite indifferent (Lev. xvi. 32, xxi.
10; Num. iii. 3); the installation does not depend upon the person who
performs the rite, but upon the rite itself, upon the unction,
investiture, and other formalities (Exod. xxix. 29).

This variation in the *usus loquendi* is the echo of real changes in the
outward condition of the clergy, which we must now proceed to consider
more in detail.

#### I.

1\. Of the offerings, it was the custom in the earlier time to dedicate
a portion to the deity but to use the greater part in sacred feasts, at
which a priest, if present, was of course allowed also in one way or
another to participate. But he does not appear to have had a legal claim
to any definite dues of flesh. "Eli's sons were worthless persons, and
cared not about Jehovah, or about the priests’ right and duty with the
people. When any man offered a sacrifice the servant of the priest came
(that is all we have here to represent the 22,000 Levites) while the
flesh was in seething, with a three-pronged flesh-hook in his hand, and
stuck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; and all that the
flesh-hook brought up the priest took. So they did in Shiloh unto all
the Israelites that came thither. Even before the fat was burnt, the
servant of the priest came and said to the man that sacrificed: "Give
flesh to roast for the priest; he will not take sodden flesh of thee,
but raw. And if the other said to him: Let the fat first be burnt, and
then take according to thy soul's desire; then he would answer: Nay, but
thou shalt give it now; and if not, I will take it by force" (1 Sam. ii.
12-16). The tribute of raw portions of flesh before the burning of the
fat is here treated as a shameless demand which is fitted to bring
Jehovah's offering into contempt (ver. 17), and which has the ruin of
the sons of Eli as its merited reward. More tolerable is it, though even
that is an abuse, when the priests cause boiled flesh to be brought them
from the pot, though not seeking out the best for themselves, but
leaving the selection to chance; they ought to wait and see what is
given to them, or be contented with an invitation to the banquet. On the
other hand we have it in Deuteronomy as "the priest's due from the
people" (xviii. 3 = 1 Sam. ii. 12) that he receives the shoulder and the
two cheeks and the maw of the slaughtered animal; and yet this is a
modest

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

claim compared with what the sons of Aaron have in the Priestly Code
(Lev. vii. 34),—the right leg and the breast. The course of the
development is plain; the Priestly Code became law for Judaism. In
sacrifice, *its* demands were those which were regarded; but in order to
fulfil all righteousness the precept of Deuteronomy was also maintained,
this being applied—against the obvious meaning and certainly only as a
result of later scrupulosity of the scribes—not to sacrifices but to
ordinary secular slaughterings, from which also accordingly the priests
received a portion, the cheeks (according to Jerome on Mal. ii. 3),
including the tongue, the precept being thus harmonistically
doubled. <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) At an earlier date the
priests at Jerusalem received money from those who employed them (Deut.
xviii. 8), but for this had the obligation of maintaining the temple;
from this one can discern that the money was properly speaking paid to
the sanctuary, and was only conditionally delivered to its servitors.
When they failed to observe the condition, King Jehoash took the money
also from them (2 Kings xii. 7 seq.).

The meal-offerings are in the Priestly Code a subordinate matter, and
the share that falls to the priests is here trifling compared with what
they receive of the other sacrifices. The meal, of which only a handful
is sprinkled upon the altar, the baked bread, and the
[minḥa](errata.htm#2) altogether are theirs entirely, so also the sin
and trespass offerings so frequently demanded, of which God receives
only the blood and the fat and the offerer nothing at all (Ezek. xliv.
29); of the burnt-offering at least the skin falls to their lot, These
perquisites, however, none of them in their definite form demonstrably
old, and some of them demonstrably the reverse, may be presumed to have
had their analogues in the earlier period, so that they cannot be
regarded absolutely as augmentation of the priestly income. In Josiah's
time the maççoth were among the principal means of support of the
priests (2 Kings xxiii. 9); doubtless they came for the most part from
the minḥa. Instead of sin and trespass offerings, which are still
unknown to Deuteronomy, there were formerly sin and trespass dues in the
form of money payments to the priests,—payments which cannot, however,
have been so regular (2 Kings xii. 17). It is as if money payments were
in the eye of the law too profane; for atonement there must be shedding
of blood. That the skin of the holocaust, which cannot well be consumed

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

on the altar, should fall to the priest is so natural an arrangement,
that one will hardly be disposed to regard it as new, although Ezekiel
is silent about a due which was not quite worthless (xliv. 28-31).

So far then as departures from earlier custom can be shown in the
sacrificial dues enjoined by the Priestly Code, they must not indeed be
treated as purely local differences, but neither are they to be regarded
as on the whole showing a serious raising of the tariff. But in the Code
the sacrificial dues are only a subordinate part of the income of the
priests. In Deuteronomy the priests are entirely thrown upon the
sacrifices; they live upon them (xviii. 1) and upon invitations to the
sacred banquets (xii. 12, 18 seq.); if they are not exercising the
priestly function they must starve (1 Sam. ii. 36). On the other hand,
the Aaronidæ of the Priestly Code do not need to sacrifice at all, and
yet have means of support, for their chief revenue consists of the rich
dues which must be paid them from the products of the soil.

2\. The dues falling to the priests according to the law were all
originally offerings—the regular offerings which had to be brought on
the festivals; and these all originally were for sacred banquets, of
which the priests received nothing more than the share which was
generally customary. This is true in the first instance of the male
firstlings of cattle. As we have seen in the chapter on the sacred
feasts, these are sacrifices and sacrificial meals, alike in the
Jehovistic legislation and in the Jehovistic narrative of the exodus and
of Abel, as were all the offerings brought by private individuals in the
olden time. When in Exod. xxii. 29 it is said that they must be given to
*Jehovah*, this does not mean that they must be given to *the priests;*
no such thing is anywhere said in the Book of the Covenant. Matters
still stand on essentially the same footing in Deuteronomy also: "*thou
shalt sanctify them unto Jehovah;* thou shalt not plough with the
firstling of the bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep; *thou
shalt eat it before Jehovah* year by year in the place which He shall
choose; and if there be any blemish therein, thou shalt not *offer it to
Jehovah thy God*" (Deut. xv. 19, 20). To sanctify to Jehovah, to eat
before Jehovah, to offer to Jehovah, are here three equivalent ideas. If
now, in Num. xviii. 15 seq., every first birth is assigned without
circumlocution to the priest, and a special paschal offering is
appointed in addition, this can only be understood as the last phase in
the development, partly because the idea of dues altogether is secondary
to that

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

of offerings, and partly because the immense augmentation in the income
of the priests points to an increase of the hierocratic power. Ezekiel
does not yet reckon the firstlings among the revenues of the clergy
(xliv. 28-31); the praxis of Judaism, on the other hand, since Neh. x.
37, is regulated, as usual, in accordance with the norm of the Priestly
Code.

The tithe also is originally given to God, and treated just as the other
offerings are; that is to say, it is not appropriated by the priests,
but eaten by those who bring it in sacred banquets. It does not occur in
the Jehovistic legislation, but Jacob dedicates it (Gen. xxviii. 22) to
the God of Bethel, a place where, although the whole story is a
projection out of a later time, it would hardly be in harmony with the
conceptions of the narrator to think of the presence of priests. The
prophet Amos, who probably represents much the same stage of the cultus
as the Jehovist does, says: "Come to Bethel to transgress, to Gilgal to
sin still more; and bring every morning your sacrifices, every three
days your tithes, and offer with bread pieces of flesh to the flames,
and proclaim free offerings aloud, for so ye like, ye children of
Israel" (Amos iv. 4 seq.). He ironically recommends them to persevere in
the efforts they have hitherto made in honour of God, and to double
them; to offer daily, instead of, as was usual (1 Sam. i.), yearly at
the chief festival; to pay tithes every three days, instead of, as was
the custom, every three years. It is clear that the tithe here holds
rank with Zebah, Toda, and Nedaba; it is a sacrifice of joy, and a
splendid element of the public cultus, no mere due to the priests. Now,
in this point also Deuteronomy has left the old custom, on the whole,
unchanged. According to xiv. 22 seq. the tithe of the produce of the
soil, or its equivalent in money, must be brought year by year to the
sanctuary, and there consumed before Jehovah that is, as a sacrificial
meal; only every third year it is not to be offered in Jerusalem, but is
to be given as alms to the people of the locality who have no land, to
which category the Levites in particular belong. This last application
is an innovation, connected on the one hand with the abolition of the
sanctuaries, and on the other with the tendency of the Deuteronomist to
utilise festal mirth for humane ends. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) But this is a mere trifle compared with
what we find in the Priestly Code, where the whole tithe has

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

become a mere due to be collected by the Levites (Neh. x. 38 \[37\]) on
behalf of the clergy, whose endowment thereby is again very largely
increased. Ezekiel is silent on this point also (xliv. 18-31), but as
the tithe is demanded in Numbers (xviii. 21 seq.), so was it paid from
the days of Nehemiah (x. 38 \[37\] seq.) by the church of the second
temple. Later there was added over and above, so as to meet the
divergent requirement of Deuteronomy, the so-called second tithe, which
usually was consumed at Jerusalem, but in every third year was given to
the poor (so Deut. xxvi. 12, LXX), and in the end the tithe for the poor
was paid separately over and above the first and second (Tobit i. 7, 8;
Jos., *Ant.*, iv. 8, 22).

It is absolutely astounding that the tithe which in its proper nature
should apply only to products of definite measure, such as corn and wine
and oil (Deut. xiv. 23), comes to be extended in the Priestly Code to
cattle also, so that besides the male firstlings every tenth head of
cattle and of sheep must also be paid to the priests. This demand,
however, is not yet met with in Numbers xviii., nor even in Neh. x. 38,
39, but first occurs as a novel in Lev. xxvii. 32 (1 Sam. viii. 17).
Whether it ever came into the actual practice of Judaism seems doubtful;
in 2 Chron. xxxi. 6 the tithe of cattle is indeed mentioned, but on the
other hand the firstlings are not; in the pre-rabbinical literature no
traces of it are discoverable,—especially not in Philo, who knows only
of the ordinary tithes due to the Levites, and not of the tithes of
cattle due to the priests (*De praem. sacerd.* 6).

With the tithe of the fruit of the soil the first fruits are at bottom
identical; the latter were reduced to definite measure later and through
the influence of the former. This is no doubt the reason why in the
Jehovistic legislation tithe and first fruits are not both demanded, but
only a gift of the first and best of corn, wine, and oil, left to the
free discretion of the offerer, which is conjoined with the firstling of
cattle and sheep (Exod. xxii. 28 \[29\]. xxiii. 19, xxxiv. 26). In a
precisely similar way the *tithe* of the field stands conjoined with the
firstlings of cattle in Deuteronomy (xiv. 22, 23, xv. 19 seq.). But also
the *reshith*, usually translated first-fruits, occurs in
Deuteronomy,—as a payment of corn, wine, oil, and wool to the priests
(xviii. 4); a small portion, a basketful, thereof is brought before the
altar and dedicated with a significant liturgy (xxvi. 1 seq.). It
appears that it is taken from the tithe, as might be inferred from xxvi.
12 seq. taken as the continuation of vers. 1-11; in one passage, xxvi.
2, the more general

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

*usus loquendi* reappears, according to which the *reshith* means the
entire consecrated fruit, which as a whole is consumed by the offerers
before Jehovah, and of which the priests receive only a portion. But in
the Priestly Code not only is the entire tithe demanded as a due of the
clergy, the *reshith* also is demanded in addition (Num. xviii. 12), and
it is further multiplied, inasmuch as it is demanded from the
kneading-trough as well as from the threshing-floor: in every leavening
the *ḥalla* belongs to Jehovah (xv. 20). Nor is this all; to the
*reshith* (xviii. 12) are added the *bikkurim* also (xviii. 13), as
something distinct. The distinction does not occur elsewhere (Exod.
xxxiv. 26); prepared fruits alone are invariably spoken of, the yield of
the threshing-floor and the wine-press, of which first produce—"the
fulness and the overflow "—was to be consecrated. The *fat* of oil,
wine, and corn is the main thing in Num. xviii. also, and is called
*reshith* (ver. 12) or *terumah* (ver. 27); but the *bikkurim* (ver. 13)
seem to be a separate thing, and, if this be really the case, must mean
those raw fruits which have ripened earliest. Judaism, here once more
moulding itself essentially in accordance with the tenor of the Priestly
Code, actually drew this distinction; from the publication of the Law
through Ezra the community pledged itself to bring up yearly the
*bikkurim* to the house of Jehovah, and to deliver the *reshith* into
the temple cells (Neh. x. 36 \[35\]). The former was a religious
solemnity, associated with processions, and the use of the ritual in
Deut. xxvi.; the latter was rather a simple tax paid from natural
products,—a distinction which perhaps is connected with the different
expressions *they shall bring* (Num. xviii. 13) and *they shall give*
(xviii. 12). The LXX keeps ἀπαρχή and πρωτογενιήματα strictly apart, as
also do Philo (*De praem. sacerd.* 1, 2) and Josephus (*Ant.*, iv. 4, 8,
22).

3\. The amount which at last is required to be given is enormous. What
originally were alternatives are thrown together, what originally was
left free and undetermined becomes precisely measured and prescribed.
The priests receive all the sin and trespass offerings, the greater
share of the vegetable offerings, the hides of the burnt offerings, the
shoulder and breast of meat offerings. Over and above are the
firstlings, to which are added the tithes and first-fruits in a
duplicate form, in short, all *kodashim*, which originally were demanded
merely as ordinary meat offerings (Deut. xii. 26 = ver. 6, 7, and so
on), and were consumed at holy places and by consecrated guests indeed,
but not by

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the priest. And, notwithstanding all this, the clergy are not even asked
(as in Ezekiel is the prince, who there receives the dues, xlv. 13 seq.)
to defray the cost of public worship; for this there is a poll-tax,
which is not indeed enjoined in the body of the Priestly Code, but which
from the time of Nehemiah x. 33 \[32\] was paid at the rate of a third
of a shekel, till a novel of the law (Exod. xxx. 15) raised it to half a
shekel.

#### II.

1\. To the endowment of the clergy in the Priestly Code belong finally
the forty-eight cities assigned by Joshua in accordance with the
appointment of Moses (Num. xxxv.; Josh. xxi.). The tribes gave them up
freely; the smaller giving few and the larger more (Num. xxxv. 8). The
Aaronidæ and the three families of the Levites cast lots about them in
four divisions; the sons of Aaron get thirteen cities in Judah, the
Levites ten in Ephraim-Manasseh, thirteen in Galilee, and twelve in the
territory eastward of Jordan. It is not merely the right to inhabit,
but, in spite of all apologetic rationalism, the right of absolute
possession that they receive (Josh. xxi. 12), inclusive of a portion of
land two thousand ells square (square in the strictly literal sense;
Num. xxxv. 5), which serves as public common.

The physical impracticability of such an arrangement has been
conclusively shown, after Gramberg, by Graf (Merx, *Archiv*, i. p. 83).
The 4 × 12 or the substituted 13 + 10 + 13 + 12 cities, of which in
spite of Num. xxxv. 8 for the most part four belong to each of the
twelve tribes, are already sufficient to suggest a suspicion of
artificial construction; but the regulation that a rectangular territory
of two thousand ells square should be measured off as pasture for the
Levites around each city (which at the same time is itself regarded only
as a point; Num. xxxv. 4) might, to speak with Graf, be very well
carried out perhaps in a South Russian steppe or in newly founded
townships in the western States of America, but not in a mountainous
country like Palestine, where territory that can be thus geometrically
portioned off does not exist, and where it is by no means left to
arbitrary legal enactments to determine what pieces of ground are
adapted for pasturage and what for tillage and gardening; there, too,
the cities were already in existence, the land was already under
cultivation, as the Israelites slowly conquered

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

it in the course of centuries. Besides, from the time of Joshua there is
not a historical trace of the existence of the Levitical cities. Quite a
number of them were in the days of the judges and down to the early
monarchy still in the hands of the Canaanites,—Gibeon, Shechem, Gezer,
Taanach; some perhaps may even have so continued permanently. Those on
the other hand which passed into the possession of the Israelites at no
time belonged to the Levites. Shechem, Hebron, Ramoth, were the capital
cities of Ephraim, Judah, and Gilead; and Gibeon, Gezer, Heshbon were in
like manner important but by no means ecclesiastical towns. In the
Deuteronomic period the Levites were scattered throughout Judah in such
a manner that each locality had its own Levites or Levite; nowhere did
they live separated from the rest of the world in compact masses
together, for they made their living by sacrificing for others, and
without a community they could not exercise their calling. Some indeed
possessed land and heritage; such were at an earlier period the Silonic
family at Gibeath-Phineas, Amaziah at Bethel, and Abiathar at Anathoth,
and at a later period Jeremiah, also at Anathoth. But Anathoth (for
example) was not on that account a priestly city in the sense of Joshua
xxi.; Jeremiah had his holding there as a citizen and not as a priest,
and he shared not with the priests but *with the people* (xxxvii. 12).
As a tribe Levi was distinguished from the other tribes precisely by
holding no land, and its members joined themselves to the settled
citizens and peasants, for the most part as dependent inmates
(Deuteronomy x. 9, xviii. 1).

Even after the exile, indeed, matters were not different in this
respect. "Ab excidio templi prioris sublatum est Levitis jus
suburbiorum," says R. Nachman (B. Sotah, 48*b*), and he is borne out by
the silence of Neh. x. The execution of the law was probably postponed
to the days of the Messiah; it was not in truth within the power of man,
and cannot be seriously demanded in the Priestly Code itself, which
contemplates a purely ideal Israel, with ideal boundaries, and leaves
the sober reality so far out of sight that on archaeological grounds it
never once so much as mentions Jerusalem, the historical capital of the
priests.

The circumstance that these towns lay *in partibus infiidelium* seems to
make them unavailable as a means of fixing the antiquity of the Priestly
Code. It is possible with Bleek to explain the transcendence of history
as Mosaicity; such a view is not to be argued against. But it is also
possible with Nöldeke to insist that an

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

invention so bold cannot possibly be imputed to the spirit of the exilic
and post-exilic time, which in everything is only anxiously concerned to
cleave to what is old and to restore it; and such a contention deserves
and admits of refutation. It is not the case that the Jews had any
profound respect for their ancient history; rather they condemned the
whole earlier development, and allowed only the Mosaic time along with
its Davidic reflex to stand; in other words, not history but the ideal.
The theocratic ideal was from the exile onwards the centre of all
thought and effort, and it annihilated the sense for objective truth,
all regard and interest for the actual facts as they had been handed
down. It is well known that there never have been more audacious
history-makers than the Rabbins. But Chronicles affords evidence
sufficient that this evil propensity goes back to a very early time, its
root the dominating influence of the Law, being the root of Judaism
itself. Judaism is just the right soil for such an artificial growth as
the forty-eight priestly and Levitical cities. It would hardly have
occurred to an author living in the monarchical period, when the
continuity of the older history was still unbroken, to look so
completely away from all the conditions of the then existing reality;
had he done so, he would have produced upon his contemporaries the
impression merely that he had scarcely all his wits about him. But after
the exile had annihilated the ancient Israel, and violently and
completely broken the old connection with the ancient conditions, there
was nothing to hinder from planting and partitioning the *tabula rasa*
in thought at pleasure, just as geographers are wont to do with their
map as long as the countries are unknown.

But, of course, no fancy is pure fancy; every imagination has underlying
it some elements of reality by which it can be laid hold of, even should
these only be certain prevailing notions of a particular period. It is
clear, if a proper territory is assigned to the clergy, that the notion
of the clerical tribe which already had begun to strike root in
Deuteronomy has here grown and gathered strength to such a degree that
even the last and differentiating distinction is abolished which
separates the actual tribes from the Levites, viz. communal independence
and the degree of concentration which expresses itself in separate
settlements. For when we read, notwithstanding, in the Priestly Code
that Aaron and Levi are to have no lot nor inheritance in Israel (Num.
xviii. 20, 23), this is merely a form of speech taken over from
Deuteronomy and at the same time an involuntary concession to

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

fact; what would the forty-eight cities have been, had they actually
existed, if not a lot, a territorial possession, and that too a
comparatively large one? The general basis which serves as
starting-point for the historical fiction being thus far recognisable,
we are able also to gain a closer view of its concrete material. The
priestly and Levitical cities stand in close connection with the
so-called cities of refuge. These are also appointed in Deuteronomy
(xix.), although not enumerated by name (for Deut. iv. 41-43 cannot be
regarded as genuine). Originally the altars were asylums (Exod. xxi. 14;
1 Kings ii. 28), some in a higher degree than others (Exod. xxi. 13). In
order not to abolish the asylums also along with the altars, the
Deuteronomic legislator desired that certain holy places should continue
as places of refuge, primarily three for Judah, to which, when the
territory of the kingdom extended, three others were to be afterwards
added. The Priestly Code adopts the arrangement, and specifies three
definite cities on this side and three on the other side of Jordan (Num.
xxxv.; Josh. xx.), four of which are demonstrably famous old seats of
worship,—all the three western ones, and Ramoth, that is, Mizpah, of the
eastern ones (Gen. xxxi.; Judges xi. 11). But as all these asylums are
at the same time priestly and Levitical cities, it is an obvious
conjecture that these also in like manner arose out of old sanctuaries.
We need not suppose that there is more in this than an echo of the
general recollection that there were once in Israel many holy places and
residences of priesthoods; it is by no means necessary to assert that
each of the towns enumerated in Josh. xxi. had actually been an ancient
sanctuary. In many cases, however, this also admits of being
shown, <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) although some of the most
famous (or according to the later view, infamous) high places, such as
Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, and Beersheba are omitted, probably of set purpose.

The immediate starting-point, however, for this territorial donation to
the Levites is perhaps to be sought in Ezekiel, in the picture of the

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

future Israel which he draws at the close of his book. He concerns
himself there in a thorough-going manner about the demarcation of the
national and tribal boundaries, and in doing so sets quite freely to
work, taking, so to speak, the yard measure in his hand. Leaving the
land eastward of Jordan wholly to the Saracens, he divides the western
portion into thirteen parallel transverse sections; in the middle of the
thirteenth (the rest of which is assigned to the prince), lying between
Judah and Benjamin, the twelve tribes give up a square with a base line
of 25,000 ells as a sacred offering to Jehovah. This square is divided
into three parallelograms, 25,000 ells long, running east and west; the
southernmost of these, 5000 ells broad, includes the capital with its
territory; the middle one, 10,000 ells broad, contains the temple and
the priestly territory; the northernmost, also 10,000 ells broad, has
the inheritance and the cities of the Levites. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) Thus we have here also a surrender of
land to the clergy on the part of the tribes; the comparison with Josh.
xxi. is not to be put aside,—all the less, because nowhere else in the
Old Testament is anything similar met with. Now Ezekiel is quite
transparent, and requires no interpreter but himself. In order that the
temple may be protected in its sanctity in the best possible manner, it
is placed in the centre of the priestly territory, which in its turn is
covered by the city on the south, and by the Levites on the north. At
the same time the *personnel* connected with the function of worship is
to dwell as much as possible apart on its own soil and territory, which
*shall serve them for separate houses to sanctify them*, as is expressly
remarked for the priests (xiv. 4), and in an inferior degree holds good
also, of course, for the Levites beside them. Here everything starts
from, and has its explanation in, the temple. Its original is
unmistakably the temple of Solomon; its site is beside the capital, in
the heart of the sacred centre of the land between Judah and Benjamin;
there the sons of Zadok have their abode, and beside them are the
Levites whom Josiah had brought up from all the country to Jerusalem.
Obviously the motives are not here far to seek. In the Priestly Code, on
the other hand, which was not in a position to shape the future freely
out of the present, but was compelled to accept archaeological
restrictions, the motives are historically concealed and almost
paralysed. The result has remained, namely, the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

holding of separate territory by the clergy, but the cause or the
purpose of it can no longer be recognised on account of the sanctuary
being now an abstract idea. Jerusalem and the temple, which, properly
speaking, occasioned the whole arrangement, are buried in silence with a
diligence which is in the highest degree surprising; and on the other
hand, in remembrance of the priesthoods scattered everywhere among the
high places of Israel in earlier days, forty-eight fresh Levitical
cities are created, from which, however, their proper focus, a temple to
wit, is withheld only in the circumstance that precisely the thirteen
cities of Judah and Benjamin happen to fall to the lot of the sons of
Aaron, does the influence of Jerusalem unconsciously betray itself.

2\. Apart from this historical fiction, the other claims that are made
for the endowment of the clergy are, however exorbitant, nevertheless
practicable and seriously meant. So far as the circumstances of their
origin are concerned, two possibilities present themselves. Either the
priests demanded what they could hope to obtain, in which case they were
actually supreme over the nation, or they set up claims which at the
time were neither justified nor even possible; in which case they were
not indeed quite sober, yet at the same time so sane prophetically, that
centuries afterwards the revenues they dreamed of became in actuality
theirs. Is it to be supposed that it was (say) Moses, who encouraged his
people as they were struggling for bare life in the wilderness to
concern themselves about a superabundantly rich endowment of their
clergy? Or is it believed that it was in the period of the judges, when
the individual tribes and families of Israel, after having forced their
way among the Canaanites, had a hard fight to maintain their position,
get somehow settled in their new dwelling-places and surroundings, that
the thought first arose of exacting such taxes from a people that was
only beginning to grow into a national unity, for an end that was
altogether remote from its interest? What power could then have been
able in those days, when every man did what was right in his own eyes,
to compel the individual to pay? But even when actually, under the
pressure of circumstances, a political organisation had arisen which
embraced all the tribes, it could hardly have occurred to the priests to
utilise the secular arm as a means for giving to themselves a place of
sovereignty; and still less could they have succeeded *without* the king
on whom they were so completely dependent. In short, the claims they
make in the Law would in the pre-exilic period have been regarded as
utopian in the strict

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

sense of that word; they allow of explanation only by the circumstances
which from the beginning of the Chaldæan rule, and still more that of
the Persians, lent themselves to the formation of a hierocracy, to
which, as to the truly national and moreover divine authority, the
people gave voluntary obedience, and to which the Persians also conceded
rights they could not have granted to the family of David. At the very
beginning of the exile, Ezekiel begins to augment the revenues of the
priests (xliv. 28-30), yet he still confines himself on the whole to the
lines of Deuteronomy, and makes no mention of tithes and firstlings. Of
the demands of the Priestly Code in their full extent we hear
historically in Neh. x. for the first time; there it is stated that they
were carried through by men who had the authority of Artaxerxes behind
them. This was the most difficult and at the same time the most
important part of the work Ezra and Nehemiah had to do in introducing
the Pentateuch as the law of the Jewish Church; and that is the reason
why it is so specially and minutely spoken of. Here plainly lies the
material basis of the hierocracy from which the royal throne was
ultimately reached.

For all these dues, apart from sacrificial perquisites, flowed into a
common coffer, and benefited those who had the control of this, viz.,
the priestly aristocracy of Jerusalem, whom it helped to rise to a truly
princely position. The ordinary priests, and especially the Levites, did
not gain by all this wealth. The latter indeed ought, according to law,
to have had the tithes, and to have handed over the tithes of these
again to the sons of Aaron, but as the general tendency of the time was
to depress the Levites, this legal revenue was also gradually withdrawn
from them and appropriated by the priests. Afterwards the chief priests
claimed the tithes for themselves alone, while their inferior brethren
had to suffer severe privation and even hunger itself (Josephus, *Ant.*,
xx. 8, 8; 9, 2).

Upon the difference just stated between the later practice and the Law,
one argument more has recently been founded against assigning the latter
to the Babylonio-Persian period. "Another testimony borne by tradition
completely excludes the idea of the Elohistic torah (*i.e.*, the
Priestly Code) having been composed by Ezra. As is well known, it is the
Elohistic torah that carefully regulates the mutual relations of priests
and Levites, while Deuteronomy groups the two together without bringing
forward the distinction. It is the former that assigns the tithes to the
Levites, while requiring these in their turn to

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

hand over the tithe of their tithes as a due to the priests. Such was
also the practice (Neh. x. 38 seq.) soon after the exile \[*i.e.*, a
hundred years later; Neh. vii. 5\]. But subsequently the payment of the
tithes to the Levites fell entirely into disuse; these were rendered
immediately and exclusively to the priests, so that Jose ben Hanina
actually confesses: "We do not pay the tithes according to the command
of God" (Sota, 47*b*). But everywhere the Talmud refers this practice
back to Ezra. Ezra it was who punished the Levites by withdrawal of the
tithes, and that because they had not come out from Babylon (Jebam.
386*b*; Chullin 11*b*). The point to be noted is that Ezra, according to
the testimony of tradition, superseded a precept of the Elohistic torah,
supporting himself in this perhaps by reference to the Deuteronomic
torah." So Delitzsch in the *Zeitschr. für luth. Theol.*, 1877, p. 448
seq. That Ezra is not the author of the Priestly Code may readily be
granted—only not on such an argument as this. If the genuine historical
tradition expressly names Ezra as the man who introduced the Levites’
tithe just as prescribed by law (Neh. x. 38 seq.), what conscientious
man can attach any weight to the opposite assertion of the Talmud?

But, even assuming that the divergence of practice from the legal
statute actually does go back to the time of Ezra, what would follow
from that against the post-exilic origin of the Priestly Code? For this
is what the question comes to, not to Ezra's authorship, which is made
the main point by a mere piece of transparent controversial tactics. The
demands of the Priestly Code, which demonstrably were neither laid down,
nor in any sense acted on before the exile, attained the force of law
one hundred years after the return from Babylon (Neh. x.); the whole
taxation system of Judaism ever afterwards rested upon it;—shall this be
held to have no meaning as against the trifling circumstance that the
tithe also was indeed *paid to the clergy*, in full accordance with the
Priestly Code, and inconsistently with ancient custom, but paid to the
higher, and not to the lower order?

In point of fact any other difference whatever between Jewish practice
and the Law might better have been adduced against the thesis of
Graf,—for example, the absence of Urim and Thummim (Neh. vii. 65), or of
the forty-eight Levitical cities, the church of the returned exiles
instead of that of the twelve tribes of Israel, the second temple
instead of the tabernacle, Ezra instead of Moses, the sons of

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zadok instead of
the sons of Aaron, the absence of the other marks of Mosaicity. For the
position of the Levites is the Achilles heel of the Priestly Code. If
the Levites at a later date were still further lowered beneath the
priests, and put into a worse position in favour of these, this
nevertheless presupposes the distinction between the two; let it first
then be shown that the distinction is known to the genuine Old
Testament, and that, in particular, it is introduced by Ezekiel not as a
new thing, but as of immemorial antiquity. Or is the primary fact that
the separation between priests and Levites was set up only in the
Priestly Code and in Judaism, and that its genesis can be traced with
confidence from the time of Josiah downwards, a fact of less importance
than the secondary one that the distinction extended itself somewhat
further still in the subsequent development of Judaism?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[154:1](phai08.htm#fr_105) Philo, *De praem.
sacerd.*, sec. 3. Josephus, *Ant.*, iii. 9. 2; iv. 4, 4.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[156:1](phai08.htm#fr_106) Connection is,
however, possible with some older custom, such as must certainly be
assumed for Amos iv. 4. Comp. Deut. xxvi. 12, "the year of tithing."

<span id="fn_107"></span>[162:1](phai08.htm#fr_107) In the cases of
Hebron, Gibeon, Shechem, Ramoth, Mahanaim and Tabor (Host v. 1) by
historical data; in those of Bethshemesh, Ashtaroth, Kadesh,, perhaps
also Rimmon, by the names. Not even here can one venture to credit the
Priestly Code with consistent fidelity to history. As for Hosea v. 1, 2,
the original meaning seems to be: "A snare have ye become for Mizpah,
and an outspread net upon Tabor, and the pit-fall of Shittim (‏שחת
השטים‎) have they made deep." Shittim as a camping-place under Moses and
Joshua must certainly have been a sanctuary, just like Kadesh, Gilgal,
and Shiloh; the prophet names these seats at which in his opinion the
worship was especially seductive and soul-destroying; his reproach is
levelled at the priests most famous (or according to the later view,
infamous) high places, such as Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, and Beersheba are
omitted, probably of set purpose.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[163:1](phai08.htm#fr_108) For ‏עשרים לשכת‎
(xlv. 5), read, with the LXX, ‏שערים לשבת‎ "to dwell within the gates."
Compare a similar transposition of letters in xiii. 3, LXX. The
expression "gates" for "cities" has its origin in Deuteronomy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Chronicles](phai09)
