[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai12) 
[Next](phai14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

### CHAPTER X.

### *THE ORAL AND THE WRITTEN TORAH*.

<span class="smallcaps">What</span> importance the written letter, the
book of the law, possessed for the Jews, we all know from the New
Testament. Of ancient Israel, again, it is said in the introductory poem
of Goethe's *West-Oestlicher Divan*, that the word was so important
there, because it was a spoken word. The contrast which Goethe evidently
perceived is really characteristic, and deserves some further attention.

#### I.

1\. Even if it be the case that Deuteronomy and the Priestly Code were
only reduced to writing at a late period, still there remains the
Jehovistic legislation (Exod. xx.-xxiii. xxxiv.) which might be regarded
as the document which formed the starting-point of the religious history
of Israel. And this position is in fact generally claimed for it; yet
not for the whole of it, since it is commonly recognised that the
Sinaitic Book of the Covenant (Exod. xx.-xxiii. 19) was given to a
people who were settled and thoroughly accustomed to agriculture, and
who, moreover, had passed somewhat beyond the earliest stage in the use
of money. <span id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218)

The Decalogue alone is commonly maintained to be in the strictest sense
Mosaic. This is principally on account of the statement that it was
written down on the two stone tables of the sacred ark. Yet of
Deuteronomy also we read, both that it was written on twelve stones and
that it was deposited in the sacred ark (Deut. xxxi. 26). We cannot
therefore place implicit reliance on such statements. What is attested
in this way of the Decalogue seems to find confirmation in 1 Kings viii.
9. But the authority of this statement is greatly weakened by the fact
that it occurs in a passage which has undergone the Deuteronomistic

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

revision, and has been, in addition to this, subjected to interpolation.
The more weight must we therefore allow to the circumstance, which makes
for a different conclusion, that the name "The Ark of the Covenant"
(*i.e.*, the box of the law) <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219) is
peculiar to the later writers, and, when it occurs in older narratives,
is proved by its sporadic appearance, as well as by a comparison of the
Septuagint with the Massoretic text, to be a correction. In early times
the ark was not a mere casket for the law; the "the ark of Jehovah" was
of itself important, as we see clearly enough from 1 Sam. iv.-vi. Like
the twelve maççebas which surrounded the altar on the holy hill of
Shechem, and which only later assumed the character of monuments of the
law, so the ark of the covenant no doubt arose by a change of meaning
out of the old idol. If there were stones in it at all, they probably
served some other purpose than that of writing materials, otherwise they
would not have been hidden as a mystery in the darkness of the
sanctuary; they must have been exposed to public view. Add to this that
the tradition is not agreed as to the tenor of the ten words said to
have been inserted on the two tables; two decalogues being preserved to
us, Exod. xx. and Exod. xxxiv., which are quite different from each
other. It results from this that there was no real or certain knowledge
as to what stood on the tables, and further that if there were such
stones in the ark—and probably there were—there was nothing written on
them. This is not the place to decide which of the two versions is prior
to the other; the negative result we have obtained is sufficient for our
present purpose.

 

2\. Ancient Israel was certainly not without God-given bases for the
ordering of human life; only they were not fixed in writing. Usage and
tradition were looked on to a large extent as the institution of the
Deity. Thus, for example, the ways and rules of agriculture. Jehovah had
instructed the husbandman and taught him the right way. He it was whose
authority gave to the unwritten laws of custom their binding power. "It
is never so done in Israel," "that is folly in Israel," and similar
expressions of insulted public conscience are of frequent occurrence,

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

and show the power of custom: the fear of God acts as a motive for
respecting it. "Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they
will slay me for my wife's sake," so Abraham says to himself in Gerar.
"How shall I do such great wrong and sin against God?" says Joseph to
the woman in Egypt. "The people of Sodom were wicked and sinned
grievously against Jehovah," we read in Gen. xiii. 13. Similarly Deut.
xxv. 18: "The Amalekites attacked Israel on the march, and killed the
stragglers, all that were feeble and fell behind, and feared not God."
We see that the requirements of the Deity are known and of force, not to
the Israelites only, but to all the world; and accordingly they are not
to be identified with any positive commands. The patriarchs observed
them long before Moses. "I know Abraham," Jehovah says, xviii. 19, "that
he will command his children to keep the way of Jehovah, to do justice
and judgment."

Much greater importance is attached to the special Torah of Jehovah,
which not only sets up laws of action of universal validity, but shows
man the way in special cases of difficulty, where he is at a loss. This
Torah is one of the special gifts with which Israel is endowed (Deut.
xxxiii. 4); and it is intrusted to the priests, whose influence, during
the period of the Hebrew kings, of which we are now speaking, rested
much more on this possession than on the privilege of sacrifice. The
verb from which Torah is derived signifies in its earliest usage to give
direction, decision. The participle signifies *giver of oracles* in the
two, examples *gibeath moreh* and *allon moreh*. The latter expression
is explained by another which alternates with it, "oak of the
soothsayers." Now we know that the priests in the days of Saul and David
gave divine oracles by the ephod and the lots connected with it, which
answered one way or the other to a question put in an alternative form.
Their Torah grew no doubt out of this practice. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_220) The Urim and Thummim are regarded,
according to Deut. xxxiii. 8, as the true and universal insignia of the
priesthood; the ephod is last mentioned in the historical

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

books in 1 Kings ii. 26, <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) but
appears to have remained in use down to the time of Isaiah (Hos. iii. 4;
Isa. xxx. 22). The Torah freed itself in the process of time, following
the general mental movement, from such heathenish media and vehicles
(Hab. ii. 19). But it continued to be an oral decision and direction. As
a whole it is only a power and activity of God, or of the priests. Of
this subject there can be no abstract; the *teaching;* is only thought
of as the action of the *teacher*. There is no torah as a ready-made
product, as a system existing independently of its originator and
accessible to every one: it becomes actual only in the various
utterances, which naturally form by degrees the basis of a fixed
tradition. "They preserve Thy word, and keep Thy law; they teach Jacob
Thy judgments and Israel Thy statutes" (Deut. xxxiii. 9, 10).

The Torah of the priests appears to have had primarily a legal
character. In cases which there was no regular authority to decide, or
which were too difficult for human decision, the latter was brought in
the last instance before God, *i.e.*, before the sanctuary or the
priests (Exod. xviii. 25 seq.). The priests thus formed a kind of
supreme court, which, however, rested on a voluntary recognition of its
moral authority, and could not support its decisions by force. "If a man
sin against another, God shall judge him," 1 Sam. ii. 25 says, very
indefinitely. Certain legal transactions of special solemnity are
executed before God (Exod. xxi. 6). Now in proportion as the executive
gained strength under the monarchy, *jus*—civil justice—necessarily grew
up into a separate existence from the older sacred *fas*. The knowledge
of God, which Hosea (chap. iv.) regards as the contents of the torah,
has as yet a closer connection with jurisprudence than with theology;
but as its practical issue is that God requires of man righteousness,
and faithfulness, and good-will, it is fundamentally and essentially
morality, though morality at that time addressed its demands less to the
conscience than to society. A ritual tradition naturally developed
itself even before the exile (2 Kings xvii. 27, 28). But only those
rites were included in the Torah which the priests had to teach others,
not those which they discharged themselves; even in Leviticus this
distinction may be traced; the instructions characterised as toroth
being chiefly those as to animals which might or might not be eaten, as
to clean and unclean states, as to leprosy and its marks (cf. Deut.
xxiv. 8).

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

So it was in Israel, to which the testimony applies which we have cited:
and so it was in Judah also. There was a common proverb in the days of
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, "The Torah shall not perish from the priest, nor
counsel from the ancient, nor the word from the prophet:" but no doubt
the saying was not new in their time, and at any rate it will apply to
the earlier time as well. Not because they sacrifice but because they
teach, do the priests here appear as pillars of the religious order of
things; and their Torah is a living power, equal to the occasion and
never-failing. Micah reproaches them with judging for reward (iii. 11),
and this shows their wisdom to have been based on a tradition accessible
to them alone; this is also shown by some expressions of Deuteronomy
(xvii. 10 seq., xxiv. 8). We have the counterpart to the proverb above
cited (Jer. xviii. 18; Ezek. vii. 26) in the complaint in Lamentations
(ii. 9): "Jerusalem is destroyed; her king and her princes are among the
Gentiles: the Torah is no more; the prophets obtain no vision from
Jehovah;" after the ruin of the sanctuary and the priests there is no
longer any Torah; and if that be so, the axe is laid to the root of the
life of the people. In the post-exile prophets the torah, which even in
Deuteronomy (xvii. 11) was mainly legal in its nature, acquires a strong
savour of ritual which one did not notice before; yet even here it is
still an oral teaching of the priests (Hag. ii. 11).

The priests derived their Torah from Moses: they claimed only to
preserve and guard what Moses had left (Deuteronomy xxxiii 4, 9 seq.).
He counted as their ancestor (xxxiii. 8; Judges xviii. 30); his father
in-law is the *priest* of Midian at Mount Sinai, as Jehovah also is
derived in a certain sense from the older deity of Sinai. But at the
same time Moses was reputed to be the incomparable originator and
practicer of *prophecy* (Num. xii. 6 seq.; Deut. xxxiv. 10; Hos. xii.
14), as his brother Aaron also is not only a Levite (Exod. iv. 14), but
also a prophet (iv. 15; Num. xii. 2). There is thus a close relation
between priests and prophets, *i.e.*, seers; as with other peoples (1
Sam. vi. 3; 1 Kings xviii. 19, compare with 2 Kings x. 19), so also with
the Hebrews. In the earliest time it was not knowing the technique of
worship, which was still very simple and undeveloped, but being a man of
God, standing on an intimate footing with God, that made a man a priest,
that is one who keeps up the communication with heaven for others; and
the seer is better qualified than others for the office (1 Kings xviii.
30 seq.).

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is no fixed
distinction in early times between the two offices; Samuel is in 1 Sam.
i.-iii. an aspirant to the priesthood; in ix. x. he is regarded as a
seer.

In later times also, when priests and prophets drew off and separated
from each other, they yet remained connected, both in the kingdom of
Israel (Hos. iv. 5) and in Judah. In the latter this was very markedly
the case (2 Kings xxiii. 2; Jer. xxvi. 7 seq., v. 31; Deut. xviii. 1-8,
9-22; Zech. vii. 3). What connected them with each other was the
revelation of Jehovah which went on and was kept alive in both of them.
It is Jehovah from whom the torah of the priest and the word of the
prophet proceeds: He is the true *director*, as Isaiah calls Him in the
passage xxx. 20 seq., where, speaking of the Messianic time, he says to
the people, "Then thy director (‏מוריך‎) is no more concealed, but thine
eyes see thy director, and thine ears hear the words of One calling
behind thee; this is the way, walk ye in it; when ye are turning to the
right hand or to the left." *Torah* and *word* are cognate notions, and
capable of being interchanged (Deut. xxxiii. 9; Isa. i. 10, ii. 3, v.
24, viii. 16, 20). This explains how both priests and prophets claimed
Moses for their order: he was not regarded as the founder of the cultus.

The difference, in the period when it had fully developed itself, may be
said to be this: the Torah of the priests was like a spring which runs
always, that of the prophets like a spring which is intermittent, but
when it does break forth, flows with all the greater force. The priests
take precedence of the prophets when both are named together; they
obviously consolidated themselves earlier and more strongly. The order,
and the tradition which propagates itself within the order, are
essential to them: they observe and keep the torah (Deut. xxxiii. 9).
For this reason, that they take their stand so entirely on the
tradition, and depend on it, their claim to have Moses for their father,
the beginner and founder of their tradition, is in itself the better
founded of the two. <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_222) In the
ordinary parlance of the Hebrews torah always meant first, and

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

chiefly the Priestly Torah. The prophets have notoriously no father (1
Sam. x. 12), their importance rests on the individuals; it is
characteristic that only names and sketches of their lives have reached
us. They do indeed, following the tendency of the times, draw together
in corporations; but in doing so they really renounce their own
distinctive characteristics: the representative men are always single,
resting on nothing outside themselves. We have thus on the one side the
tradition of a class, which suffices for the occasions of ordinary life,
and on the other the inspiration of awakened individuals, stirred up by
occasions which are more than ordinary. After the spirit of the oldest
men of God, Moses at the head of them, had been in a fashion laid to
sleep in institutions, it sought and found in the prophets a new
opening; the old fire burst out like a volcano through the strata which
once, too, rose fluid from the deep, but now were fixed and dead.

The element in which the prophets live is the storm of the world's
history, which sweeps away human institutions; in which the rubbish of
past generations with the houses built on it begins to shake, and that
foundation alone remains firm, which needs no support but itself. When
the earth trembles and seems to be passing away, then they triumph
because Jehovah alone is exalted. They do not preach on set texts; they
speak out of the spirit which judges all things and itself is judged of
no man. Where do they ever lean on any other authority than the truth of
what they say; where do they rest on any other foundation than their own
certainty? It belongs to the notion of prophecy of true revelation, that
Jehovah, overlooking all the media of ordinances and institutions,
communicates Himself to the *individual*, the called one, in whom that
mysterious and irreducible rapport in which the deity stands with man
clothes itself with energy. Apart from the prophet, *in abstracto*,
there is no revelation; it lives in his divine-human ego. This gives
rise to a synthesis of apparent contradictions: the subjective in the
highest sense, which is exalted above all ordinances, is the truly
objective, the divine. This it proves itself to be by the consent of the
conscience of all, on which the prophets count, just as Jesus does in
the Gospel of John, in spite of all their polemic against the
traditional religion. They are not saying anything new: they are only
proclaiming old truth. While acting in the most creative way they feel
entirely passive: the *homo tantum et audacia* which may with perfect
justice be applied to such men as Elijah, Amos, and Isaiah, is with them
equivalent

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

to *deus tantum et servitus*. But their creed is not to be found in any
book. It is barbarism, in dealing with such a phenomenon, to distort its
physiognomy by introducing the law.

 

3\. It is a vain imagination to suppose that the prophets expounded and
applied the law. Malachi (*circa* 450 B.C.) says, it is true, iv. 4,
"Remember ye the torah of Moses my servant;" but where shall we look for
any second expression of this nature? Much more correctly than modern
scholars did these men judge, who at the close of the pre-exilic history
looked back on the forces which had moulded it, both the divine and
those opposed to God. In their eyes the prophets are not the expounders
of Moses, but his continuators and equals; the word of God in their
mouth is not less weighty than in the mouth of Moses; they, as well as
he, are organs of the spirit of Jehovah by which He is present in
Israel. The immediate revelation to the people, we read in Deuteronomy
xviii., ceased with the ten commandments: from that point onwards
Jehovah uses the prophets as His mouth: "A prophet like unto thee," He
says to Moses, "will I raise up to them from among their brethren, and
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
shall command him; and whosoever shall not hearken unto my words which
he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him." We find it the
same in Jeremiah; the voice of the prophets, always sounding when there
is need for it, occupies the place which, according to the prevailing
view, should have been filled by the law: this living command of Jehovah
is all he knows of, and not any testament given once for all. "This only
I commanded your fathers when I brought them up out of Egypt: Obey my
voice, and walk ye in all the ways that I will command you. Since the
day that your fathers came forth out of Egypt, I have sent unto you all
my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them; but ye
would not hear." And even after the exile we meet in Zechariah (520
B.C.) the following view of the significance of the prophets: "Thus
spake Jehovah of hosts \[to the fathers before the exile\], Speak true
judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to his brother, and
oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor: and
let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart. But they
refused to hearken, and shrugged the shoulder, and stopped their ears,
that they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as a flint, lest
they should hear the Torah and the

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

words which Jehovah Sebaoth hath sent by His Spirit through the old
prophets: therefore came a great wrath from Jehovah Sebaoth. And as He
cried and they would not hear, so now shall they cry and I will not
hear, and I will blow them away among the peoples. . . . Thus saith
Jehovah Sebaoth \[after the exile to the present generation\], As I
thought to punish you without pity because your fathers provoked me to
anger, so again have I thought in these days to do well to the house of
Judah: fear ye not. These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye
every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and
peace in your gates; and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts
against his neighbour, and love no false oath, for all these are things
which I hate, saith Jehovah" (Zech. vii. 9-11, viii. 14-16). The
contents of the Torah, on obedience to which the theocracy is here
based, are very suggestive, as also its derivation from the "old"
prophets. Even Ezra can say (ix. 10, 11): "We have forsaken Thy
commandments which Thou hast commanded by the servants the prophets,
saying, The land unto which ye go to possess it is an unclean land with
the filthiness of the people of the land, which have filled it from one
end to another with their uncleanness." He is thinking of Deuteronomy,
Ezekiel, and Levit. xvii.-xxvi.

Of those who at the end reflected on the meaning of the development
which had run its course, the writer of Isaiah xl.-lxvi. occupies the
first place. The Torah, which he also calls *mishpat*, right (*i.e.*,
truth), appears to him to be the divine and imperishable element in
Israel. With him, however, it is inseparable from its mouthpiece, the
servant of Jehovah, xlii. 1-4, xlix. 1-6, l. 4-9, lii. 13-liii. 12. The
name would denote the prophet, but here it stands for the people, a
prophet on a large scale. Israel's calling is not that of the
world-monarchies, to make sensation and noise in the streets (xiii.
1-4), but the greater one of promulgating the Torah and getting it
received. This is to be done both in Israel and among the heathen. What
makes Israel a prophet is not his own inner qualities, but his relation
to Jehovah, his calling as the depository of divine truth: hence it
involves no contradiction that the servant should begin his work in
Israel itself. <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223) Till now he has

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

spent his strength only in the bosom of his own people, which is always
inclined to fall away from Jehovah and from itself: heedless of reproach
and suffering he has laboured unweariedly in carrying out the behests of
his Master and has declared His word. All in vain. He has not been able
to avert the victory of heathenism *in* Israel, now followed by its
victory *over* Israel. Now in the exile Jehovah has severed His relation
with His people; the individual Hebrews survive, but the servant, the
people of Jehovah, is dead. Then is the Torah to die with him, and truth
itself to succumb to falsehood, to heathenism? That cannot be; truth
must prevail, must come to the light. As to the Apostle Paul the Spirit
is the earnest of the resurrection of those who are born again, so to
our author the Torah is the pledge of the resurrection of Israel, the
justification of the servant of Jehovah. The final triumph of the cause,
which is God's, will surpass all expectations. Not only in Israel itself
will the Torah, will the servant of Jehovah prevail and bring about a
regeneration of the people: the truth will in the future shine forth
from Israel into the whole world, and obtain the victory among all the
Gentiles (xlix. 6). Then it will appear that the work of the servant,
resultless as it seemed to be up to the exile, has yet not been in vain.

It is surely unnecessary for me to demonstrate how uncommonly vivid, I
might say how uncommonly historical, the notion of the Torah is as here
set forth, and how entirely incompatible that notion is with "the Torah
of Moses." It might most fitly be compared with the Logos of the
prologue of John, if the latter is understood in accordance with John x.
35, an utterance certainly authentic, and not according to Philo. As
Jesus is the revelation of God made man, so the servant of Jehovah is
the revelation of God made a people. The similarity of their nature and
their significance involves the similarity of their work and of their
sufferings, so that the Messianic interpretation of Isa. lii. 13-liii.
12 is in fact one which could not fail to suggest itself. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224)

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

#### II.

1\. In the 18th year of King Josiah (621 B.C.) Deuteronomy was found and
published. In the account of the discovery, 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., it is
always called simply *the book of the Torah;* it was accordingly the
first, and in its time the only book of the kind. It is certainly the
case that the prophets had written down some of their speeches before
this, and the priests also may before this time have written down many
of their precepts: it appears in fact, as Vatke surmises, that we have a
monument of their spirit, *e.g.*, in the Sinaitic Book of the Covenant.
Deuteronomy presupposes earlier attempts of this kind, and borrows its
materials largely from them; but on the other hand it is distinguished
from them not only by its greater compass but also by its much higher
claims. It is written with the distinct intention not to remain a
private memorandum, but to obtain public authority as a *book*. The idea
of making a definite formulated written Torah the law of the land, is
the important point: <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225) it was a
first attempt and succeeded at the outset beyond expectation. A reaction
set in afterwards, it is true; but the Babylonian exile completed the
triumph of the law. Extraordinary excitement was at that time followed
by the deepest depression (Amos viii. 11 seq.). At such a time those who
did not despair of the future clung anxiously to the religious
acquisitions of the past. These had been put in a book just in time in
Deuteronomy, with a view to practical use in the civil and religious
life of the people . The book of the Torah did not perish in the general
ruin, but remained in existence, and was the compass of those who were
shaping their course for a new Israel. How thoroughly determined they
were to use it as their rule we see from the revision of the Hexateuch
and of the historical books which was taken in hand during the exile.

With the appearance of the law came to an end the old freedom, not only
in the sphere of worship, now restricted to Jerusalem, but in the sphere
of the religious spirit as well. There was now in existence an authority
as objective as could be; and this was the death of prophecy.

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For it was a
necessary condition of prophecy that the tares should be at liberty to
grow up beside the wheat. The signs given in Deuteronomy to distinguish
the true from the false prophet, are no doubt vague and unpractical:
still they show the tendency towards control and the introduction of
uniformity; that is the great step which is new. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226) It certainly was not the intention of
the legislator to encroach upon the spoken Torah or the free word. But
the consequence, favoured by outward circumstances, was not to be
avoided: the feeling that the prophets had come to an end did not arise
in the Maccabean wars only. In the exile we hear the complaint that the
instruction of the priests and the word of the prophets are silent (Lam.
ii. 9); it is asked, where he is who in former times put his spirit in
Israel (Isa. lxiii. 11); in Nehemiah's time a doubtful question is left
unsettled, at least theoretically, till the priest with Urim and
Thummim, *i.e.*, with a trustworthy prophecy, shall appear (Neh. vii.
69). We may call Jeremiah the last of the prophets: <span
id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_227) those who came after him were prophets
only in name. Ezekiel had swallowed a book (iii. 1-3), and gave it out
again. He also, like Zechariah, calls the pre-exilic prophets the old
prophets, conscious that he himself belongs to the epigoni: he meditates
on their words like Daniel and comments on them in his own prophecy
(xxxviii. 17, xxxix. 8). The writer of Isa. xl. seq.

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

might with much more reason be called a prophet, but he does not claim
to be one; his anonymity, which is evidently intentional, leaves no
doubt as to this. He is, in fact, more of a theologian: he is
principally occupied in reflecting on the results of the foregoing
development, of which prophecy had been the leaven; these are fixed
possessions now secured; he is gathering in the harvest. As for the
prophets after the exile, we have already seen how Zechariah speaks of
the old prophets as a series which is closed, in which he and those like
him are not to be reckoned. In the writing of an anonymous contemporary
which is appended to his book we find the following notable expression:
"In that (hoped-for) day, saith Jehovah, I will cut off the names of the
idols out of the land, that they be no more remembered, and also I will
cause to cease the prophets and the unclean spirit; and if a man will
yet prophesy, his parents shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live, for
thou speakest lies in the name of Jehovah, and his parents shall thrust
him through when he prophesieth" (xiii. 2-3).

 

2\. Deuteronomy was the programme of a reform, not of a restoration. It
took for granted the existence of the cultus, and only corrected it in
certain general respects. But the temple was now destroyed and the
worship interrupted, and the practice of past times had to be written
down if it was not to be lost. Thus it came about that in the exile the
*conduct of worship* became the subject of the Torah, and in this
process reformation was naturally aimed at as well as restoration. We
have seen ([p. 59](phai05.htm#page_59)) that Ezekiel was the first to
take this step which the circumstances of the time indicated. In the
last part of his work he made the first attempt to record the ritual
which had been customary in the temple of Jerusalem. Other priests
attached themselves to him (Lev. xvii.-xxvi.), and thus there grew up in
the exile from among the members of this profession a kind of school of
people who reduced to writing and to a system what they had formerly
practiced in the way of their calling. After the temple was restored
this theoretical zeal still continued to work, and the ritual when
renewed was still further developed by the action and reaction on each
other of theory and practice: the priests who had stayed in Babylon took
as great a part, from a distance, in the sacred services, as their
brothers at Jerusalem who had actually to conduct them. The latter
indeed lived in adverse circumstances and do not appear to have
conformed with great

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

strictness or accuracy to the observances which had been agreed upon.
The last result of this labour of many years is the Priestly Code. It
has indeed been said that we cannot ascribe the creation of such a work
to an age which was bent on nothing but repristination. Granted that
this is a correct description of it, such an age is peculiarly fitted
for an artificial systematising of given materials, and this is what the
originality of the Priestly Code in substance amounts to. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228)

The Priestly Code, worked into the Pentateuch as the standard
legislative element in it, became the definite "Mosaic law." As such it
was published and introduced in the year 444 B.C., a century after the
exile. In the interval, the duration of which is frequently
under-estimated, Deuteronomy alone had been known and recognised as the
written Torah, though as a fact the essays of Ezekiel and his successors
may have had no inconsiderable influence in leading circles. The man who
made the Pentateuch the constitution of Judaism was the Babylonian
priest and scribe, Ezra. He had come from Babylon to Jerusalem as early
as the year 458 B.C., the seventh of Artaxerxes Longimanus, at the head
of a considerable company of zealous Jews, provided it is said with a
mandate from the Persian king, empowering him to reform according to the
law the congregation of the temple, which had not yet been able to
consolidate itself inwardly nor to shut itself off sufficiently from
those without.

"Thou art sent of the king and of his seven counsellors to hold an
inquiry concerning Judah and Jerusalem *according to the law of thy God
which is in thine hand*. . . . And thou Ezra, according to *the wisdom
of thy God which is in thine hand*, set magistrates and judges which may
judge all the people that are beyond the river, all such as acknowledge
the laws of thy God, and teach ye them that know them not. And whosoever
will not do the law of thy God and the law of the king, let him be
prosecuted." So we read in

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

the commission of the Persian king to Ezra, vii. 12-26; which, even
should it be spurious, must yet reflect the views of his contemporaries.
The expression taken from Ezra's own memoirs, vii. 27, leaves no doubt
that he was assisted by Artaxerxes in the objects he had in view. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229)

But Ezra did not, as we should expect, at once introduce the law on his
arrival in Judah. In concert with the heads of the people, and
proceeding on the existing Torah, that, namely, of
[Deuteronomy](errata.htm#3), he ordained and relentlessly carried out a
strict separation of the returned exiles from the heathen and
half-heathen inhabitants of the land. This was done a few months after
his arrival in Jerusalem. But a long time, at least fourteen years,
elapsed before he produced the law which he had brought with him. Why he
delayed so long we can at the best only surmise, as no accounts have
reached us of what he did in the interval; there is a great gap in the
narrative of the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah between the 7th and the 20th
year of Artaxerxes. Perhaps the outward circumstances of the young
community, which, probably in consequence of the repellent attitude
taken up to the surrounding peoples, were not of the happiest, made it
unadvisable at once to introduce a legislative innovation; perhaps, too,
Ezra desired to wait to see the correcting influence of the practice of
Jerusalem on the product of Babylonian scholarship, and moreover to
train up assistants for the work. The principal reason, however, appears
to have been, that in spite of the good-will of the king he did not
enjoy the energetic support of the Persian authorities on the spot, and
could not without it get the authority of the new law recognised.

But in the year 445 it came about that a Jew and a sympathiser of Ezra,
Nehemiah ben Hakkelejah, cup-bearer and favourite of Artaxerxes,
appeared in Judea as Persian governor. With straightforward earnestness
he first addressed himself to the task of liberating the Jewish
community from outward pressure and lifting them up from their depressed
condition; and, this being accomplished, the time had come to go forward

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

with the introduction of the Pentateuch. Ezra and Nehemiah were
manifestly in concert as to this. On the 1st day of the 7th month—we do
not know the year, but it cannot have been earlier than 444 B.C.—the
whole people came together as one man before the water-gate, and Ezra
was called on to produce the book of the law of Moses, which Jehovah had
commanded Israel. The scribe mounted a wooden pulpit; seven priests
stood beside him on the right hand, and seven on the left. When he
opened the book all present stood up, both men and women; with loud Amen
they joined in the opening blessing, lifted up their heads, and cast
themselves on the ground. Then he read the book, from early morning till
mid-day, in small sections, which were repeated and expounded by a
number of Levites dispersed throughout the crowd. The effect was that a
general weeping arose, the people being aware that they had not till
then followed the commandments of God. Nehemiah and Ezra and the Levites
had to allay the excitement, and said: "This day is holy unto Jehovah
your God; mourn not nor weep. Go your way, eat the fat and drink the
sweet, and give unto them that have brought nothing with them." The
assembled people then dispersed and set on foot a "great mirth," because
they had understood the words which had been communicated to them. The
reading was continued the next day, but before the heads of families
only, and a very appropriate section was read, viz., the ordinances as
to festivals, and particularly that about the feast of tabernacles,
which was to be kept under branches of trees on the 15th day of the 7th
month, the month then just beginning. The matter was taken up with the
greatest zeal, and the festival, which had not been kept *rite* since
the days of Joshua ben Nun, was now instituted in accordance with the
precepts of Leviticus xxiii. and celebrated with general enthusiasm from
the 15th to the 22nd of the month. <span id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_230)
On the 24th, however, a great day of humiliation was held, with
sackcloth and ashes. On this occasion also the proceedings began with
reading the law, and then followed a confession of sins spoken by the
Levites in the name of the people, and concluding with a prayer for
mercy and compassion. This was preparatory to the principal and
concluding act, in which the secular and spiritual officials and elders,
85 in number, bound themselves in writing to the Book of the Law,
published by Ezra, and all the rest undertook an obligation, with oath
and curse, to walk in the Torah of God, given by His servant Moses, and
to keep

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

all the commandments of Jehovah and His statutes and laws. Special
attention was directed to such provisions of the Pentateuch as were of
immediate importance for the people in the circumstances of the day—the
greater part of the whole work is about the ritual of the priests—and
those were in particular insisted on which refer to the contributions of
the laity to the priesthood, on which the very existence of the
hierocracy depended. <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231)

Lagarde expresses great surprise—and the surprise is reasonable—that so
little importance is attributed to this narrative by Old Testament
critics; only Kuenen had rightly appreciated its significance.  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_232) It is obvious that Neh. viii.-x. is a
close parallel to 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., especially to xxiii. 1-3. There
we read that Josiah caused all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem to come
together, and went up with the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, with the priests and the prophets and all the people, high
and low, to the house of Jehovah; where he read to the assemblage all
the words of the Book of the Law, and bound himself with all the people
before Jehovah to keep all the words of the book. Just as it is in
evidence that Deuteronomy became known in the year 621, and that it was
unknown up to that date, so it is in evidence that the remaining Torah
of the Pentateuch—for there is no doubt that the law of Ezra was the
whole Pentateuch—became known in the year 444 and was unknown till then.
This shows in the first place, and puts it beyond question, that
Deuteronomy is the first, and the priestly Torah the second, stage of
the legislation. But in the second place, as we are accustomed to infer
the date of the composition of Deuteronomy from its publication and
introduction by Josiah, so we must infer the date of the composition of
the Priestly Code from its publication and introduction by Ezra and
Nehemiah. It would require very strong internal evidence to destroy the
probability, thus based on a most positive statement of facts, that the
codification of the ritual only

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

took place in the post-exile period. We have already seen of what nature
the internal evidence is which is brought forward with this view. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)

3\. Ezra and Nehemiah, and the eighty-five men of the great assembly
(Nehemiah viii. seq.), who are named as signatories of the covenant, are
regarded by later tradition as the founders of the canon. And not
without reason: only King Josiah has a still stronger claim to this
place of honour. The introduction of the law, first Deuteronomy, and
then the whole Pentateuch, was in fact the decisive step, by which the
written took the place of the spoken word, and the people of the word
became a "people of the book." To *the book* were added in course of
time *the books;* the former was formally and solemnly introduced in two
successive acts, the latter acquired imperceptibly a similar public
authority for the Jewish church. The notion of the canon proceeds
entirely from that of the written Torah; the prophets and the
hagiographa are also called Torah by the Jews, though not Torah of
Moses.

The origin of the canon thus lies, thanks to the two narratives 2 Kings
xxii. xxiii., Neh. viii.-x. in the full light of history; but the
traditional science of Biblical introduction has no clear or
satisfactory account to give of it. Josiah, the ordinary notion is,
introduced the law, but not the canon; Ezra, on the other hand, the
canon and not the law. An analogy drawn from the secondary part of the
canon, the prophets and hagiographa, is applied without consideration to
the primary part, the Torah of Moses. The historical and prophetical
books were, in part at least, a long time in existence before they
became canonical, and the same, it is thought, might be the case with
the law. But the case of the law is essentially different. The law
claims to have public authority, to be a book of the community; the
difference between law and canon, does not exist. Hence it is easy to
understand that the Torah, though as a literary product later than the
historical and prophetical books, is yet as law older than these
writings,

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

which have originally and in their nature no legal character, but only
acquired such a character in a sort of metaphorical way, through their
association with the law itself.

When it is recognised that *the canon* is what distinguishes Judaism
from ancient Israel, it is recognised at the same time that what
distinguishes Judaism from ancient Israel is *the written Torah*. The
water which in old times rose from a spring, the Epigoni stored up in
cisterns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_218"></span>[392:1](phai13.htm#fr_218) Exod. xxi. 35:
compare xxi. 33 with Judges ix. 4.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[393:1](phai13.htm#fr_219) Compare 1 Kings
viii. 21, "the ark wherein is the covenant of Jehovah," and viii 9,
"there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses
put there at Horeb, the tables of the covenant which Jehovah had made
with the children of Israel." The Deuteronomistic expression "tables of
the covenant", alternates in the Priestly Code with that of "tables of
testimony"; i e., likewise of the law. For ‏הערות‎, "the testimony," 2
Kings xi. 12, read ‏הצעדות‎, "the bracelets," according to 2 Sam. i. 10.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[394:1](phai13.htm#fr_220) 1 Sam. xiv. xxiii.
xxx. In connection with 1 Sam. xxxi. 3 I have conjectured that the verb
of which Torah is the abstract means originally to throw the lot-arrows.
The Thummim have been compared in the most felicitous way by Freytag,
and by Lagarde independently of him (*Proph. Chald.* p. xlvii.) with the
Arabian Tamaim, which not only signifies children's amulets but any
means of "averruncatio". Urim is probably connected with ‏ערר‎ "to
curse" (cf. *Iliad* i. 11 and Num. xxiii. 23): the two words of the
formula seem mutually to supplement each other.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[395:1](phai13.htm#fr_221) Bleek, *Einleitung
in das A. T.*, 1878, p. 642.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[397:1](phai13.htm#fr_222) It is also more
firmly rooted in history; for if Moses did anything at all, he certainly
founded the sanctuary at Kadesh and the torah there, which the priests
of the ark carried on after him, thus continuing the thread of the
history of Israel, which was taken up again in power by the monarchy.
The prophets only appeared among the Hebrews from the time of Samuel
onwards, but the seers were older than Moses, and can scarcely have had
such a close connection with his tradition as the priests at the
sanctuary of the ark of Jehovah.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[400:1](phai13.htm#fr_223) This is as if one
were to say that there is much to be done before we Evangelicals are
truly evangelical. Yet the distinction as worked out in Isaiah xl. seq.
is certainly very remarkable, and speaks for a surprising degree of
profound meditation.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[401:1](phai13.htm#fr_224) The personification
is carried further in this passage than anywhere else, and it is
possible that the colours of the sketch are borrowed from some actual
instance of a prophet-martyr: yet the Ebed Jahve cannot have a different
meaning here from that which it has everywhere else. It is to be noted
that the sufferings and death of the servant are in the past, and his
glorification in the future, a long pause lying between them in the
present. A resurrection of the individual could not be in the mind <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> of the writer of Isa. xl seq., nor do the
details of the description, lii. 12 seq., at all agree with such an
idea. Moreover, it is clear that liv. 1-lvi. 8 is a kind of sermon on
the text lii. 13-liii. 12; and there the prophecy of the glorification
of the servant has reference to Zion. See Vatke, p. 528 seq.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[402:1](phai13.htm#fr_225) Duhm, *op. cit.* p.
201.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[403:1](phai13.htm#fr_226) The difference
between Deut. xviii. 22 and 1 Kings xxii. 19-23 may be thought to throw
light on the two positions. In the former passage we read that if a
prophet says something in the name of Jehovah which does not come to
pass, it is a word which Jehovah has not spoken. Here, on the contrary,
Micaiah ben Imlah, when the prophets of Jehovah promise the king of
Israel a happy issue of the campaign against the Syrians, regards the
prediction as contrary to the truth, but as none the less on that
account inspired by the spirit of prophecy; Jehovah, he said, had made
his spirit a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. It may be
that this difference reflects to us the interval between two different
ages: but on the whole Micaiah's view appears to be rather a piece of
ingenuity which might have been resorted to in later times as well. In
the seventh century the command, "every firstborn is mine," was held to
apply to the human firstborn as well, the sacrifice of which Jehovah was
thought to require: this appears from Jeremiah's protest, "I commanded
them not, neither came it into my mind," vii. 31, xix. 5. With reference
to this Ezekiel says that because the Israelites despised the wholesome
commandments of Jehovah, He gave them laws which were not good and
statutes by which they could not live. That is a similar ingenious
escape from a difficulty, without deeper meaning. See the converse,
Koran, Sura ii. 174.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[403:2](phai13.htm#fr_227) In his early years
Jeremiah had a share in the introduction of the law: but in later times
he shows himself little edified by the effects it produced: the lying
pen of the scribes, he says, has written for a lie. People despised the
prophetic word because they had the Torah in black and white (viii.
7-9).

<span id="fn_228"></span>[405:1](phai13.htm#fr_228) Dillmann arrives at
the conclusion that the assumption is the most natural one in the world,
and still capable of proof from ACD (!) that the priesthood of the
central sanctuary wrote down their toroth even in early times; and that
it is absurd to suppose that the priestly and ceremonial laws were first
written down, or even made, in the exile and in Babylon, where there was
no worship. We will let it be absurd, if it is true. It is not progress,
though it is a fact, that the kings were succeeded by the high-priests,
and the prophets by the Rabbis. Yet it is a thing which is likely to
occur, that a body of traditional practice should only be written down
when it is threatening to die out, and that a book should be, as it
were, the ghost of a life which is closed.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[406:1](phai13.htm#fr_229) With regard to his
relation to the law, we have to consider the following points: he was a
scribe (‏סופר‎ = literatus), at home in the Torah of Moses, vii. 6. He
had directed his mind to study the Torah of Jehovah, and to do and to
teach in Israel judgment and statute, vii. 10. "The priest Ezra, the
master of the law of the God of heaven," vii. 21. The most important
expression, however, is that which states that the law (the wisdom) of
his God was in his hand: thus it was his private property, though it
claimed authority for all Israel. With this agree the statements as to
the object of the learned priest's mission.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[407:1](phai13.htm#fr_230) For eight days,
according to Lev. xxiii. 39: as against Deut. xvi. 13-15.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[408:1](phai13.htm#fr_231) Neh. viii. 1-x. 40.
The credibility of the narrative appears on the face of it. The writer
of Chronicles did not write it himself, but took it from his main
source, from which also he drew the fragments he gives us of the memoirs
of Ezra and Nehemiah. This we see from the fact that while copying Neh.
vii. in Ezra ii. he unconsciously goes on with the beginning of Neh.
viii. (= Ezra iii. 1). That shows that he found Neh. vii. and viii. in
their present connection, and did not write viii. seq. himself, as we
might suppose.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[408:2](phai13.htm#fr_232) *Göttinger Gel.
Anzeigen*, 1870, p. 1557 seq. Kuenen, *Religion of Israel*, vol. ii.
chapter viii.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[409:1](phai13.htm#fr_233) It is not, however,
necessary, and it can scarcely be correct, to make Ezra more than the
editor, the real and principal editor, of the Hexateuch: and in
particular he is not likely to have been the author of Q. Nor on the
other hand is it meant to deny that many new features may have been
added and alterations made after Ezra. A body of customs is a subject
which can scarcely be treated quite exhaustively. There are no
directions about the *nervus ischiadicus*, about the priests having
their feet bare, about shutting up before Jehovah (1 Sam. xxi. cf. Jer.
xxxvi. 5), or about the stoning of adulterers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Theocracy as Idea and as Institution.](phai14)
