[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai04.md) 
[Next](phai06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### *SACRIFICE*.

<span class="smallcaps">With</span> the Hebrews, as with the whole
ancient world, sacrifice constituted the main part of worship. The
question is whether their worship did not also in this most important
respect pass through a history the stages of which are reflected in the
Pentateuch. From the results already reached this must be regarded at
the outset as probable, but the sources of information accessible to us
seem hardly sufficient to enable us actually to follow the process, or
even so much as definitely to fix its two termini.

#### I.

1\. The Priestly Code alone occupies itself much with the subject; it
gives a minute classification of the various kinds of offerings, and a
description of the procedure to be followed in the case of each. In this
way it furnishes also the normative scheme for modern accounts of the
matter, into which all the other casual notices of the Old Testament on
the subject must be made to fit as best they can. This point accordingly
presents us with an important feature by which the character of the book
can be determined. In it the sacrificial ritual is a constituent, and
indeed a very essential element, of the Mosaic legislation: that ritual
is not represented as ancient use handed down to the Israelites by
living practice from ancestral times: it was Moses who gave them the
theory of it—a very elaborate one too—and he himself received his
instruction from God (Exod. xxv. seq.; Lev. i. seq.). An altogether
disproportionate emphasis is accordingly laid upon the technique of
sacrifice corresponding to the theory, alike upon the *when*, the
*where*, and the *by whom*, and also in a very special manner upon the
*how*. It is from these that the sacrifice obtains its specific value;
one could almost suppose that even if it were offered to another God, it
would by means of the legitimate

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

rite alone be at once made essentially Jehovistic. The cultus of Israel
is essentially distinguished from all others by its *form*, the
distinctive and constitutive mark of the holy community. With it the
theocracy begins and it with the theocracy; the latter is nothing more
than the institution for the purpose of carrying on the cultus after the
manner ordained by God. For this reason also the ritual, which appears
to concern the priests only, finds its place in a law-book intended for
the whole community; in order to participate in the life of the
theocracy, all must of course, have clear knowledge of its essential
nature, and in this the theory of sacrifice holds a first place.

The Jehovistic portion of the Pentateuch also knows of no other kind of
divine worship besides the sacrificial, and does not attach to it less
importance than the Priestly Code. But we do not find many traces of the
view that the sacrificial system of Israel is distinguished from all
others by a special form revealed to Moses, which makes it the alone
legitimate. Sacrifice is sacrifice: when offered to Baal, it is
heathenish; when offered to Jehovah, it is Israelite. In the Book of the
Covenant and in both Decalogues it is enjoined before everything to
serve no other God besides Jehovah, but also at the proper season to
offer firstlings and gifts to Him. Negative determinations, for the most
part directed against one heathenish peculiarity or another, occur but
there are no positive ordinances relating to the ritual. How one is to
set about offering sacrifice is taken for granted as already known, and
nowhere figures as an affair for the legislation, which, on the
contrary, occupies itself with quite other things. What the Book of the
Covenant and the Decalogue leave still perhaps doubtful becomes
abundantly clear from the Jehovistic narrative. The narrative has much
more to say about sacrifice than the incorporated law books, and this
may be regarded as characteristic; in the Priestly Code it is quite the
other way. But what is specially important is that, according to the
Jehovistic history, the praxis of sacrifice, and that too of the regular
and God-pleasing sort, extends far beyond the Mosaic legislation, and,
strictly speaking, is as old as the world itself. A sacrificial feast
which the Hebrews wish to celebrate in the wilderness is the occasion of
the Exodus; Moses already builds an altar at Rephidim (Exod. xvii.),
and, still before the ratification of the covenant on Sinai, a solemn
meal in the presence of Jehovah is set on foot on occasion of Jethro's
visit (Exod. xviii.). But the custom is much older still; it was known
and practiced by Abraham, Isaac, and

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jacob. Noah, the
father of all mankind, built the first altar after the Flood, and long
before him Cain and Abel sacrificed in the same way as was usual in
Palestine thousands of years afterwards. Balaam the Aramæan understands
just as well as any Israelite how to offer sacrifices to Jehovah that do
not fail of their effect. All this brings out, with as much clearness as
could be desired, that sacrifice is a very ancient and quite universal
mode of honouring the Deity, and that Israelite sacrifice is
distinguished not by the manner in which, but by the being to whom, it
is offered, in being offered to the God of Israel. According to this
representation of the matter, Moses left the procedure in sacrifice, as
he left the procedure in prayer, to be regulated by the traditional
praxis; if there was any definite origination of the cultus of Israel,
the patriarchs must be thought of, but even they were not the
discoverers of the ritual; they were merely the founders of those holy
places at which the Israelites dedicated gifts to Jehovah, a usage which
was common to the whole world. The contrast with the Priestly Code is
extremely striking, for it is well known that the latter work makes
mention of no sacrificial act prior to the time of Moses, neither in
Genesis nor in Exodus, although from the time of Noah slaughtering is
permitted. The offering of a sacrifice of sheep and oxen as the occasion
of the exodus is omitted, and in place of the sacrifice of the
firstlings we have the paschal lamb, which is slaughtered and eaten
without altar, without priest, and not in the presence of Jehovah. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

The belief that the cultus goes back to pre-Mosaic usage is
unquestionably more natural than the belief that it is the main element
of the Sinaitic legislation; the thought would be a strange one that God
should suddenly have revealed, or Moses discovered and introduced, the
proper sacrificial ritual. At the same time this does not necessitate
the conclusion that the Priestly Code is later than the Jehovist. Nor
does this follow from the very elaborately-developed technique of the
agenda, for elaborate ritual may have existed in the great sanctuaries
at a very early period,—though that, indeed, would not prove it to be
genuinely Mosaic. On the other hand, it is certainly a consideration
deserving of great weight that the representation of the exclusive
legitimacy of so definite a sacrificial ritual, treated in the Priestly
Code as the only possible one in Israel, is one which can have arisen
only as a consequence of the centralisation of the cultus at Jerusalem.
Yet by

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

urging this the decision of the question at present before us would only
be referred back to the result already arrived at in the preceding
chapter, and it is much to be desired that it should be solved
independently, so as not to throw too much weight upon a single support.

2\. In this case also the elements of a decision can only be obtained
from the historical documents dating from the pre-exilic time,—the Books
of Judges, Samuel, and Kings on the one hand, and the writings of the
prophets on the other. As regards those of the first class, they
represent the cultus and sacrifice on all occasions as occupying a large
place in the life of the nation and of the individual. But, although it
would be wrong to say that absolutely no weight is attached to the
*rite*, it is certainly not the fact that the main stress is laid upon
it; the antithesis is not between *rite* and *non-rite*, but between
sacrifice *to Jehovah* and sacrifice *to strange gods*, the reverse of
what we find in the Priestly Code. Alongside of splendid sacrifices,
such as those of the kings, presumably offered in accordance with all
the rules of priestly skill, there occur others also of the simplest and
most primitive type, as, for example, those of Saul (1 Sam. xiv. 35) and
Elisha (1 Kings xix. 21); both kinds are proper if only they be
dedicated to the proper deity. Apart from the exilian redaction of the
Book of Kings, which reckons the cultus outside of Jerusalem as
heretical, it is nowhere represented that a sacrifice could be dedicated
to the God of Israel, and yet be illegitimate. Naaman (2 Kings v. 17),
it is to be supposed, followed his native Syrian ritual, but this does
not in the least impair the acceptability of his offering. For reasons
easily explained, it is seldom that an occasion arises to describe the
ritual, but when such a description is given it is only with violence
that it can be forced into accordance with the formula of the law. Most
striking of all is the procedure of Gideon in Judges vi. 19-21, in which
it is manifest that the procedure still usual at Ophrah in the time of
the narrator is also set forth. Gideon boils a he-goat and bakes in the
ashes cakes of unleavened bread, places upon the bread the flesh in a
basket and the broth in a pot, and then the meal thus prepared is burnt
in the altar flame. It is possible that instances may have also occurred
in which the rule of the Pentateuch is followed, but the important point
is that the distinction between legitimate and heretical is altogether
wanting. When the Book of Chronicles is compared the difference is at
once perceived.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

The impression derived from the historical books is confirmed by the
prophets. It is true that in their polemic against confounding worship
with religion they reveal the fact that in their day the cultus was
carried on with the utmost zeal and splendour, and was held in the
highest estimation. But this estimation does not rest upon the opinion
that the cultus, as regards its matter, goes back to Moses or to Jehovah
Himself, gives to the theocracy its distinctive character, and even
constitutes the supernatural priesthood of Israel among the nations, but
simply upon the belief that Jehovah must be honoured by His dependents,
just as other gods are by their subjects, by means of offerings and
gifts as being the natural and (like prayer) universally current
expressions of religious homage. The larger the quantity, and the finer
the quality, so much the better; but that the merit arising from the
presentation depends upon strict observance of etiquette regarded as
Jehovah's law is not suggested. Thus it is that the prophets are able to
ask whether then Jehovah has commanded His people to tax their energies
with such exertions? the fact presupposed being that no such command
exists, and that no one knows anything at all about a ritual Torah.
Amos, the leader of the chorus, says (iv. 4 seq.), "Come to Bethel to
sin, to Gilgal to sin yet more, and bring your sacrifices every morning,
your tithes every three days, for so ye like, ye children of Israel." In
passing sentence of rejection upon the value of the cultus he is in
opposition to the faith of his time; but if the opinion had been a
current one that precisely the cultus was what Jehovah had instituted in
Israel, he would not have been able to say, "For so ye like." "Ye," not
Jehovah; it is an idle and arbitrary worship. He expresses himself still
more clearly in v. 21 seq. "I hate, I despise your feasts, and I smell
not on your holy days; though ye offer me burnt-offerings and your
gifts, I will not accept them; neither do I regard your thank-offerings
of fatted calves. Away from me with the noise of thy songs, the melody
of thy viols I will not hear; but let judgment roll on like waters, and
righteousness like a mighty stream. Did ye offer unto me sacrifices and
gifts in the wilderness the forty years, O house of Israel?" In asking
this last question Amos has not the slightest fear of raising any
controversy; on the contrary, he is following the generally received
belief. His polemic is directed against the praxis of his
contemporaries, but here he rests it upon a theoretical foundation in
which they are at one with him,—on this, namely, that

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the sacrificial worship is not of Mosaic origin. Lastly, if ii. 4 be
genuine, it teaches the same lesson. By the Law of Jehovah which the
people of Judah have despised it is impossible that Amos can have
understood anything in the remotest degree resembling a ritual
legislation. Are we to take it then that he formed his own special
private notion of the Torah? How in that case would it have been
possible for him to make himself understood by the people, or to
exercise influence over them? Of all unlikely suppositions, at all
events it is the least likely that the herdsman of Tekoah, under the
influence of prophetic tradition (which in fact he so earnestly
disclaims), should have taken the Torah for something quite different
from what it actually was.

Hosea, Isaiah, and Micah are in agreement with Amos. The first mentioned
complains bitterly (iv. 6 seq.) that the priests cultivate the system of
sacrifices instead of the Torah. The Torah, committed by Jehovah to
their order, lays it on them as their vocation to diffuse the knowledge
of God in Israel,—the knowledge that He seeks truthfulness and love,
justice and considerateness, and no gifts; but they, on the contrary, in
a spirit of base self-seeking, foster the tendency of the nation towards
cultus, in their superstitions over-estimate of which lies their sin and
their ruin. "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; ye
yourselves (ye priests!) reject knowledge, and I too will reject you
that ye shall not be priests unto me; seeing ye have forgotten the law
of your God, so will I also forget you. The more they are, the more they
sin against me; their glory they barter for shame. They eat the sin of
my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity." From this we see
how idle it is to believe that the prophets opposed "the Law;" they
defend the priestly Torah, which, however, has nothing to do with
cultus, but only with justice and morality. In another passage (viii. 11
seq.) we read, "Ephraim has built for himself many altars, to sin; the
altars are there for him, to sin. How many soever my instructions
(torothái) may be, they are counted those of a stranger." This text has
had the unmerited misfortune of having been forced to do service as a
proof that Hosea knew of copious writings similar in contents to our
Pentateuch. All that can be drawn from the contrast "instead of
following my instructions they offer sacrifice" (for that is the meaning
of the passage) is that the prophet had never once dreamed of the
possibility of cultus being made the subject of Jehovah's directions. In
Isaiah's discourses the well-known passage of

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the first chapter belongs to this connection: "To what purpose is the
multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord. I am weary with
the burnt-offerings of rams and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not
in the blood of bullocks and of lambs and of he-goats. When ye come to
look upon my face, who hath required this at your hands?—to trample my
courts!" This expression has long been a source of trouble, and
certainly the prophet could not possibly have uttered it if the
sacrificial worship had, according to any tradition whatever, passed for
being specifically Mosaic. Isaiah uses the word Torah to denote not the
priestly but the prophetical instruction (i. 10, ii. 3, v. 24, viii. 16,
20, xxx. 9); as both have a common source and Jehovah is the proper
instructor (xxx. 20), this is easily explicable, and is moreover full of
instruction as regards the idea involved; the contents of the Priestly
Code fit badly in with the Torah of i. 10. Lastly, Micah's answer to the
people's question, how a return of the favour of an angry God is to be
secured, is of conspicuous significance (vi. 6 seq.): "Shall I come
before Him with burnt-offerings with calves of a year old? Is the Lord
pleased with thousands of rams, with ten thousands of rivers of oil?
Shall I give my first-born for my transgression, the fruit of my body as
atonement for my soul?—It hath been told thee, O man, what is good, and
what Jehovah requireth of thee. Nay, it is to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly before thy God." Although the blunt statement
of the contrast between cultus and religion is peculiarly prophetic,
Micah can still take his stand upon this, "It hath been told thee, O
man, what Jehovah requires." It is no new matter, but a thing well
known, that sacrifices are not what the Torah of the Lord contains.

That we have not inferred too much from these utterances of the older
prophets is clear from the way in which they are taken up and carried on
by Jeremiah, who lived shortly before the Babylonian exile. Just as in
vi. 19 seq. he opposes the Torah to the cultus, so in vii. 11 seq. he
thus expresses himself: "Add your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices,
and eat flesh! For I said nought unto your fathers, and commanded them
nought, in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices. But this thing commanded I
them: hearken to my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my
people, and walk ye in the way that I shall always teach you, that it
may be well with you." The view indeed, that the prophets

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (who, from the
connection, are the ever-living voice to which Israel is to hearken) are
the proper soul of the theocracy, the organ by which Jehovah influences
and rules it, has no claim to immemorial antiquity. But no stress lies
upon the positive element here; enough that at all events Jeremiah is
unacquainted with the Mosaic legislation as it is contained in the
Priestly Code. His ignoring of it is not intentional, for he is far from
hating the cultus (xvii. 26). But, as priest and prophet, staying
continually in the temple at Jerusalem, he must have known it, if it had
existed and actually been codified. The fact is one which it is
difficult to get over.

Thus the historical witnesses, particularly the prophets, decide the
matter in favour of the Jehovistic tradition. According to the universal
opinion of the pre-exilic period, the cultus is indeed of very old and
(to the people) very sacred usage, but not a Mosaic institution; the
ritual is not the main thing in it, and is in no sense the subject with
which the Torah deals. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) In other
words, no trace can be found of acquaintance with the Priestly Code,
but, on the other hand, very clear indications of ignorance of its
contents.

3\. In this matter the transition from the pre-exilic to the post-exilic
period is effected, not by Deuteronomy, but by Ezekiel the priest in
prophet's mantle, who was one of the first to be carried into exile. He
stands in striking contrast with his elder contemporary Jeremiah. In the
picture of Israel's future which he drew in B.C. 573 (chaps.
xl.-xlviii.), in which fantastic hopes are indeed built upon Jehovah,
but no impossible demand made of man, the temple and cultus hold a
central place. Whence this sudden change? Perhaps because now the
Priestly Code has suddenly awakened to life after its long trance, and
become the inspiration of Ezekiel? The explanation is certainly not to
be sought in any such occurrence, but simply in the historical
circumstances. So long as the sacrificial worship remained in actual
use, it was zealously carried on, but people did not concern themselves
with it theoretically, and had not the least occasion for reducing it to
a code. But once the temple was in ruins, the cultus at an end, its
*personnel* out

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of employment, it is easy to understand how the sacred praxis should
have become a matter of theory and writing, so that it might not
altogether perish, and how an exiled priest should have begun to paint
the picture of it as he carried it in his memory, and to publish it as a
programme for the future restoration of the theocracy. Nor is there any
difficulty if arrangements, which as long as they were actually in force
were simply regarded as natural, were seen after their abolition in a
transfiguring light, and from the study devoted to them gained
artificially a still higher value. These historical conditions supplied
by the exile suffice to make clear the transition from Jeremiah to
Ezekiel, and the genesis of Ezekiel xl.-xlviii. The co-operation of the
Priestly Code is here not merely unnecessary, it would be absolutely
disconcerting. Ezekiel's departure from the ritual of the Pentateuch
cannot be explained as intentional alterations of the original; they are
too casual and insignificant. The prophet, moreover, has the rights of
authorship as regards the end of his book as well as for the rest of it;
he has also his right to his picture of the future as the earlier
prophets had to theirs. And finally, let its due weight be given to the
simple fact that an exiled priest saw occasion to draft such a sketch of
the temple worship. What need would there have been for it, if the
realised picture, corresponding completely to his views, had actually
existed, and, being already written in a book, wholly obviated any
danger lest the cultus should become extinct through the mere fact of
its temporary cessation?

Here again a way of escape is open by assuming a lifeless existence of
the law down to Ezra's time. But if this is done it is unallowable to
date that existence, not from Moses, but from some other intermediate
point in the history of Israel. Moreover, the assumption of a
codification either as preceding all praxis, or as alongside and
independent of it, is precisely in the case of sacrificial ritual one of
enormous difficulty, for it is obvious that such a codification can only
be the final result of an old and highly developed use, and not the
invention of an idle brain. This consideration also makes retreat into
the theory of an illegal praxis impossible, and renders the legitimacy
of the actually subsisting indisputable.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

#### II.

At all times, then, the sacrificial worship of Israel existed, and had
great importance attached to it, but in the earlier period it rested
upon custom, inherited from the fathers, in the post-exilian on the law
of Jehovah, given through Moses. At first it was naive, and what was
chiefly considered was the quantity and quality of the gifts; afterwards
it became legal,—the scrupulous fulfilment of the law, that is, of the
prescribed ritual, was what was looked to before everything. Was there
then, apart from this, strictly speaking, no material difference? To
answer this question our researches must be carried further afield,
after some preliminary observations have been made in order to fix our
position.

1\. In the Pentateuch the sacrificial ritual is indeed copiously
described, but nowhere in the Old Testament is its significance formally
explained; this is treated as on the whole self-evident and familiar to
every one. The general notion of a sacrifice is in the Priestly Code
that of *ḳorban*, in the rest of the Old Testament that of
*minḥa*, <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) *i.e.*, "gift;" the
corresponding verbs are *haḳrib* and *haggish*, *i.e.*, "to bring near."
Both nouns and both verbs are used originally for the offering of a
present to the king (or the nobles) to do him homage, to make him
gracious, to support a petition (Judges iii. 17 seq.; 1 Sam. x. 27; 1
Kings v. 1 \[A.V. iv. 21\]), and from this are employed with reference
to the highest King (Malachi i. 8).

Δῶρα θεοὺς πείθει, δῶῤ αἰδοίους βασιλῆας

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The gift must not
be unseasonably or awkwardly thrust upon the recipient, not when the
king's anger is at white heat, and not by one the sight of whom he
hates.

With respect to the matter of it, the idea of a sacrifice is in itself
indifferent, if the thing offered only have value of some sort, and is
the property of the offerer. Under *ḳorban* and *minḥa* is included also
that which the Greeks called *anathema*. The sacred dues which at a
later

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

date fall to the priest were without doubt originally ordinary
offerings, and amongst these are found even wool and flax (Deut. xviii.
4; Hos. ii. 7, 11 \[A.V. 5, 9\]). But it is quite in harmony with the
*naïveté* of antiquity that as to man so also to God that which is
eatable is by preference offered; in this there was the additional
advantage, that what God had caused to grow was thus rendered back to
Him. In doing this, the regular form observed is that a meal is prepared
in honour of the Deity, of which man partakes as God's guest. Offering
without any qualifying expression always means a meat or drink offering.
On this account the altar is called a table, on this account also salt
goes along with flesh, oil with meal and bread, and wine with both; and
thus also are we to explain why the flesh, according to rule, is put
upon the altar in pieces and (in the earlier period) boiled, the corn
ground or baked. Hence also the name "bread of Jehovah" for the offering
(Lev. xxi. 22). It is of course true that "in his offering the
enlightened Hebrew saw no banquet to Jehovah:" but we hardly think of
taking the enlightened Protestant as a standard for the original
character of Protestantism.

The manner in which the portions pertaining to God are conveyed to Him
varies. The most primitive is the simple "setting in order" (‏ארך‎,
struere) and "pouring out" (‏שפך‎, fundere) in the case of the shewbread
and drink offerings; to this a simple eating and drinking would
correspond. But the most usual is burning, or, as the Hebrews express
it, "making a savour" (‏הקטיר‎), to which corresponds the more delicate
form of enjoyment, that of smelling. Originally, however, it is God
Himself who consumes what the flame consumes. In any case the burning is
a means of conveying the offering, not, as one might perhaps be disposed
to infer from the "sweet savour" (‏ריח ניחח‎ Gen. viii. 21), a means of
preparing it. For in ancient times the Hebrews did not roast the flesh,
but boiled it; in what is demonstrably the oldest ritual (Judges vi.
19), the sacrifice also is delivered to the altar flame boiled; and,
moreover, not the flesh only but also the bread and the meal are burnt.

As regards the distinction between bloodless and bloody offerings, the
latter, it is well known, are preferred in the Old Testament, but,
strictly speaking, the former also have the same value and the same
efficacy. The incense-offering is represented as a means of propitiation
(Lev. xvi., Num. xvii. 12 \[A.V. xvi. 47\]), so also are the ten
thousands of rivers of oil figuring between the thousands of rams and
the human

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

sacrifice in Micah vi. That the cereal offering is never anything but an
accompaniment of the animal sacrifice is a rule which does not hold,
either in the case of the shewbread or in that of the high priest's
daily *minḥa* (Lev. vi. 13 \[A.V. 20\]; Neh. x. 35). Only the
drink-offering has no independent position, and was not in any way the
importance it had among the Greeks.

When a sacrifice is killed, the offering consists not of the blood but
of the eatable portions of the flesh. Only these can be designated as
the "bread of Jehovah," and, moreover, only the eatable domestic animals
can be presented. At the same time, however, it is true that in the case
of the bloody offerings a new motive ultimately came to be associated
with the original idea of the gift. The life of which the blood was
regarded as the substance (2 Sam. xxiii. 17) had for the ancient Semites
something mysterious and divine about it; they felt a certain religious
scruple about destroying it. With them flesh was an uncommon luxury, and
they ate it with quite different feelings from those with which they
partook of fruits or of milk. Thus the act of killing was not so
indifferent or merely preparatory a step as for example the cleansing
and preparing of corn; on the contrary, the pouring out of blood was
ventured upon only in such a way as to give it back to the Deity, the
source of life. In this way, not by any means every meal indeed, but
every slaughtering, came to be a sacrifice. What was primarily aimed at
in it was a mere restoration of His own to the Deity, but there readily
resulted a combination with the idea of sacrifice, whereby the latter
was itself modified in a peculiar manner. The atoning efficacy of the
gift began to be ascribed mainly to the blood and to the vicarious value
of the life taken away. The outpouring and sprinkling of blood was in
all sacrifices a rite of conspicuous importance, and even the act of
slaughtering in the case of some, and these the most valued, a holy act.

2\. The features presented by the various literary sources harmonise
with the foregoing sketch. But the Priestly Code exhibits some
peculiarities by which it is distinguished from the pre-exilian remains
in matters sacrificial.

In the first place, it is characterised in the case of bloodless
offerings by a certain refinement of the material. Thus in the
meal-offerings it will have ‏סלת‎ (simila) not ‏קמח‎ (far). In the whole
pre-exilian literature the former is mentioned only three times
altogether, but

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

never in connection with sacrifice, where, on the contrary, the ordinary
meal is used (Judges vi. 19; 1 Sam. i. 24). That this is no mere
accident appears on the one hand from the fact that in the later
literature, from Ezekiel onwards, ‏קמח‎ as sacrificial meal entirely
disappears, and ‏סלת‎ invariably take its place; on the other hand, from
this that the LXX (or the Hebrew text from which that version was taken)
is offended by the illegality of the material in 1 Sam. i. 24, and
alters the reading so as to bring it to conformity with the Law. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)

So also a striking preference is shown for incense. With every
meal-offering incense is offered upon the altar; in the inner sanctuary
a special mixture of spices is employed, the accurately given recipe for
which is not to be followed for private purposes. The offering of
incense is the privilege of the higher priesthood; in the ritual of the
great Day of Atonement, the sole one in which Aaron must discharge the
duties in person, it occupies a conspicuous place. It has an altogether
dangerous sanctity; Aaron's own sons died for not having made use of the
proper fire. It is the cause of death and destruction to the Levites of
Korah's company who are not entitled to use it, while immediately
afterwards, in the hands of the legitimate high priest, it becomes the
means of appeasing the anger of Jehovah, and of staying the plague. Now
of this offering, thus invested with such a halo of sanctity, the older
literature of the Jewish Canon, down to Jeremiah and Zephaniah, knows
absolutely nothing. The verb ‏קטּר‎ there used invariably and
exclusively of the *burning* of fat or meal, and thereby making to God a
sweet-smelling savour; it is never used to denote the *offering of
incense*, and the substantive ‏קטרת‎ as a sacrificial term has the quite
general signification of that which is burnt on the altar. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34.md)

In enumerations where the prophets

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

exhaust everything pertaining to sacred gifts and liturgic performances,
in which, for the sake of lengthening the catalogue, they do not shrink
from repetitions even, there is not any mention of incense-offerings,
neither in Amos (iv. 4 seq., v. 21 seq.) nor in Isaiah (i. 11 seq.) nor
in Micah (vi. 6 seq.). Shall we suppose that they all of them forget
this subject by mere accident, or that they conspired to ignore it? If
it had really existed, and been of so great consequence, surely one of
them at least would not have failed to speak of it. The Jehovistic
section of the Hexateuch is equally silent, so also the historical
books, except Chronicles, and so the rest of the prophets, down to
Jeremiah, who (vi. 20) selects incense as the example of a rare and
far-fetched offering: "To what purpose cometh there to me incense from
Sheba, and the precious cane from a far country?" Thenceforward it is
mentioned in Ezekiel, in Isaiah (xl.-lxvi.), in Nehemiah, and in
Chronicles; the references are continuous. The introduction of incense
is a natural result of increased luxury; one is tempted to conjecture
that its use must have first crept into the Jehovah worship as an
innovation from a more luxuriously-developed foreign cultus. But the
importance which it has attained in the ritual legislation of the
Pentateuch is manifest above all from this, that it has led to the
invention of a peculiar new and highly sacred piece of furniture,
namely, the golden altar in the inner tabernacle, which is unknown to
history, and which is foreign even to the kernel of the Priestly Code
itself.

We expect to find the altar of incense in Exod. xxv.-xxix., but find it
instead as an appendix at the beginning of Exod. xxx. Why not until now?
why thus separated from the other furnishings of the inner sanctuary?
and not only so, but even after the ordinances relating to the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

adornment of the priests, and the inauguration of the divine service?
The reason why the author of chaps. xxv.-xxix. is thus silent about the
altar of incense in the passage in which the furniture of the
tabernacle, consisting of ark, table, and candlestick, is described, is,
that he does not know of it. There is no other possibility; for he
cannot have forgotten it. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) And the
phenomenon is repeated; the altar of incense occurs only in certain
portions of the Priestly Code, and is absent from others where it could
not possibly have been omitted, had it been known. The rite of the most
solemn atoning sacrifice takes place in Leviticus iv. indeed on the
golden altar, but in Exod. xxix., Levi. viii., ix., without its use. A
still more striking circumstance is, that in passages where the holiest
incense-offering itself is spoken of, no trace can be discovered of the
corresponding altar. This is particularly the case in Lev. xvi. To burn
incense in the sanctuary, Aaron takes a censer, fills it with coals from
the altar of burnt-offering (ver. 12, 18-20), and lays the incense upon
them in the adytum. Similarly in Lev. x., Num. xvi., xvii., incense is
offered on censers, of which each priest possesses one. The coals are
taken from the altar of burnt-offering (Num. xvii. 11; \[A.V. xvi.
46\]), which is plated with the censers of the Korahite Levites (xvii.
3, 4; \[A.V. xvi. 38, 39\]); whoever takes fire from any other source,
incurs the penalty of death (Lev. x. 1 seq.). The altar of incense is
everywhere unknown here; the altar of burnt-offering is the only altar,
and, moreover, is always called simply *the altar*, as for example, even
in Exodus xxvii., where it would have been specially necessary to add
the qualifying expression. Only in certain later portions of the
Priestly Code does the name altar of burnt-offering occur, viz., in
those passages which do recognise the altar of incense. In this
connection the command of Exod. xxvii. as compared with the execution in
Exod. xxxviii. is characteristic.

The golden altar in the sanctuary is originally simply the golden

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

table; the variation of the expression has led to a doubling of the
thing. Ezekiel does not distinguish between the table and the altar in
the temple, but uses either expression indifferently. For he says (xii.
21 seq.): "Before the adytum stood what looked like an altar of wood,
three cubits in height, two cubits in length and breadth, and it had
projecting corners, and its frame and its walls were of wood; this is
the table which is before the Lord." In like manner he designates the
service of the priests in the inner sanctuary as table-service (xliv.
16); table is the name, altar the function. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) In 1 Kings vii. 48, it is true that the
golden altar and the golden table are mentioned together. It seems
strange, however, that in this case the concluding summary mentions one
piece of furniture more—and that piece one of so great importance—than
the preceding detailed description; for in the latter only the
preparation of the golden altar is spoken of, and nothing is said of the
golden table (vi. 20-22). As matters stand, nothing is less improbable
than that some later transcriber should have interpolated the golden
table in vii. 48, regarding it, in accordance with the Pentateuch, as
distinct from the golden altar, and therefore considering its absence as
an omission. From other considerations also, it is clear that the text
of the whole chapter is in many ways corrupt and interpolated.

It is not to be wondered at if in the post-exilian temple there existed
both a golden altar and a golden table. We learn from 1 Macc. i. 21
seq., iv. 49, that both were carried off by Antiochus Epiphanes, and
renewed at the Feast of the Dedication. But it causes no small surprise
to find that at the destruction of Jerusalem the Romans found and
carried off table and candlestick only. What can have become, in the
meantime, of the golden altar of incense? And it is further worth
remarking that in the LXX the passage Exod. xxxvii. 25-29 is absent;
that is to say, the altar of incense is indeed commanded, but there is
no word of its execution. In these circumstances, finally, the
vacillating statement as to its position in Exod. xxx. 6, and the
supposed mistake of the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, are
important and intelligible. Compare also 2 Mac. ii. 5, where only the
table, but not the altar, is hidden by Jeremiah.

So much for the offering of incense and its altar. We may in like manner
venture to regard it as a kind of refinement, though rather a

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

refinement of idea, that the flesh of the sacrifice in the Priestly Code
is no longer boiled, but consigned to the altar flames in its raw
condition. Such was not the ancient custom, as is seen, not only from
the case of Gideon already cited (Judges vi.), but also from the
procedure at Shiloh, described in 1 Sam. ii., where the sons of Eli will
not wait until the flesh of the sacrifice has been boiled, and the altar
pieces burnt, but demand their share raw for roasting. The meal which
the Deity shares with men is prepared in the same way as for men. This
naive conception gave way before advancing culture, and that at a
comparatively early date. It is possible that another cause may also
have co-operated towards this result. The old method of preparing flesh
in general use among the people, at a later period also, was by boiling.
The word ‏בשל‎ (to seethe in water) occurs with extreme frequency; ‏אלה‎
(to roast), on the other hand, only in Exod. xii. 8, and Isa. xliv. 16,
19. All sacrificial flesh (‏בשלה‎) was boiled, and there was no other
kind. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) But among persons of the upper
class roasting must also have come into use at an early period. "Give
flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not take sodden flesh of
thee, but raw," says the servant of the sons of Eli in 1 Sam. ii. 15.
The fact that in the interval the custom of boiling had gone generally
somewhat out of fashion may accordingly have also contributed to bring
about the abandonment of the old usage of offering the sacrificial
portions boiled. In any case this is the explanation of the circumstance
that the paschal lamb, which originally was boiled like all other
offerings, could, according to the express appointment of the Priestly
Code, be eaten roasted only. <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38.md)

The phenomenon that in the Law meal is by preference offered raw, while
in the earlier period, even as an adjunct of the burnt-offering, it was
presented baked, belongs to the same category. The latter is the case in
Judges vi. 19 at least, and the statement of 1 Sam. i. 24 is also to be
understood in the same sense; the sacrificer brings meal along with him
in order to bake it into *maççah* on the spot (Ezek. xlvi. 20). But he
may bring along with him common, that is leavened, cakes also (1 Sam. x.
3), which seem originally by no means to have

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

been considered unfit to be offered as in Lev. ii. 11. For under this
law of Lev. ii. even the presentation of the shewbread would be
inexplicable, and moreover it is certain that at first the loaves of the
feast of weeks were offerings, properly so called, and not merely dues
to the priests. According, to Amos iv. 5, leavened bread was made use of
precisely at a particularly solemn sacrifice, and a reminiscence of this
usage has been preserved even in Lev. vii. 13, although of course
without any practical weight being attached to it. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) Moreover, *maççah* also means, properly
speaking, only the bread that is prepared in haste and in the most
primitive manner for immediate use, and originally implies no contrast
with leaven, but simply with the more artificial and tedious manners of
producing ordinary bread <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40.md) In the
Priestly Code the materials are finer, but they are as much as possible
left in their raw condition; both are steps in advance.

3\. There is another and much more important difference in the case of
the animal sacrifice. Of this the older practice knows only two kinds
apart from extraordinary varieties, which may be left out of account.
These two are the burnt-offering (*‘Olah*) and the thank-offering
(*Shelem*, *Zebaḥ*, *Zebaḥ-Shelamim*). In the case of the first the
whole animal is offered on the altar; in the other God receives, besides
the blood, only an honorary portion, while the rest of the flesh is
eaten by the sacrificial guests. Now it is worth noticing how seldom the
burnt-offering occurs alone. It is necessarily so in the case of human
sacrifice (Gen. xxii. 2 seq.; Judges xi. 31; <span
id="fr_41"></span>[3](#fn_41) 2 Kings iii. 27; Jer. xix. 5.md); otherwise
it is not usual (Gen. viii. 20; Num. xxiii. 1 seq.; Judges vi. 20, 26,
xiii. 16, 23; 1 Sam. vii. 9 seq.;

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1 Kings iii. 4,
xviii. 34, 38); <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md) moreover, all the
examples just cited are extraordinary or mythical in their character, a
circumstance that may not affect the evidence of the existence of the
custom in itself, but is important as regards the statistics of its
frequency. As a rule, the ‘Olah occurs only in conjunction with Zebaḥim,
and when this is the case the latter are in the majority and are always
in the plural, while on the other hand the first is frequently in the
singular. <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md)

They supplement each other like two corresponding halves; the ‘Olah is,
as the name implies, properly speaking, nothing more than the part of a
great offering that reaches the altar. One might therefore designate as
‘Olah also that part of a single animal which is consecrated to the
Deity; this, however, is never done; neither of the blood nor of the fat
(‏קטר‎) is the verb ‏העלה‎ used, but only of the pieces of the flesh, of
which in the case of the minor offering nothing was burnt. But the
distinction is merely one of degree; there is none in kind; a small
Zebaḥ, enlarged and augmented, becomes an ‘Olah and Zebaḥim; out of a
certain number of slaughtered animals which are eaten by the sacrificial
company, one is devoted to God and wholly given to the flames. For the
rest, it must be borne in mind that as a rule it is only great
sacrificial feasts that the historical books take occasion to mention,
and that consequently the burnt-offering, notwithstanding what has been
said, comes before us with greater prominence than can have been the
average case in ordinary life. Customarily, it is certain, none but
thank-offerings were offered; necessarily so

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

if slaughtering could only be done beside the altar. Where mention is
made of a simple offering in the Books of Samuel and Kings, that it is a
thank-offering is matter of course. 1 Sam. ii. 12 seq. is in this
connection also particularly instructive.

From what has been said it results that according to the praxis of the
older period a meal was almost always connected with a sacrifice. It was
the rule that only blood and fat were laid upon the altar, but the
people ate the flesh; only in the case of very great sacrificial feasts
was a large animal (one or more) given to Jehovah. Where a sacrifice
took place, there was also eating and drinking (Exod. xxxii. 6; Judges
ix. 27; 2 Sam. xv. 11 seq.; Amos ii. 7); there was no offering without a
meal, and no meal without an offering (1 Kings i. 9); at no important
Bamah was entertainment wholly wanting, such a λέσχη as that in which
Samuel feasted Saul, or Jeremiah the Rechabites (1 Sam. ix. 22; Jer.
xxxv. 2). To be merry, to eat and drink before Jehovah, is a usual form
of speech down to the period of Deuteronomy; even Ezekiel calls the
cultus on the high places an *eating* upon the mountains (1 Sam. ix.
13,19 seq.), and in Zechariah the pots in the temple have a special
sanctity (Zech. xiv. 20). By means of the meal in presence of Jehovah is
established a covenant fellowship on the one hand between Him and the
guests, and on the other hand between the guests themselves
reciprocally, which is essential for the idea of sacrifice and gives
their name to the Shelamim (compare Exod. xviii. 12, xxiv. 11). In
ordinary slaughterings this notion is not strongly present, but in
solemn sacrifices it was in full vigour. It is God who invites, for the
house is His; His also is the gift, which must be brought to Him entire
by the offerer before the altar, and the greater portion of which He
gives up to His guests only after that. Thus in a certain sense they eat
at God's table, and must accordingly prepare or sanctify themselves for
it. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) Even on occasions that, to our
way of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

thinking, seem highly unsuitable, the meal is nevertheless not wanting
(Judges xx. 26, xxi. 4; 1 Sam xiii. 9-12). That perfect propriety was
not always observed might be taken for granted, and is proved by Isa.
xxviii. 8 even with regard to the temple of Jerusalem; "all tables are
full of vomit, there is no room." Hence also Eli's suspicion regarding
Hannah was a natural one, and by no means so startling as it appears.

How different from this picture is that suggested by the Priestly Code!
Here one no longer remarks that a meal accompanies every sacrifice;
eating before Jehovah, which even in Deuteronomy is just the expression
for sacrificing, nowhere occurs, or at all events is no act of divine
worship. Slaying and sacrificing are no longer coincident, the
thank-offering of which the breast and right shoulder are to be
consecrated is something different from the old simple Zebaḥ. But,
precisely for this reason, it has lost its former broad significance.
The *mizbéaḥ*, that is, the place where the *zebaḥim* are to be offered,
has been transformed into a *mizbaḥ ha-‘olah*. The burnt-offering has
become quite independent and comes everywhere into the foreground, the
sacrifices which are unconnected with a meal altogether predominate,—so
much that, as is well known, Theophrastus could declare there were no
others among the Jews, who in this way were differentiated from all
other nations. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) Where formerly a
thank-offering which was eaten before Jehovah, and which might with
greater clearness be called a sacrificial meal, was prescribed, the
Priestly Code, as we shall afterwards see, has made out of it simple
dues to the priests, as, for example, in the case of the first-born and
of firstlings. Only in this point it still bears involuntary testimony
to the old custom by applying the names *Todah*, *Neder*, and *Nedabah*,
of which the last two in particular must necessarily have a quite
general meaning (Lev. xxii. 18; Ezek. xlvi. 12), exclusively to the
thank-offering, while *Milluim* and paschal sacrifice are merely
subordinate varieties of it.

4\. What the thank-offering has lost, the sin and trespass offering have
gained; the voluntary private offering which the sacrificer ate in a
joyful company at the holy place has given way before the compulsory, of
which he obtains no share, and from which the character of the sacred
meal has been altogether taken away. The burnt-offering, it is true,
still continues to be a meal, if only a one-sided one, of which God
alone partakes; but in the case of the sin-offering everything is kept
far

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

out of sight which could recall a meal, as, for example, the
accompaniments of meal and wine, oil and salt; of the flesh no portion
reaches the altar, it all goes as a fine to the priest. Now, of this
kind of sacrifice, which has an enormous importance in the Priestly
Code, not a single trace occurs in the rest of the Old Testament before
Ezekiel, neither in the Jehovist and Deuteronomist, nor in the
historical and prophetical books. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)
‘Olah and Zebaḥ comprehend all animal sacrifices, ‘Olah and Minḥah, or
Zebaḥ and Minḥah, all sacrifices whatsoever; nowhere is a special kind
of sacrifice for atonement met with (1 Sam. iii. 14). Hos. iv. 8 does
indeed say: "They eat the sin of my people, and they are greedy for its
guilts," but the interpretation which will have it that the priests are
here reproached with in the first instance themselves inducing the
people to falsification of the sacred dues, in order to make these up
again with the produce of the sin and trespass offerings, is either too
subtle or too dull. <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md) It would be less
unreasonable to co-ordinate with the similarly named sin and trespass
offering of the Pentateuch the five golden mice, and the five golden
emerods with which the Philistines send back the ark, and which in 1
Sam. vi. 3, 4, 8 are designated *asham*, or, still better, the sin and
trespass monies which, according to 2 Kings xii. 17 \[A.V. 16\], fell to
the share of the Jerusalem priests. Only the fact is that even in the
second passage the *asham* and *ḥaṭṭath* are no sacrifices, but, more
exactly to render the original meaning of the words, mere fines, and in
fact money fines. On the other hand, the *ḥaṭṭath* referred to in Micah
vi. 7 has nothing to do with a due of the priests, but simply denotes
the guilt which eventually another takes upon himself. Even in Isa.
liii. 10, a passage which is certainly late, *asham* must not be taken
in the technical sense of the ritual legislation, but simply (as in
Micah) in the sense of guilt, borne by the innocent for the guilty. For
the explanation of this prophetic passage Gramberg has rightly had
recourse to the narrative of 2 Sam. xi. 1-14. "Upon Saul and upon his
house lies blood-guiltiness,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

for having slain the Gibeonites" is announced to David as the cause of a
three years' famine. When asked how it can be taken away, the Gibeonites
answer, "It is not a matter of silver and gold to us with respect to
Saul and his house; let seven men of his family be delivered to us that
we may hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul upon the mountain of
the Lord." This was done; all the seven were hanged.

*Asham* and *ḥaṭṭath* as offerings occur for the first time in Ezekiel,
and appear, not long before his day to have come into the place of the
earlier pecuniary fines (2 Kings xii. 17 \[16\]), which perhaps already
also admitted of being paid in kind; probably in the seventh century,
which seems to have been very open to the mystery of atonement and
bloodshedding, and very fertile in the introduction of new religious
usages. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) The sin and trespass
offerings of the Pentateuch still bear traces of their origin in fines
and penalties; they are not gifts to God, they are not even symbolical,
they are simply mulcts payable to the priests, partly of fixed
commutation value (Lev. v. 15). Apart from the mechanical burning of the
fat they have in common with the sacrifice only the shedding of blood,
originally a secondary matter, which has here become the chief thing.
This circumstance is an additional proof of our thesis. The ritual of
the simple offering has three acts: (1.) the presentation of the living
animal before Jehovah, and the laying on of hands as a token of
manumission on the part of the offerer; (2.) the slaughtering and the
sprinkling of the blood on the altar; (3.) the real or seeming gift of
the sacrificial portions to the Deity, and the meal of the human guests.
In the case of the burnt-offering the meal in the third act disappears,
and the slaughtering in the second comes into prominence as significant
and sacred, inasmuch as (what is always expressly stated) it must take
place in the presence of Jehovah, at the north side of the altar. In the
case of the sin and trespass offering the third act is dropped entirely,
and accordingly the whole significance of the rite attaches to the
slaughtering, which of course also takes place before the altar, and to
the sprinkling of the blood, which has become peculiarly developed

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

here. It is obvious how the metamorphosis of the gift and the meal into
a bloody atonement advances and reaches its acme in this last
sacrificial act.

This ritual seems to betray its novelty even within the Priestly Code
itself by a certain vacillation. In the older corpus of law (Lev.
xvii.-xxvi.) which has been taken into that document, all sacrifices are
still embraced under one or other of the two heads ‏זבח‎ and ‏עלה‎
(xvii. 8, xxii. 18, 21); there are no others. The *asham* indeed occurs
in xix. 21 seq., but, as is recognised, only in a later addition; on the
other hand, it is not demanded <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) in
xxii. 14, where it must have been according to Lev. v. and Num. v. And
even apart from Lev. xvii.-xxvi there is on this point no sort of
agreement between the kernel of the Priestly Code and the later
additions, or "novels," so to speak. For one thing, there is a
difference as to the ritual of the most solemn sin-offering between
Exod. xxix., Lev. ix. on the one hand, and Leviticus iv. on the other;
and what is still more serious, the *trespass*-offering never occurs in
the primary but only in the secondary passages, Lev. iv.-vii., xiv.;
Num. v. 7, 8, vi. 1, xviii. 9. In the latter, moreover, the distinction
between *asham* and *ḥaṭṭath* is not very clear, but only the intention
to make it, perhaps because in the old praxis there actually was a
distinction between ‏כסף חטאות‎ and ‏כסף אשם‎, and in Ezekiel between
‏חטאת‎ and ‏אשם‎. <span id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50.md)

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

#### III.

The turning-point in the history of the sacrificial system was the
reformation of Josiah; what we find in the Priestly Code is the matured
result of that event. It is precisely in the distinctions that are
characteristic of the sacrificial law as compared with the ancient
sacrificial praxis that we have evidence of the fact that, if not all
exactly occasioned by the centralisation of the worship, they were
almost all somehow at least connected with that change.

In the early days, worship arose out of the midst of ordinary life, and
was in most intimate and manifold connection with it. A sacrifice was a
meal, a fact showing how remote was the idea of antithesis between
spiritual earnestness and secular joyousness. A meal unites a definite
circle of guests, and in this way the sacrifice brought into connection
the members of the family, the associates of the corporation, the
soldiers of the army, and, generally speaking, the constituents of any
permanent or temporary society. It is earthly relationships that receive
their consecration thereby, and in correspondence are the natural festal
occasions presented by the vicissitudes of life. Year after year the
return of vintage, corn-harvest, and sheep-shearing brought together the
members of the household to eat and to drink in the presence of Jehovah;
and besides these there were less regularly recurring events which were
celebrated in one circle after another. There was no warlike expedition
which was not inaugurated in this fashion, no agreement that was not
thus ratified, no important undertaking of any kind was gone about
without a sacrifice. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

When an honoured guest arrives, there is slaughtered for him a calf, not
without an offering of the blood and fat to the Deity. The occasion
arising out of daily life is thus inseparable from the holy action, and
is what gives it meaning and character; an end corresponding to the
situation always underlies it. Hence also prayer must not be wanting.
The verb ‏העתיר‎, to "burn" (fat and *minḥa*), means simply to "pray,"
and conversely ‏בקש את יהוה‎, "to seek Jehovah," in point of fact not
unfrequently means to "sacrifice." The gift serves to reinforce

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the question or the request, and to express thankfulness; and the prayer
is its interpretation. This of course is rather incidentally indicated
than expressly said (Hos. v. 6; Isa. i. 15; Jer. xiv. 12; 1 Kings viii.
27 seq.; Prov. xv. 8); we have a specimen of a grace for the offering of
the festival gift only in Deuteronomy xxvi. 3 seq.; a blessing is
pronounced when the slaughtering takes place (1 Sam. ix. 13). The prayer
of course is simply the expression of the feeling of the occasion, with
which accordingly it varies in manifold ways. Arising out of the
exigencies and directed to the objects of daily life, the sacrifices
reflect in themselves a correspondingly rich variety. Our wedding,
baptismal, and funeral feasts on the one hand, and our banquets for all
sorts of occasions on the other, might still be adduced as the most
obvious comparison, were it not that here too the divorce between sacred
and secular destroys it. Religious worship was a natural thing in Hebrew
antiquity; it was the blossom of life, the heights and depths of which
it was its business to transfigure and glorify.

The law which abolished all sacrificial seats, with a single exception,
severed this connection. Deuteronomy indeed does not contemplate such a
result. Here, in marked opposition to what we find in the Priestly Code,
to eat and be merry before Jehovah is the standing phrase for
sacrificing; the idea is that in concentrating all the worship towards
Jerusalem, all that is effected is a mere change of place, the essence
of the thing remaining unaltered. This, however, was a mistake. To
celebrate the vintage festival among one's native hills, and to
celebrate it at Jerusalem, were two very different things; it was not a
matter of indifference whether one could seize on the spot any occasion
that casually offered itself for a sacrificial meal, or whether it was
necessary that one should first enter upon a journey. And it was not the
same thing to appear by oneself at home before Jehovah and to lose
oneself in a large congregation at the common seat of worship. Human
life has its root in local environment, and so also had the ancient
cultus; in being transplanted from its natural soil it was deprived of
its natural nourishment. A separation between it and the daily life was
inevitable, and Deuteronomy itself paved the way for this result by
permitting profane slaughtering. A man lived in Hebron, but sacrificed
in Jerusalem; life and worship fell apart. The consequences which lie
dormant in the Deuteronomic law are fully developed in the Priestly
Code.

This is the reason why the sacrifice combined with a meal, formerly

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

by far the chief, now falls completely into the background. One could
eat flesh at home, but in Jerusalem one's business was to do worship.
Accordingly, those sacrifices were preferred in which the religious
character came to the front with the utmost possible purity and without
any admixture of natural elements, sacrifices of which God received
everything and man nothing,—burnt-offerings, sin-offerings, and
trespass-offerings.

If formerly the sacrifice had taken its complexion from the quality of
the occasion which led to it, it now had essentially but one uniform
purpose—to be a medium of worship. The warm pulse of life no longer
throbbed in it to animate it; it was no longer the blossom and the fruit
of every branch of life; it had its own meaning all to itself. It
symbolised worship, and that was enough. The soul was fled; the shell
remained, upon the shaping out of which every energy was now
concentrated. A manifoldness of rites took the place of individualising
occasions; technique was the main thing, and strict fidelity to rubric.

Once cultus was spontaneous, now it is a thing of statute. The
satisfaction which it affords is, properly speaking, something which
lies outside of itself and consists in the moral satisfaction arising
out of the conscientiousness with which the ritual precepts, once for
all enjoined by God on His people, are fulfilled. The freewill offering
is not indeed forbidden, but value in the strict sense is attached only
to those which have been prescribed, and which accordingly preponderate
everywhere. And even in the case of the freewill offering, everything
must strictly and accurately comply with the restrictions of the
ordinance; if any one in the fulness of his heart had offered in a
*zebaḥ shelamim* more pieces of flesh than the ritual enjoined, it would
have been the worse for him.

Of old the sacrifice combined with a meal had established a special
relation between the Deity and a definite society of guests; the natural
sacrificial society was the family or the clan (1 Sam. i. 1 seq., xvi. 1
seq., xx. 6). Now the smaller sacred fellowships get lost, the varied
groups of social life disappear in the neutral shadow of the universal
congregation or church (‏קהל‎, ‏עדה‎). The notion of this last is
foreign to Hebrew antiquity, but runs through the Priestly Code from
beginning to end. Like the worship itself, its subject also became
abstract, a spiritual entity which could be kept together by no other
means except worship. As now the participation of the "congregation of
the children of Israel" in the sacrifice was of necessity always mainly
ideal, the consequence

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

was that the sacred action came to be regarded as essentially perfect by
virtue of its own efficacy in being performed by the priest, even though
no one was present. Hence later the necessity for a special sacrificial
deputation, the *anshe ma‘amad*. The connection of all this with the
Judaising tendency to remove God to a distance from man, it may be
added, is clear. <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)

Two details still deserve special prominence here. In the Priestly Code
the most important sacrifice is the burnt-offering; that is to say, in
point of fact, the *tamid*, the *holocaustum juge*, consisting of two
yearling lambs which are daily consumed upon the "altar of
burnt-offering," one in the morning, another in the evening. The custom
of daily offering a fixed sacrifice at a definite time existed indeed,
in a simpler form, <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53.md) even in the
pre-exilian period, but alongside of it at that

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

time, the freewill private offerings had a much more important place,
and bulked much more largely. In the law the *tamid* is in point of fact
the fundamental element of the worship, for even the sacrifices of
Sabbaths and feast days consist only of its numerical increase (compare
Num. xxviii., xxix.). Still later, when it is said in the Book of Daniel
that the *tamid* was done away, this is equivalent to saying that the
worship was abolished (viii. 11-13, xi. 31, xii. 11). But now the
dominant position of the daily, Sabbath day, and festival *tamid* means
that the sacrificial worship had assumed a perfectly firm shape, which
was independent of every special motive and of all spontaneity; and
further (what is closely connected with this), that it took place for
the sake of the congregation,—the "congregation" in the technical sense
attached to that word in the Law. Hence the necessity for the general
temple-tax, the prototype of which is found in the poll-tax of half a
shekel for the service of the tabernacle in Exod. xxx. 11 seq. Prior to
the exile, the regular sacrifice was paid for by the Kings of Judah, and
in Ezekiel the monarch still continues to defray the expenses not only
of the Sabbath day and festival sacrifices (xiv. 17 seq.), but also of
the *tamid* (xlvi. 13-15). <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) It is
also a mark of the date that, according to Exod. xxx., the expenses of
the temple worship are met directly out of the poll-tax levied from the
community, which can only be explained by the fact that at that time
there had ceased to be any sovereign. So completely was the sacrifice
the affair of the community in Judaism that the voluntary *ḳorban* of
the individual became metamorphosed into a money payment as a
contribution to the cost of the public worship (Mark vii., xii. 42 seq.;
Matt. xxvii. 6).

The second point is this: Just as the special purposes and occasions of
sacrifice fall out of sight, there comes into increasing prominence the
one uniform and universal occasion—that of sin; and one uniform and
universal purpose—that of propitiation. In the Priestly Code the
peculiar mystery in the case of all animal sacrifices is atonement by
blood; this appears in its purest development in the case of the sin and
trespass offerings, which are offered as well for individuals as for the
congregation and for its head. In a certain sense the great day of
atonement is the culmination of the whole religious and sacrificial

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

service, to which, amid all diversities of ritual, continuously
underlying reference to sin is common throughout. Of this feature the
ancient sacrifices present few traces. It was indeed sought at a very
early period to influence the doubtful or threatening mood of Deity, and
make His countenance gracious by means of rich gifts, but the gift had,
as was natural then, the character of a tentative effort only (Micah vi.
6). There was no such thought as that a definite guilt must and could be
taken away by means of a prescribed offering. When the law discriminates
between such sins as are covered by an offering and such sins as
relentlessly are visited with wrath, it makes a distinction very remote
from the antique; to Hebrew antiquity the wrath of God was something
quite incalculable, its causes were never known, much less was it
possible to enumerate beforehand those sins which kindled it and those
which did not. <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) An underlying
reference of sacrifice to sin, speaking generally, was entirely absent.
The ancient offerings were wholly of a joyous nature,—a merrymaking
before Jehovah with music and song, timbrels, flutes, and stringed
instruments (Hos. ix. 1 seq.; Amos v. 23, viii. 3; Isa. xxx. 3). No
greater contrast could be conceived than the monotonous seriousness of
the so-called Mosaic worship. Νόμος παρεισῆλθεν ἵνα πλεοιάσῃ τὸ
παράπτωμα.

In this way the spiritualisation of the worship is seen in the Priestly
Code as advancing *pari passu* with its centralisation. It receives, so
to speak, an *abstract* religious character; it separates itself in the
first instance from daily life, and then absorbs the latter by becoming,
strictly speaking, its proper business. The consequences for the future
were momentous. The Mosaic "congregation" is the mother of the Christian
church; the Jews were the creators of that idea.

We may compare the cultus in the olden time to the green tree which
grows up out of the soil as it will and can; later it becomes the
regularly shapen timber, ever more artificially shaped with square and
compass. Obviously there is a close connection between the qualitative
antithesis we have just been expounding and the formal one of law and

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

custom from which we set out. Between "naturaliter ea quæ legis sunt
facere" and "secundum legem agere" there is indeed a more than external
difference. If at the end of our first section we found improbable
precisely in this region the independent co-existence of ancient praxis
and Mosaic law, the improbability becomes still greater from the fact
that the latter is filled with a quite different spirit, which can be
apprehended only as Spirit of the age (*Zeitgeist*). It is not from the
atmosphere of the old kingdom, but from that of the church of the second
temple, that the Priestly Code draws its breath. It is in accordance
with this that the sacrificial ordinances as regards their positive
contents are no less completely ignored by antiquity than they are
scrupulously followed by the post-exilian time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[54:1](phai05.htm#fr_30.md) With regard to
sacrifice, Deuteronomy still occupies the same standpoint as JE.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[59:1](phai05.htm#fr_31.md) That the priests were
not mere teachers of law and morals, but also gave ritual instruction
(*e.g.*, regarding cleanness and uncleanness), is of course not denied
by this. All that is asserted is that in pre-exilian antiquity the
priests’ own praxis (at the altar) never constituted the contents of the
Torah, but that their Torah always consisted of instructions to the
laity. The distinction is easily intelligible to those who choose to
understand it.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[61:1](phai05.htm#fr_32.md) Gen. iv. 3-5, Num. xvi.
15; 1 Sam. ii. 17, 29, xxvi. 19; Isa. i. 13; Mal. i. 10-13, ii. 12, 13,
iii. 3, 4. In the Priestly Code *minḥa* is exclusively a terminus
technicus for the meal-offering. The general name in the LXX and in the
New Testament is δῶρον (Matt. v. 23-24, viii. 4, xv. 5, xxiii. 18, 19).
Compare Spencer, "De ratione et origine sacrificiorum" (*De Legibus
Hebræorum ritualibus*, iii. 2), by far the best thing that has ever been
written on the subject.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[64:1](phai05.htm#fr_33.md) Ezekiel xvi. 13, 19,
xlvi. 14; 1 Chron. ix. 29, xxiii. 22; Ecclus. xxxv. 2, xxxviii. 11,
xxxix. 32; Isaiah i. 13 (LXX); lxvi. 3 (LXX). In the Priestly Code ‏סלת‎
occurs more than forty times.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[64:2](phai05.htm#fr_34.md) The verb is used in
*piel* by the older writers, in *hiphil* by the Priestly Code
(Chronicles), and promiscuously in both forms during the transition
period by the author of the Books of Kings. This is the case, at least,
where the forms can with certainty be distinguished, namely, in the
perfect, imperative, and infinitive; the distinction between ‏יקטר‎ and
‏יקטיר‎, ‏מקטר‎ and ‏מקטיר‎ rests, as is well known, upon no secure
tradition. Compare, for example, *ḳaṭṭer jaḳṭirun*, 1 Sam. ii. 16; the
transcribers and punctuators under the influence of the Pentateuch
preferred the hiphil. In the Priestly Code (Chronicles) ‏הקטיר‎ has both
meanings alongside of each other, but when used without a qualifying
phrase it generally means incensing, and when consuming a sacrifice is
intended ‏המזבחה‎ is usually added, "on the altar," that is, the <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> place on which the incense-offering strictly
so called was *not* offered. The substantive ‏קטרת‎ in the sense of "an
offering of incense" in which it occurs exclusively and very frequently
in the Priestly Code, is first found in Ezekiel (viii. 11, xvi. 18,
xxiii. 41) and often afterwards in Chronicles, but in the rest of the
Old Testament only in Proverbs xxvii. 9, but there in a profane sense.
Elsewhere never, not even in passages so late as 1 Sam. ii. 28; Ps.
lxvi. 15, cxli. 2. In authors of a certainly pre-exilian date the word
occurs only twice, both times in a perfectly general sense. Isaiah i.
13: "Bring me no more oblations; it is an abominable incense to me."
Deut. xxxiii. 10: "The Levites shall put incense (*i.e.*, the fat of
thank-offerings) before thee, and whole burnt-offerings upon thine
altar." The name ‏לבנה‎ (frankincense) first occurs in Jeremiah (vi. 20,
xvii. 26, xli. 5); elsewhere only in the Priestly Code (nine times), in
Isa. xl.-lxvi. (three times), in Chronicles and Nehemiah (three times),
and in Canticles (three times). Compare Zeph. iii. 10; 1 Kings ix. 25.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[66:1](phai05.htm#fr_35.md) There is a peculiar
perversity in meeting the objection by alleging other singularities in
the ordinance as for example, that the vessels of the tabernacle are
appointed (chap. xxv.) before the tabernacle itself (chap. xxvi.). This
last is no eccentricity; the order in commanding is first the end, and
then the means; but in obeying, the order is reversed. In like manner,
it is not at all surprising if subsidiary implements, such as benches
for slaughtering. or basins for washing, which have no importance for
the cultus, properly so called, should be either passed over altogether,
or merely brought in as an appendix. The case is not at all parallel
with the omission of the most important utensil of the sanctuary from
the very passage to which it necessarily belongs.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[67:1](phai05.htm#fr_36.md) Malachi, on the other
hand, designates the so-called altar of burnt-offering as a table.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[68:1](phai05.htm#fr_37.md) Accordingly one must
understand ‏עשה‎ also of boiling (Judges vi. 19). Compare the
boiling-houses of the temple still found in Ezek. xlvi. 20-24. In 1 Sam.
i. 9 pronounce *beshéla* instead of *beshilo*, and delete ‏ואהרי שתה‎.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[68:2](phai05.htm#fr_38.md) Compare the polemical
ordinance of Exod. xii. 9 with Deut. xvi. 7.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[69:1](phai05.htm#fr_39.md) The loaves are passed
over in silence in Leviticus vii. 29 seq., although it is in this very
place that the matter of presenting on the part of the offerer is most
fully described. And when it is said (vii. 12), "If he offer it for a
thanksgiving (Todah), then he shall offer with it unleavened cakes
mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil and fine flour
(LXX), mingled with oil;" vii. 13, "\[With\] leavened cakes shall he
offer as a gift with the thank-offering of the Todah," the suspicion
very readily occurs that verse 12 is an authentic interpretation
prefixed, to obviate beforehand the difficulty presented by verse 13,
and that similarly the first ‏על‎ in verse 13 is also a later
correction, which does not harmonise well by any means with the second.
Verse 13 connects itself better with verse 11 than with verse 12.—Exod.
xxxiv. 25.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[69:2](phai05.htm#fr_40.md) Compare Gen. xviii. 6
with xix. 3.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[69:3](phai05.htm#fr_41.md) It is probable that
Jephthah expected a human creature and not an animal to meet him from
his house.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[70:1](phai05.htm#fr_42.md) In the above list of
passages no notice is taken of the *sacrificium juge* of 2 Kings xvi.
15. The statement in 1 Kings iii. 4 is perhaps to be taken along with
iii. 15, but does not become at all more credible on that account. Of
course it is understood that only those passages are cited here in which
mention is made of offerings actually made, and not merely general
statements about one or more kinds of offering. The latter could very
well fix attention upon the ‘Olah alone without thereby throwing any
light upon the question as to the actual practice.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[70:2](phai05.htm#fr_43.md) Exod. x. 25, xviii. 12,
xxiv. 5, xxxii. 6; Joshua viii. 31; Judges xx. 26, xxi. 4; 1 Sam. vi. 14
seq., x. 8, xiii. 9-12; 2 Sam. vi. 17 seq., xxiv. 23-25, 1 Kings iii.
15, viii. 63 seq.; 2 Kings v. 17, x. 24, 25. The zeugma in Judges xx.
26, xxi. 4 is inconsistent with the older *usus loquendi*. The proper
name for the holocaust appears to be ‏כליל‎ (Deuteronomy xxxiii. 10; 1
Samuel vii. 9) not ‏עלה‎. It is impossible to decide whether the
sacrificial due in all sorts of *Zebaḥ* was the same, but most probably
it was not. Probably the *Shelamim* are a more solemn kind of sacrifice
than the simple *Zebaḥ*. The word 'fat' is used in Gen. iv. 4; Exod.
xxiii. 18 in a very general sense. It is not quite clear what is meant
by the blessing of the *Zebaḥ* in 1 Sam. ix. 13; perhaps a kind of grace
before meat.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[71:1](phai05.htm#fr_44.md) In order to appear
before Jehovah the guest adorns himself with clothes and ornaments
(Exod. iii. 22, xi. 2 seq.; Hos. ii. 15 \[A.V. 13\]; Ezek. xvi. 13;
compare Koran, Sur. xx. 61), sanctifies himself (Num. xi. 18) and is
sanctified (1 Sam. xvi. 5; Exod. xix. 10, 14). The sacrificial meal is
regarded as Kodesh (hallowed) for not only the priests, but all the
sanctified persons eat Kodesh (1 Sam. xxi. 5 seq. On what is meant by
sanctification light is thrown by 1 Sam. xxi. 5; 2 Sam. xi. 2. Compare
‏לא לפנו חנף יבא‎ (Job xiii. 16; Lev. vii. 20; Matt. xxii. 11-13).
Jehovah invites the armies of the nations to His sacrifice, for which He
delivers over to them some other nation, and calls the Medes, to whom He
gives Babylon over, His sanctified ones, that is, His guests (Zeph. i. 7
seq.; Jer. xlvi. 10; Ezek. xxxix 17; Isa. xiii. 3).

<span id="fn_45"></span>[72:1](phai05.htm#fr_45.md) Porphyry, *De Abstin.*
ii. 26. Compare Joseph., *C. Ap.*, ii. 13: ὀ͂υτοι εὔχονται ύειν ἐκατόμβας
τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ χρῶνται τοῖς ἰερείος πρὸς εὐωχίαν.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[73:1](phai05.htm#fr_46.md) How great is the
difference in Deut. xxi. 1-9; how very remote the sacrificial idea!

<span id="fn_47"></span>[73:2](phai05.htm#fr_47.md) The sin and guilt are
the sacrificial worship generally as carried on by the people (viii. 11;
Amos iv. 4); in the entire section the prophet is preparing the way for
the here sharply accentuated reproach against the priests that they
neglect the Torah and encourage the popular propensity to superstitious
and impure religious service. Besides, where is there any reproach at
all, according to the Pentateuch, in the first section of iv. 8? And the
second speaks of ‏עונם‎, not of ‏אשמם‎.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[74:1](phai05.htm#fr_48.md) Consider for example
the prevalence of child sacrifice precisely at this time, the
introduction of incense, the new fashions which King Manasseh brought
in, and of which certainly much survived that suited the temper of the
period, and admitted of being conjoined with the worship of Jehovah, or
even seemed to enhance its dignity and solemnity.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[75:1](phai05.htm#fr_49.md) Perhaps it would be
more accurate to say that the *asham* here, in the case of property
unlawfully held, is simply the impost of a fifth part of the value, and
not the sacrifice of a ram, which in Lev. v. is required in addition. In
Num. v. also, precisely this fifth part is called *asham*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[75:2](phai05.htm#fr_50.md) The three sections,
Lev. iv. 1-35 (*ḥaṭṭath*), v. 1-13 (*ḥaṭṭath-asham*), and v. 14-26
(*asham*), are essentially not co-ordinate parts of one whole, but
independent pieces proceeding from the same school. For v. 1-13 is no
continuation of or appendix to iv. 27-35, but a quite independent
treatment of the same material, with important differences of form. The
place of the systematic generality of chap. iv. is here taken by the
definite individual case, and what is analogous to it; the ritual is
given with less minuteness, and the hierarchical subordination of ranks
has no influence on the classification of offences. In this section also
*asham* and *ḥaṭṭath* occur interchangeably as synonymous. In the third
section a ram as an *asham* is prescribed (v. 17-19) for the very case
in which in the first a he-goat or a she-goat is required as *ḥaṭṭath*
(iv. 22, 27). The third section has indeed in form greater similarity to
the second, but cannot be regarded as its true completion, for this
simple reason, that the latter does not distinguish between *ḥaṭṭath*
and *asham*. If Lev. v. 13-16, 20-26 be followed simply without regard
being had to vers. 17-19, the *asham* comes in only in the case of
voluntary restitution of property illegally come by or detained, more
particularly of the sacred dues. The goods must be restored to their
owner augmented by a fifth part of their value; and as an *asham* there
must be added a ram, which falls to the <span id="page_76">p. 76</span>
sanctuary. In Num. v. 5-10 the state of the case is indeed the same, but
the language employed is different, for in this passage it is the
restored property that is called *asham*, and the ram is called ‏איל
הכפרים‎. Comp. Lev. xxii. 14.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[76:1](phai05.htm#fr_51.md) Sacrifice is used as a
pretext in 1 Sam. xvi. 1 seq.; 1 Kings i. 9 seq. Compare Proverbs vii.
14.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[79:1](phai05.htm#fr_52.md) It is not asserted that
the cultus before the law (of which the darker sides are known from Amos
and Hosea) was better than the legal, but merely that it was more
original; the standard of judgment being, not the moral element, but
merely the idea, the primary meaning of worship. Nor is it disputed
further that the belief in the dependence of sacrifices and other sacred
acts upon a laboriously strict compliance with traditional and
prescriptive rites occurs in the case of certain peoples, even in the
remotest antiquity. But with the Israelites, judging by the testimony of
the historical and prophetical books, this was not on the whole the case
any more than with the ancient Greeks; there were no Brahmans or Magians
in either case. Moreover, it must be carefully noted that not even in
the Priestly Code do we yet find the same childish appreciation of the
cultus as occurs in such a work as the Rigveda, and that the strict
rules are not prescribed and maintained with any such notion in view as
that by their observance alone can the taste of the Deity be pleased;
the idea of God is here even strikingly remote from the anthropomorphic,
and the whole cultus is nothing more than an exercise in piety which has
simply been enjoined so once for all without any one being in any way
the better for it.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[79:2](phai05.htm#fr_53.md) See Kuenen, *Godsdienst
van Israel*, ii. 271. According to 2 Kings xvi. 15, an ‏עלה‎ in the
morning and a ‏מנחה‎ in the evening were daily offered in the temple of
Jerusalem, in the time of Ahaz. Ezekiel also (xlvi. 13-15) speaks only
of the morning ‏עלה‎. Compare also Ezra ix. 4; Neh. x. 33. In the
Priestly Code the evening *minḥah* has risen to the dignity of a second
*‘olah;* but at the same time survives in the daily *minḥah* of the high
priest, and is now offered in the morning also (Lev. vi. 12-16). The
daily *minḥah* appears to be older than the daily *‘olah*. For while it
was a natural thing to prepare a meal regularly for the Deity, the
expense of a daily *‘olah* was too great for an ordinary place of
worship, and, besides, it was not in accordance with the custom of men
to eat flesh every day. The offering of the daily *minḥah* is already
employed in 1 Kings xviii. 29, 36, as a mark of time to denote the
afternoon, and this use is continued down to the latest period, while
the tamid, *i.e.*, the *‘olah*, is never so utilised. The oddest custom
of all, however, was doubtless not the daily *minḥah*, but the offering
of the shewbread, which served the same purpose, but was not laid out
fresh every day.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[80:1](phai05.htm#fr_54.md) Compare LXX. The
Massoretic text has corrected the third person (referring to the
princes) into the second, making it an address to the priests, which,
however, is quite impossible in Ezekiel.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[81:1](phai05.htm#fr_55.md) When the wrath is
regulated by the conditions of the "covenant," the original notion
(which scorns the thought of adjustment) is completely changed. What
gave the thing its mysterious awfulness was precisely this: that in no
way was it possible to guard against it, and that nothing could avail to
counteract it. Under the pressure of Jehovah's wrath not only was
sacrifice abandoned, but even the mention of His name was shunned so as
to avoid attracting His attention (Hos. iii. 4, ix. 4; Amos vi. 10).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Sacred Feasts.](phai06.md)
