[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai29) 
[Next](phai31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 16. *THE JEWISH DISPERSION*.

<span class="smallcaps">Something</span> still remains to be said with
reference to the diaspora. We have seen how it began; in spite of
Josephus (*Ant.*, xi. 5, 2), it is to be carried back not to the
Assyrian but merely to the Babylonian captivity; it was not composed of
Israelites, but solely of citizens of the southern kingdom. It received
its greatest impulse from Alexander, and then afterwards from Cæsar. In
the Græco-Roman period Jerusalem at the time of the great festival
presented the appearance of a veritable Babel (Acts ii. 9-11); with the
Jews themselves were mingled the proselytes (Acts ii. 11), for even
already that religion was gaining considerable conquests among the
heathen; as King Agrippa I. writes to the Emperor Caius (Philo, *Legat.
ad Gaium*, sec. 36), "Jerusalem is the metropolis not only of Judæa but
of very many lands, on account of the colonies which on various
occasions (ἐπὶ καιρῶν) it has sent out into the adjoining countries of
Egypt, Phœnicia, Syria, and

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cœlesyria, and
into the more remote Pamphylia, Cilicia, the greater part of Asia Minor
as far as to Bithynia and the remotest parts of Pontus; likewise into
Europe—Thessaly, Bœotia, Macedonia, Ætolia, Attica, Argos, Corinth, most
parts (and these the fairest) of the Peloponnesus. Nor are the Jewish
settlements confined to the mainland only; they are found also in the
more important islands, Euboea, Cyprus, Crete. I do not insist on the
countries beyond the Euphrates, for with few exceptions all of them,
Babylon and the fertile regions around it, have Jewish inhabitants." In
the west of Europe also they were not wanting; many thousands of them
lived in Rome. In those cities where they were at all numerous they,
during the imperial period, formed separate communities; Josephus has
preserved a great variety of documents in which the Roman authorities
recognise their rights and liberties (especially as regards the Sabbath
rest and the observance of festivals). Of greatest importance was the
community in Alexandria; according to Philo a million of Jews had their
residence there under an ethnarch for whom a gerusia was afterwards
substituted by Augustus (*In Flac.*, secs. 6, 10). The extent to which
this diaspora was helpful in the diffusion of Christianity, the manner
in which the mission of the apostles everywhere attached itself to the
synagogues and proseuchai, is well known from the New Testament. That
the Christians of the 1st century had much to suffer along with the Jews
is also a familiar fact. For at this period, in other respects more
favourable to them than any other had previously been, the Jews had
occasionally to endure persecution. The emperors, taking umbrage at
their intrusiveness, more than once banished them from Rome (Acts xviii.
2). The good will of the native population they never secured; they were
most hated in Egypt and Syria, where they were strongest. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_276)

The position of the Jews in the Roman Empire was naturally not improved
by the great risings under Nero, Trajan (in Cyrene, Cyprus,
Mesopotamia), and Hadrian. The East strictly so called, became

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

more and more their proper home. The Christianization of the empire
helped still further in a very special way to detach them from the
Western world. <span id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_277) They sided with the
Persians against the Byzantines; in the year 614 they were even put in
possession of Jerusalem by Chosroes, but were not long able to hold
their own against Heraclius. <span id="fr_278"></span>[2](#fn_278) With
Islam also they found themselves in greater sympathy than with
Christianity, although they were cruelly treated by Mahomet in Arabia,
and driven by Omar out of the Hejaz, and notwithstanding the facts that
they were as matter of course excluded from citizenship, and that they
were held by Moslems as a whole in greater contempt than the Christians.
They throve especially well on what may be called the bridge between
East and West, in Mauretania and Spain, where they were the intellectual
intermediaries between the Arab and the Latin culture. In the Sephardim
and Ashkenazim the distinction between the subtler Oriental and the more
conservative Western Jews has maintained itself in Europe also. From the
8th century onwards Judaism put forth a remarkable side shoot in the
Khazars on the Volga; if legend is to he believed, but little was
required at one time to have induced the Russians to accept the Jewish
rather than the Christian faith.

In the West the equal civil rights which Caracalla had conferred on all
free inhabitants of the empire came to an end, so far as the Jews were
concerned, in the time of Constantine. The state then became the secular
arm of the church, and took action, though with less severity, against
Jews just as against heretics and pagans. As early as the

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

year 315, Constantine made conversion from Christianity to Judaism a
penal offence, and prohibited Jews, on pain of death, from circumcising
their Christian slaves. These laws were re-enacted and made more severe
by Constantius, who attached the penalty of death to marriages between
Jews and Christians. Theodosius I. and Honorius, indeed, by strictly
prohibiting the destruction of synagogues, and by maintaining the old
regulation that a Jew was not to be summoned before a court of justice
on a Sabbath-day, put a check upon the militant zeal of the Church, by
which even Chrysostom, for example, allowed himself to be carried away
at Antioch. But Honorius rendered them ineligible for civil or military
service, leaving open to them only the bar and the decurionate, the
latter being a *privilegium odiosum*. Their liberty to try cases by
their own law was curtailed; the cases between Jews and Christians were
to be tried by Christian judges only. Theodosius II. prohibited them
from building new synagogues, and anew enforced their disability for all
state employments. Most hostile of all was the orthodox Justinian, who,
however, was still more severe against Pagans and Samaritans. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_279) He harassed the Jews with a law
enjoining them to observe Easter on the same day as the Christians, a
law which it was of course found impossible to carry out. <span
id="fr_280"></span>[2](#fn_280)

In the Germanic states which arose upon the ruins of the Roman empire,
the Jews did not fare badly on the whole. It was only in cases where the
state was dominated by the Catholic Church, as, for example; among the
Spanish Visigoths, that they were cruelly oppressed; among the Arian
Ostrogoths, on the other hand, they had nothing to complain of. One
thing in their favour was the Germanic principle that the law to be
applied depended not on the land but on the nationality, as now in the
East Europeans are judged by the consuls according to the law of their
respective nations. The autonomy of the Jewish communities, which had
been curtailed by the later emperors, was now enlarged once more under
the laxer political and legal conditions. The Jews fared remarkably well
under the Frankish monarchy; the Carolingians helped them in every
possible way, making no account of the complaints of the bishops. They
were allowed to hold property in land, but showed no

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

eagerness for it; leaving agriculture to the Germans, they devoted them
selves to trade. The market was completely in their hands; as a
specially lucrative branch of commerce they still carried on the traffic
in slaves, which had engaged them even in ancient times. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_281)

Meanwhile the Church was not remiss in seeking constantly repeated
re-enactments of the old imperial laws, in the framing of which she had
had paramount influence, and which she now incorporated with her own
canon law. <span id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_282) Gradually she succeeded
in attaining her object. In the later Middle Ages the position of the
Jews in the Christian society deteriorated. Intercourse with them was
shunned; their isolation from being voluntary became compulsory; from
the 13th century onwards they were obliged to wear, as a distinctive
mark (more necessary in the East than in the West), a round or square
yellow badge on their breast. <span id="fr_283"></span>[3](#fn_283) The
difference of religion elicited a well-marked religious hate with
oft-repeated deadly outbreaks, especially during the period of the
crusades, and afterwards when the Black Death was raging (1348-50).
Practical consequences like these the Church of course did not
countenance; the popes set themselves against persecutions of the
Jews, <span id="fr_284"></span>[4](#fn_284) but with imperfect success.
The popular aversion rested by no means exclusively on religious
considerations; worldly motives were also present. The Jews of that
period had in a still higher degree than now the control of financial
affairs in their hands; and they used it without scruple. The Church
herself had unintentionally given them a monopoly of the money market,
by forbidding Christians to take interest. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[5](#fn_285) In this way the Jews became

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

rich indeed, but at the same time made themselves still more repugnant
to the Christian population than they previously were by reason of their
religion.

Having, according to the later mediæval system, no rights in the
Christian state, the Jews were tolerated only in those territories where
the sovereign in the exercise of free favour accorded them protection.
This protection was granted them in many quarters, but never for
nothing; numerous and various taxes, which could be raised or changed in
a perfectly arbitrary way, were exacted in exchange. But in countries
where the feeling of nationality attained to a vigorous development, the
spirit of toleration was speedily exhausted; the Jews were expelled by
the act of the state. England was the first kingdom in which this
occurred (1290); France followed in 1395, Spain and Portugal in 1492 and
1495. In this way it came about that the Holy Roman Empire—Germany,
Italy, and adjoining districts—became the chief abode of the Jews. <span
id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_286) In the anarchy which here prevailed they
could best maintain their separate attitude, and if they were expelled
from one locality they readily found refuge in some other. The emperor
had indeed the right of extirpating them altogether (with the exception
of a small number to be left as a memorial); but, in the first place, he
had in various ways given up this right to the states of the empire,
and, moreover, his pecuniary resources were so small that he could not
afford to want the tax which the Jews as his "servi cameræ" paid him for
protecting their persons and property. In spite of many savage
persecutions the Jews maintained their ground, especially in those parts
of Germany where the political confusion was greatest. They even
succeeded in maintaining a kind of autonomy by means of an arrangement
in virtue of which civil processes which they had against each other
were decided by their own rabbins in accordance with the law of the
Talmud. <span id="fr_287"></span>[2](#fn_287)

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

The Jews, through their having on the one hand separated themselves, and
on the other hand been excluded on religious grounds from the Gentiles,
gained an internal solidarity and solidity which has hitherto enabled
them to survive all the attacks of time. The hostility of the Middle
Ages involved them in no danger; the greatest peril has been brought
upon them by modern times, along with permission and increasing
inducements to abandon their separate position. It is worth while to
recall on this point the opinion of Spinoza, who was well able to form a
competent judgment (*Tract. Theol. polit.*, c. 4, *ad fin.*):—"That the
Jews have maintained themselves so long in spite of their dispersed and
disorganised condition is not at all to be wondered at, when it is
considered how they separated themselves from all other nationalities in
such a way as to bring upon themselves the hatred of all, and that not
only by external rites contrary to those of other nations, but also by
the sign of circumcision, which they maintain most religiously.
Experience shows that their conservation is due in a great degree to the
very hatred which they have incurred. When the king of Spain compelled
the Jews either to accept the national religion or to go into
banishment, very many of them accepted the Roman Catholic faith, and in
virtue of this received all the privileges of Spanish subjects, and were
declared eligible for every honour; the consequence was that a process
of absorption began immediately, and in a short time neither trace nor
memory of them survived. Quite different was the history of those whom
the king of Portugal compelled to accept the creed of his nation;
although converted, they continued to live apart from the rest of their
fellow-subjects, having been declared unfit for any dignity. So great
importance do I attach to the sign of circumcision also in this
connection, that I am persuaded that it is sufficient by itself to
maintain the separate existence of the nation for ever." The persistency
of the race may of course prove a harder thing to overcome than Spinoza
has supposed; but nevertheless he will be found to have spoken truly in
declaring that the so-called emancipation of the Jews must inevitably
lead to the extinction of Judaism wherever the process is extended
beyond the political to the social sphere. For the accomplishment of
this centuries may be required.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[543:1](phai30.htm#fr_276) Compare Schürer,
*Neutest. Zeitgeschichte* (1874), sec. 31. The place taken by the Jewish
element in the world of that time is brilliantly set forth by Mommsen in
his *History of Rome* (book v. chapter ii.; English translation iv. p.
538 seq., 1866):—"How numerous even in Rome the Jewish population was
already before Cæsar's time, and how closely at the same time the Jews
even then kept together as fellow-countrymen, is shown by the remark of
an author of this period, that it was dangerous for a governor to offend
the Jews in his province, because he might then certainly reckon on
being hissed after his return, by the populace of the capital. Even at
this time the predominant business <span id="page_544">p. 544</span> of
the Jews was trade. . . . At this period too we encounter the peculiar
antipathy of the Occidentals towards this so thoroughly Oriental race
and their foreign opinions and customs. This Judaism, although not the
most pleasing feature in the nowhere pleasing picture of the mixture of
nations which then prevailed, was, nevertheless, an historical element
developing itself in the natural course of things,. . . which Cæsar just
like his predecessor Alexander fostered as far as possible. . . .They
did not, of course, contemplate placing the Jewish nationality on an
equal footing with the Hellenic or Italo-Hellenic. But the Jew who has
not, like the Occidental, received the Pandora's gift of political
organisation, and stands substantially in a relation of indifference to
the state, who, moreover, is as reluctant to give up the essence of his
national idiosyncrasy as he is ready to clothe it with any nationality
at pleasure and to adapt himself up to a certain degree to foreign
habits—the Jew was, for this very reason, as it were, made for a state
which was to be built on the ruins of a hundred living polities, and to
be endowed with a somewhat abstract and, from the outset, weakened
nationality. In the ancient world also Judaism was an effective leaven
of cosmopolitanism and of national decomposition."

<span id="fn_277"></span>[544:1](phai30.htm#fr_277) For a brief time
only were they again favoured by Julian the Apostate; compare Gibbon,
chapter xxiii.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[544:2](phai30.htm#fr_278) Gibbon, chapter
xlvi.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[545:1](phai30.htm#fr_279) Cod. Theod., xvi. 8:
"De Judæis, Cœlicolis, et Samaritanis;" *Cod. Just.*, i. 9: "De Judæis
et Cœlicolis." With regard to these cœlicolæ, see Gothofredus on *Cod.
Theod.*, xvi. 8, 9, and also J. Bernays, "Ueber die Gottesfürchtigen bei
Juvenal," in the *Comm. Philol in hon. Th. Mommsen*, 1877, p. 163.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[545:2](phai30.htm#fr_280) Gibbon, ch. xlvii.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[546:1](phai30.htm#fr_281) Agobardus
Lugdunensis, *Die Insolentia Judæorum, De Judaicis superstitionibus*.
Agobard was no superstitious fanatic, but one of the weightiest and most
enlightened ecclesiastics of the Middle Ages.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[546:2](phai30.htm#fr_282) Compare Decret. i.,
dist. 45, c. 3; Decr. ii., caus. 23, qæst. 8, c. 9, caus. 28, qu. 1, c.
10-12; Decr. iii., de consecr., dist. 4, c. 93; Decretal. Greg. 5, 6
("De Judæis, Sarracenis, et eorum servis"), 5, 19, 18; Extrav. commun.
5, 2.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[546:3](phai30.htm#fr_283) Compare Du Cange, s.
v. "Judæi;" also Reuter, *Gesch. d. Aufklärung im Mittelalter*, i. 154
seq. In spite of all the legal restrictions laid upon them, the Jews
still continued to have great influence with the princes, and more
especially with the popes, of the Middle Ages.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[546:4](phai30.htm#fr_284) Decr. ii. 23, 8, 9.
Alexander II. omnibus episcopis Hispaniæ: Dispar . . . est Judæorum et
Sarracenorum causa; in illos enim, qui Christianos persequuntur et ex
urbibus et propriis sedibus pellunt, juste pugnatur, hi vero ubique
servire parati sunt.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[546:5](phai30.htm#fr_285) Decretal. Greg. v.
19, 18. Innocent III. in name of the Lateran Council: Quanto amplius
Christiana religio ab exactione compescitur usurarum, tanto gravisu
super his Judæorum perfidia insolescit, ita quod brevi tempore
Christianorum exhauriunt <span id="page_547">p. 547</span> facultates.
Volentes igitur in hac parte prospicere Christianis, ne a Judæis
immaniter aggraventur, synodali decreto statuimus, ut, si de cætero
quocunque prætextu Judæi a Christianis graves immoderatasve usuras
extorserint, Christianorum eis participium subtrahatur, donec de
immoderato gravamine satisfecerint competenter. . . . Principibus autem
injungimus, ut propter hoc non sint Christianis infesti, sed potius a
tanto gravamine studeant cohibere Judæos.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[547:1](phai30.htm#fr_286) The Polish Jews are
German Jews who migrated in the Middle Ages to Poland, but have
maintained to the present day their German speech, a mediæval
South-Frankish dialect, of course greatly corrupted. In Russian "German"
and "Jew" mean the same thing.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[547:2](phai30.htm#fr_287) Stobbe, *Die Juden
in Deutschl. währ. d. Mittelalt.*, Brunsw., 1866.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Passages Discussed](phai31)
