[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai23) 
[Next](phai25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

### 10. *THE CAPTIVITY AND THE RESTORATION*.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> exiled Jews were not scattered all
over Chaldæa, but were allowed to remain together in families and clans.
Many of them, notwithstanding this circumstance, must have lapsed and
become merged in the surrounding heathenism; but many also continued
faithful to Jehovah and to Israel. They laboured under much depression
and sadness, groaning under the wrath of Jehovah, who had rejected His
people and cancelled His covenant. They were lying under a sort of vast
interdict; they could not celebrate any sacrifice or keep any feast;
they could only observe days of fasting and humiliation, and such rites
as had no inseparable connection with the holy land. The observance of
the Sabbath, and the practice of the rite of circumcision, acquired much
greater importance than they formerly possessed as signs of a common
religion. The meetings on the Sabbath day out of which the synagogues
were afterwards developed appear to have first come into use during this
period; perhaps also even then it had become customary to read aloud
from the prophetic writings which set forth that all had happened in the
providence of God, and moreover that the days of adversity were not to
last for ever.

Matters improved somewhat as Cyrus entered upon his victorious career.
Was he the man in whom the Messianic prophecies had found their
fulfilment? The majority were unwilling to think so. For it was out of
Israel (they argued) that the Messiah was to proceed who should
establish the kingdom of God upon the ruins of the kingdoms of the
world; the restitution effected by means of a Persian could only be
regarded as a passing incident in the course of an historical process
that had its goal entirely elsewhere. This doubt was met by more than
one prophetical writer, and especially by the great anonymous author to
whom we are indebted for Isa. xl.-lxvi. "Away with sorrow; deliverance
is at the door! Is it a humiliating thing that Israel should owe its
freedom to a Persian? Nay, is it not rather a proof of the world-wide
sway of the God of Jacob that He should thus summon His instruments from
the ends of the earth? Who else than Jehovah could have thus sent Cyrus?
Surely not the false gods which he has destroyed? Jehovah alone it was
who foretold and foreknew the things which are now coming to
pass,—because long ago He had prearranged and predetermined them, and
they are now being executed in accordance

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

with his plan. Rejoice therefore in the prospect of your near
deliverance; prepare yourselves for the new era; gird yourselves for the
return to your homes." It is to be observed, as characteristic in this
prophecy, how the idea of Jehovah as God alone and God over all—in
constantly recurring lyrical parenthesis he is praised as the author of
the world and of all nature—is yet placed in positive relation to Israel
alone, and that upon the principle that Israel is in exclusive
possession of the universal truth, which cannot perish with Israel, but
must through the instrumentality of Israel, become the common possession
of the whole world. "There is no God but Jehovah, and Israel is his
prophet."

For many years the Persian monarch put the patience of the Jews to the
proof; Jehovah's judgment upon the Chaldæans, instead of advancing,
seemed to recede. At length, however, their hopes were realised; in the
year 538 Cyrus brought the empire of Babylon to an end, and gave the
exiles leave to seek their fatherland once more. This permission was not
made use of by all, or even by a majority. The number of those who
returned is stated at 42,360; whether women and children are included in
this figure is uncertain. On arriving at their destination, after the
difficult march through the desert, they did not spread themselves over
the whole of Judah, but settled chiefly in the neighbourhood of
Jerusalem. The Calebites, for example, who previously had had their
settlements in and around Hebron, now settled in Bethlehem and in the
district of Ephrath. They found it necessary to concentrate themselves
in face of a threatened admixture of doubtful elements. From all sides
people belonging to the surrounding nations had pressed into the
depopulated territory of Judah. Not only had they annexed the border
territories—where, for example, the Edomites or Idumæans held the whole
of the Negeb as far as to Hebron; they had effected lodgments
everywhere, and—as the Ammonites, Ashdodites, and especially the
Samaritans—had amalgamated with the older Jewish population, a residue
of which had remained in the country in spite of all that had happened.
These half-breed "pagani" (Amme haareç, ὄχλοι) gave a friendly reception
to the returning exiles (Bne haggola); particularly did the Samaritans
show themselves anxious to make common cause with them. But they were
met with no reciprocal cordiality. The lesson of religious isolation
which the children of the captivity had learned in Babylon, they did not
forget on their return to

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

their home. Here also they lived as in a strange land. Not the native of
Judæa, but the man who could trace his descent from the exiles in
Babylon, was reckoned as belonging to their community.

The first decennia after the return of the exiles, during which they
were occupied in adjusting themselves to their new homes, were passed
under a variety of adverse circumstances and by no means either in
joyousness or security. Were these then the Messianic times which, it
had been foretold, were to dawn at the close of their captivity? They
did not at all events answer the expectations which had been formed. A
settlement had been again obtained, it was true, in the fatherland; but
the Persian yoke pressed now more heavily than ever the Babylonian had
done. The sins of God's people seemed still unforgiven, their period of
bond-service not yet at an end. A slight improvement, as is shown by the
prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah, followed when in the year 520 the
obstacles disappeared which until then had stood in the way of the
rebuilding of the temple; the work then begun was completed in 516.
Inasmuch as the Jews were now nothing more than a religious community,
based upon the traditions of a national existence that had ceased, the
rebuilding of the temple, naturally, was for them an event of supreme
importance.

The law of the new theocracy was the Book of Deuteronomy; this was the
foundation on which the structure was to be built. But the force of
circumstances, and the spirit of the age, had even before and during the
exile exerted a modifying influence upon that legislative code; and it
continued to do so still. At first a "son of David" had continued to
stand at the head of the Bne haggola, but this last relic of the old
monarchy soon had to give way to a Persian governor who was under the
control of the satrap of trans-Euphratic Syria, and whose principal
business was the collection of revenue. Thenceforward the sole national
chief was Joshua the high priest, on whom, accordingly, the political
representation also of the community naturally devolved. In the
circumstances as they then were no other arrangement was possible. The
way had been paved for it long before in so far as the Assyrians had
destroyed the kingdom of Israel, while in the kingdom of Judah which
survived it the religious cultus had greater importance attached to it
than political affairs, and also inasmuch as in point of fact the
practical issue of the prophetic reformation sketched in Deuteronomy had
been to make the temple the national centre still

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

more than formerly. The hierocracy towards which Ezekiel had already
opened the way was simply inevitable. It took the form of a monarchy of
the high priest, he having stepped into the place formerly occupied by
the theocratic king. As his peers and at his side stood the members of
his clan, the Levites of the old Jerusalem, who traced their descent
from Zadok (Sadduk); the common Levites held a much lower rank, so far
as they had maintained their priestly rank at all and had not been
degraded, in accordance with Ezekiel's law (chap. xliv.), to the
position of mere temple servitors. "Levite," once the title of honour
bestowed on all priests, became more and more confined to members of the
second order of the clergy.

Meanwhile no improvement was taking place in the condition of the Jewish
colonists. They were poor; they had incurred the hostility of their
neighbours by their exclusiveness; the Persian Government was
suspicious; the incipient decline of the great kingdom was accompanied
with specially unpleasant consequences so far as Palestine was concerned
(Megabyzus). All this naturally tended to produce in the community a
certain laxity and depression. To what purpose (it was asked) all this
religious strictness, which led to so much that was unpleasant? Why all
this zeal for Jehovah, who refused to be mollified by it? It is a
significant fact that the upper ranks of the priesthood were least of
all concerned to counteract this tendency. Their priesthood was less to
them than the predominance which was based upon it; they looked upon the
neighbouring ethnarchs as their equals, and maintained relations of
friendship with them. The general community was only following their
example when it also began to mingle with the Amme haareç.

The danger of Judaism merging into heathenism was imminent. But it was
averted by a new accession from without. In the year 458 Ezra the
scribe, with a great number of his compatriots, set out from Babylon,
for the purpose of reinforcing the Jewish element in Palestine. The Jews
of Babylon were more happily situated than their Palestinian brethren,
and it was comparatively easy for them to take up a separatist attitude,
because they were surrounded by heathenism not partial but entire. They
were no great losers from the circumstance that they were precluded from
participating directly in the life of the ecclesiastical community; the
Torah had long ago become separated from the people, and was now an
independent abstraction following a career of

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

its own. Babylonia was the place where a further codification of the law
had been placed alongside of Deuteronomy. Ezekiel had led the way in
reducing to theory and to writing the sacred praxis of his time; in this
he was followed by an entire school; in their exile the Levites turned
scribes. Since then Babylon continued to be the home of the Torah; and,
while in Palestine itself the practice was becoming laxer, their
literary study had gradually intensified the strictness and distinctive
peculiarities of Judaism. And now there came to Palestine a Babylonian
scribe having the law of his God in his hand, and armed with authority
from the Persian king to proceed upon the basis of this law with a
reformation of the community.

Ezra did not set about introducing the new law immediately on his
arrival in Judæa In the first instance he concentrated his attention on
the task of effecting a strict separation between the Bne haggola and
the heathen or half-heathen inhabitants. So much he could accomplish
upon the basis of Deuteronomy, but it was long before he gave publicity
to the law which he himself had brought. Why he hesitated so long it is
impossible to say; between the seventh and the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus (458-445 B.C.) there is a great hiatus in the
narrative of the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. The main reason appears to
have been that, in spite of the good will of the Persian king, Ezra had
not the vigorous support of the local authorities. But this was
indispensably necessary in order to secure recognition for a new law.

At last, in 445, it fell to the lot of a Jew, who also shared the views
of Ezra, Nehemiah ben Hakkelejah, <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_264)
the cupbearer and the favourite of Artaxerxes, to be sent as Persian
governor to Judæa. After he had freed the community from external
pressure with vigour and success, and brought it into more tolerable
outward circumstances, the business of introducing the new law-book was
next proceeded with; in this Ezra and Nehemiah plainly acted in concert.

On the first of Tisri—the year is unfortunately not given, but it cannot
have been earlier than 444 B.C.—the promulgation of the law began at a
great gathering in Jerusalem; Ezra, supported by the Levites, was
present. Towards the end of the month, the concluding act took place, in
which the community became solemnly bound by the contents

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

of the law. Special prominence was given to those provisions with which
the people were directly concerned, particularly those which related to
the dues payable by the laity to the priests.

The covenant which hitherto had rested on Deuteronomy was thus expanded
into a covenant based upon the entire Pentateuch. Substantially at least
Ezra's law-book, in the form in which it became the Magna Charta of
Judaism in or about the year 444, must be regarded as practically
identical with our Pentateuch, although many minor amendments and very
considerable additions may have been made at a later date.

The character of the post-Deuteronomic legislation (Priestly Code) is
chiefly marked, in its external aspects, by the immense extension of the
dues payable to the priests, and by the sharp distinction made between
the descendants of Aaron and the common Levites; this last feature is to
be traced historically to the circumstance that after the Deuteronomic
reformation the legal equality between the Levites who until then had
ministered at the "high places" and the priests of the temple at
Jerusalem was not *de facto* recognised. Internally, it is mainly
characterised by its ideal of Levitical holiness, the way in which it
everywhere surrounds life with purificatory and propitiatory ceremonies,
and its prevailing reference of sacrifice to sin. Noteworthy also is the
manner in which everything is regarded from the point of view of
Jerusalem, a feature which comes much more boldly into prominence here
than in Deuteronomy; the nation and the temple are strictly speaking
identified. That externalisation towards which the prophetical movement,
in order to become practical, had already been tending in Deuteronomy
finally achieved its acme in the legislation of Ezra; a new artificial
Israel was the result; but, after all, the old would have pleased an
Amos better. At the same time it must be remembered that the kernel
needed a shell. It was a necessity that Judaism should incrust itself in
this manner; without those hard and ossified forms the preservation of
its essential elements would have proved impossible. At a time when all
nationalities, and at the same time all bonds of religion and national
customs, were beginning to be broken up in the seeming cosmos and real
chaos of the Græco-Roman empire, the Jews stood out like a rock in the
midst of the ocean. When the natural conditions of independent
nationality all failed them, they nevertheless artificially maintained
it with an energy truly marvellous, and thereby

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

preserved for themselves, and at the same time for the whole world, an
eternal good.

As regards the subsequent history of the Jewish community under the
Persian domination, we have almost no information. The high priest in
Nehemiah's time was Eliashib, son of Joiakim and grandson of Joshua, the
patriarchal head of the sons of Zadok, who had returned from Babylon; he
was succeeded in the direct line by Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua (Neh.
xii. 10, 11, 22); the last-named was in office at the time of Alexander
the Great (Josephus, *Ant.*, xi. 8). Palestine was the province which
suffered most severely of all from the storms which marked the last days
of the sinking Persian empire, and it is hardly likely that the Jews
escaped their force; we know definitely, however, of only one episode,
in which the Persian general Bagoses interfered in a disagreeable
controversy about the high-priesthood (*cir*. 375).

To this period also (and not, as Josephus states, to the time of
Alexander) belongs the constitution of the Samaritan community on an
independent footing by Manasseh, a Jewish priest of rank. He was
expelled from Jerusalem by Nehemiah in 432, for refusing to separate
from his alien wife. He took shelter with his father-in-law Sanballat,
the Samaritan prince, who built him a temple on Mount Gerizim near
Shechem, where he organised a Samaritan church and a Samaritan worship,
on the Jerusalem model, and on the basis of a but slightly modified
Jerusalem Pentateuch. If the Samaritans had hitherto exerted, themselves
to the utmost to obtain admission into the fellowship of the Jews, they
henceforward were as averse to have anything to do with these as these
were to have any dealings with them; the temple on Mount Gerizim was now
the symbol of their independence as a distinct religious sect. For the
Jews this was a great advantage, as they had no longer to dread the
danger of syncretism. They could now quite confidently admit the Amme
haareç into their communion, in the assurance of assimilating them
without any risk of the opposite process taking place. The Judaizing
process began first with the country districts immediately surrounding
Jerusalem, and then extended to Galilee and many portions of Peræa. In
connection with it, the Hebrew language, which hitherto had been firmly
retained by the Bne haggola, now began to yield to the Aramaic, and to
hold its own only as a sacred speech.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[496:1](phai24.htm#fr_264) According to the
present punctuation this name is Hakalja (Hachaljah), but such a
pronunciation is inadmissible; it has no possible etymology, the
language having no such word as *hakal*. The name in its correct form
means "Wait upon Jehovah."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Judaism and Christianity](phai25)
