[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai27) 
[Next](phai29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14. *HEROD AND THE ROMANS*.

<span class="smallcaps">Henceforward</span> Roman intervention forms a
constant disturbing factor in Jewish history. The struggle between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees continued indeed to be carried on, but only
because the momentum of their old feud was not yet exhausted. The
Pharisees in a sense had been victorious. While the two brothers were
pleading their rival claims before Pompey, ambassadors from the
Pharisees had made their appearance in Damascus to petition for the
abolition of the kingship; this object had now to some extent been
gained. Less

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

ambiguous than the victory of the Pharisees was the fall of the
Sadducees, who in losing the sovereignty of the Jewish state lost all
real importance. But the intervention of the foreign element exercised
its most powerful influence upon the temper of the lower classes. Though
in times of peace the masses still continued to accept the guidance of
the rabbins, their patriotism instantly burst into flame as soon as a
pretender to the throne, belonging to the family of Aristobulus,
appeared in Palestine. During the decennia which immediately followed,
Jewish history was practically absorbed in vain attempts to restore the
old Hasmonæan kingdom. Insurrections of steadily increasing dimensions
were made in favour of Aristobulus, the representative of the national
cause. For Hyrcanus was not regarded as a Hasmonæan at all, but merely
as the creature of Antipater and the Romans. First, in the year 57,
Alexander the son of Aristobulus broke into rebellion, then in 56
Aristobulus himself and his son Antigonus, and in 55 Alexander again.
Antipater was never able to hold his own; Roman intervention was in
every case necessary. The division of the Hasmonæan state into five
"aristocracies" by Gabinius had no effect in diminishing the feeling of
national unity cherished by the Jews of Palestine. Once again, after the
battle of Carrhæ, a rising took place, which Cassius speedily repressed.

In 49 the great Roman civil war broke out; Cæsar instigated Aristobulus
against Antipater, who in common with the whole East had espoused the
cause of Pompey. But Aristobulus was poisoned by the opposite party
while yet in Italy, and about the same time his son Alexander was also
put to death at Antioch; thus the danger to Antipater passed away. After
the battle of Pharsalus he went over to Cæsar's side, and soon after
rendered him an important service by helping him out of his difficulties
at Alexandria. By this means he earned the good-will of Cæsar towards
the whole body of the Jews and secured for himself (or Hyrcanus) a great
extension of power and of territory. The five "synedria" or
"aristocracies" of Gabinius were superseded, the most important conquest
of the Hasmonæans restored, the walls of Jerusalem, which Pompey had
razed, rebuilt.

However indisputable the advantages conferred by the rule of Antipater,
the Jews could not forget that the Idumæan, in name of Hyrcanus, the
rightful heir of the Hasmonæans, was in truth setting up an authority of
his own. The Sadducæan aristocracy in particular, which

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

formerly in the synedrium had shared the supreme power with the high
priest, endeavoured to restore reality once more to the nominal
ascendancy which still continued to be attributed to the ethnarch and
the synedrium. "When the authorities (οἱ ἐν τέλει) of the Jews saw how
the power of Antipater and his sons was growing, their disposition
towards him became hostile" (Josephus, *Ant.*, xiv. 9, 3). They were
specially jealous of the youthful Herod, to whom Galilee had been
entrusted by his father. On account of the arbitrary execution of a
robber chief Ezechias, who perhaps had originally been a Hasmonæan
partisan, they summoned him before the synedrium, under the impression
that it was not yet too late to remind him that he was after all but a
servant. But the defiant demeanour of the culprit, and a threatening
missive which at the same time arrived from Sextus Cæsar demanding his
acquittal, rendered his judges speechless, nor did they regain their
courage until they had heard the stinging reproaches of Sameas the
scribe. Yet the aged Hyrcanus, who did not comprehend the danger that
was threatening himself, postponed judgment upon Herod, and gave him
opportunity to withdraw. Having been appointed strategus of Cœlesyria by
Sextus Cæsar in the meanwhile he soon afterwards appeared before
Jerusalem at the head of an army, and the authorities were compelled to
address themselves in a conciliatory manner to his father and to Phasael
his brother in order to secure his withdrawal.

The attempt to crush the serpent which had thus effected a lodgment in
the Hasmonæan house came too late. The result of it simply was that the
Herodians had now the advantage of being able to distinguish between
Hyrcanus and his "evil counsellors." From that moment the downfall of
the Sadducæan notables was certain. It was of no avail to them that
after the battle of Philippi (42) they accused Herod and Phasael
(Antipater having been murdered in 43) before Antony of having been
helpful in every possible way to Cassius; Antony declared himself in the
most decisive manner for the two brothers. In their despair—for properly
speaking they were not national fanatics but only egoistic
politicians—they ultimately made common cause with Antigonus the son of
Aristobulus, and threw themselves into the arms of the Parthians,
perceiving the interests of the Romans and of Herod to be inseparable
(40). Fortune at first seemed to have declared in favour of the
pretender. The masses unanimously took his side; Phasael committed
suicide in

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

prison; with a single blow Herod was stripped of all his following and
made a helpless fugitive. He took refuge in Rome, however, where he was
named king of Judæa by the senate, and after a somewhat protracted war
he finally, with the help of the legions of Sosius, made himself master
of Jerusalem (37). The captive Antigonus was beheaded at Antioch.

King Herod began his reign by reorganising the synedrium; he ordered the
execution of forty-five of its noblest members, his most zealous
opponents. These were the Sadducæan notables who long had headed the
struggle against the Idumæan interlopers. Having thus made away with the
leaders of the Jerusalem aristocracy, he directed his efforts to the
business of corrupting the rest. He appointed to the most important
posts obscure individuals, of priestly descent, from Babylon and
Alexandria, and thus replaced with creatures of his own the old
aristocracy. Nor did he rest content with this; in order to preclude the
possibility of any independent authority ever arising alongside of his
own, he abolished the life-tenure of the high-priestly office, and
brought it completely under the control of the secular power. By this
means he succeeded in relegating the Sadducees to utter insignificance.
They were driven out of their native sphere—the political—into the
region of theoretical and ecclesiastical discussion, where they
continued, but on quite unequal terms, their old dispute with the
Pharisees.

It was during the period of Herod's activity that the Pharisees,
strictly speaking, enjoyed their greatest prosperity (Sameas and
Abtalion, Hillel and Shammai); in the synedrium they became so numerous
as almost to equal the priests and elders. Quite consistently with their
principles they had abstained from taking any part in the life and death
struggle for the existence of the national state. Their leaders had even
counselled the fanatical defenders of Jerusalem to open the gates to the
enemy; for this service they were treated with the highest honour by
Herod. He made it part of his general policy to favour the Pharisees (as
also the sect of the Essenes, insignificant though it was), it being his
purpose to restrict the national life again within those purely
ecclesiastical channels of activity which it had abandoned since the
Maccabæan wars. However reckless his conduct in other respects, he was
always scrupulously careful to avoid wounding religious susceptibilities
(*Ant.*, xiv. 16, 3). But although the Pharisees might be quite pleased
that the high-priesthood and the kingship were no longer united in one
and the

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

same person, and that interest in the law again overshadowed interest in
politics, the populace for their part could never forgive Herod for
overthrowing the old dynasty. That he himself, at least in religious
profession, was a Jew did not improve his position, but rather made it
worse. It was not easy for him to stifle the national feeling after it
had once been revived among the Jews; they could not forget the recent
past, and objected to being thrust back into the time when foreign
domination was endured by them as a matter of course. The Romans were
regarded in quite a different light from that in which the Persians and
the Greeks had been viewed, and Herod was only the client of the Romans.

His greatest danger seemed to arise from the still surviving members of
the Hasmonæan family, to whom, as is easily understood, the national
hopes clung. In the course of the earlier years of his reign he removed
every one of them from his path, beginning with his youthful
brother-in-law Aristobulus (35), after whom came his old patron Hyrcanus
II. (30), then Mariamne his wife (29), and finally his stepmother
Alexandra (28), the daughter of Hyrcanus and the widow of Alexander
Aristobuli. Subsequently, in 25, he caused Costobarus and the sons of
Babas to be executed. While thus occupied with domestic affairs, Herod
had constant trouble also in his external relations, and each new phase
in his political position immediately made itself felt at home. In the
first instance he had much to suffer from Cleopatra, who would willingly
have seen Palestine reduced under Egyptian domination once more, and who
actually succeeded in inducing Antony to take from Herod several fair
and valuable provinces of his realm. Next, his whole position was
imperilled by the result of the battle of Actium; he had once more
ranged himself upon the wrong side. But his tact did not fail him in
winning Octavianus, as before it had made Antony his friend. In fact he
reaped nothing but advantage from the great overturn which took place in
Roman affairs; it rid him of Cleopatra, a dangerous enemy, and gave him
in the new imperator a much better master than before.

During the following years he had leisure to carry out those splendid
works of peace by which it was his aim to ingratiate himself with the
emperor. He founded cities and harbours (Antipatris, Cæsarea),
constructed roads, theatres, and temples, and subsidised far beyond his
frontier all works of public utility. He taxed the Jews heavily, but in
compensation promoted their material interests with energy and
discretion,

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

and built for them, from 20 or 19 B.C. onwards, the temple at Jerusalem.
To gain their sympathies he well knew to be impossible. Apart from the
Roman legions at his back his authority had its main support in his
fortresses and in his system of espionage.

But just as the acme of his splendour had been reached, he himself
became the instrument of a terrible vengeance for the crimes by which
his previous years had been stained; as executioner of all the
Hasmonæans, he was now constrained to be the executioner of his own
children also. His suspicious temper had been aroused against his now
grown-up sons by Mariamne, whose claims through their mother to the
throne were superior to his own; his brother Pheroras and his sister
Salome made it their special business to fan his jealousy into flame. To
show the two somewhat arrogant youths that the succession was not so
absolutely secure in their favour as they were supposing, the father
summoned to his court Antipater, the exiled son of a former marriage.
Antipater, under the mask of friendship, immediately began to carry on
infamous intrigues against his half brothers, in which Pheroras and
Salome unconsciously played into his hands. For years he persevered
alike in favouring and unfavouring circumstances with his part, until at
last, by the machinations of a Lacedemonian, Eurycles, who had been
bribed, Herod was induced to condemn the sons of Mariamne at Berytus,
and cause them to be strangled (Samaria, 7-6 B.C.). Not long afterwards
a difference between Antipater and Salome led to the exposure of the
former. Herod was compelled to drain the cup to the dregs; he was not
spared the knowledge that he had murdered his children without a cause.
His remorse threw him into a serious illness, in which his strong
constitution wrestled long with death. While he lay at Jericho near his
end he gave orders for the execution of Antipater also; and to embitter
the joy of the Jews at his removal he caused their elders to be shut up
together in the hippodrome at Jericho with the injunction to butcher
them as soon as he breathed his last, that so there might be sorrow
throughout the land. The latter order, however, was not carried out.

His death (4 B.C.) gave the signal for an insurrection of small
beginnings which gradually spread until it ultimately infected all the
people; it was repressed by Varus with great cruelty. Meanwhile Herod's
connexions were at Rome disputing about the inheritance. The deceased
king (who was survived by several children of various marriages) had

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

made a will, which was substantially confirmed by Augustus. By it his
son Philip received the northern portion of the territory on the east of
the Jordan along with the district of Paneas (Cæsarea Philippi); his
thirty-seven years’ reign over this region was happy. Another son, Herod
Antipas, obtained Galilee and Peræa; he beautified his domains with
architectural works (Sepphoris, Tiberias; Livias, Machærus), and
succeeded by his fox-like policy in ingratiating himself with the
emperors, particularly with Tiberius, for that very cause, however,
becoming odious to the Roman provincial officials. The principal heir
was Archelaus, to whom Idumæa, Judæa, and Samaritis were allotted;
Augustus at first refused him the title of king. Archelaus had
experienced the greatest difficulty in carrying through his claims
before the emperor in face of the manifold oppositions of his enemies;
the vengeance which he wreaked upon his subjects was so severe that in 6
A.D. a Jewish and Samaritan embassy besought the emperor for his
deposition. Augustus assented, banishing Archelaus to Vienne, and
putting in his place a Roman procurator. Thenceforward Judæa continued
under procurators, with the exception of a brief interval (41-44 A.D.),
during which Herod Agrippa I. united under his sway all the dominions of
his grandfather. <span id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_270)

The termination of the vassal kingship resulted in manifest advantage to
the Sadducees. The high priest and synedrium again acquired political
importance; they were the responsible representatives of the nation in
presence of the suzerain power, and conceived themselves to be in some
sort lords of land and people (John xi. 48). For the Pharisees the new
state of affairs appears to have been less satisfactory. That the Romans
were much less oppressive to the Jews than the rulers of the house of
Herod was a consideration of less importance to them than the fact that
the heathen first unintentionally and then deliberately were guilty of
the rudest outrages upon the law,

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

outrages against which those sly half-Jews had well understood how to be
on their guard. It was among the lower ranks of the people, however,
that hatred to the Romans had its proper seat. On the basis of the views
and tendencies which had long prevailed there, a new party was now
formed, that of the Zealots, which did not, like the Pharisees, aim
merely at the fulfilment of all righteousness, *i.e.*, of the law, and
leave everything else in the hands of God, but was determined to take an
active part in bringing about the realisation of the kingdom of God
(Josephus, *Ant.*, xviii. 1, 1).

As the transition to the new order of things was going on, the census of
Quirinius took place (6-7 A.D.); it occasioned an immense excitement,
which, however, was successfully allayed. On the withdrawal of
Quirinius, Coponius remained behind as procurator of Judæa; he was
followed, under Augustus, by Marcus Ambivius and Annius Rufus; under
Tiberius, by Valerius Gratus (15-26 A.D.) and Pontius Pilatus (26-36
A.D.); under Caligula, by Marcellus (36-37) and Marullus (37-41 A.D.).
The procurators were subordinate to the imperial legati of Syria; they
resided in Cæsarea, and visited Jerusalem on special occasions only.
They had command of the military, and their chief business was the
maintenance of the peace and the care of the revenue. They interested
themselves in affairs of religion only in so far as these had a
political side; the temple citadel Antonia was constantly garrisoned
with a cohort. The administration of justice appears to have been left
to a very considerable extent in the hands of the synedrium, but it was
not allowed to give effect to any capital sentence. At the head of the
native authorities stood at this time not so much the actual high priest
as the college of the chief priests. The actual office of high priest
had lost its political importance in consequence of the frequency with
which its holders were changed; thus, for example, Annas had more
influence than Caiaphas.

The principle of interfering as little as possible with the religious
liberty of the Jews was rudely assailed by the Emperor Caius, who like a
second Antiochus, after various minor vexations, gave orders that his
image should be set up in the temple of Jerusalem as in others
elsewhere. It was entirely through the courage and tact of the Syrian
governor P. Petronius that the execution of these orders was temporarily
postponed until the emperor was induced by Agrippa I. to withdraw them.
Caius soon afterwards died, and under the rule of Agrippa I., to whom
the government of the entire kingdom of his grandfather was committed

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

by Claudius, the Jews enjoyed much prosperity; in every respect the king
was all they could wish. This very prosperity seems, however, to have
caused them fresh danger. For it made them feel the government by
procurators, which was resumed after the death of Agrippa I., to be
particularly hard to bear, whatever the individual characters of these
might be. They were Cuspius Fadus (from 44, under whom Theudas),
Tiberius Alexander (the Romanised nephew of Philo, till 48), Cumanus
(48-52, under whom the volcano already began to give dangerous signs of
activity), and Felix (52-60). Felix, who has the honour to be pilloried
in the pages of Tacitus, contrived to make the dispeace permanent. The
influence of the two older parties, both of which were equally
interested in the maintenance of the existing order, and in that
interest were being drawn nearer to each other, diminished day by day.
The masses broke loose completely from the authority of the scribes; the
ruling nobility adapted itself better to the times; under the
circumstances which then prevailed, it is not surprising that they
became thoroughly secular and did not shrink from the employment of
directly immoral means for the attainment of their ends. The Zealots
became the dominant party. It was a combination of noble and base
elements; superstitious enthusiasts (Acts xxi. 38) and political
assassins, the so-called sicarii, were conjoined with honest but
fanatical patriots. Felix favoured the sicarii in order that he might
utilise them; against the others his hostility raged with
indiscriminating cruelty, yet without being able to check them. The
anarchy which he left behind him as a legacy was beyond the control of
his able successor Porcius Festus (60-62), and the last two procurators,
Albinus (62-64) and Gessius Florus, acted as if it had been their
special business to encourage and promote it. All the bonds of social
order were dissolved; no property was secure; the assassins alone
prospered, and the procurators went shares with them in the profits.

It was inevitable that deep resentment against the Romans should be felt
in every honest heart. At last it found expression. During his visit to
Jerusalem in May 66 Florus laid hands upon the temple treasure; the Jews
allowed themselves to go so far as to make a joke about it, which he
avenged by giving over a portion of the city to be plundered, and
crucifying a number of the inhabitants. He next insisted upon their
kissing the rod, ordering that a body of troops which was approaching
should be met and welcomed. At the persuasion of their leaders the Jews
forced

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

themselves even to this; but a constant succession of fresh insults and
cruelties followed, till patience was quite exhausted at last, and in a
violent street fight the Romans were so handled that the procurator
withdrew from the town, leaving only the cohort in Antonia. Once again
was an attempt at pacification made by Agrippa II., who hastened from
Alexandria with this purpose, but the Jews could not bring themselves to
make submission to Gessius Florus. It so happened that at this juncture
the fortress of Masada on the Dead Sea fell into the hands of the
Zealots; the courage of the party of action rose, and at the instance of
the hot-headed Eleazar the son of Ananias, a man, still young, of
highest priestly family, the sacrifice on behalf of the emperor was
discontinued, *i.e.*, revolt was declared. But the native authorities
continued opposed to a war. At their request King Agrippa sent soldiers
to Jerusalem; at first they appeared to have some effect, but ultimately
they were glad to make their escape in safety from the city. The cohort
in Antonia was in like manner unable to hold its own; freedom was given
it to withdraw; but, contrary to the terms of capitulation, it was put
to the sword. The war party now signalised its triumph over all elements
of opposition from within by the murder of the high priest Ananias.

A triumph was gained also over the outer foe. The Syrian legate, Cestius
Gallus, appeared before Jerusalem in the autumn of 66, but after a short
period raised the siege; his deliberate withdrawal was changed into a
precipitate flight in an attack made by the Jews at Bethhoron. The
revolt now spread irresistibly through all ranks and classes of the
population, and the aristocracy found it expedient itself to assume the
leadership. An autonomous government was organised, with the noblest
members of the community at its head; of these the most important was
the high priest Ananus.

Meanwhile Nero entrusted the conduct of the Jewish war to Vespasian, his
best general. In the spring of 67 he began his task in Galilee, where
the historian Josephus had command of the insurgents. The Jews entirely
distrusted him and he them; in a short time the Romans were masters of
Galilee, only a few strong places holding out against them. Josephus was
besieged in Jotapata, and taken prisoner; the other places also were
unable to hold out long. Such of the champions of freedom in Galilee as
escaped betook themselves to Jerusalem; amongst these was the Zealot
leader John of Giscala. There they told

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

the story of their misfortunes, of which they laid the blame upon
Josephus, and upon the aristocratic government as having no heart for
the common cause and having treachery for their motto. The Zealots now
openly aimed at the overthrow of the existing government, but Ananus
bravely withstood them, and pressed so hard on them that they summoned
the Idumæans into the city to their aid. These honourable fanatics
indeed withdrew again as soon as they had discovered that they were
being used for sinister designs; but in the meanwhile they had
accomplished the work of the Zealots. The old magistracy of Jerusalem
was destroyed, Ananus with the heads of the aristocracy and very many
other respectable citizens put to death. The radicals, for the most part
not natives of the city, came into power; John of Giscala at their head
tyrannized over the inhabitants.

While these events were taking place in Jerusalem, Vespasian had subdued
the whole country, with the exception of one or two fortresses. But as
he was setting about the siege of the capital, tidings arrived of the
death of Nero, and the offensive was discontinued. For almost two years
(June 68 to April 70), with a short break, war was suspended. When
Vespasian at the end of this period became emperor, he entrusted to
Titus the task of reducing Jerusalem. There in the interval the internal
struggle had been going on, even after the radicals had gained the
mastery. As a counterpoise to John of Giscala the citizens had received
the guerilla captain Simon bar Giora into the city; the two were now at
feud with each other, but were alike in their rapacity towards the
citizens. John occupied the temple, Simon the upper city lying over
against it on the west. For a short time a third entered into
competition with the two rivals, a certain Eleazar who had separated
from John and established himself in the inner temple. But just as Titus
was beginning the siege (Easter, 70) John contrived to get rid of this
interloper.

Titus attacked from the north. After the lower city had fallen into his
hands, he raised banks with a view to the storm of the temple and the
upper city. But the defenders, who were now united in a common cause,
taught him by their vigorous resistance that his object was not to be so
quickly gained. He therefore determined to reduce them by famine, and
for this end completely surrounded the city with a strong wall. In the
beginning of July he renewed the attack, which he directed in the first
instance against the temple. The tower of Antonia fell on the 5th, but
the temple continued to beheld notwithstanding; until the 17th the

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

daily sacrifice continued to be offered. The Romans succeeded in gaining
the outer court in August only. To drive them out, the Jews in the night
of August 10-11 made a sortie, but were compelled to retire, the enemy
forcing their way behind them into the inner court. A legionary flung a
firebrand into an annexe of the temple, and soon the whole structure was
in flames. A terrible slaughter of the defenders ensued, but John with a
determined band succeeded in cutting his way out, and by means of the
bridge over the Tyropœon valley made his escape into the upper city.

No attack had as yet been directed against this quarter; but famine was
working terrible ravages among the crowded population. Those in command,
however, refused to capitulate unless freedom to withdraw along with
their wives and children were granted. These terms being withheld, a
storm, after the usual preparations on the part of the Romans, took
place. The resistance was feeble; the strong towers were hardly defended
at all; Simon bar Giora and John of Giscala now thought only of their
personal safety. In the unprotected city the Roman soldiers spread fire
and slaughter unchecked (September 7, 70).

Of those who survived also some were put to death; the rest were sold or
carried off to the mines and amphitheatres. The city was levelled with
the ground; the tenth legion was left behind in charge. Titus took with
him to Rome for his triumphal procession Simon bar Giora and John of
Giscala, along with seven hundred other prisoners, also the sacred booty
taken from the temple, the candlestick, the golden table, and a copy of
the Torah. He was slightly premature with his triumph; for some time
elapsed, and more than one bloody battle was necessary before the
rebellion was completely stifled. It did not come wholly to an end until
the fall of Masada (April 73).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_270"></span>[533:1](phai28.htm#fr_270) Agrippa was the
grandson of Mariamne through Aristobulus. Caligula, whose friendship he
had secured in Rome, bestowed upon him in 37 the dominions of Philip
with the title of king, and afterwards the tetrarchy of Antipas, whom he
deposed and banished to Lugdunum (39). Claudius added the possessions of
Archelaus. But the kingdom was again taken away from his son Agrippa II.
(44), who, however, after the death of his uncle, Herod of Chalcis,
obtained that principality for which at a later period (52) the
tetrarchy of Philip was substituted. His sister Berenice is known as the
mistress of Titus; another sister, Drusilla, was the wife of the
procurator Felix. The descendants of Mariamne through Alexander held for
some time an Armenian principality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Rabbins.](phai29)
