[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020289)  [Next](1020291) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.19"></span>

<span id="iv.X.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—On the Reasonableness of Offering,
as the True Religion Teaches, a Visible Sacrifice to the One True and
Invisible God.</span>

<span id="iv.X.19-p2"></span>As to those who think that these visible
sacrifices are suitably offered to other gods, but that invisible
sacrifices, the graces of purity of mind and holiness of will, should be
offered, as greater and better, to the invisible God, Himself greater
and better than all others, they must be oblivious that these visible
sacrifices are signs of the invisible, as the words we utter are the
signs of things.  And therefore, as in prayer or praise we direct
intelligible words to Him to whom in our heart <span id="page_193">p.
193</span> <span id="iv.X.19-Page_193"></span> we offer the very
feelings we are expressing, so we are to understand that in sacrifice we
offer visible sacrifice only to Him to whom in our heart we ought to
present ourselves an invisible sacrifice.  It is then that the angels,
and all those superior powers who are mighty by their goodness and
piety, regard us with pleasure, and rejoice with us and assist us to the
utmost of their power.  But if we offer such worship to them, they
decline it; and when on any mission to men they become visible to the
senses, they positively forbid it.  Examples of this occur in holy
writ.  Some fancied they should, by adoration or sacrifice, pay the same
honor to angels as is due to God, and were prevented from doing so by
the angels themselves, and ordered to render it to Him to whom alone
they know it to be due.  And the holy angels have in this been imitated
by holy men of God.  For Paul and Barnabas, when they had wrought a
miracle of healing in Lycaonia, were thought to be gods, and the
Lycaonians desired to sacrifice to them, and they humbly and piously
declined this honor, and announced to them the God in whom they should
believe.  And those deceitful and proud spirits, who exact worship, do
so simply because they know it to be due to the true God.  For that
which they take pleasure in is not, as Porphyry says and some fancy, the
smell of the victims, but divine honors.  They have, in fact, plenty
odors on all hands, and if they wished more, they could provide them for
themselves.  But the spirits who arrogate to themselves divinity are
delighted not with the smoke of carcasses but with the suppliant spirit
which they deceive and hold in subjection, and hinder from drawing near
to God, preventing him from offering himself in sacrifice to God by
inducing him to sacrifice to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020291)
