[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020151)  [Next](1020153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.11"></span>

<span id="iv.V.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Concerning the Universal Providence
of God in the Laws of Which All Things are Comprehended.</span>

<span id="iv.V.11-p2"></span>Therefore God supreme and true, with His
Word and Holy Spirit (which three are one), one God omnipotent, creator
and maker of every soul and of every body; by whose gift all are happy
who are happy through verity and not through vanity; who made man a
rational animal consisting of soul and body, who, when he sinned,
neither permitted him to go unpunished, nor left him without mercy; who
has given to the good and to the evil, being in common with stones,
vegetable life in common with trees, sensuous life in common with
brutes, intellectual life in common with angels alone; from whom is
every mode, every species, every order; from whom are measure, number,
weight; from whom is everything which has an existence in nature, of
whatever kind it be, and of whatever value; from whom are the seeds of
forms and the forms of seeds, and the motion of seeds and of forms; who
gave also to flesh its origin, beauty, health, reproductive fecundity,
disposition of members, and the salutary concord of its parts; who also
to the irrational soul has given memory, sense, appetite, but to the
rational soul, in addition to these, has given intelligence and will;
who has not left, not to speak of heaven and earth, angels and men, but
not even the entrails of the smallest and most contemptible animal, or
the feather of a bird, or the little flower of a plant, or the leaf of a
tree, without an harmony, and, as it were, a mutual peace among all its
parts;—that God can never be believed to have left the kingdoms of men,
their dominations and servitudes, outside of the laws of His providence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020153)
