[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020220)  [Next](1020222) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—Concerning the Two Schools of
Philosophers, that Is, the Italic and Ionic, and Their Founders.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.2-p2"></span>As far as concerns the literature of the
Greeks, whose language holds a more illustrious place than any of the
languages of the other nations, history mentions two schools of
philosophers, the one called the Italic school, originating in that part
of Italy which was formerly called Magna Græcia; the other called the
Ionic school, having its origin in those regions which are still called
by the name of Greece.  The Italic school had for its founder Pythagoras
of Samos, to whom also the term “philosophy” is said to owe its origin. 
For whereas formerly those who seemed to excel others by the laudable
manner in which they regulated their lives were called sages,
Pythagoras, on being asked what he professed, replied that he was a
philosopher, that is, a student or lover of wisdom; for it seemed to him
to be the height of arrogance to profess oneself a sage. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)   The founder of the Ionic school,
again, was Thales of Miletus, one of those seven who were styled the
“seven sages,” of whom six were distinguished by the kind of life they
lived, and by certain maxims which they gave forth for the proper
conduct of life.  Thales was distinguished as an investigator into the
nature of things; and, in order that he might have successors in his
school, he committed his dissertations to writing.  That, however, which
especially rendered him eminent was his ability, by means of
astronomical calculations, even to predict eclipses of the sun and
moon.  He thought, however, that water was the first principle of
things, and that of it all the elements of the world, the world itself,
and all things which are generated in it, ultimately consist.  Over all
this work, however, which, when we consider the world, appears so
admirable, he set nothing of the nature of divine mind.  To him
succeeded Anaximander, his pupil, who held a different opinion
concerning the nature of things; for he did not hold that all things
spring from one principle, as Thales did, who held that principle to be
water, but thought that each thing springs from its own proper
principle.  These principles of things he believed to be infinite in
number, and thought that they generated innumerable worlds, and all the
things which arise in them.  He thought, also, that these worlds are
subject to a perpetual process of alternate dissolution and
regeneration, each one continuing for a longer or shorter period of
time, according to the nature of the case; nor did he, any more than
Thales, attribute anything to a divine mind in the production of all
this activity of things.  Anaximander left as his successor his disciple
Anaximenes, who attributed all the causes of things to an infinite air. 
He neither denied nor ignored the existence of gods, but, so far from
believing that the air was made by them, he held, on the contrary, that
they sprang from the air.  Anaxagoras, however, who was his pupil,
perceived that a divine mind was the productive cause of all things
which we see, and said that all the various kinds of things, according
to their several modes and species, were produced out of an infinite
matter consisting of homogeneous particles, but by the efficiency of a
divine mind.  Diogenes, also, another pupil of Anaximenes, said that a
certain air was the original substance of things out of which all things
were produced, but that it was possessed of a divine reason, without
which nothing could be produced from it.  Anaxagoras was succeeded by
his disciple Archelaus, who also thought that all things consisted of
homogeneous particles, of which each particular thing was made, but that
those particles were pervaded by a divine mind, which perpetually
energized all the eternal bodies, namely, those particles, so that they
are alternately united and separated.  Socrates, the master of Plato, is
said to have been the disciple of Archelaus; and on Plato’s account it
is that I have given this brief historical sketch of the whole history
of these schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[145:297](1020221.htm#fr_296) <span
id="iv.VIII.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.2-p3"></span> *Sapiens,*that is, a wise man, one who
had attained to wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020222)
