[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020013)  [Next](1020015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of the Advantages and Disadvantages
Which Often Indiscriminately Accrue to Good and Wicked Men.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p2"></span>Will some one say, Why, then, was this
divine compassion extended even to the ungodly and ungrateful?  Why, but
because it was the mercy of Him who daily “maketh His sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust.” <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)   For though some of these
men, taking thought of this, repent of their wickedness and reform,
some, as the apostle says, “despising the riches of His goodness and
long-suffering, after their hardness and impenitent heart, treasure up
unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his
deeds:” <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) nevertheless does the
patience of God still invite the wicked to repentance, even as the
scourge of God educates the good to patience.  And so, too, does the
mercy of God embrace the good that it may cherish them, as the severity
of God arrests the wicked to punish them.  To the divine providence it
has seemed good to prepare in the world to come for the righteous good
things, which the unrighteous shall not enjoy; and for the wicked evil
things, by which the good shall not be tormented.  But as for the good
things of this life, and its ills, God has willed that these should be
common to both; that we might not too eagerly covet the things which
wicked men are seen equally to enjoy, nor shrink with an unseemly fear
from the ills which even good men often suffer.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>There is, too, a very great difference in
the purpose served both by those events which we call adverse and those
called prosperous.  For the good man is neither uplifted with the good
things of time, nor broken by its ills; but the wicked man, because he
is corrupted by this world’s happiness, feels himself punished by its
unhappiness. <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)   Yet often, even in
the present distribution of temporal things, does God plainly evince His
own interference.  For if every sin were now visited with manifest
punishment, nothing would seem to be reserved for the final judgment; on
the other hand, if no sin received now a plainly divine punishment, it
would be concluded that there is no divine providence at all.  And so of
the good things of this life:  if God did not by a very visible
liberality confer these on some of those persons who ask for them, we
should say that these good things were not at His disposal; and if He
gave them to all who sought them, we should suppose that such were the
only rewards of His service; and such a service would make us not godly,
but greedy rather, and covetous.  Wherefore, though good and bad men
suffer alike, we must not suppose that there is no difference between
the men themselves, because there is no <span id="page_6">p. 6</span>
<span id="iv.ii.ix-Page_6"></span> difference in what they both suffer. 
For even in the likeness of the sufferings, there remains an unlikeness
in the sufferers; and though exposed to the same anguish, virtue and
vice are not the same thing.  For as the same fire causes gold to glow
brightly, and chaff to smoke; and under the same flail the straw is
beaten small, while the grain is cleansed; and as the lees are not mixed
with the oil, though squeezed out of the vat by the same pressure, so
the same violence of affliction proves, purges, clarifies the good, but
damns, ruins, exterminates the wicked.  And thus it is that in the same
affliction the wicked detest God and blaspheme, while the good pray and
praise.  So material a difference does it make, not what ills are
suffered, but what kind of man suffers them.  For, stirred up with the
same movement, mud exhales a horrible stench, and ointment emits a
fragrant odor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[5:48](1020014.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3"></span> [Matt.
5.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[5:49](1020014.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4"></span> [Rom.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[5:50](1020014.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p6"></span> So Cyprian (*Contra Demetrianum*) says: 
*Pænam de adversis mundi ille sentit, cui et lœtitia et gloria omnis in
mundo est.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020015)
