[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020323)  [Next](1020325) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.20"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Of the Words Which Follow the
Separation of Light and Darkness, “And God Saw the Light that It Was
Good.”</span>

<span id="iv.XI.20-p2"></span>Then, we must not pass from this passage
of Scripture without noticing that when God said, “Let there be light,
and there was light,” it was immediately added, “And God saw the light
that it was good.”  No such expression followed the statement that He
separated the light from the darkness, and called the light Day and the
darkness Night, lest the seal of His approval might seem to be set on
such darkness, as well as on the light.  For when the darkness was not
subject of disapprobation, as when it was divided by the heavenly bodies
from this light which our eyes discern, the statement that God saw that
it was good is inserted, not before, but after the division is
recorded.  “And God set them,” so runs the passage, “in the firmament of
the heaven, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and
over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness:  and God saw
that it was good.”  For He approved of both, because both were sinless. 
But where God said, “Let there be light, and there was light; and God
saw the <span id="page_216">p. 216</span> <span
id="iv.XI.20-Page_216"></span> light that it was good;” and the
narrative goes on, “and God divided the light from the darkness! and God
called the light Day, and the darkness He called Night,” there was not
in this place subjoined the statement, “And God saw that it was good,”
lest both should be designated good, while one of them was evil, not by
nature, but by its own fault.  And therefore, in this case, the light
alone received the approbation of the Creator, while the angelic
darkness, though it had been ordained, was yet not approved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020325)
