[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020806)  [Next](1020808) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xxvii"></span> <span id="page_567">p. 567</span> <span
id="v.vi.xxvii-Page_567"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.vi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—One Passage Susceptible of
Various Interpretations.</span>

<span id="v.vi.xxvii-p2"></span>38.  When, again, not some one
interpretation, but two or more interpretations are put upon the same
words of Scripture, even though the meaning the writer intended remain
undiscovered, there is no danger if it can be shown from other passages
of Scripture that any of the interpretations put on the words is in
harmony with the truth.  And if a man in searching the Scriptures
endeavors to get at the intention of the author through whom the Holy
Spirit spoke, whether he succeeds in this endeavor, or whether he draws
a different meaning from the words, but one that is not opposed to sound
doctrine, he is free from blame so long as he is supported by the
testimony of some other passage of Scripture.  For the author perhaps
saw that this very meaning lay in the words which we are trying to
interpret; and assuredly the Holy Spirit, who through him spoke these
words, foresaw that this interpretation would occur to the reader, nay,
made provision that it should occur to him, seeing that it too is
founded on truth.  For what more liberal and more fruitful provision
could God have made in regard to the Sacred Scriptures than that the
same words might be understood in several senses, all of which are
sanctioned by the concurring testimony of other passages equally divine?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020808)
