[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020305)  [Next](1020307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—Of the Knowledge of God, to Which No
Man Can Attain Save Through the Mediator Between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.2-p2"></span> It is a great and very rare thing for a
man, <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="iv.XI.2-Page_206"></span> after he has contemplated the whole
creation, corporeal and incorporeal, and has discerned its mutability,
to pass beyond it, and, by the continued soaring of his mind, to attain
to the unchangeable substance of God, and, in that height of
contemplation, to learn from God Himself that none but He has made all
that is not of the divine essence.  For God speaks with a man not by
means of some audible creature dinning in his ears, so that atmospheric
vibrations connect Him that makes with him that hears the sound, nor
even by means of a spiritual being with the semblance of a body, such as
we see in dreams or similar states; for even in this case He speaks as
if to the ears of the body, because it is by means of the semblance of a
body He speaks, and with the appearance of a real interval of space,—for
visions are exact representations of bodily objects.  Not by these,
then, does God speak, but by the truth itself, if any one is prepared to
hear with the mind rather than with the body.  For He speaks to that
part of man which is better than all else that is in him, and than which
God Himself alone is better.  For since man is most properly understood
(or, if that cannot be, then, at least, *believed*) to be made in God’s
image, no doubt it is that part of him by which he rises above those
lower parts he has in common with the beasts, which brings him nearer to
the Supreme.  But since the mind itself, though naturally capable of
reason and intelligence is disabled by besotting and inveterate vices
not merely from delighting and abiding in, but even from tolerating His
unchangeable light, until it has been gradually healed, and renewed, and
made capable of such felicity, it had, in the first place, to be
impregnated with faith, and so purified.  And that in this faith it
might advance the more confidently towards the truth, the truth itself,
God, God’s Son, assuming humanity without destroying His divinity, <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) established and founded this faith,
that there might be a way for man to man’s God through a God-man.  For
this is the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.  For it
is as man that He is the Mediator and the Way.  Since, if the way lieth
between him who goes, and the place whither he goes, there is hope of
his reaching it; but if there be no way, or if he know not where it is,
what boots it to know whither he should go?  Now the only way that is
infallibly secured against all mistakes, is when the very same person is
at once God and man, God our end, man our way. <span
id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_448"></span>[206:449](1020306.htm#fr_448) <span
id="iv.XI.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.2-p3"></span> *Homine assumto, non Deo consumto.*

<span id="fn_449"></span>[206:450](1020306.htm#fr_449) <span
id="iv.XI.2-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.2-p4"></span> *Quo itur Deus, qua itur homo.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020307)
