[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020030)  [Next](1020032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxvi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—That We Should Not Endeavor By
Sin to Obviate Sin.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>But, we are told, there is ground to
fear that, when the body is subjected to the enemy’s lust, the insidious
pleasure of sense may entice the soul to consent to the sin, and steps
must be taken to prevent so disastrous a result.  And is not suicide the
proper mode of preventing not only the enemy’s sin, but the sin of the
Christian so allured?  Now, in the first place, the soul which is led by
God and His wisdom, rather than by bodily concupiscence, will certainly
never consent to the desire aroused in its own flesh by another’s lust. 
And, at all events, if it be true, as the truth plainly declares, that
suicide is a detestable and damnable wickedness, who is such a fool as
to say, Let us sin now, that we may obviate a possible future sin; let
us now commit murder, lest we perhaps afterwards should commit
adultery?  If we are so controlled by iniquity that innocence is out of
the question, and we can at best but make a choice of sins, is not a
future and uncertain adultery preferable to a present and certain
murder?  Is it not better to commit a wickedness which penitence may
heal, than a crime which leaves no place for healing contrition?  I say
this for the sake of those men or women who fear they may be enticed
into consenting to their violator’s lust, and think they should lay
violent hands on themselves, and so prevent, not another’s sin, but
their own.  But far be it from the mind of a Christian confiding in God,
and resting in the hope of His aid; far be it, I say, from such a mind
to yield a shameful consent to pleasures of the flesh, howsoever
presented.  And if that lustful disobedience, which still dwells in our
mortal members, follows its own law irrespective of our will, surely its
motions in the body of one who rebels against them are as blameless as
its motions in the body of one who sleeps.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020032)
