[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020103)  [Next](1020105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.31"></span>

<span id="iv.III.31-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.31-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—That It is Effrontery to Impute
the Present Troubles to Christ and the Prohibition of Polytheistic
Worship Since Even When the Gods Were Worshipped Such Calamities Befell
the People.</span>

<span id="iv.III.31-p2"></span>Let those who have no gratitude to Christ
for His great benefits, blame their own gods for these heavy disasters. 
For certainly when these occurred the altars of the gods were kept
blazing, and there rose the mingled fragrance of “Sabæan incense and
fresh garlands;” <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) the priests
were clothed with honor, the shrines were maintained in splendor;
sacrifices, games, sacred ecstasies, were common in the temples; while
the blood of the citizens was being so freely shed, not only in remote
places, but among the very altars of the gods.  Cicero did not choose to
seek sanctuary in a temple, because Mucius had sought it there in vain. 
But they who most unpardonably calumniate this Christian era, are the
very men who either themselves fled for asylum to the places specially
dedicated to Christ, or were led there by the barbarians that they might
be safe.  In short, not to recapitulate the many instances I have cited,
and not to add to their number others which it were tedious to
enumerate, this one thing I am persuaded of, and this every impartial
judgment will readily acknowledge, that if the human race had received
Christianity before the Punic wars, and if the same desolating
calamities which these wars brought upon Europe and Africa had followed
the introduction of Christianity, there is no one of those who now
accuse us who would not have attributed them to our religion.  How
intolerable would their accusations have been, at least so far as the
Romans are concerned, if the Christian religion had been received and
diffused prior to the invasion of the Gauls, or to the ruinous floods
and fires which desolated Rome, or to those most calamitous of all
events, the civil wars!  And those other disasters, which were of so
strange a nature that they were reckoned prodigies, had they happened
since the Christian era, to whom but to the Christians would they have
imputed these as crimes?  I do not speak of those things which were
rather surprising than hurtful,—oxen speaking, unborn infants
articulating some words in their mothers’ wombs, serpents flying, hens
and women being changed into the other sex; and other similar prodigies
which, whether true or false, are recorded not in their imaginative, but
in their historical works, and which do not injure, but only astonish
men.  But when it rained earth, when it rained chalk, when it rained
stones—not hailstones, but real stones—this certainly was calculated to
do serious damage.  We have read in their books that the fires of Etna,
pouring down from the top of the mountain to the neighboring shore,
caused the sea to boil, so that rocks were burnt up, and the pitch of
ships began to run,—a phenomenon incredibly surprising, but at the same
time no less hurtful.  By the same violent heat, they relate that on
another occasion Sicily was filled with cinders, so that the houses of
the city Catina were destroyed and buried under them,—a calamity which
moved the Romans to pity them, and remit their tribute for that year. 
One may also read that Africa, which had by that time become a province
of Rome, was visited by a prodigious multitude of locusts, which, after
consuming the fruit and foliage of the trees, were driven into the sea
in one vast and measureless cloud; so that when they were drowned and
cast upon the shore the air was polluted, and so serious a pestilence
produced that in the kingdom of Masinissa alone they <span
id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="iv.III.31-Page_63"></span> say there
perished 800,000 persons, besides a much greater number in the
neighboring districts.  At Utica they assure us that, of 30,000 soldiers
then garrisoning it, there survived only ten.  Yet which of these
disasters, suppose they happened now, would not be attributed to the
Christian religion by those who thus thoughtlessly accuse us, and whom
we are compelled to answer?  And yet to their own gods they attribute
none of these things, though they worship them for the sake of escaping
lesser calamities of the same kind, and do not reflect that they who
formerly worshipped them were not preserved from these serious
disasters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[62:159](1020104.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.III.31-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.31-p3"></span> Virgil, *Æneid*, i. 417.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](1020105)
