[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020650)  [Next](1020652) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.18"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—Of Those Who Fancy That, on
Account of the Saints’ Intercession, Man Shall Be Damned in the Last
Judgment.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.18-p2"></span>There are others, again, with whose
opinions I have become acquainted in conversation, who, though they seem
to reverence the holy Scriptures, are yet of reprehensible life, and who
accordingly, in their own interest, attribute to God a still greater
compassion towards men.  For they acknowledge that it is truly predicted
in the divine word that the wicked and unbelieving are worthy of
punishment, but they assert that, when the judgment comes, mercy will
prevail.  For, say they, God, having compassion on them, will give them
up to the prayers and intercessions of His saints.  For if the saints
used to pray for them when they suffered from their cruel hatred, how
much more will they do so when they see them prostrate and humble
suppliants?  For we cannot, they say, believe that the saints shall lose
their bowels of compassion when they have attained the most perfect and
complete holiness; so that they who, when still sinners, prayed for
their enemies, should now, when they are freed from sin, withhold from
interceding for their suppliants.  Or shall God refuse to listen to so
many of His beloved children, when their holiness has purged their
prayers of all hindrance to His answering them?  And the passage of the
psalm which is cited by those who admit that wicked men and infidels
shall be punished for a long time, though in the end <span
id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span id="iv.XXI.18-Page_467"></span>
delivered from all sufferings, is claimed also by the persons we are now
speaking of as making much more for them.  The verse runs:  “Shall God
forget to be gracious?  Shall He in anger shut up His tender
mercies?” <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529)   His anger, they
say, would condemn all that are unworthy of everlasting happiness to
endless punishment.  But if He suffer them to be punished for a long
time, or even at all, must He not shut up His tender mercies, which the
Psalmist implies He will not do?  For he does not say, Shall He in anger
shut up His tender mercies for a long period? but he implies that He
will not shut them up at all.

<span id="iv.XXI.18-p4"></span>And they deny that thus God’s threat of
judgment is proved to be false even though He condemn no man, any more
than we can say that His threat to overthrow Nineveh was false, though
the destruction which was absolutely predicted was not accomplished. 
For He did not say, “Nineveh shall be overthrown if they do not repent
and amend their ways,” but without any such condition He foretold that
the city should be overthrown.  And this prediction, they maintain, was
true because God predicted the punishment which they deserved, although
He was not to inflict it.  For though He spared them on their repentance
yet He was certainly aware that they would repent, and, notwithstanding,
absolutely and definitely predicted that the city should be overthrown. 
This was true, they say, in the truth of severity, because they were
worthy of it; but in respect of the compassion which checked His anger,
so that He spared the suppliants from the punishment with which He had
threatened the rebellious, it was not true.  If, then, He spared those
whom His own holy prophet was provoked at His sparing, how much more
shall He spare those more wretched suppliants for whom all His saints
shall intercede?  And they suppose that this conjecture of theirs is not
hinted at in Scripture, for the sake of stimulating many to reformation
of life through fear of very protracted or eternal sufferings, and of
stimulating others to pray for those who have not reformed.  However,
they think that the divine oracles are not altogether silent on this
point; for they ask to what purpose is it said, “How great is Thy
goodness which Thou hast hidden for them that fear Thee,” <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) if it be not to teach us that the
great and hidden sweetness of God’s mercy is concealed in order that men
may fear?  To the same purpose they think the apostle said, “For God
hath concluded all men in unbelief, that He may have mercy upon
all,” <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) signifying that no one
should be condemned by God.  And yet they who hold this opinion do not
extend it to the acquittal or liberation of the devil and his angels. 
Their human tenderness is moved only towards men, and they plead chiefly
their own cause, holding out false hopes of impunity to their own
depraved lives by means of this quasi compassion of God to the whole
race.  Consequently they who promise this impunity even to the prince of
the devils and his satellites make a still fuller exhibition of the
mercy of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[467:1530](1020651.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iv.XXI.18-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.18-p3"></span> [Ps.
77.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)<span id="iv.XXI.18-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[467:1531](1020651.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iv.XXI.18-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.18-p5"></span> [Ps.
31.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span
id="iv.XXI.18-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[467:1532](1020651.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iv.XXI.18-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.18-p6"></span> [Rom.
11.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XXI.18-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020652)
