[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020001)  [Next](1020003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="iii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iii-p1.1"></span>Editor’s Preface</span>

<span id="iii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii-p3.1"></span>The</span> “City of God” is the masterpiece of the
greatest genius among the Latin Fathers, and the best known and most
read of his works, except the “Confessions.”  It embodies the results of
thirteen years of intellectual labor and study (from <span
class="c20"><span id="iii-p3.2"></span> A.D.</span> 413–426).  It is a
vindication of Christianity against the attacks of the heathen in view
of the sacking of the city of Rome by the barbarians, at a time when the
old Græco-Roman civilization was approaching its downfall, and a new
Christian civilization was beginning to rise on its ruins.  It is the
first attempt at a philosophy of history, under the aspect of two rival
cities or communities,—the eternal city of God and the perishing city of
the world.

<span id="iii-p4"></span>This was the only philosophy of history known
throughout Europe during the middle ages; it was adopted and reproduced
in its essential features by Bossuet, Ozanam, Frederick Schlegel, and
other Catholic writers, and has recently been officially endorsed, as it
were, by the scholarly Pope Leo XIII. in his encyclical letter on the
Christian Constitution of States (*Immortale Dei*, Nov. 1, 1885); for
the Pope says that Augustin in his *De Civitate Dei*, “set forth so
clearly the efficacy of Christian wisdom and the way in which it is
bound up with the well-being of States, that he seems not only to have
pleaded the cause of the Christians of his own time, but to have
triumphantly refuted the false charges \[against Christianity\] for
ever.” <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="iii-p6"></span>“The City of God” is also highly appreciated by
Protestant writers as Waterland, Milman, Neander, Bindemann, Pressensé,
Flint (*The Philosophy of History*, 1874, pp. 17 sqq.) and Fairbairn,
(*The City of God*, London, 2nd ed., 1886, pp. 348 sqq.).  Even the
skeptical Gibbon, who had no sympathy whatever with the religion and
theology of Augustin, concedes to this work at least “the merit of a
magnificent design, vigorously, and not unskillfully executed.” 
(*Decline and Fall*, Ch. xxviii. note, in Harper’s ed., vol. III., 271.)

<span id="iii-p7"></span>It would be unfair to judge “The City of God”
by the standard of modern exegetical and historical scholarship. 
Augustin’s interpretations of Scripture, although usually ingenious and
often profound, are as often fanciful, and lack the sure foundation of a
knowledge of the original languages; for he knew very little Greek and
no Hebrew, and had to depend on the Latin version; he was even
prejudiced at first against Jerome’s revision of the very <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="iii-Page_vi"></span> defective
Itala, fearing, in his solicitude for the weak and timid brethren, that
more harm than good might be the result of this great and necessary
improvement.  His learning was confined to biblical and Roman literature
and the systems of Greek philosophy.  He often wastes arguments on
absurd opinions, and some of his own opinions strike us as childish and
obsolete.  He confines the Kingdom of God to the narrow limits of the
Jewish theocracy and the visible Catholic Church.  He could, indeed, not
deny the truths in Greek philosophy; but he derived them from the Jewish
Scriptures, and adopted the impossible hypothesis of Ambrose that Plato
became acquainted with the prophet Jeremiah in Egypt (comp. *De Doctr.
Christ*. II. 28), though afterwards he corrected it (*Retract*. II. 4). 
He does not sufficiently appreciate the natural virtues, the ways of
Divine providence and the working of His Spirit outside of the chosen
race; and under the influence of the ascetic spirit which then prevailed
in the Church, in justifiable opposition to the surrounding moral
corruption of heathenism, he even degrades secular history and secular
life, in the state and the family, which are likewise ordained of God. 
In some respects he forms the opposite extreme to Origen, the greatest
genius among the Greek fathers.  Both assume a universal fall from
original holiness.  But Augustin dates it from one act of
disobedience,—the historic fall of Adam, in whom the whole race was
germinally included; while Origen goes back to a pre-historic fall of
each individual soul, making each responsible for the abuse of freedom. 
Augustin proceeds to a special election of a people of God from the
corrupt and condemned mass; he follows their history in two antagonistic
lines, and ends in the dualistic contrast of an eternal heaven for the
elect and an eternal hell for the reprobate, including among the latter
even unbaptized infants (*horribile dictu!*), who never committed an
actual transgression; while Origen leads all fallen creatures, men and
angels, by a slow and gradual process of amendment and correction, under
the ever-widening influence of redeeming mercy, during the lapse of
countless ages, back to God, some outstripping others and tending by a
swifter course towards perfection, until the last enemy is finally
reached and death itself is destroyed, that “God may be all in all.” 
Within the limits of the Jewish theocracy and Catholic Christianity
Augustin admits the idea of historical development or a gradual progress
from a lower to higher grades of knowledge, yet always in harmony with
Catholic truth.  He would not allow revolutions and radical changes or
different types of Christianity.  “The best thinking” (says Dr. Flint,
in his *Philosophy of History in Europe*, I. 40), “at once the most
judicious and liberal, among those who are called the Christian fathers,
on the subject of the progress of Christianity as an organization and
system, is that of St. Augustin, as elaborated and applied by Vincent of
Lerins in his ‘Commonitorium,’ where we find substantially the same
conception of the development of the Church and Christian doctrine,
which, within the present century, De Maistre has made celebrated in
France, Möhler in Germany, and Newman in England.  Its main defect is
that it places in the Church an authority other than, and virtually
higher than, Scripture and reason, to determine what is true and false
in the development of doctrine.”

<span id="iii-p8"></span>With all its defects the candid reader will be
much instructed and edified by “the City of God,” and find more to
admire than to censure in this immortal work of sanctified genius and
learning.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span id="iii-Page_vii"></span>

<span id="iii-p9"></span>The present translation, the first accurate and
readable one in the English language, was prepared by the accomplished
editor of the *Works of Aurelius Augustin*, published by T. and T. Clark
of Edinburgh. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)   I urged <span
class="c20"><span id="iii-p10.3"></span>Dr. Dods</span> by letter and in
person to re-edit it for this Patristic Series with such changes and
additions as he might wish to make, but he declined, partly from want of
leisure, and partly for a reason which I must state in his own
language.  “I thought,” he writes in a letter to me of Nov. 23, 1886,
that “the book could not fail to be improved by passing under your own
supervision.  In editing it for Clark’s Series, I translated the greater
part of it with my own hand and carefully revised the parts translated
by others.  I was very much gratified to hear that you meant to adopt it
into your Series; and the best reward of my labor on it is that now with
your additional notes and improvements, it is likely to find a wider
circulation than it could otherwise have had.”

<span id="iii-p11"></span>But in this expectation the reader will be
disappointed.  The translation is far better than I could have made it,
and it would have been presumption on my part to attempt to improve it. 
The notes, too, are all to the point and leave little to be desired.  I
have only added a few.  Besides the Latin original, I have compared also
the German translation of Ulrich Uhl <span id="iii-p11.1"></span>(*Des
heiligen Kirchenvaters Augustinus zwei und zwanzig Bücher über den
Gottesstaat*) in the Catholic “Bibliothek der Kirchenväter,” edited by
Dr. Thalhofer, but I found nothing in the occasional foot-notes which is
better than those of Dr. Dods.  The present edition, therefore, is
little more than a careful reproduction of that of my esteemed Scotch
friend, who deserves the undivided credit of making this famous work of
the Bishop of Hippo accessible to the English reader.

<span id="iii-p12"></span>I have included in this volume the four books
of St. Augustin *On Christian Doctrine*. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)   It is the first and best patristic work on
biblical Hermeneutics, and continued for a thousand years, together with
the Prefaces of Jerome, to be the chief exegetical guide.  Although it
is superseded as a scientific work by modern Hermeneutics and Critical
Introductions to the Old and New Testaments, it is not surpassed for
originality, depth and spiritual insight.

<span id="iii-p14"></span>The translation was prepared by the Rev.
Professor J. F.<span class="c20"><span
id="iii-p14.1"></span>Shaw</span>, of Londonderry, and is likewise all
that can be desired.  I have enlarged the introductory note and added a
table of contents.

<span id="iii-p15"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii-p15.1"></span>Philip</span> <span class="c20"><span
id="iii-p15.2"></span>Schaff</span>.

<span id="iii-p16"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii-p16.1"></span>New York</span>, *December* 10, 1886.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](1020002.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p5"></span> “*<span id="iii-p5.1"></span>Augustinus
præsertim in* *‘<span id="iii-p5.2"></span>Civitate Dei’<span
id="iii-p5.3"></span>virtutem Christianæ sapientiæ, qua parte
necessitudinem habet cum republica, tanto in lumine collocavit, ut non
tam pro Christianis sui temporis dixisse caussam quam de criminibus
falsis perpetuum triumphum egisse videatur*.”  I quote from the Paris
edition of the *Acta Leonis Pap<span id="iii-p5.4"></span>æXIII.*, 1886,
p. 284.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vii:2](1020002.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p10"></span> An older translation appeared under the
title:  *Of the citie of God, with the learned comments of Jo. Lodovicus
Vives, Englished first by J. H., and now in this second edition compared
with the Latin original, and in very many places corrected and amended,*
London, 1620.  The Oxford Library of the Fathers does not include the
City of God nor Christian Doctrine.  In French there are, it seems, no
less than eight independent translations of the *Civitas Dei*, the best
by Emile Saisset, with introduction and notes, Paris, 1855, 4 vols. gr.
in 18.  Moreau’s translation includes the Latin original, Paris, 1846
and 1854, in 3 vols.  The Latin text alone is found in the 7th vol. of
the Benedictine edition (1685).  A handy (stereotyped) edition was
published by C. Tauchnitz, Lipsi<span id="iii-p10.1"></span>æ, 1825, in
2 vols.; another by Jos. Strange, Coloni<span id="iii-p10.2"></span>æ,
1850, in 2 vols.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[vii:3](1020002.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii-p13"></span> “*De Doctrina Christiana libri quatuor*”,
included in the third vol. (1680) of the Benedictine edition at the head
of the exegetical works.  A separate edition was published by Car. Herm.
Bruder, ed. stereotypa, Lips. (Tauchnitz), 1838.  A German translation
<span id="iii-p13.1"></span>(*Vier Bücher über die christliche Lehre*)
by Remigius Storf was published at Kempten, 1877, in Thalhofer’s
“Bibliothek der Kirchenväter.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: City of God](1020003)
