[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020690)  [Next](1020692) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.30"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.30-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—Of the Eternal Felicity of the
City of God, and of the Perpetual Sabbath.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p2"></span>How great shall be that felicity, which
shall be tainted with no evil, which shall lack no good, and which shall
afford leisure for the praises of God, who shall be all in all!  For I
know not what other employment there can be where no lassitude shall
slacken activity, nor any want stimulate to labor.  I am admonished also
by the sacred song, in which I read or hear the words, “Blessed are they
that dwell in Thy house, O Lord; they will be still praising
Thee.” <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689)   All the members
<span id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span id="iv.XXII.30-Page_510"></span>
and organs of the incorruptible body, which now we see to be suited to
various necessary uses, shall contribute to the praises of God; for in
that life necessity shall have no place, but full, certain, secure,
everlasting felicity.  For all those parts <span
id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690) of the bodily harmony, which are
distributed through the whole body, within and without, and of which I
have just been saying that they at present elude our observation, shall
then be discerned; and, along with the other great and marvellous
discoveries which shall then kindle rational minds in praise of the
great Artificer, there shall be the enjoyment of a beauty which appeals
to the reason.  What power of movement such bodies shall possess, I have
not the audacity rashly to define, as I have not the ability to
conceive.  Nevertheless I will say that in any case, both in motion and
at rest, they shall be, as in their appearance, seemly; for into that
state nothing which is unseemly shall be admitted.  One thing is
certain, the body shall forthwith be wherever the spirit wills, and the
spirit shall will nothing which is unbecoming either to the spirit or to
the body.  True honor shall be there, for it shall be denied to none who
is worthy, nor yielded to any unworthy; neither shall any unworthy
person so much as sue for it, for none but the worthy shall be there. 
True peace shall be there, where no one shall suffer opposition either
from himself or any other.  God Himself, who is the Author of virtue,
shall there be its reward; for, as there is nothing greater or better,
He has promised Himself.  What else was meant by His word through the
prophet, “I will be your God, and ye shall be my people,” <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) than, I shall be their
satisfaction, I shall be all that men honorably desire,—life, and
health, and nourishment, and plenty, and glory, and honor, and peace,
and all good things?  This, too, is the right interpretation of the
saying of the apostle, “That God may be all in all.” <span
id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692)   He shall be the end of our
desires who shall be seen without end, loved without cloy, praised
without weariness.  This outgoing of affection, this employment, shall
certainly be, like eternal life itself, common to all.

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p7"></span>But who can conceive, not to say
describe, what degrees of honor and glory shall be awarded to the
various degrees of merit?  Yet it cannot be doubted that there shall be
degrees.  And in that blessed city there shall be this great blessing,
that no inferior shall envy any superior, as now the archangels are not
envied by the angels, because no one will wish to be what he has not
received, though bound in strictest concord with him who has received;
as in the body the finger does not seek to be the eye, though both
members are harmoniously included in the complete structure of the
body.  And thus, along with his gift, greater or less, each shall
receive this further gift of contentment to desire no more than he has.

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p8"></span>Neither are we to suppose that because
sin shall have no power to delight them, free will must be withdrawn. 
It will, on the contrary, be all the more truly free, because set free
from delight in sinning to take unfailing delight in not sinning.  For
the first freedom of will which man received when he was created upright
consisted in an ability not to sin, but also in an ability to sin;
whereas this last freedom of will shall be superior, inasmuch as it
shall not be able to sin.  This, indeed, shall not be a natural ability,
but the gift of God.  For it is one thing to be God, another thing to be
a partaker of God.  God by nature cannot sin, but the partaker of God
receives this inability from God.  And in this divine gift there was to
be observed this gradation, that man should first receive a free will by
which he was able not to sin, and at last a free will by which he was
not able to sin,—the former being adapted to the acquiring of merit, the
latter to the enjoying of the reward. <span
id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693)   But the nature thus constituted,
having sinned when it had the ability to do so, it is by a more abundant
grace that it is delivered so as to reach that freedom in which it
cannot sin.  For as the first immortality which Adam lost by sinning
consisted in his being able not to die, while the last shall consist in
his not being able to die; so the first free will consisted in his being
able not to sin, the last in his not being able to sin.  And thus piety
and justice shall be as indefeasible as happiness.  For certainly by
sinning we lost both piety and happiness; but when we lost happiness, we
did not lose the love of it.  Are we to say that God Himself is not free
because He cannot sin?  In that city, then, there shall be free will,
one in all the citizens, and indivisible in each, delivered from all
ill, filled with all good, enjoying indefeasibly the delights of eternal
joys, oblivious of sins, oblivious of sufferings, and yet not so
oblivious of its deliverance as to be ungrateful to its Deliverer.

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p10"></span>The soul, then, shall have an
intellectual remembrance of its past ills; but, so far as regards
sensible experience, they shall be quite forgotten.  For a skillful
physician knows, indeed, professionally almost all diseases; but <span
id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span id="iv.XXII.30-Page_511"></span>
experimentally he is ignorant of a great number which he himself has
never suffered from.  As, therefore, there are two ways of knowing evil
things,—one by mental insight, the other by sensible experience, for it
is one thing to understand all vices by the wisdom of a cultivated mind,
another to understand them by the foolishness of an abandoned life,—so
also there are two ways of forgetting evils.  For a well-instructed and
learned man forgets them one way, and he who has experimentally suffered
from them forgets them another,—the former by neglecting what he has
learned, the latter by escaping what he has suffered.  And in this
latter way the saints shall forget their past ills, for they shall have
so thoroughly escaped them all, that they shall be quite blotted out of
their experience.  But their intellectual knowledge, which shall be
great, shall keep them acquainted not only with their own past woes, but
with the eternal sufferings of the lost.  For if they were not to know
that they had been miserable, how could they, as the Psalmist says, for
ever sing the mercies of God?  Certainly that city shall have no greater
joy than the celebration of the grace of Christ, who redeemed us by His
blood.  There shall be accomplished the words of the psalm, “Be still,
and know that I am God.” <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694)  
There shall be the great Sabbath which has no evening, which God
celebrated among His first works, as it is written, “And God rested on
the seventh day from all His works which He had made.  And God blessed
the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it He had rested
from all His work which God began to make.” <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695)   For we shall ourselves be the
seventh day, when we shall be filled and replenished with God’s blessing
and sanctification.  There shall we be still, and know that He is God;
that He is that which we ourselves aspired to be when we fell away from
Him, and listened to the voice of the seducer, “Ye shall be as
gods,” <span id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) and so abandoned God,
who would have made us as gods, not by deserting Him, but by
participating in Him.  For without Him what have we accomplished, save
to perish in His anger?  But when we are restored by Him, and perfected
with greater grace, we shall have eternal leisure to see that He is God,
for we shall be full of Him when He shall be all in all.  For even our
good works, when they are understood to be rather His than ours, are
imputed to us that we may enjoy this Sabbath rest.  For if we attribute
them to ourselves, they shall be servile; for it is said of the Sabbath,
“Ye shall do no servile work in it.” <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697)   Wherefore also it is said by
Ezekiel the prophet, “And I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between
me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord who sanctify
them.” <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698)   This knowledge shall
be perfected when we shall be perfectly at rest, and shall perfectly
know that He is God.

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p16"></span>This Sabbath shall appear still more
clearly if we count the ages as days, in accordance with the periods of
time defined in Scripture, for that period will be found to be the
seventh.  The first age, as the first day, extends from Adam to the
deluge; the second from the deluge to Abraham, equalling the first, not
in length of time, but in the number of generations, there being ten in
each.  From Abraham to the advent of Christ there are, as the evangelist
Matthew calculates, three periods, in each of which are fourteen
generations,—one period from Abraham to David, a second from David to
the captivity, a third from the captivity to the birth of Christ in the
flesh.  There are thus five ages in all.  The sixth is now passing, and
cannot be measured by any number of generations, as it has been said,
“It is not for you to know the times, which the Father hath put in His
own power.” <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699)   After this
period God shall rest as on the seventh day, when He shall give us (who
shall be the seventh day) rest in Himself. <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700)   But there is not now space to
treat of these ages; suffice it to say that the seventh shall be our
Sabbath, which shall be brought to a close, not by an evening, but by
the Lord’s day, as an eighth and eternal day, consecrated by the
resurrection of Christ, and prefiguring the eternal repose not only of
the spirit, but also of the body.  There we shall rest and see, see and
love, love and praise.  This is what shall be in the end without end. 
For what other end do we propose to ourselves than to attain to the
kingdom of which there is no end?

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p19"></span>I think I have now, by God’s help,
discharged my obligation in writing this large work.  Let those who
think I have said too little, or those who think I have said too much,
forgive me; and let those who think I have said just enough join me in
giving thanks to God.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[509:1690](1020691.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p3"></span> [Ps.
84.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[510:1691](1020691.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p4"></span> Numbers.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[510:1692](1020691.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p5"></span> [Lev.
26.12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[510:1693](1020691.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
15.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[510:1694](1020691.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p9"></span> Or, the former to a state of probation,
the latter to a state of reward.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[511:1695](1020691.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p11"></span> [Ps.
46.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[511:1696](1020691.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p12"></span> [Gen.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)<span id="iv.XXII.30-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[511:1697](1020691.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p13"></span> [Gen.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[511:1698](1020691.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p14"></span> [Deut.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[511:1699](1020691.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p15"></span> [Ezek.
20.12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[511:1700](1020691.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p17"></span> [Acts
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span
id="iv.XXII.30-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[511:1701](1020691.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="iv.XXII.30-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.30-p18"></span> \[On Augustin’s view of the millennium
and the first resurrection, see Bk. xx. 6–10.—P.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Christian Doctrine](1020692)
