[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020576)  [Next](1020578) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—What the Christians Believe
Regarding the Supreme Good and Evil, in Opposition to the Philosophers,
Who Have Maintained that the Supreme Good is in Themselves.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p2"></span>If, then, we be asked what the city of God
has to say upon these points, and, in the first place, what its opinion
regarding the supreme good and evil is, it will reply that life eternal
is the supreme good, death eternal the supreme evil, and that to obtain
the one and escape the other we must live rightly.  And thus it is
written, “The just lives by faith,” <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) for we do not as yet see our good,
and must therefore live by faith; neither have we in ourselves power to
live rightly, but can do so only if He who has given us faith to believe
in His help do help us when we believe and pray.  As for those who have
supposed that the sovereign good and evil are to be found in this life,
and have placed it either in the soul or the body, or in both, or, to
speak more explicitly, either in pleasure or in virtue, or in both; in
repose or in virtue, or in both; in pleasure and repose, or in virtue,
or in all combined; in the primary objects of nature, or in virtue, or
in both,—all these have, with a marvelous shallowness, sought to find
their blessedness in this life and in themselves.  Contempt has been
poured upon such ideas by the Truth, saying by the prophet, “The Lord
knoweth the thoughts of men” (or, as the Apostle Paul cites the passage,
“The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the *wise*”) “that they are
vain.” <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263)

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p5"></span>For what flood of eloquence can suffice to
detail the miseries of this life?  Cicero, in the *Consolation* on the
death of his daughter, has spent all his ability in lamentation; but how
inadequate was even his ability here?  For when, where, how, in this
life can these primary objects of nature be possessed so that they may
not be assailed by unforeseen accidents?  Is the body of the wise man
exempt from any pain which may dispel pleasure, from any disquietude
which may banish repose?  The amputation or decay of the members of the
body puts an end to its integrity, deformity blights its beauty,
weakness its health, lassitude its vigor, sleepiness or sluggishness its
activity,—and which of these is it that may not assail the flesh of the
wise man?  Comely and fitting attitudes and movements of the body are
numbered among the prime natural blessings; but what if some sickness
makes the members tremble? what if a man suffers from curvature of the
spine to such an extent that his hands reach the ground, and he goes
upon all-fours like a quadruped?  Does not this destroy all beauty and
grace in the body, whether at rest or in motion?  What shall I say of
the fundamental blessings of the soul, sense and intellect, of which the
one is given for the perception, and the other for the comprehension of
truth?  But what kind of sense is it that remains when a man becomes
deaf and blind? where are reason and intellect when disease makes a man
delirious?  We can scarcely, or not at all, refrain from tears, when we
think of or see the actions and words of such frantic persons, and
consider how different from and even opposed to their own sober judgment
and ordinary conduct their present demeanor is.  And what shall I say of
those who suffer from demoniacal possession?  Where is their own
intelligence hidden and buried while the malignant spirit is using their
body and soul according to his own will?  And who is quite sure that no
such thing can happen to the wise man in this life?  Then, as to the
perception of truth, what can we hope for even in this way while in the
body, as we read in the true book of Wisdom, “The corruptible body
weigheth down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle presseth down the
mind that museth upon many things?” <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264)   And eagerness, or <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span id="iv.XIX.4-Page_402"></span> desire
of action, if this is the right meaning to put upon the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIX.4-p6.2"></span>ὁρμη</span>, is also
reckoned among the primary advantages of nature; and yet is it not this
which produces those pitiable movements of the insane, and those actions
which we shudder to see, when sense is deceived and reason deranged?

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p7"></span>In fine, virtue itself, which is not among
the primary objects of nature, but succeeds to them as the result of
learning, though it holds the highest place among human good things,
what is its occupation save to wage perpetual war with vices,—not those
that are outside of us, but within; not other men’s, but our own,—a war
which is waged especially by that virtue which the Greeks call <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIX.4-p7.1"></span>σωφροσυνη</span>, and we
temperance, <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) and which bridles
carnal lusts, and prevents them from winning the consent of the spirit
to wicked deeds?  For we must not fancy that there is no vice in us,
when, as the apostle says, “The flesh lusteth against the spirit;” <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) for to this vice there is a
contrary virtue, when, as the same writer says, “The spirit lusteth
against the flesh.”  “For these two,” he says, “are contrary one to the
other, so that you cannot do the things which you would.”  But what is
it we wish to do when we seek to attain the supreme good, unless that
the flesh should cease to lust against the spirit, and that there be no
vice in us against which the spirit may lust?  And as we cannot attain
to this in the present life, however ardently we desire it, let us by
God’s help accomplish at least this, to preserve the soul from
succumbing and yielding to the flesh that lusts against it, and to
refuse our consent to the perpetration of sin.  Far be it from us, then,
to fancy that while we are still engaged in this intestine war, we have
already found the happiness which we seek to reach by victory.  And who
is there so wise that he has no conflict at all to maintain against his
vices?

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p10"></span>What shall I say of that virtue which is
called prudence?  Is not all its vigilance spent in the discernment of
good from evil things, so that no mistake may be admitted about what we
should desire and what avoid?  And thus it is itself a proof that we are
in the midst of evils, or that evils are in us; for it teaches us that
it is an evil to consent to sin, and a good to refuse this consent.  And
yet this evil, to which prudence teaches and temperance enables us not
to consent, is removed from this life neither by prudence nor by
temperance.  And justice, whose office it is to render to every man his
due, whereby there is in man himself a certain just order of nature, so
that the soul is subjected to God, and the flesh to the soul, and
consequently both soul and flesh to God,—does not this virtue
demonstrate that it is as yet rather laboring towards its end than
resting in its finished work?  For the soul is so much the less
subjected to God as it is less occupied with the thought of God; and the
flesh is so much the less subjected to the spirit as it lusts more
vehemently against the spirit.  So long, therefore, as we are beset by
this weakness, this plague, this disease, how shall we dare to say that
we are safe? and if not safe, then how can we be already enjoying our
final beatitude?  Then that virtue which goes by the name of fortitude
is the plainest proof of the ills of life, for it is these ills which it
is compelled to bear patiently.  And this holds good, no matter though
the ripest wisdom co-exists with it.  And I am at a loss to understand
how the Stoic philosophers can presume to say that these are no ills,
though at the same time they allow the wise man to commit suicide and
pass out of this life if they become so grievous that he cannot or ought
not to endure them.  But such is the stupid pride of these men who fancy
that the supreme good can be found in this life, and that they can
become happy by their own resources, that their wise man, or at least
the man whom they fancifully depict as such, is always happy, even
though he become blind, deaf, dumb, mutilated, racked with pains, or
suffer any conceivable calamity such as may compel him to make away with
himself; and they are not ashamed to call the life that is beset with
these evils happy.  O happy life, which seeks the aid of death to end
it?  If it is happy, let the wise man remain in it; but if these ills
drive him out of it, in what sense is it happy?  Or how can they say
that these are not evils which conquer the virtue of fortitude, and
force it not only to yield, but so to rave that it in one breath calls
life happy and recommends it to be given up?  For who is so blind as not
to see that if it were happy it would not be fled from?  And if they say
we should flee from it on account of the infirmities that beset it, why
then do they not lower their pride and acknowledge that it is
miserable?  Was it, I would ask, fortitude or weakness which prompted
Cato to kill himself? for he would not have done so had he not been too
weak to endure Cæsar’s victory.  Where, then, is his fortitude?  It has
yielded, it has succumbed, it has been so thoroughly overcome as to
abandon, forsake, flee this happy life.  Or was it no longer happy? 
Then it was miserable.  How, then, were these not evils which made life
miserable, and a thing to be escaped from?

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span id="iv.XIX.4-Page_403"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p11"></span>And therefore those who admit that these
are evils, as the Peripatetics do, and the Old Academy, the sect which
Varro advocates, express a more intelligible doctrine; but theirs also
is a surprising mistake, for they contend that this is a happy life
which is beset by these evils, even though they be so great that he who
endures them should commit suicide to escape them.  “Pains and anguish
of body,” says Varro, “are evils, and so much the worse in proportion to
their severity; and to escape them you must quit this life.”  What life,
I pray?  This life, he says, which is oppressed by such evils.  Then it
is happy in the midst of these very evils on account of which you say we
must quit it?  Or do you call it happy because you are at liberty to
escape these evils by death?  What, then, if by some secret judgment of
God you were held fast and not permitted to die, nor suffered to live
without these evils?  In that case, at least, you would say that such a
life was miserable.  It is soon relinquished, no doubt but this does not
make it not miserable; for were it eternal, you yourself would pronounce
it miserable.  Its brevity, therefore, does not clear it of misery;
neither ought it to be called happiness because it is a brief misery. 
Certainly there is a mighty force in these evils which compel a
man—according to them even a wise man—to cease to be a man that he may
escape them, though they say, and say truly, that it is as it were the
first and strongest demand of nature that a man cherish himself, and
naturally therefore avoid death, and should so stand his own friend as
to wish and vehemently aim at continuing to exist as a living creature,
and subsisting in this union of soul and body.  There is a mighty force
in these evils to overcome this natural instinct by which death is by
every means and with all a man’s efforts avoided, and to overcome it so
completely that what was avoided is desired, sought after, and if it
cannot in any other way be obtained, is inflicted by the man on
himself.  There is a mighty force in these evils which make fortitude a
homicide,—if, indeed, that is to be called fortitude which is so
thoroughly overcome by these evils, that it not only cannot preserve by
patience the man whom it undertook to govern and defend, but is itself
obliged to kill him.  The wise man, I admit, ought to bear death with
patience, but when it is inflicted by another.  If, then, as these men
maintain, he is obliged to inflict it on himself, certainly it must be
owned that the ills which compel him to this are not only evils, but
intolerable evils.  The life, then, which is either subject to
accidents, or environed with evils so considerable and grievous, could
never have been called happy, if the men who give it this name had
condescended to yield to the truth, and to be conquered by valid
arguments, when they inquired after the happy life, as they yield to
unhappiness, and are overcome by overwhelming evils, when they put
themselves to death, and if they had not fancied that the supreme good
was to be found in this mortal life; for the very virtues of this life,
which are certainly its best and most useful possessions, are all the
more telling proofs of its miseries in proportion as they are helpful
against the violence of its dangers, toils, and woes.  For if these are
true virtues,—and such cannot exist save in those who have true
piety,—they do not profess to be able to deliver the men who possess
them from all miseries; for true virtues tell no such lies, but they
profess that by the hope of the future world this life, which is
miserably involved in the many and great evils of this world, is happy
as it is also safe.  For if not yet safe, how could it be happy?  And
therefore the Apostle Paul, speaking not of men without prudence,
temperance, fortitude, and justice, but of those whose lives were
regulated by true piety, and whose virtues were therefore true, says,
“For we are saved by hope:  now hope which is seen is not hope; for what
a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?  But if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for it.” <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) As, therefore, we are saved, so we
are made happy by hope.  And as we do not as yet possess a present, but
look for a future salvation, so is it with our happiness, and this “with
patience;” for we are encompassed with evils, which we ought patiently
to endure, until we come to the ineffable enjoyment of unmixed good; for
there shall be no longer anything to endure.  Salvation, such as it
shall be in the world to come, shall itself be our final happiness.  And
this happiness these philosophers refuse to believe in, because they do
not see it, and attempt to fabricate for themselves a happiness in this
life, based upon a virtue which is as deceitful as it is proud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[401:1263](1020577.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="iv.XIX.4-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p3"></span> [Hab.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="iv.XIX.4-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[401:1264](1020577.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="iv.XIX.4-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p4"></span> [Ps.
94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011), [1 Cor.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#020)<span id="iv.XIX.4-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[401:1265](1020577.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="iv.XIX.4-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p6"></span> [Wisd.
9.15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="iv.XIX.4-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[402:1266](1020577.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="iv.XIX.4-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p8"></span> Cicero, *Tusc. Quæst.* iii. 8.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[402:1267](1020577.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="iv.XIX.4-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p9"></span> [Gal.
v.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="iv.XIX.4-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[403:1268](1020577.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="iv.XIX.4-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.4-p12"></span> [Rom.
8.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="iv.XIX.4-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020578)
