[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020050)  [Next](1020052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.8"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—That the Theatrical Exhibitions
Publishing the Shameful Actions of the Gods, Propitiated Rather Than
Offended Them.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.8-p2"></span>But, some one will interpose, these are
the fables of poets, not the deliverances of the gods themselves.  Well,
I have no mind to arbitrate between the lewdness of theatrical
entertainments and of mystic rites; only this I say, and history bears
me out in making the assertion, that those same entertainments, in which
the fictions of poets are the main attraction, were not introduced in
the festivals of the gods by the ignorant devotion of the Romans, but
that the gods themselves gave the most urgent commands to this effect,
and indeed extorted from the Romans these solemnities and celebrations
in their honor.  I touched on this in the preceding book, and mentioned
that dramatic entertainments were first inaugurated at Rome on occasion
of a pestilence, and by authority of the pontiff.  And what man is there
who is not more likely to adopt, for the regulation of his own life, the
examples that are represented in plays which have a divine sanction,
rather than the precepts written and promulgated with no more than human
authority?  If the poets gave a false representation of Jove in
describing him as adulterous, then it were to be expected that the
chaste gods should in anger avenge so wicked a fiction, in place of
encouraging the games which circulated it.  Of these plays, the most
inoffensive are comedies and tragedies, that is to say, the dramas which
poets write for the stage, and which, though they often handle impure
subjects, yet do so without the filthiness of language which
characterizes many other performances; and it is these dramas which boys
are obliged by their seniors to read and learn as a part of what is
called a liberal and gentlemanly education. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[27:101](1020051.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.II_1.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.8-p3"></span> This sentence recalls Augustin’s own
experience as a boy, which he bewails in his *Confessions.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020052)
