[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020114)  [Next](1020116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.10"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—What Opinions Those Have Followed
Who Have Set Divers Gods Over Divers Parts of the World.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.10-p2"></span>Why, also, is Juno united to him as his
wife, who is called at once “sister and yoke-fellow?” <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168)   Because, say they, we have Jove in
the ether, Juno in the air; and these two elements are united, the one
being superior, the other inferior.  It is not he, then, of whom it is
said, “All things are full of Jove,” if Juno also fills some part.  Does
each fill either, and are both of this couple in both of these elements,
and in each of them at the same time?  Why, then, is the ether given to
Jove, the air to Juno?  Besides, these two should have been enough.  Why
is it that the sea is assigned to Neptune, the earth to Pluto?  And that
these also might not be left without mates, Salacia is joined to
Neptune, Proserpine to Pluto.  For they say that, as Juno possesses the
lower part of the heavens,—that is, the air,—so Salacia possesses the
lower part of the sea, and Proserpine the lower part of the earth.  They
seek how they may patch up these fables, but they find no way.  For if
these things were so, their ancient sages would have maintained that
there are three chief elements of the world, not four, in order that
each of the elements might have a pair of gods.  Now, they have
positively affirmed that the ether is one thing, the air another.  But
water, whether higher or lower, is surely water.  Suppose it ever so
unlike, can it ever be so much so as no longer to be water?  And the
lower earth, by whatever divinity it may be distinguished, what else can
it be than earth?  Lo, then, since the whole physical world is complete
in these four or three elements, where shall Minerva be?  What should
she possess, what should she fill?  For she is placed in the Capitol
along with these two, although she is not the offspring of their
marriage.  Or if they say that she possesses the higher part of the
ether,—and on that account the poets have feigned that she sprang from
the head of Jove,—why then is she not rather reckoned queen of the gods,
because she is superior to Jove?  Is it because it would be improper to
set the daughter before the father?  Why, then, is not that rule of
justice observed concerning Jove himself toward Saturn?  Is it because
he was conquered?  Have they fought then?  By no means, say they; that
is an old wife’s fable.  Lo, we are not to believe fables, and must hold
more worthy opinions concerning the gods!  Why, then, do they not assign
to the father of Jove a seat, if not of higher, at least of equal
honor?  Because Saturn, say they, is length of time. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)   Therefore they who worship Saturn
worship Time; and it is insinuated that Jupiter, the king of the gods,
was born of Time.  For is anything unworthy said when Jupiter and Juno
are said to have been sprung from Time, if he is the heaven and she is
the earth, since both heaven and earth have been made, and are therefore
not eternal?  For their learned and wise men have this also in their
books.  Nor is that saying taken by Virgil out of poetic figments, but
out of the books of philosophers,

<span id="iv.IV.10-p5"></span>“Then Ether, the Father Almighty, in
copious showers descended

<span id="iv.IV.10-p6"></span>Into his spouse’s glad bosom, making it
fertile,” <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="iv.IV.10-p8"></span>—that is, into the bosom of Tellus, or the
earth.  Although here, also, they will have it that there are some
differences, and think that <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="iv.IV.10-Page_70"></span> in the earth herself Terra is one thing,
Tellus another, and Tellumo another.  And they have all these as gods,
called by their own names distinguished by their own offices, and
venerated with their own altars and rites.  This same earth also they
call the mother of the gods, so that even the fictions of the poets are
more tolerable, if, according, not to their poetical but sacred books,
Juno is not only the sister and wife, but also the mother of Jove.  The
same earth they worship as Ceres, and also as Vesta; while yet they more
frequently affirm that Vesta is nothing else than fire, pertaining to
the hearths, without which the city cannot exist; and therefore virgins
are wont to serve her, because as nothing is born of a virgin, so
nothing is born of fire;—but all this nonsense ought to be completely
abolished and extinguished by Him who is born of a virgin.  For who can
bear that, while they ascribe to the fire so much honor, and, as it
were, chastity, they do not blush sometimes even to call Vesta Venus, so
that honored virginity may vanish in her hand-maidens?  For if Vesta is
Venus, how can virgins rightly serve her by abstaining from venery?  Are
there two Venuses, the one a virgin, the other not a maid?  Or rather,
are there three, one the goddess of virgins, who is also called Vesta,
another the goddess of wives, and another of harlots?  To her also the
Phenicians offered a gift by prostituting their daughters before they
united them to husbands. <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)   Which
of these is the wife of Vulcan?  Certainly not the virgin, since she has
a husband.  Far be it from us to say it is the harlot, lest we should
seem to wrong the son of Juno and fellow-worker of Minerva.  Therefore
it is to be understood that she belongs to the married people; but we
would not wish them to imitate her in what she did with Mars.  “Again,”
say they, “you return to fables.”  What sort of justice is that, to be
angry with us because we say such things of their gods, and not to be
angry with themselves, who in their theatres most willingly behold the
crimes of their gods?  And,—a thing incredible, if it were not
thoroughly well proved,—these very theatric representations of the
crimes of their gods have been instituted in honor of these same gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[69:169](1020115.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iv.IV.10-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.10-p3"></span> Virgil, *Æneid,* i. 47.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[69:170](1020115.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iv.IV.10-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.10-p4"></span> Cicero, *De Nat. Deor.* ii. 25.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[69:171](1020115.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iv.IV.10-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.10-p7"></span> Virgil, *Georg.* ii. 325, 326.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[70:172](1020115.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iv.IV.10-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.10-p9"></span> Eusebius, *De Prœp. Evang.*  i. 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020116)
