[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020119)  [Next](1020121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.15"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.15-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.15-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Whether It is Suitable for Good
Men to Wish to Rule More Widely.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.15-p2"></span>Let them ask, then, whether it is quite
fitting for good men to rejoice in extended empire.  For the iniquity of
those with whom just wars are carried on favors the growth of a kingdom,
which would certainly have been small if the peace and justice of
neighbors had not by any wrong provoked the carrying on of war against
them; and human affairs being thus more happy, all kingdoms would have
been small, rejoicing in neighborly concord; and thus there would have
been very many kingdoms of nations in the world, as there are very many
houses of citizens in a city.  Therefore, to carry on war and extend a
kingdom over wholly subdued nations seems to bad men to be felicity, to
good men necessity.  But because it would be worse that the injurious
should rule over those who are more righteous, therefore even that is
not unsuitably called felicity.  But beyond doubt it is greater felicity
to have a good neighbor at peace, than to conquer a bad one by making
war.  Your wishes are bad, when you desire that one whom you hate or
fear should be in such a condition that you can conquer him.  If,
therefore, by carrying on wars that were just, not impious or
unrighteous, the Romans could have acquired so great an empire, ought
they not to worship as a goddess even the injustice of foreigners?  For
we see that this has cooperated much in extending the empire, by making
foreigners so unjust that they became people with whom just wars might
be carried on, and the empire increased.  And why may not injustice, at
least that of foreign nations, also be a goddess, if Fear and Dread and
Ague have deserved to be Roman gods?  By these two, therefore,—that is,
by foreign injustice, and the goddess Victoria, for injustice stirs up
causes of wars, and Victoria brings these same wars to a happy
termination,—the empire has increased, even although Jove has been
idle.  For what part could Jove have here, when those things which might
be thought to be his benefits are held to be gods, called gods,
worshipped as gods, and are themselves invoked for their own parts?  He
also might have some part here, if he himself might be called Empire,
just as she is called Victory.  Or if empire is the gift of Jove, why
may not victory also be held to be his gift?  And it certainly would
have been held to be so, had he been recognized and worshipped, not as a
stone in the Capitol, but as the true King of kings and Lord of lords.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020121)
