[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020397)  [Next](1020399) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.6"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Of the Character of the Human Will
Which Makes the Affections of the Soul Right or Wrong.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.6-p2"></span>But the character of the human will is of
moment; because, if it is wrong, these motions of the soul will be
wrong, but if it is right, they will be not merely blameless, but even
praiseworthy.  For the will is in them all; yea, none of them is
anything else than will.  For what are desire and joy but a volition of
consent to the things we wish?  And what are fear and sadness but a
volition of aversion from the things which we do not wish?  But when
consent takes the form of seeking to possess the things we wish, this is
called desire; and when consent takes the form of enjoying the things we
wish, this is called joy.  In like manner, when we turn with aversion
from that which we do not wish to happen, this volition is termed fear;
and when we turn away from that which has happened against our will,
this act of will is called sorrow.  And generally in respect of all that
we seek or shun, as a man’s will is attracted or repelled, so it is
changed and turned into these different affections.  Wherefore the man
who lives according to God, and not according to man, ought to be a
lover of good, and therefore a hater of evil.  And since no one is evil
by nature, but whoever is evil is evil by vice, he who lives according
to God ought to cherish towards evil men a perfect hatred, so that he
shall neither hate the man because of his vice, nor love the vice
because of the man, but hate the vice and love the man.  For the vice
being cursed, all that ought to be loved, and nothing that ought to be
hated, will remain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020399)
