[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020485)  [Next](1020487) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.37"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.37-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.37-p1.1"></span>Chapter 37.—Of the Things Mystically
Prefigured in Esau and Jacob.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.37-p2"></span>Isaac’s two sons, Esau and Jacob, grew up
together.  The primacy of the elder was transferred to the younger by a
bargain and agreement between them, when the elder immoderately lusted
after the lentiles the younger had prepared for food, and for that price
sold his birthright to him, confirming it <span id="page_332">p.
332</span> <span id="iv.XVI.37-Page_332"></span> with an oath.  We learn
from this that a person is to be blamed, not for the kind of food he
eats, but for immoderate greed.  Isaac grew old, and old age deprived
him of his eyesight.  He wished to bless the elder son, and instead of
the elder, who was hairy, unwittingly blessed the younger, who put
himself under his father’s hands, having covered himself with kid-skins,
as if bearing the sins of others.  Lest we should think this guile of
Jacob’s was fraudulent guile, instead of seeking in it the mystery of a
great thing, the Scripture has predicted in the words just before, “Esau
was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a simple man,
dwelling at home.” <span id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956)   Some of our
writers have interpreted this, “without guile.”  But whether the Greek
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.XVI.37-p3.2"></span>ἄλαστος</span>
means “without guile,” or “simple,” or rather “without reigning,” in the
receiving of that blessing what is the guile of the man without guile? 
What is the guile of the simple, what the fiction of the man who does
not lie, but a profound mystery of the truth?  But what is the blessing
itself?  “See,” he says, “the smell of my son is as the smell of a full
field which the Lord hath blessed:  therefore God give thee of the dew
of heaven, and of the fruitfulness of the earth, and plenty of corn and
wine:  let nations serve thee, and princes adore thee:  and be lord of
thy brethren, and let thy father’s sons adore thee:  cursed be he that
curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.” <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957)   The blessing of Jacob is therefore a
proclamation of Christ to all nations.  It is this which has come to
pass, and is now being fulfilled.  Isaac is the law and the prophecy: 
even by the mouth of the Jews Christ is blessed by prophecy as by one
who knows not, because it is itself not understood.  The world like a
field is filled with the odor of Christ’s name:  His is the blessing of
the dew of heaven, that is, of the showers of divine words; and of the
fruitfulness of the earth, that is, of the gathering together of the
peoples:  His is the plenty of corn and wine, that is, the multitude
that gathers bread and wine in the sacrament of His body and blood.  Him
the nations serve, Him princes adore.  He is the Lord of His brethren,
because His people rules over the Jews.  Him His Father’s sons adore,
that is, the sons of Abraham according to faith; for He Himself is the
son of Abraham according to the flesh.  He is cursed that curseth Him,
and he that blesseth Him is blessed.  Christ, I say, who is ours is
blessed, that is, truly spoken of out of the mouths of the Jews, when,
although erring, they yet sing the law and the prophets, and think they
are blessing another for whom they erringly hope.  So, when the elder
son claims the promised blessing, Isaac is greatly afraid, and wonders
when he knows that he has blessed one instead of the other, and demands
who he is; yet he does not complain that he has been deceived, yea, when
the great mystery is revealed to him, in his secret heart he at once
eschews anger, and confirms the blessing.  “Who then,” he says, “hath
hunted me venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before
thou camest, and have blessed him, and he shall be blessed?” <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958)   Who would not rather have expected
the curse of an angry man here, if these things had been done in an
earthly manner, and not by inspiration from above?  O things done, yet
done prophetically; on the earth, yet celestially; by men, yet
divinely!  If everything that is fertile of so great mysteries should be
examined carefully, many volumes would be filled; but the moderate
compass fixed for this work compels us to hasten to other things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_956"></span>[332:957](1020486.htm#fr_956) <span
id="iv.XVI.37-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.37-p3"></span> [Gen.
25.27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)<span
id="iv.XVI.37-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[332:958](1020486.htm#fr_957) <span
id="iv.XVI.37-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.37-p4"></span> [Gen.
27.27-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#027)<span
id="iv.XVI.37-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[332:959](1020486.htm#fr_958) <span
id="iv.XVI.37-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.37-p5"></span> [Gen.
27.33](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#033)<span
id="iv.XVI.37-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](1020487)
