[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020358)  [Next](1020360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.20"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Of the Impiety of Those Who
Assert that the Souls Which Enjoy True and Perfect Blessedness, Must Yet
Again and Again in These Periodic Revolutions Return to Labor and
Misery.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.20-p2"></span>What pious ears could bear to hear that
after a life spent in so many and severe distresses (if, indeed, that
should be called a life at all which is rather a death, so utter that
the love of this present death makes us fear that death which delivers
us from it,) that after evils so disastrous, and miseries of all kinds
have at length been expiated and finished by the help of true religion
and wisdom, and when we have thus attained to the vision of God, and
have entered into bliss by the contemplation of spiritual light and
participation in His unchangeable immortality, which we burn to
attain,—that we must at some time lose all this, and that they who do
lose it are cast down from that eternity, truth, and felicity to
infernal mortality and shameful foolishness, and are involved in
accursed woes, in which God is lost, truth held in detestation, and
happiness sought in iniquitous impurities? and that this will happen
endlessly again and again, recurring at fixed intervals, and in
regularly returning periods? and that this everlasting and ceaseless
revolution of definite cycles, which remove and restore true misery and
deceitful bliss in turn, is contrived in order that God may be able to
know His own works, since on the one hand He cannot rest from creating
and on the other, cannot know the infinite number of His creatures, if
He always makes creatures?  Who, I say, can listen to such things?  Who
can accept or suffer them to be spoken?  Were they true, it were not
only more prudent to keep silence regarding them, but even (to express
myself as best I can) it were the part of wisdom not to know them.  For
if in the future world we shall not remember these things, and by this
oblivion be blessed, why should we now increase our misery, already
burdensome enough, by the knowledge of them?  If, on the other hand, the
knowledge of them will be forced upon us hereafter, now at least let us
remain in ignorance, that in the present expectation we may enjoy a
blessedness which the future reality is not to bestow; since in this
life we are expecting to obtain life everlasting, but in the world to
come are to discover it to be blessed, but not everlasting.

<span id="iv.XII.20-p3"></span>And if they maintain that no one can
attain to the blessedness of the world to come, unless in this life he
has been indoctrinated in those cycles in which bliss and misery relieve
one another, how do they avow that the more a man loves God, the more
readily he attains to blessedness,—they who teach what paralyzes love
itself?  For who would not be more remiss and lukewarm in his love for a
person whom he thinks he shall be forced to abandon, and whose truth and
wisdom he shall come to hate; and this, too, after he has quite attained
to the utmost and most blissful knowledge of Him that he is capable of? 
Can any one be faithful in his love, even to a human friend, if he knows
that he is destined to become his enemy? <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562)   God forbid that there be any truth
in an opinion which threatens us with a real misery that is never to
end, but is often and endlessly to be interrupted by intervals of
fallacious happiness.  For what happiness can be more fallacious and
false than that in whose blaze of truth we yet remain ignorant that we
shall be miserable, or in whose most secure citadel we yet <span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="iv.XII.20-Page_240"></span> fear
that we shall be so?  For if, on the one hand, we are to be ignorant of
coming calamity, then our present misery is not so short-sighted for it
is assured of coming bliss.  If, on the other hand, the disaster that
threatens is not concealed from us in the world to come, then the time
of misery which is to be at last exchanged for a state of blessedness,
is spent by the soul more happily than its time of happiness, which is
to end in a return to misery.  And thus our expectation of unhappiness
is happy, but of happiness unhappy.  And therefore, as we here suffer
present ills, and hereafter fear ills that are imminent, it were truer
to say that we shall always be miserable than that we can some time be
happy.

<span id="iv.XII.20-p5"></span>But these things are declared to be false
by the loud testimony of religion and truth; for religion truthfully
promises a true blessedness, of which we shall be eternally assured, and
which cannot be interrupted by any disaster.  Let us therefore keep to
the straight path, which is Christ, and, with Him as our Guide and
Saviour, let us turn away in heart and mind from the unreal and futile
cycles of the godless.  Porphyry, Platonist though he was, abjured the
opinion of his school, that in these cycles souls are ceaselessly
passing away and returning, either being struck with the extravagance of
the idea, or sobered by his knowledge of Christianity.  As I mentioned
in the tenth book, <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) he preferred
saying that the soul, as it had been sent into the world that it might
know evil, and be purged and delivered from it, was never again exposed
to such an experience after it had once returned to the Father.  And if
he abjured the tenets of his school, how much more ought we Christians
to abominate and avoid an opinion so unfounded and hostile to our
faith?  But having disposed of these cycles and escaped out of them, no
necessity compels us to suppose that the human race had no beginning in
time, on the ground that there is nothing new in nature which, by I know
not what cycles, has not at some previous period existed, and is not
hereafter to exist again.  For if the soul, once delivered, as it never
was before, is never to return to misery, then there happens in its
experience something which never happened before; and this, indeed,
something of the greatest consequence, to wit, the secure entrance into
eternal felicity.  And if in an immortal nature there can occur a
novelty, which never has been, nor ever shall be, reproduced by any
cycle, why is it disputed that the same may occur in mortal natures?  If
they maintain that blessedness is no new experience to the soul, but
only a return to that state in which it has been eternally, then at
least its deliverance from misery is something new, since, by their own
showing, the misery from which it is delivered is itself, too, a new
experience.  And if this new experience fell out by accident, and was
not embraced in the order of things appointed by Divine Providence, then
where are those determinate and measured cycles in which no new thing
happens, but all things are reproduced as they were before?  If,
however, this new experience was embraced in that providential order of
nature (whether the soul was exposed to the evil of this world for the
sake of discipline, or fell into it by sin), then it is possible for new
things to happen which never happened before, and which yet are not
extraneous to the order of nature.  And if the soul is able by its own
imprudence to create for itself a new misery, which was not unforeseen
by the Divine Providence, but was provided for in the order of nature
along with the deliverance from it, how can we, even with all the
rashness of human vanity, presume to deny that God can create new
things—new to the world, but not to Him—which He never before created,
but yet foresaw from all eternity?  If they say that it is indeed true
that ransomed souls return no more to misery, but that even so no new
thing happens, since there always have been, now are, and ever shall be
a succession of ransomed souls, they must at least grant that in this
case there are new souls to whom the misery and the deliverance from it
are new.  For if they maintain that those souls out of which new men are
daily being made (from whose bodies, if they have lived wisely, they are
so delivered that they never return to misery) are not new, but have
existed from eternity, they must logically admit that they are
infinite.  For however great a finite number of souls there were, that
would not have sufficed to make perpetually new men from eternity,—men
whose souls were to be eternally freed from this mortal state, and never
afterwards to return to it.  And our philosophers will find it hard to
explain how there is an infinite number of souls in an order of nature
which they require shall be finite, that it may be known by God.

<span id="iv.XII.20-p7"></span>And now that we have exploded these
cycles which were supposed to bring back the soul at fixed periods to
the same miseries, what can seem more in accordance with godly reason
than to believe that it is possible for God both to create new things
never before created, and in doing so, to preserve His will <span
id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span id="iv.XII.20-Page_241"></span>
unaltered?  But whether the number of eternally redeemed souls can be
continually increased or not, let the philosophers themselves decide,
who are so subtle in determining where infinity cannot be admitted.  For
our own part, our reasoning holds in either case.  For if the number of
souls can be indefinitely increased, what reason is there to deny that
what had never before been created, could be created? since the number
of ransomed souls never existed before, and has yet not only been once
made, but will never cease to be anew coming into being.  If, on the
other hand, it be more suitable that the number of eternally ransomed
souls be definite, and that this number will never be increased, yet
this number, whatever it be, did assuredly never exist before, and it
cannot increase, and reach the amount it signifies, without having some
beginning; and this beginning never before existed.  That this
beginning, therefore, might be, the first man was created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_562"></span>[239:563](1020359.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.XII.20-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.20-p4"></span> Cicero has the same *(de Amicitia,
16):*  *Quonam modo quisquam amicus esse poterit, cui se putabit
inimicum esse posse?*  He also quotes Scipio to the effect that no
sentiment is more unfriendly to friendship than this, that we should
love as if some day we were to hate.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[240:564](1020359.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.XII.20-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.20-p6"></span> C. 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020360)
