[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020569)  [Next](1020571) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.52"></span> <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.52-Page_393"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.52-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.52-p1.1"></span>Chapter 52.—Whether We Should Believe What
Some Think, That, as the Ten Persecutions Which are Past Have Been
Fulfilled, There Remains No Other Beyond the Eleventh, Which Must Happen
in the Very Time of Antichrist.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.52-p2"></span>I do not think, indeed, that what some
have thought or may think is rashly said or believed, that until the
time of Antichrist the Church of Christ is not to suffer any
persecutions besides those she has already suffered,—that is, *ten*,—and
that the eleventh and last shall be inflicted by Antichrist.  They
reckon as the first that made by Nero, the second by Domitian, the third
by Trajan, the fourth by Antoninus, the fifth by Severus, the sixth by
Maximin, the seventh by Decius, the eighth by Valerian, the ninth by
Aurelian, the tenth by Diocletian and Maximian.  For as there were ten
plagues in Egypt before the people of God could begin to go out, they
think this is to be referred to as showing that the last persecution by
Antichrist must be like the eleventh plague, in which the Egyptians,
while following the Hebrews with hostility, perished in the Red Sea when
the people of God passed through on dry land.  Yet I do not think
persecutions were prophetically signified by what was done in Egypt,
however nicely and ingeniously those who think so may seem to have
compared the two in detail, not by the prophetic Spirit, but by the
conjecture of the human mind, which sometimes hits the truth, and
sometimes is deceived.  But what can those who think this say of the
persecution in which the Lord Himself was crucified?  In which number
will they put it?  And if they think the reckoning is to be made
exclusive of this one, as if those must be counted which pertain to the
body, and not that in which the Head Himself was set upon and slain,
what can they make of that one which, after Christ ascended into heaven,
took place in Jerusalem, when the blessed Stephen was stoned; when James
the brother of John was slaughtered with the sword; when the Apostle
Peter was imprisoned to be killed, and was set free by the angel; when
the brethren were driven away and scattered from Jerusalem; when Saul,
who afterward became the Apostle Paul, wasted the Church; and when he
himself, publishing the glad tidings of the faith he had persecuted,
suffered such things as he had inflicted, either from the Jews or from
other nations, where he most fervently preached Christ everywhere?  Why,
then, do they think fit to start with Nero, when the Church in her
growth had reached the times of Nero amid the most cruel persecutions;
about which it would be too long to say anything?  But if they think
that only the persecutions made by kings ought to be reckoned, it was
king Herod who also made a most grievous one after the ascension of the
Lord.  And what account do they give of Julian, whom they do not number
in the ten?  Did not he persecute the Church, who forbade the Christians
to teach or learn liberal letters?  Under him the elder Valentinian, who
was the third emperor after him, stood forth as a confessor of the
Christian faith, and was dismissed from his command in the army.  I
shall say nothing of what he did at Antioch, except to mention his being
struck with wonder at the freedom and cheerfulness of one most faithful
and steadfast young man, who, when many were seized to be tortured, was
tortured during a whole day, and sang under the instrument of torture,
until the emperor feared lest he should succumb under the continued
cruelties and put him to shame at last, which made him dread and fear
that he would be yet more dishonorably put to the blush by the rest. 
Lastly, within our own recollection, did not Valens the Arian, brother
of the foresaid Valentinian, waste the catholic Church by great
persecution throughout the East?  But how unreasonable it is not to
consider that the Church, which bears fruit and grows through the whole
world, may suffer persecution from kings in some nations even when she
does not suffer it in others!  Perhaps, however, it was not to be
reckoned a persecution when the king of the Goths, in Gothia itself,
persecuted the Christians with wonderful cruelty, when there were none
but catholics there, of whom very many were crowned with martyrdom, as
we have heard from certain brethren who had been there at that time as
boys, and unhesitatingly called to mind that they had seen these
things?  And what took place in Persia of late?  Was not persecution so
hot against the Christians (if even yet it is allayed) that some of the
fugitives from it came even to Roman towns?  When I think of these and
the like things, it does not seem to me that the number of persecutions
with which the Church is to be tried can be definitely stated.  But, on
the other hand, it is no less rash to affirm that there will be some
persecutions by kings besides that last one, about which no Christian is
in doubt.  Therefore we leave this undecided, supporting or refuting
neither side of this question, but only restraining men from the
audacious presumption of affirming either of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 53](1020571)
