[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020160)  [Next](1020162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.20"></span>

<span id="iv.V.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—That It is as Shameful for the
Virtues to Serve Human Glory as Bodily Pleasure.</span>

<span id="iv.V.20-p2"></span>Philosophers,—who place the end of human
good in virtue itself, in order to put to shame certain other
philosophers, who indeed approve of the virtues, but measure them all
with reference to the end of bodily pleasure, and think that this
pleasure is to be sought for its own sake, but the virtues on account of
pleasure,—are wont to paint a kind of word-picture, in which Pleasure
sits like a luxurious queen on a royal seat, and all the virtues are
subjected to her as slaves, watching her nod, that they may do whatever
she shall command.  She commands Prudence to be ever on the watch to
discover how Pleasure may rule, and be safe.  Justice she orders to
grant what benefits she can, in order to secure those friendships which
are necessary for bodily pleasure; to do wrong to no one, lest, on
account of the breaking of the laws, Pleasure be not able to live in
security.  Fortitude she orders to keep her mistress, that is, Pleasure,
bravely in her mind, if any affliction befall her body which does not
occasion death, in order that by remembrance of former delights she may
mitigate the poignancy of present pain.  Temperance she commands to take
only a certain quantity even of the most favorite food, lest, through
immoderate use, anything prove hurtful by disturbing the health of the
body, and thus Pleasure, which the Epicureans make to consist chiefly in
the health of the body, be grievously offended.  Thus the virtues, with
the whole dignity of their glory, will be the slaves of Pleasure, as of
some imperious and disreputable woman.

<span id="iv.V.20-p3"></span>There is nothing, say our philosophers,
more disgraceful and monstrous than this picture, and which the eyes of
good men can less endure.  And they say the truth.  But I do not think
that the picture would be sufficiently becoming, even if it were made so
that the virtues should be represented as the slaves of human glory;
for, though that glory be not a luxurious woman, it is nevertheless
puffed up, and has much vanity in it.  Wherefore it is unworthy of the
solidity and firmness of the virtues to represent them as serving this
glory, so that Prudence shall provide nothing, Justice distribute
nothing, Temperance moderate nothing, except to the end that men may be
pleased and vain glory served.  Nor will they be able to defend
themselves from the charge of such baseness, whilst they, by way of
being despisers of glory, disregard the judgment of other men, seem to
themselves wise, and please themselves.  For their virtue,—if, indeed,
it is virtue at all,—is only in another way subjected to human praise;
for he who seeks to please himself seeks still to please man.  But he
who, with true piety towards God, whom he loves, believes, and hopes in,
fixes his attention more on those things in which he displeases himself,
than on those things, if there are any such, which please himself, or
rather, not himself, but the truth, does not attribute that by which he
can now please the truth to anything but to the mercy of Him whom he has
feared to displease, giving thanks for what in him is healed, and
pouring out prayers for the healing of that which is yet unhealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020162)
