[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020554)  [Next](1020556) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.37"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.37-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.37-p1.1"></span>Chapter 37.—That Prophetic Records are
Found Which are More Ancient Than Any Fountain of the Gentile
Philosophy.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.37-p2"></span>In the time of our prophets, then,
whose writings had already come to the knowledge of almost all nations,
the philosophers of the nations had not yet arisen,—at least, not those
who were called by that name, which originated with Pythagoras the
Samian, who was becoming famous at the time when the Jewish captivity
ended.  Much more, then, are the other philosophers found to be later
than the prophets.  For even Socrates the Athenian, the master of all
who were then most famous, holding the pre-eminence in that department
that is called the moral or active, is found after Esdras in the
chronicles.  Plato also was born not much later, who far out went the
other disciples of Socrates.  If, besides these, we take their
predecessors, who had not yet been styled philosophers, to wit, the
seven sages, and then the physicists, who succeeded Thales, and imitated
his studious search into the nature of things, namely, Anaximander,
Anaximenes, and Anaxagoras, and some others, before Pythagoras first
professed himself a philosopher, even these did not precede the whole of
our prophets in antiquity of time, since Thales, whom the others
succeeded, is said to have flourished in the reign of Romulus, when the
stream of prophecy burst forth from the fountains of Israel in those
writings which spread over the whole world.  So that only those
theological poets, Orpheus, Linus, and Musæus, and, it may be, some
others among the Greeks, are found earlier in date than the Hebrew
prophets whose writings we hold as authoritative.  But not even these
preceded in time our true divine, Moses, who authentically preached the
one true God, and whose writings are first in the authoritative canon;
and therefore the Greeks, in whose <span id="page_383">p. 383</span>
<span id="iv.XVIII.37-Page_383"></span> tongue the literature of this
age chiefly appears, have no ground for boasting of their wisdom, in
which our religion, wherein is true wisdom, is not evidently more
ancient at least, if not superior.  Yet it must be confessed that before
Moses there had already been, not indeed among the Greeks, but among
barbarous nations, as in Egypt, some doctrine which might be called
their wisdom, else it would not have been written in the holy books that
Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) as he was, when, being born there,
and adopted and nursed by Pharaoh’s daughter, he was also liberally
educated.  Yet not even the wisdom of the Egyptians could be antecedent
in time to the wisdom of our prophets, because even Abraham was a
prophet.  And what wisdom could there be in Egypt before Isis had given
them letters, whom they thought fit to worship as a goddess after her
death?  Now Isis is declared to have been the daughter of Inachus, who
first began to reign in Argos when the grandsons of Abraham are known to
have been already born.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[383:1212](1020555.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iv.XVIII.37-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.37-p3"></span> [Acts
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span
id="iv.XVIII.37-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](1020556)
