[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020158)  [Next](1020160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.18"></span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—How Far Christians Ought to Be from
Boasting, If They Have Done Anything for the Love of the Eternal
Country, When the Romans Did Such Great Things for Human Glory and a
Terrestrial City.</span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p2"></span>What great thing, therefore, is it for that
<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span id="iv.V.18-Page_99"></span>
eternal and celestial city to despise all the charms of this world,
however pleasant, if for the sake of this terrestrial city Brutus could
even put to death his son,—a sacrifice which the heavenly city compels
no one to make?  But certainly it is more difficult to put to death
one’s sons, than to do what is required to be done for the heavenly
country, even to distribute to the poor those things which were looked
upon as things to be massed and laid up for one’s children, or to let
them go, if there arise any temptation which compels us to do so, for
the sake of faith and righteousness.  For it is not earthly riches which
make us or our sons happy; for they must either be lost by us in our
lifetime, or be possessed when we are dead, by whom we know not, or
perhaps by whom we would not.  But it is God who makes us happy, who is
the true riches of minds.  But of Brutus, even the poet who celebrates
his praises testifies that it was the occasion of unhappiness to him
that he slew his son, for he says,

<span id="iv.V.18-p3"></span>“And call his own rebellious seed

<span id="iv.V.18-p4"></span>For menaced liberty to bleed.

<span id="iv.V.18-p5"></span>Unhappy father! howsoe’er

<span id="iv.V.18-p6"></span>The deed be judged by after days.” <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217)

<span id="iv.V.18-p8"></span>But in the following verse he consoles him
in his unhappiness, saying,

<span id="iv.V.18-p9"></span>“His country’s love shall all o’erbear.”

<span id="iv.V.18-p10"></span>There are those two things, namely,
liberty and the desire of human praise, which compelled the Romans to
admirable deeds.  If, therefore, for the liberty of dying men, and for
the desire of human praise which is sought after by mortals, sons could
be put to death by a father, what great thing is it, if, for the true
liberty which has made us free from the dominion of sin, and death, and
the devil,—not through the desire of human praise, but through the
earnest desire of fleeing men, not from King Tarquin, but from demons
and the prince of the demons,—we should, I do not say put to death our
sons, but reckon among our sons Christ’s poor ones?  If, also, another
Roman chief, surnamed Torquatus, slew his son, not because he fought
against his country, but because, being challenged by an enemy, he
through youthful impetuosity fought, though for his country, yet
contrary to orders which he his father had given as general; and this he
did, notwithstanding that his son was victorious, lest there should be
more evil in the example of authority despised, than good in the glory
of slaying an enemy;—if, I say, Torquatus acted thus, wherefore should
they boast themselves, who, for the laws of a celestial country, despise
all earthly good things, which are loved far less than sons?  If Furius
Camillus, who was condemned by those who envied him, notwithstanding
that he had thrown off from the necks of his countrymen the yoke of
their most bitter enemies, the Veientes, again delivered his ungrateful
country from the Gauls, because he had no other in which he could have
better opportunities for living a life of glory;—if Camillus did thus,
why should he be extolled as having done some great thing, who, having,
it may be, suffered in the church at the hands of carnal enemies most
grievous and dishonoring injury, has not betaken himself to heretical
enemies, or himself raised some heresy against her, but has rather
defended her, as far as he was able, from the most pernicious perversity
of heretics, since there is not another church, I say not in which one
can live a life of glory, but in which eternal life can be obtained?  If
Mucius, in order that peace might be made with King Porsenna, who was
pressing the Romans with a most grievous war, when he did not succeed in
slaying Porsenna, but slew another by mistake for him, reached forth his
right hand and laid it on a red-hot altar, saying that many such as he
saw him to be had conspired for his destruction, so that Porsenna,
terrified at his daring, and at the thought of a conspiracy of such as
he, without any delay recalled all his warlike purposes, and made
peace;—if, I say, Mucius did this, who shall speak of his meritorious
claims to the kingdom of heaven, if for it he may have given to the
flames not one hand, but even his whole body, and that not by his own
spontaneous act, but because he was persecuted by another?  If Curtius,
spurring on his steed, threw himself all armed into a precipitous gulf,
obeying the oracles of their gods, which had commanded that the Romans
should throw into that gulf the best thing which they possessed, and
they could only understand thereby that, since they excelled in men and
arms, the gods had commanded that an armed man should be cast headlong
into that destruction;—if he did this, shall we say that that man has
done a great thing for the eternal city who may have died by a like
death, not, however, precipitating himself spontaneously into a gulf,
but having suffered this death at the hands of some enemy of his faith,
more especially when he has received from his Lord, who is also King of
his country, a more certain oracle, “Fear not them who kill the body,
but cannot kill the soul?” <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)   If
the Decii dedicated themselves to death, consecrating themselves in a
form <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span
id="iv.V.18-Page_100"></span> of words, as it were, that falling, and
pacifying by their blood the wrath of the gods, they might be the means
of delivering the Roman army;—if they did this, let not the holy martyrs
carry themselves proudly, as though they had done some meritorious thing
for a share in that country where are eternal life and felicity, if even
to the shedding of their blood, loving not only the brethren for whom it
was shed, but, according as had been commanded them, even their enemies
by whom it was being shed, they have vied with one another in faith of
love and love of faith.  If Marcus Pulvillus, when engaged in dedicating
a temple to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, received with such indifference
the false intelligence which was brought to him of the death of his son,
with the intention of so agitating him that he should go away, and thus
the glory of dedicating the temple should fall to his colleague;—if he
received that intelligence with such indifference that he even ordered
that his son should be cast out unburied, the love of glory having
overcome in his heart the grief of bereavement, how shall any one affirm
that he had done a great thing for the preaching of the gospel, by which
the citizens of the heavenly city are delivered from divers errors and
gathered together from divers wanderings, to whom his Lord has said,
when anxious about the burial of his father, “Follow me, and let the
dead bury their dead?” <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219)  
Regulus, in order not to break his oath, even with his most cruel
enemies, returned to them from Rome itself, because (as he is said to
have replied to the Romans when they wished to retain him) he could not
have the dignity of an honorable citizen at Rome after having been a
slave to the Africans, and the Carthaginians put him to death with the
utmost tortures, because he had spoken against them in the senate.  If
Regulus acted thus, what tortures are not to be despised for the sake of
good faith toward that country to whose beatitude faith itself leads? 
Or what will a man have rendered to the Lord for all He has bestowed
upon him, if, for the faithfulness he owes to Him, he shall have
suffered such things as Regulus suffered at the hands of his most
ruthless enemies for the good faith which he owed to them?  And how
shall a Christian dare vaunt himself of his voluntary poverty, which he
has chosen in order that during the pilgrimage of this life he may walk
the more disencumbered on the way which leads to the country where the
true riches are, even God Himself;—how, I say, shall he vaunt himself
for this, when he hears or reads that Lucius Valerius, who died when he
was holding the office of consul, was so poor that his funeral expenses
were paid with money collected by the people?—or when he hears that
Quintius Cincinnatus, who, possessing only four acres of land, and
cultivating them with his own hands, was taken from the plough to be
made dictator,—an office more honorable even than that of consul,—and
that, after having won great glory by conquering the enemy, he preferred
notwithstanding to continue in his poverty?  Or how shall he boast of
having done a great thing, who has not been prevailed upon by the offer
of any reward of this world to renounce his connection with that
heavenly and eternal country, when he hears that Fabricius could not be
prevailed on to forsake the Roman city by the great gifts offered to him
by Pyrrhus king of the Epirots, who promised him the fourth part of his
kingdom, but preferred to abide there in his poverty as a private
individual?  For if, when their republic,—that is, the interest of the
people, the interest of the country, the common interest,—was most
prosperous and wealthy, they themselves were so poor in their own
houses, that one of them, who had already been twice a consul, was
expelled from that senate of poor men by the censor, because he was
discovered to possess ten pounds weight of silverplate,—since, I say,
those very men by whose triumphs the public treasury was enriched were
so poor, ought not all Christians, who make common property of their
riches with a far nobler purpose, even that (according to what is
written in the Acts of the Apostles) they may distribute to each one
according to his need, and that no one may say that anything is his own,
but that all things may be their common possession, <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) —ought they not to understand that
they should not vaunt themselves, because they do that to obtain the
society of angels, when those men did well-nigh the same thing to
preserve the glory of the Romans?

<span id="iv.V.18-p14"></span>How could these, and whatever like things
are found in the Roman history, have become so widely known, and have
been proclaimed by so great a fame, had not the Roman empire, extending
far and wide, been raised to its greatness by magnificent successes? 
Wherefore, through that empire, so extensive and of so long continuance,
so illustrious and glorious also through the virtues of such great men,
the reward which they sought was rendered to their earnest aspirations,
and also examples are set before us, containing necessary admonition, in
order that we may be <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="iv.V.18-Page_101"></span> stung with shame if we shall see that we
have not held fast those virtues for the sake of the most glorious city
of God, which are, in whatever way, resembled by those virtues which
they held fast for the sake of the glory of a terrestrial city, and
that, too, if we shall feel conscious that we have held them fast, we
may not be lifted up with pride, because, as the apostle says, “The
sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared to the
glory which shall be revealed in us.” <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)   But so far as regards human and
temporal glory, the lives of these ancient Romans were reckoned
sufficiently worthy.  Therefore, also, we see, in the light of that
truth which, veiled in the Old Testament, is revealed in the New,
namely, that it is not in view of terrestrial and temporal benefits,
which divine providence grants promiscuously to good and evil, that God
is to be worshipped, but in view of eternal life, everlasting gifts, and
of the society of the heavenly city itself;—in the light of this truth
we see that the Jews were most righteously given as a trophy to the
glory of the Romans; for we see that these Romans, who rested on earthly
glory, and sought to obtain it by virtues, such as they were, conquered
those who, in their great depravity, slew and rejected the giver of true
glory, and of the eternal city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_217"></span>[99:218](1020159.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iv.V.18-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p7"></span> *Æneid,* vi. 820.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[99:219](1020159.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iv.V.18-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p11"></span> [Matt.
10.28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.V.18-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[100:220](1020159.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iv.V.18-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p12"></span> [Matt.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="iv.V.18-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[100:221](1020159.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iv.V.18-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p13"></span> [Acts
2.45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045)<span id="iv.V.18-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[101:222](1020159.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iv.V.18-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.18-p15"></span> [Rom
8.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="iv.V.18-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020160)
