[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020451)  [Next](1020453) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Of the Generations of the Three
Sons of Noah.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.3-p2"></span>We must therefore introduce into this work
an explanation of the generations of the three sons of Noah, in so far
as that may illustrate the progress in time of the two cities. 
Scripture first mentions that of the youngest son, who is called
Japheth:  he had eight sons, <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) and
by two of these sons seven grandchildren, three by one son, four by the
other; in all, fifteen descendants.  Ham, Noah’s middle son, had four
sons, and by one of them five grandsons, and by one of these two
great-grandsons; in all, eleven.  After enumerating these, Scripture
returns to the first of the sons, and says, “Cush begat Nimrod; he began
to be a giant on the earth.  He was a giant hunter against the Lord
God:  wherefore they say, As Nimrod the giant hunter against the Lord. 
And the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, Erech, Accad, and Calneh,
in the land of Shinar.  Out of that land went forth Assur, and built
Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen between Nineveh and
Calah:  this was a great city.”  Now this Cush, father of the giant
Nimrod, is the first-named among the sons of Ham, to whom five sons and
two grandsons are ascribed.  But he either begat this giant after his
grandsons were born, or, which is more credible, Scripture speaks of him
separately on account of his eminence; for mention is also made of his
kingdom, which began with that magnificent city Babylon, and the other
places, whether cities or districts, mentioned along with it.  But what
is recorded of the land of Shinar which belonged to Nimrod’s kingdom, to
wit, that Assur went forth from it and built Nineveh and the other
cities mentioned with it, happened long after; but he takes occasion to
speak of it here on account of the grandeur of the Assyrian kingdom,
which was wonderfully extended by Ninus son of Belus, and founder of the
great city Nineveh, which was named after him, Nineveh, from Ninus.  But
Assur, father of the Assyrian, was not one of the sons of Ham, Noah’s
son, but is found among the sons of Shem, his eldest son.  Whence it
appears that among Shem’s offspring there arose men who afterwards took
possession of that giant’s kingdom, and advancing from it, founded other
cities, the first of which was called Nineveh, from Ninus.  From him
Scripture returns to Ham’s other son, Mizraim; and his sons are
enumerated, not as seven individuals, but as seven nations.  And from
the sixth, as if from the sixth son, the race called the Philistines are
said to have sprung; so that there are in all eight.  Then it returns
again to Canaan, in whose person Ham was cursed; and his eleven sons are
named.  Then the territories they occupied, and some of the cities, are
named.  And thus, if we count sons and grandsons, there are thirty-one
of Ham’s descendants registered.

<span id="iv.XVI.3-p4"></span>It remains to mention the sons of Shem,
Noah’s eldest son; for to him this genealogical narrative gradually
ascends from the youngest.  But in the commencement of the record of
Shem’s sons there is an obscurity which calls for explanation, since it
is closely connected with the object of our investigation.  For we read,
“Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Heber, the brother of
Japheth the elder, were children born.” <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871)   This is the order of the words:  And
to Shem was born Heber, even to himself, that is, to Shem himself was
born Heber, and Shem is the father of all his children.  We are intended
to understand that Shem is the patriarch of all his posterity who were
to be mentioned, whether sons, grandsons, great-grandsons, or
descendants at any remove.  For Shem did not beget Heber, who was indeed
in the fifth generation from him.  For Shem begat, among other sons,
Arphaxad; Arphaxad begat Cainan, Cainan begat Salah, Salah begat Heber. 
And it was with good reason that he was named first among Shem’s
offspring, taking precedence even of his sons, though only a grandchild
of the fifth generation; for from him, as tradition says, the Hebrews
derived their name, though the other etymology which derives the name
from Abraham (as if *Abrahews*) may possibly be correct. <span
id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span id="iv.XVI.3-Page_312"></span> But
there can be little doubt that the former is the right etymology, and
that they were called after Heber, *Heberews*, and then, dropping a
letter, Hebrews; and so was their language called Hebrew, which was
spoken by none but the people of Israel among whom was the city of God,
mysteriously prefigured in all the people, and truly present in the
saints.  Six of Shem’s sons then are first named, then four grandsons
born to one of these sons; then it mentions another son of Shem, who
begat a grandson; and his son, again, or Shem’s great-grandson, was
Heber.  And Heber begat two sons, and called the one Peleg, which means
“dividing;” and Scripture subjoins the reason of this name, saying, “for
in his days was the earth divided.”  What this means will afterwards
appear.  Heber’s other son begat twelve sons; consequently all Shem’s
descendants are twenty-seven.  The total number of the progeny of the
three sons of Noah is seventy-three, fifteen by Japheth, thirty-one by
Ham, twenty-seven by Shem.  Then Scripture adds, “These are the sons of
Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after
their nations.”  And so of the whole number “These are the families of
the sons of Noah after their generations, in their nations; and by these
were the isles of the nations dispersed through the earth after the
flood.”  From which we gather that the seventy-three (or rather, as I
shall presently show, seventy-two) were not individuals, but nations. 
For in a former passage, when the sons of Japheth were enumerated, it is
said in conclusion, “By these were the isles of the nations divided in
their lands, every one after his language, in their tribes, and in their
nations.”

<span id="iv.XVI.3-p6"></span>But nations are expressly mentioned among
the sons of Ham, as I showed above.  “Mizraim begat those who are called
Ludim;” and so also of the other seven nations.  And after enumerating
all of them, it concludes, “These are the sons of Ham, in their
families, according to their languages, in their territories, and in
their nations.”  The reason, then, why the children of several of them
are not mentioned, is that they belonged by birth to other nations, and
did not themselves become nations.  Why else is it, that though eight
sons are reckoned to Japheth, the sons of only two of these are
mentioned; and though four are reckoned to Ham, only three are spoken of
as having sons; and though six are reckoned to Shem, the descendants of
only two of these are traced?  Did the rest remain childless?  We cannot
suppose so; but they did not produce nations so great as to warrant
their being mentioned, but were absorbed in the nations to which they
belonged by birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_870"></span>[311:871](1020452.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iv.XVI.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.3-p3"></span> Augustin here follows the Greek version,
which introduces the name Elisa among the sons of Japheth, though not
found in the Hebrew.  It is not found in the Complutensian Greek
translation, nor in the <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.XVI.3-p3.1"></span> Mss</span>. used by Jerome.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[311:872](1020452.htm#fr_871) <span
id="iv.XVI.3-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.3-p5"></span> [Gen.
10.21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)<span id="iv.XVI.3-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020453)
