[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020126)  [Next](1020128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.22"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Concerning the Knowledge of the
Worship Due to the Gods, Which Varro Glories in Having Himself Conferred
on the Romans.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.22-p2"></span>What is it, then, that Varro boasts he has
bestowed as a very great benefit on his fellow-citizens, because he not
only recounts the gods who ought to be worshipped by the Romans, but
also tells what pertains to each of them?  “Just as it is of no
advantage,” he says, “to know the name and appearance of any man who is
a physician, and not know that he is a physician, so,” he says, “it is
of no advantage to know well that Æsculapius is a god, if you are not
aware that he can bestow the gift of health, and consequently do not
know why you ought to supplicate him.”  He also affirms this by another
comparison, saying, “No one is able, not only to live well, but even to
live at all, if he does not know who is a smith, who a baker, who a
weaver, from whom he can seek any utensil, whom he may take for a
helper, whom for a leader, whom for a teacher;” asserting, “that in this
way it can be doubtful to no one, that thus the knowledge of the gods is
useful, if one can know what force, and faculty, or power any god may
have in any thing.  For from this we may be able,” he says, “to know
what god we ought to call to, and invoke for any cause; lest we should
do as too many are wont to do, and desire water from Liber, and wine
from Lymphs.”  Very useful, forsooth!  Who would not give this man
thanks if he could show true things, and if he could teach that the one
true God, from whom all good things are, is to be worshipped by men?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020128)
