[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020769)  [Next](1020771) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxiii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—False Inferences May Be Drawn
from Valid Reasonings, and Vice Versa.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxxiii-p2"></span>51.  In this passage, however, where the
argument is about the resurrection, both the law of the inference is
valid, and the conclusion arrived at is true.  But in the case of false
conclusions, too, there is a validity of inference in some such way as
the following.  Let us suppose some man to have admitted:  If a snail is
an animal, it has a voice.  This being admitted, then, when it has been
proved that the snail has no voice, it follows (since when the
consequent is proved false, the antecedent is also false) that the snail
is not an animal.  Now this conclusion is false, but it is a true and
valid inference from the false admission.  Thus, the truth of a
statement stands on its own merits; the validity of an inference depends
on the statement or the admission of the man with whom one is arguing. 
And thus, as I said above, a false inference may be drawn by a valid
process of reasoning, in order that he whose error we wish to correct
may be sorry that he has admitted the antecedent, when he sees that its
logical consequences are utterly untenable.  And hence it is easy to
understand that as the inferences may be valid where the opinions are
false, so the inferences may be unsound where the opinions are true. 
For example, suppose that a man propounds the statement, “If this man is
just, he is good,” and we admit its truth.  Then he adds, “But he is not
just;” and when we admit this too, he draws the conclusion, “Therefore
he is not good.”  Now although every one of these <span id="page_552">p.
552</span> <span id="v.v.xxxiii-Page_552"></span> statements may be
true, still the principle of the inference is unsound.  For it is not
true that, as when the consequent is proved false the antecedent is also
false, so when the antecedent is proved false the consequent is false. 
For the statement is true, “If he is an orator, he is a man.”  But if we
add, “He is not an orator,” the consequence does not follow, “He is not
a man.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1020771)
