[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020038)  [Next](1020040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—That the Overthrow of Rome Has
Not Corrected the Vices of the Romans.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxiv-p2"></span>Oh infatuated men, what is this
blindness, or rather madness, which possesses you?  How is it that
while, as we hear, even the eastern nations are bewailing your ruin, and
while powerful states in the most remote parts of the earth are mourning
your fall as a public calamity, ye yourselves should be crowding to the
theatres, should be pouring into them and filling them; and, in short,
be playing a madder part now than ever before?  This was the foul
plague-spot, this the wreck of virtue and honor that Scipio sought to
preserve you from when he prohibited the construction of theatres; this
was his reason for desiring that you might still have an enemy to fear,
seeing as he did how easily prosperity would corrupt and destroy you. 
He did not consider that republic flourishing whose walls stand, but
whose morals are in ruins.  But the seductions of evil-minded devils had
more influence with you than the precautions of prudent men.  Hence the
injuries you do, you will not permit to be imputed to you:  but the
injuries you suffer, you impute to Christianity.  Depraved by good
fortune, and not chastened by adversity, what you desire in the
restoration of a peaceful and secure state, is not the tranquillity of
the commonwealth, but the impunity of your own vicious luxury.  Scipio
wished you to be hard pressed by an enemy, that you might not abandon
yourselves to luxurious manners; but so abandoned are you, that not even
when crushed by the enemy is your luxury repressed.  You have missed the
profit of your calamity; you have been made most wretched, and have
remained most profligate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1020040)
