[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020497)  [Next](1020499) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.5"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Of Those Things Which a Man of God
Spake by the Spirit to Eli the Priest, Signifying that the Priesthood
Which Had Been Appointed According to Aaron Was to Be Taken Away.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p2"></span>But this is said more plainly by a man of
God sent to Eli the priest himself, whose name indeed is not mentioned,
but whose office and ministry show him to have been indubitably a
prophet.  For it is thus written:  “And there came a man of God unto
Eli, and said, Thus saith the Lord, I plainly revealed myself unto thy
father’s house, when they were in the land of Egypt slaves in Pharaoh’s
house; and I chose thy father’s house out of all the sceptres of Israel
to fill the office of priest for me, to go up to my altar, to burn
incense and wear the ephod; and I gave thy father’s house for food all
the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel.  Wherefore then
hast thou looked at mine incense and at mine offerings with an impudent
eye, and hast glorified thy sons above me, to bless the first-fruits of
every sacrifice in Israel before me?  Therefore thus saith the Lord God
of Israel, I said thy house and thy father’s house should walk before me
for ever:  but now the Lord saith, Be it far from me; for them that
honor me will I honor, and he that despiseth me shall be despised. 
Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thy seed, and the seed of thy
father’s house, and thou shalt never have an old man in my house.  And I
will cut off the man of thine from mine altar, so that his eyes shall be
consumed, and his heart shall melt away; and every one of thy house that
is left shall fall by the sword of men.  And this shall be a sign unto
thee that shall come upon these thy two sons, Hophni and Phinehas; in
one day they shall die both of them.  And I will raise me up a faithful
priest, that shall do according to all that is in mine heart and in my
soul; and I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before my
Christ for ever.  And it shall come to pass that he who is left in thine
house shall come to worship him with a piece of money, saying, Put me
into one part of thy priesthood, that I may eat bread.” <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013)

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p4"></span>We cannot say that this prophecy, in
which the change of the ancient priesthood is foretold with so great
plainness, was fulfilled in Samuel; for although Samuel was not of
another tribe than that which had been appointed by God to serve at the
altar, yet he was not of the sons of Aaron, whose offspring <span
id="page_344">p. 344</span> <span id="iv.XVII.5-Page_344"></span> was
set apart that the priests might be taken out of it.  And thus by that
transaction also the same change which should come to pass through
Christ Jesus is shadowed forth, and the prophecy itself in deed, not in
word, belonged to the Old Testament properly, but figuratively to the
New, signifying by the fact just what was said by the word to Eli the
priest through the prophet.  For there were afterwards priests of
Aaron’s race, such as Zadok and Abiathar during David’s reign, and
others in succession, before the time came when those things which were
predicted so long before about the changing of the priesthood behoved to
be fulfilled by Christ.  But who that now views these things with a
believing eye does not see that they are fulfilled?  Since, indeed, no
tabernacle, no temple, no altar, no sacrifice, and therefore no priest
either, has remained to the Jews, to whom it was commanded in the law of
God that he should be ordained of the seed of Aaron; which is also
mentioned here by the prophet, when he says, “Thus saith the Lord God of
Israel, I said thy house and thy father’s house shall walk before me for
ever:  but now the Lord saith, That be far from me; for them that honor
me will I honor, and he that despiseth me shall be despised.”  For that
in naming his father’s house he does not mean that of his immediate
father, but that of Aaron, who first was appointed priest, to be
succeeded by others descended from him, is shown by the preceding words,
when he says, “I was revealed unto thy father’s house, when they were in
the land of Egypt slaves in Pharaoh’s house; and I chose thy father’s
house out of all the sceptres of Israel to fill the office of priest for
me.”  Which of the fathers in that Egyptian slavery, but Aaron, was his
father, who, when they were set free, was chosen to the priesthood?  It
was of his lineage, therefore, he has said in this passage it should
come to pass that they should no longer be priests; which already we see
fulfilled.  If faith be watchful, the things are before us:  they are
discerned, they are grasped, and are forced on the eyes of the
unwilling, so that they are seen:  “Behold the days come,” he says,
“that I will cut off thy seed, and the seed of thy father’s house, and
thou shall never have an old man in mine house.  And I will cut off the
man of thine from mine altar, so that his eyes shall be consumed and his
heart shall melt away.”  Behold the days which were foretold have
already come.  There is no priest after the order of Aaron; and whoever
is a man of his lineage, when he sees the sacrifice of the Christians
prevailing over the whole world, but that great honor taken away from
himself, his eyes fail and his soul melts away consumed with grief.

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p5"></span>But what follows belongs properly to the
house of Eli, to whom these things were said:  “And every one of thine
house that is left shall fall by the sword of men.  And this shall be a
sign unto thee that shall come upon these thy two sons, Hophni and
Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.”  This, therefore, is
made a sign of the change of the priesthood from this man’s house, by
which it is signified that the priesthood of Aaron’s house is to be
changed.  For the death of this man’s sons signified the death not of
the men, but of the priesthood itself of the sons of Aaron.  But what
follows pertains to that Priest whom Samuel typified by succeeding this
one.  Therefore the things which follow are said of Christ Jesus, the
true Priest of the New Testament:  “And I will raise me up a faithful
Priest that shall do according to all that is in mine heart and in my
soul; and I will build Him a sure house.”  The same is the eternal
Jerusalem above.  “And He shall walk,” saith He, “before my Christ
always.”  “He shall walk” means “he shall be conversant with,” just as
He had said before of Aaron’s house, “I said that thine house and thy
father’s house shall walk before me for ever.”  But what He says, “He
shall walk before my Christ,” is to be understood entirely of the house
itself, not of the priest, who is Christ Himself, the Mediator and
Saviour.  His house, therefore, shall walk before Him.  “Shall walk” may
also be understood to mean from death to life, all the time this
mortality passes through, even to the end of this world.  But where God
says, “Who will do all that is in mine heart and in my soul,” we must
not think that God has a soul, for He is the Author of souls; but this
is said of God tropically, not properly, just as He is said to have
hands and feet, and other corporal members.  And, lest it should be
supposed from such language that man in the form of this flesh is made
in the image of God, wings also are ascribed to Him, which man has not
at all; and it is said to God, “Hide me under the shadow of Thy
wings,” <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) that men may
understand that such things are said of that ineffable nature not in
proper but in figurative words.

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p7"></span>But what is added, “And it shall come to
pass that he who is left in thine house shall come to worship him,” is
not said properly of the house of this Eli, but of that Aaron, the men
of which remained even to the advent of <span id="page_345">p.
345</span> <span id="iv.XVII.5-Page_345"></span> Jesus Christ, of which
race there are not wanting men even to this present.  For of that house
of Eli it had already been said above, “And every one of thine house
that is left shall fall by the sword of men.”  How, therefore, could it
be truly said here, “And it shall come to pass that every one that is
left shall come to worship him,” if that is true, that no one shall
escape the avenging sword, unless he would have it understood of those
who belong to the race of that whole priesthood after the order of
Aaron?  Therefore, if it is of these the predestinated remnant, about
whom another prophet has said, “The remnant shall be saved;” <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) whence the apostle also says, “Even
so then at this time also the remnant according to the election of grace
is saved;” <span id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) since it is easily
understood to be of such a remnant that it is said, “He that is left in
thine house,” assuredly he believes in Christ; just as in the time of
the apostle very many of that nation believed; nor are there now wanting
those, although very few, who yet believe, and in them is fulfilled what
this man of God has here immediately added, “He shall come to worship
him with a piece of money;” to worship whom, if not that Chief Priest,
who is also God?  For in that priesthood after the order of Aaron men
did not come to the temple or altar of God for the purpose of
worshipping the priest.  But what is that he says, “With a piece of
money,” if not the short word of faith, about which the apostle quotes
the saying, “A consummating and shortening word will the Lord make upon
the earth?” <span id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017)   But that money
is put for the word the psalm is a witness, where it is sung, “The words
of the Lord are pure words, money tried with the fire.” <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018)

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p12"></span>What then does he say who comes to
worship the priest of God, even the Priest who is God?  “Put me into one
part of Thy priesthood, to eat bread.”  I do not wish to be set in the
honor of my fathers, which is none; put me in a part of Thy priesthood. 
For “I have chosen to be mean in Thine house;” <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) I desire to be a member, no matter
what, or how small, of Thy priesthood.  By the priesthood he here means
the people itself, of which He is the Priest who is the Mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus. <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020)   This people the Apostle Peter
calls “a holy people, a royal priesthood.” <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021)   But some have translated, “Of Thy
sacrifice,” not “Of Thy priesthood,” which no less signifies the same
Christian people.  Whence the Apostle Paul says, “We being many are one
bread, one body.” <span id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) \[And again
he says, “Present your bodies a living sacrifice.” <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) \]  What, therefore, he has added,
to “eat bread,” also elegantly expresses the very kind of sacrifice of
which the Priest Himself says, “The bread which I will give is my flesh
for the life of the world.” <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024)  
The same is the sacrifice not after the order of Aaron, but after the
order of Melchisedec: <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025)   let
him that readeth understand. <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026)
  Therefore this short and salutarily humble confession, in which it is
said, “Put me in a part of Thy priesthood, to eat bread,” is itself the
piece of money, for it is both brief, and it is the Word of God who
dwells in the heart of one who believes.  For because He had said above,
that He had given for food to Aaron’s house the sacrificial victims of
the Old Testament, where He says, “I have given thy father’s house for
food all things which are offered by fire of the children of Israel,”
which indeed were the sacrifices of the Jews; therefore here He has
said, “To eat bread,” which is in the New Testament the sacrifice of the
Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[343:1014](1020498.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p3"></span> [1 Sam.
2.27-36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[344:1015](1020498.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p6"></span> [Ps.
17.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)<span id="iv.XVII.5-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[345:1016](1020498.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p8"></span> [Isa.
10.21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[345:1017](1020498.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p9"></span> [Rom.
11.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="iv.XVII.5-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[345:1018](1020498.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p10"></span> [Isa.
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#022), [Rom.
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[345:1019](1020498.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p11"></span> [Ps.
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[345:1020](1020498.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p13"></span> [Ps.
84.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[345:1021](1020498.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p14"></span> [1 Tim.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iv.XVII.5-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[345:1022](1020498.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p15"></span> [1 Pet.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.XVII.5-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[345:1023](1020498.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
10.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[345:1024](1020498.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p17"></span> [Rom.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[345:1025](1020498.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p18"></span> [John
6.51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[345:1026](1020498.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p19"></span> [Heb.
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027)<span id="iv.XVII.5-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[345:1027](1020498.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="iv.XVII.5-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.5-p20"></span> [Matt.
24.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)<span
id="iv.XVII.5-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020499)
