[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020163)  [Next](1020165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.23"></span>

<span id="iv.V.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Concerning the War in Which
Radagaisus, King of the Goths, a Worshipper of Demons, Was Conquered in
One Day, with All His Mighty Forces.</span>

<span id="iv.V.23-p2"></span>Nevertheless they do not mention with
thanksgiving what God has very recently, and within our own memory,
wonderfully and mercifully done, but as far as in them lies they
attempt, if possible, to bury it in universal oblivion.  But should we
be silent about these things, we should be in like manner ungrateful. 
When Radagaisus, king of the Goths, having taken up his position very
near to the city, with a vast and savage army, was already close upon
the Romans, he was in one day so speedily and so thoroughly beaten,
that, whilst not even one Roman was wounded, much less slain, far more
than a hundred thousand of his army were prostrated, and he himself and
his sons, having been captured, were forthwith put to death, suffering
the punishment they deserved.  For had so impious a man, with so great
and so impious a host, entered the city, whom would he have spared? what
tombs of the martyrs would he have respected? in his treatment of what
person would he have manifested the fear of God? whose blood would he
have refrained from shedding? whose chastity would he have wished to
preserve inviolate?  But how loud would they not have been in the
praises of their gods!  How insultingly they would have boasted, saying
that Radagaisus had conquered, that he had been able to achieve such
great things, because he propitiated and won over the gods by daily
sacrifices,—a thing which the Christian religion did not allow the
Romans to do!  For when he was approaching to those places where he was
overwhelmed at the nod of the Supreme Majesty, as his fame was
everywhere increasing, it was being told us at Carthage that the pagans
were believing, publishing, and boasting, that he, on account of the
help and protection of the gods friendly to him, because of the
sacrifices which he was said to be daily offering to them, would
certainly not be conquered by those who were not performing such
sacrifices to the Roman gods, and did not even permit that they should
be offered by any one.  And now these wretched men do not give thanks to
God for his great mercy, who, having determined to chastise the
corruption of men, which was worthy of far heavier chastisement than the
corruption of the barbarians, tempered His indignation with such
mildness as, in the first instance, to cause that the king of the Goths
should be conquered in a wonderful manner, lest glory should accrue to
demons, whom he was known to be supplicating, and thus the minds of the
weak should be overthrown; and then, afterwards, to cause that, when
Rome was to be taken, it should be taken by those barbarians who,
contrary to any custom of all former wars, protected, through reverence
for the Christian religion, those who fled for refuge to the sacred
places, and who so opposed the demons themselves, and the rites of
impious sacrifices, that they seemed to be carrying on a far more
terrible war with them than with men.  Thus did the true Lord and
Governor of things both scourge the Romans mercifully, and, by the
marvellous defeat of the worshippers of demons, show that those
sacrifices were not necessary even for the safety of present things; so
that, by those who do not obstinately hold out, but prudently consider
the matter, true religion may not be deserted on account of the
urgencies of the present time, but may be more clung to in most
confident expectation of eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020165)
