[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020109)  [Next](1020111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.5"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Of the Runaway Gladiators Whose
Power Became Like that of Royal Dignity.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.5-p2"></span>I shall not therefore stay to inquire what
sort of men Romulus gathered together, seeing he deliberated much about
them,—how, being assumed out of that life they led into the fellowship
of his city, they might cease to think of the punishment they deserved,
the fear of which had driven them to greater villainies; so that
henceforth they might be made more peaceable members of society.  But
this I say, that the Roman empire, which by subduing many nations had
already grown great and an object of universal dread, was itself greatly
alarmed, and only with much difficulty avoided a disastrous overthrow,
because a mere handful of gladiators in Campania, escaping from the
games, had recruited a great army, appointed three generals, and most
widely and cruelly devastated Italy.  Let them say what god aided these
men, so that from a small and contemptible band of robbers they attained
to a kingdom, feared even by the Romans, who had such great forces and
fortresses.  Or will they deny that they were divinely aided because
they did not last long? <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)   As if,
indeed, the life of any man whatever lasted long.  In that case, too,
the gods aid no one to reign, since all individuals quickly die; nor is
sovereign power to be reckoned a benefit, because in a little time in
every man, and thus in all of them one by one, it vanishes like a
vapor.  For what does it matter to those who worshipped the gods under
Romulus, and are long since dead, that after their death the Roman
empire has grown so great, while they plead their causes before the
powers beneath?  Whether <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="iv.IV.5-Page_67"></span> those causes are good or bad, it matters
not to the question before us.  And this is to be understood of all
those who carry with them the heavy burden of their actions, having in
the few days of their life swiftly and hurriedly passed over the stage
of the imperial office, although the office itself has lasted through
long spaces of time, being filled by a constant succession of dying
men.  If, however, even those benefits which last only for the shortest
time are to be ascribed to the aid of the gods, these gladiators were
not a little aided, who broke the bonds of their servile condition,
fled, escaped, raised a great and most powerful army, obedient to the
will and orders of their chiefs and much feared by the Roman majesty,
and remaining unsubdued by several Roman generals, seized many places,
and, having won very many victories, enjoyed whatever pleasures they
wished, and did what their lust suggested, and, until at last they were
conquered, which was done with the utmost difficulty, lived sublime and
dominant.  But let us come to greater matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[66:165](1020110.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iv.IV.5-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.5-p3"></span> It was extinguished by Crassus in its
third year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020111)
