[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020325)  [Next](1020327) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.22"></span> <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iv.XI.22-Page_217"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Of Those Who Do Not Approve of
Certain Things Which are a Part of This Good Creation of a Good Creator,
and Who Think that There is Some Natural Evil.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.22-p2"></span>This cause, however, of a good creation,
namely, the goodness of God,—this cause, I say, so just and fit, which,
when piously and carefully weighed, terminates all the controversies of
those who inquire into the origin of the world, has not been recognized
by some heretics, <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) because there
are, forsooth, many things, such as fire, frost, wild beasts, and so
forth, which do not suit but injure this thin blooded and frail
mortality of our flesh, which is at present under just punishment.  They
do not consider how admirable these things are in their own places, how
excellent in their own natures, how beautifully adjusted to the rest of
creation, and how much grace they contribute to the universe by their
own contributions as to a commonwealth; and how serviceable they are
even to ourselves, if we use them with a knowledge of their fit
adaptations,—so that even poisons, which are destructive when used
injudiciously, become wholesome and medicinal when used in conformity
with their qualities and design; just as, on the other hand, those
things which give us pleasure, such as food, drink, and the light of the
sun, are found to be hurtful when immoderately or unseasonably used. 
And thus divine providence admonishes us not foolishly to vituperate
things, but to investigate their utility with care; and, where our
mental capacity or infirmity is at fault, to believe that there is a
utility, though hidden, as we have experienced that there were other
things which we all but failed to discover.  For this concealment of the
use of things is itself either an exercise of our humility or a
levelling of our pride; for no nature at all is evil, and this is a name
for nothing but the want of good.  But from things earthly to things
heavenly, from the visible to the invisible, there are some things
better than others; and for this purpose are they unequal, in order that
they might all exist.  Now God is in such sort a great worker in great
things, that He is not less in little things,—for these little things
are to be measured not by their own greatness (which does not exist),
but by the wisdom of their Designer; as, in the visible appearance of a
man, if one eyebrow be shaved off, how nearly nothing is taken from the
body, but how much from the beauty!—for that is not constituted by bulk,
but by the proportion and arrangement of the members.  But we do not
greatly wonder that persons, who suppose that some evil nature has been
generated and propagated by a kind of opposing principle proper to it,
refuse to admit that the cause of the creation was this, that the good
God produced a good creation.  For they believe that He was driven to
this enterprise of creation by the urgent necessity of repulsing the
evil that warred against Him, and that He mixed His good nature with the
evil for the sake of restraining and conquering it; and that this nature
of His, being thus shamefully polluted, and most cruelly oppressed and
held captive, He labors to cleanse and deliver it, and with all His
pains does not wholly succeed; but such part of it as could not be
cleansed from that defilement is to serve as a prison and chain of the
conquered and incarcerated enemy.  The Manichæans would not drivel, or
rather, rave in such a style as this, if they believed the nature of God
to be, as it is, unchangeable and absolutely incorruptible, and subject
to no injury; and if, moreover, they held in Christian sobriety, that
the soul which has shown itself capable of being altered for the worse
by its own will, and of being corrupted by sin, and so, of being
deprived of the light of eternal truth,—that this soul, I say, is not a
part of God, nor of the same nature as God, but is created by Him, and
is far different from its Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_494"></span>[217:495](1020326.htm#fr_494) <span
id="iv.XI.22-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.22-p3"></span> The Manichæans, to wit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020327)
