[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020525)  [Next](1020527) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Who Were Kings When Moses Was
Born, and What Gods Began to Be Worshipped Then.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.8-p2"></span>When Saphrus reigned as the fourteenth
king of Assyria, and Orthopolis as the twelfth of Sicyon, and Criasus as
the fifth of Argos, Moses was born in Egypt, by whom the people of God
were liberated from the Egyptian slavery, in which they behoved to be
thus tried that they might desire the help of their Creator.  Some have
thought that Prometheus lived during the reign of the kings now named. 
He is reported to have formed men out of clay, because he was esteemed
the best teacher of wisdom; yet it does not appear what wise men there
were in his days.  His brother Atlas is said to have been a great
astrologer; and this gave occasion for the fable that he held up the
sky, although the vulgar opinion about his holding up the sky appears
rather to have been suggested by a high mountain named after him. 
Indeed, from those times many other fabulous things began to be invented
in Greece; yet, down to Cecrops king of Athens, in whose reign that city
received its name, and in whose reign God brought His people out of
Egypt by Moses, only a few dead heroes are reported to have been deified
according to the vain superstition of the Greeks.  Among these were
Melantomice, the wife of king Criasus, and Phorbas their son, who
succeeded his father as sixth king of the Argives, and Iasus, son of
Triopas, their seventh king, and their ninth king, <span
id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.8-Page_365"></span>
Sthenelas, or Stheneleus, or Sthenelus,—for his name is given
differently by different authors.  In those times also, Mercury, the
grandson of Atlas by his daughter Maia, is said to have lived, according
to the common report in books.  He was famous for his skill in many
arts, and taught them to men, for which they resolved to make him, and
even believed that he deserved to be, a god after death.  Hercules is
said to have been later, yet belonging to the same period; although
some, whom I think mistaken, assign him an earlier date than Mercury. 
But at whatever time they were born, it is agreed among grave
historians, who have committed these ancient things to writing, that
both were men, and that they merited divine honors from mortals because
they conferred on them many benefits to make this life more pleasant to
them.  Minerva was far more ancient than these; for she is reported to
have appeared in virgin age in the times of Ogyges at the lake called
Triton, from which she is also styled Tritonia, the inventress truly of
many works, and the more readily believed to be a goddess because her
origin was so little known.  For what is sung about her having sprung
from the head of Jupiter belongs to the region of poetry and fable, and
not to that of history and real fact.  And historical writers are not
agreed when Ogyges flourished, in whose time also a great flood
occurred,—not that greatest one from which no man escaped except those
who could get into the ark, for neither Greek nor Latin history knew of
it, yet a greater flood than that which happened afterward in
Deucalion’s time.  For Varro begins the book I have already mentioned at
this date, and does not propose to himself, as the starting-point from
which he may arrive at Roman affairs, anything more ancient than the
flood of Ogyges, that is, which happened in the time of Ogyges.  Now our
writers of chronicles—first Eusebius, and afterwards Jerome, who
entirely follow some earlier historians in this opinion—relate that the
flood of Ogyges happened more than three hundred years after, during the
reign of Phoroneus, the second king of Argos.  But whenever he may have
lived, Minerva was already worshipped as a goddess when Cecrops reigned
in Athens, in whose reign the city itself is reported to have been
rebuilt or founded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020527)
