[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020775)  [Next](1020777) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxxix"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxix-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 39.—To Which of the Above-Mentioned
Studies Attention Should Be Given, and in What Spirit.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxxix-p2"></span>58. Accordingly, I think that it is well
to warn studious and able young men, who fear God and are seeking for
happiness of life, not to venture heedlessly upon the pursuit of the
branches of learning that are in vogue beyond the pale of the Church of
Christ, as if these could secure for them the happiness they seek; but
soberly and carefully to discriminate among them.  And if they find any
of those which have been instituted by men varying by reason of the
varying pleasure of their founders, and unknown by reason of erroneous
conjectures, especially if they involve entering into fellowship with
devils by means of leagues and covenants about signs, let these be
utterly rejected and held in detestation.  Let the young men also
withdraw their attention from such institutions of men as are
unnecessary and luxurious.  But for the sake of the necessities of this
life we must not neglect the arrangements of men that enable us to carry
on intercourse with those around us.  I think, however, there is nothing
useful in the other branches of learning that are found among the
heathen, except information about objects, either past or present, that
relate to the bodily senses, in which are included also the experiments
and conclusions of the useful mechanical arts, except also the sciences
of reasoning and of number.  And in regard to all these we must hold by
the maxim, “Not too much of anything;” especially in the case of those
which, pertaining as they do to the senses, are subject to the relations
of space and time. <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821)

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span> <span id="v.v.xxxix-Page_554"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxix-p4"></span>59.  What, then, some men have done in
regard to all words and names found in Scripture, in the Hebrew, and
Syriac, and Egyptian, and other tongues, taking up and interpreting
separately such as were left in Scripture without interpretation; and
what Eusebius has done in regard to the history of the past with a view
to the questions arising in Scripture that require a knowledge of
history for their solution;—what, I say, these men have done in regard
to matters of this kind, making it unnecessary for the Christian to
spend his strength on many subjects for the sake of a few items of
knowledge, the same, I think, might be done in regard to other matters,
if any competent man were willing in a spirit of benevolence to
undertake the labor for the advantage of his brethren.  In this way he
might arrange in their several classes, and give an account of the
unknown places, and animals, and plants, and trees, and stones, and
metals, and other species of things that are mentioned in Scripture,
taking up these only, and committing his account to writing.  This might
also be done in relation to numbers, so that the theory of those
numbers, and those only, which are mentioned in Holy Scripture, might be
explained and written down.  And it may happen that some or all of these
things have been done already (as I have found that many things I had no
notion of have been worked out and committed to writing by good and
learned Christians), but are either lost amid the crowds of the
careless, or are kept out of sight by the envious.  And I am not sure
whether the same thing can be done in regard to the theory of reasoning;
but it seems to me it cannot, because this runs like a system of nerves
through the whole structure of Scripture, and on that account is of more
service to the reader in disentangling and explaining ambiguous
passages, of which I shall speak hereafter, than in ascertaining the
meaning of unknown signs, the topic I am now discussing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[553:1822](1020776.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="v.v.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxix-p3"></span> *Ne quid nimis.*—<span class="c20"><span
id="v.v.xxxix-p3.1"></span>Terence</span>, *Andria*, act i. scene 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40](1020777)
