[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020173)  [Next](1020175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.5"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Concerning the Three Kinds of
Theology According to Varro, Namely, One Fabulous, the Other Natural,
the Third Civil.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.5-p2"></span>Now what are we to say of this proposition
of his, namely, that there are three kinds of theology, that is, of the
account which is given of the gods; and of these, the one is called
mythical, the other physical, and the third civil?  Did the Latin usage
permit, we should call the kind which he has placed first in order
*fabular*, <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) but let us call it
*fabulous*, <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) for mythical is
derived from the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VI.5-p4.1"></span>μῦθος</span>, a fable; but that the second
should be called *natural*, the usage of speech now admits; the third he
himself has designated in Latin, call <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>
<span id="iv.VI.5-Page_113"></span> ing it *civil*. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241)   Then he says, “they call that kind
*mythical* which the poets chiefly use; *physical*, that which the
philosophers use; *civil*, that which the people use.  As to the first I
have mentioned,” says he, “in it are many fictions, which are contrary
to the dignity and nature of the immortals.  For we find in it that one
god has been born from the head, another from the thigh, another from
drops of blood; also, in this we find that gods have stolen, committed
adultery, served men; in a word, in this all manner of things are
attributed to the gods, such as may befall, not merely any man, but even
the most contemptible man.”  He certainly, where he could, where he
dared, where he thought he could do it with impunity, has manifested,
without any of the haziness of ambiguity, how great injury was done to
the nature of the gods by lying fables; for he was speaking, not
concerning natural theology, not concerning civil, but concerning
fabulous theology, which he thought he could freely find fault with.

<span id="iv.VI.5-p6"></span>Let us see, now, what he says concerning
the second kind.  “The second kind which I have explained,” he says, “is
that concerning which philosophers have left many books, in which they
treat such questions as these:  what gods there are, where they are, of
what kind and character they are, since what time they have existed, or
if they have existed from eternity; whether they are of fire, as
Heraclitus believes; or of number, as Pythagoras; or of atoms, as
Epicurus says; and other such things, which men’s ears can more easily
hear inside the walls of a school than outside in the Forum.”  He finds
fault with nothing in this kind of theology which they call *physical*,
and which belongs to philosophers, except that he has related their
controversies among themselves, through which there has arisen a
multitude of dissentient sects.  Nevertheless he has removed this kind
from the Forum, that is, from the populace, but he has shut it up in
schools.  But that first kind, most false and most base, he has not
removed from the citizens.  Oh, the religious ears of the people, and
among them even those of the Romans, that are not able to bear what the
philosophers dispute concerning the gods!  But when the poets sing and
stage-players act such things as are derogatory to the dignity and the
nature of the immortals, such as may befall not a man merely, but the
most contemptible man, they not only bear, but willingly listen to.  Nor
is this all, but they even consider that these things please the gods,
and that they are propitiated by them.

<span id="iv.VI.5-p7"></span>But some one may say, Let us distinguish
these two kinds of theology, the mythical and the physical,—that is, the
fabulous and the natural,—from this civil kind about which we are now
speaking.  Anticipating this, he himself has distinguished them.  Let us
see now how he explains the civil theology itself.  I see, indeed, why
it should be distinguished as fabulous, even because it is false,
because it is base, because it is unworthy.  But to wish to distinguish
the natural from the civil, what else is that but to confess that the
civil itself is false?  For if that be natural, what fault has it that
it should be excluded?  And if this which is called civil be not
natural, what merit has it that it should be admitted?  This, in truth,
is the cause why he wrote first concerning human things, and afterwards
concerning divine things; since in divine things he did not follow
nature, but the institution of men.  Let us look at this civil theology
of his.  “The third kind,” says he, “is that which citizens in cities,
and especially the priests, ought to know and to administer.  From it is
to be known what god each one may suitably worship, what sacred rites
and sacrifices each one may suitably perform.”  Let us still attend to
what follows.  “The first theology,” he says, “is especially adapted to
the theatre, the second to the world, the third to the city.”  Who does
not see to which he gives the palm?  Certainly to the second, which he
said above is that of the philosophers.  For he testifies that this
pertains to the world, than which they think there is nothing better. 
But those two theologies, the first and the third,—to wit, those of the
theatre and of the city,—has he distinguished them or united them?  For
although we see that the city is in the world, we do not see that it
follows that any things belonging to the city pertain to the world.  For
it is possible that such things may be worshipped and believed in the
city, according to false opinions, as have no existence either in the
world or out of it.  But where is the theatre but in the city?  Who
instituted the theatre but the state?  For what purpose did it
constitute it but for scenic plays?  And to what class of things do
scenic plays belong but to those divine things concerning which these
books of Varro’s are written with so much ability?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[112:240](1020174.htm#fr_239) <span
id="iv.VI.5-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.5-p3"></span> *Fabulare.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[112:241](1020174.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iv.VI.5-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.5-p4"></span> *Fabulosum.*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[113:242](1020174.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iv.VI.5-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.5-p5"></span> *Civile.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020175)
