[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020254)  [Next](1020256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.8"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—How Apuleius Defines the Gods Who
Dwell in Heaven, the Demons Who Occupy the Air, and Men Who Inhabit
Earth.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.8-p2"></span>The definition which Apuleius gives of
demons, and in which he of course includes all demons, is that they are
in nature animals, in soul subject to passion, in mind reasonable, in
body aerial, in duration eternal.  Now in these five qualities he has
named absolutely nothing which is proper to good men and not also to
bad.  For when Apuleius had spoken of the celestials first, and had then
extended his description so as to include an account of those who dwell
far below on the earth, that, after describing the two extremes of
rational being, he might proceed to speak of the intermediate demons, he
says, “Men, therefore, who are endowed with the faculty of reason and
speech, whose soul is immortal and their members mortal, who have weak
and anxious spirits, dull and corruptible bodies, dissimilar characters,
similar ignorance, who are obstinate in their audacity, and persistent
in their hope, whose labor is vain, and whose fortune is ever on the
wane, their race immortal, themselves perishing, each generation
replenished with creatures whose life is swift and their wisdom slow,
their death sudden and their life a wail,—these are the men who dwell on
the earth.” <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)   In recounting so
many qualities which belong to the large proportion of men, did he
forget that which is the property of the few when he speaks of their
wisdom being slow?  If this had been omitted, this his description of
the human race, so carefully elaborated, would have been defective. And
when he commended the excellence of the gods, he affirmed that they
excelled in that very blessedness to which he thinks men must attain by
wisdom.  And therefore, if he had wished us to believe that some of the
demons are good, he should have inserted in his description something by
which we might see that they have, in common with the gods, some share
of blessedness, or, in common with men, some wisdom.  But, as it is, he
has mentioned no good quality by which the good may be distinguished
from the bad.  For although he refrained from giving a full account of
their wickedness, through fear of offending, not themselves but their
worshippers, for whom he was writing, yet he sufficiently indicated to
discerning readers what opinion he had of them; for only in the one
article of the eternity of their bodies does he assimilate them to the
gods, all of whom, he asserts, are good and blessed, and absolutely free
from what he himself calls the stormy passions of the demons; and as to
the soul, he quite plainly affirms that they resemble men and not the
gods, and that this resemblance lies not in the possession of wisdom,
which even men can attain to, but in the perturbation of passions which
sway the foolish and wicked, but <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="iv.IX.8-Page_171"></span> is so ruled by the good and wise that they
prefer not to admit rather than to conquer it.  For if he had wished it
to be understood that the demons resembled the gods in the eternity not
of their bodies but of their souls, he would certainly have admitted men
to share in this privilege, because, as a Platonist, he of course must
hold that the human soul is eternal.  Accordingly, when describing this
race of living beings, he said that their souls were immortal, their
members mortal.  And, consequently, if men have not eternity in common
with the gods because they have mortal bodies, demons have eternity in
common with the gods because their bodies are immortal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[170:346](1020255.htm#fr_345) <span
id="iv.IX.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.8-p3"></span> *De Deo Soc.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020256)
