[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020006)  [Next](1020008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Of the Adversaries of the Name of
Christ, Whom the Barbarians for Christ’s Sake Spared When They Stormed
the City.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>For to this earthly city belong the
enemies against whom I have to defend the city of God.  Many of them,
indeed, being reclaimed from their ungodly error, have become
sufficiently creditable citizens of this city; but <span id="page_2">p.
2</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii-Page_2"></span> many are so inflamed with
hatred against it, and are so ungrateful to its Redeemer for His signal
benefits, as to forget that they would now be unable to utter a single
word to its prejudice, had they not found in its sacred places, as they
fled from the enemy’s steel, that life in which they now boast
themselves. <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)   Are not those very
Romans, who were spared by the barbarians through their respect for
Christ, become enemies to the name of Christ?  The reliquaries of the
martyrs and the churches of the apostles bear witness to this; for in
the sack of the city they were open sanctuary for all who fled to them,
whether Christian or Pagan.  To their very threshold the blood-thirsty
enemy raged; there his murderous fury owned a limit.  Thither did such
of the enemy as had any pity convey those to whom they had given
quarter, lest any less mercifully disposed might fall upon them.  And,
indeed, when even those murderers who everywhere else showed themselves
pitiless came to those spots where that was forbidden which the license
of war permitted in every other place, their furious rage for slaughter
was bridled, and their eagerness to take prisoners was quenched.  Thus
escaped multitudes who now reproach the Christian religion, and impute
to Christ the ills that have befallen their city; but the preservation
of their own life—a boon which they owe to the respect entertained for
Christ by the barbarians—they attribute not to our Christ, but to their
own good luck.  They ought rather, had they any right perceptions, to
attribute the severities and hardships inflicted by their enemies, to
that divine providence which is wont to reform the depraved manners of
men by chastisement, and which exercises with similar afflictions the
righteous and praiseworthy,—either translating them, when they have
passed through the trial, to a better world, or detaining them still on
earth for ulterior purposes.  And they ought to attribute it to the
spirit of these Christian times, that, contrary to the custom of war,
these bloodthirsty barbarians spared them, and spared them for Christ’s
sake, whether this mercy was actually shown in promiscuous places, or in
those places specially dedicated to Christ’s name, and of which the very
largest were selected as sanctuaries, that full scope might thus be
given to the expansive compassion which desired that a large multitude
might find shelter there.  Therefore ought they to give God thanks, and
with sincere confession flee for refuge to His name, that so they may
escape the punishment of eternal fire—they who with lying lips took upon
them this name, that they might escape the punishment of present
destruction.  For of those whom you see insolently and shamelessly
insulting the servants of Christ, there are numbers who would not have
escaped that destruction and slaughter had they not pretended that they
themselves were Christ’s servants.  Yet now, in ungrateful pride and
most impious madness, and at the risk of being punished in everlasting
darkness, they perversely oppose that name under which they fraudulently
protected themselves for the sake of enjoying the light of this brief
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[2:33](1020007.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span> \[Aug. refers to the sacking of the city
of Rome by the West-Gothic King Alaric, 410.  He was the most humane of
the barbaric invaders and conquerors of Rome, and had embraced Arian
Christianity (probably from the teaching of Ulphilas, the Arian bishop
and translator of the Bible).  He spared the Catholic Christians.—For
particulars see Gibbon’s *Decline and Fall*, and Millman’s *Latin
Christianity.*—P.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020008)
