[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020560)  [Next](1020562) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.43"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.43-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.43-p1.1"></span>Chapter 43.—Of the Authority of the
Septuagint Translation, Which, Saving the Honor of the Hebrew Original,
is to Be Preferred to All Translations.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.43-p2"></span>For while there were other interpreters
who translated these sacred oracles out of the Hebrew tongue into Greek,
as Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, and also that translation which,
as the name of the author is unknown, is quoted as the fifth edition,
yet the Church has received this Septuagint translation just as if it
were the only one; and it has been used by the Greek Christian people,
most of whom are not aware that there is any other.  From this
translation there has also been made a translation in the Latin tongue,
which the Latin churches use.  Our times, however, have enjoyed the
advantage of the presbyter Jerome, a man most learned, and skilled in
all three languages, who translated these same Scriptures into the Latin
speech, not from the Greek, but from the Hebrew. <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216)   But although the Jews acknowledge
this very learned labor of his to be faithful, while they contend that
the Septuagint translators have erred in many places, still the churches
of Christ judge that no one should be preferred to the authority of so
many men, chosen for this very great work by Eleazar, who was then high
priest; for even if there had not appeared in them one spirit, without
doubt divine, and the seventy learned men had, after the manner of men,
compared together the words of their translation, that what pleased them
all might stand, no single translator ought to be preferred to them; but
since so great a sign of divinity has appeared in them, certainly, if
any other translator of their Scriptures from the Hebrew into any other
tongue is faithful, in that case he agrees with these seventy
translators, and if he is not found to agree with them, then we ought to
believe that the prophetic gift is with them.  For the same Spirit who
was in the prophets when they spoke these things was also in the seventy
men when they translated them, so that assuredly they could also say
something else, just as if the prophet himself had said both, because it
would be the same Spirit who said both; and could say the same thing
differently, so that, although the words were not the same, yet the same
meaning should shine forth to those of good understanding; and could
omit or add something, so that even by this it might be shown that there
was in that work not human bondage, which the translator owed to the
words, but rather divine power, which filled and ruled the mind of the
translator.  Some, however, have thought that the Greek copies of the
Septuagint version should be emended from the Hebrew copies; yet they
did not dare to take away what the Hebrew lacked and the Septuagint had,
but only added what was found in the Hebrew copies and was lacking in
the Septuagint, and noted them by placing at the beginning of the verses
certain marks in the form of stars which they call asterisks.  And those
things which the Hebrew copies have not, but the Septuagint have, they
have in like manner marked at the beginning of the verses by horizontal
spit-shaped marks like those by which we denote ounces; and many copies
having these marks <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.43-Page_387"></span> are circulated even in Latin. <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217)   But we cannot, without inspecting
both kinds of copies, find out those things which are neither omitted
nor added, but expressed differently, whether they yield another meaning
not in itself unsuitable, or can be shown to explain the same meaning in
another way.  If, then, as it behoves us, we behold nothing else in
these Scriptures than what the Spirit of God has spoken through men, if
anything is in the Hebrew copies and is not in the version of the
Seventy, the Spirit of God did not choose to say it through them, but
only through the prophets.  But whatever is in the Septuagint and not in
the Hebrew copies, the same Spirit chose rather to say through the
latter, thus showing that both were prophets.  For in that manner He
spoke as He chose, some things through Isaiah, some through Jeremiah,
some through several prophets, or else the same thing through this
prophet and through that.  Further, whatever is found in both editions,
that one and the same Spirit willed to say through both, but so as that
the former preceded in prophesying, and the latter followed in
prophetically interpreting them; because, as the one Spirit of peace was
in the former when they spoke true and concordant words, so the selfsame
one Spirit hath appeared in the latter, when, without mutual conference
they yet interpreted all things as if with one mouth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[386:1217](1020561.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="iv.XVIII.43-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.43-p3"></span> \[Jerome was an older contemporary of
Augustin, and next to him the most influential of the Latin fathers.  He
is the author of the Latin translation of the Scriptures, which under
the name of the *Vulgate* is still the authorized Bible of the Roman
church.  He died at Bethlehem, 419, eleven years before Augustin.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[387:1218](1020561.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="iv.XVIII.43-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.43-p4"></span> Var. reading, “both in Greek and
Latin.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 44](1020562)
