[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020469)  [Next](1020471) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.21"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Of the Third Promise of God, by
Which He Assured the Land of Canaan to Abraham and His Seed in
Perpetuity.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.21-p2"></span>Now, when Abraham and Lot had separated,
and dwelt apart, owing to the necessity of supporting their families,
and not to vile discord, and Abraham was in the land of Canaan, but Lot
in Sodom, the Lord said to Abraham in a third oracle, “Lift up thine
eyes, and look from the place where thou now art, to the north, and to
Africa, and to the east, and to the sea; for all the land which thou
seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.  And I will
make thy seed as the dust of the earth:  if any one can number the dust
of the earth, thy seed shall also be numbered.  Arise, and walk through
the land, in the length of it, and in the breadth of it; for unto thee
will I give it.” <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905)   It does not
clearly appear whether in this promise that also is contained by which
he is made the father of all nations.  For the clause, “And I will make
thy seed as the dust of the earth,” may seem to refer to this, being
spoken by that figure the Greeks call hyperbole, which indeed is
figurative, not literal.  But no person of understanding can doubt in
what manner the Scripture uses this and other figures.  For that figure
(that is, way of speaking) is used when what is said is far larger than
what is meant by it; for who does not see how incomparably larger the
number of the dust must be than that of all men can be from Adam himself
down to the end of the world?  How much greater, then, must it be than
the seed of Abraham,—not only that pertaining to the nation of Israel,
but also that which is and shall be according to the imitation of faith
in all nations of the whole wide world!  For that seed is indeed very
small in comparison with the multitude of the wicked, although even
those few of themselves make an innumerable multitude, which by a
hyperbole is compared to the dust of the earth.  Truly that multitude
which was promised to Abraham is not innumerable to God, although to
man; but to God not even the dust of the earth is so.  Further, the
promise here made may be understood not only of the nation of Israel,
but of the whole seed of Abraham, which may be fitly compared to the
dust for <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="iv.XVI.21-Page_323"></span> multitude, because regarding it also
there is the promise <span id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) of many
children, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.  But
we have therefore said that this does not clearly appear, because the
multitude even of that one nation, which was born according to the flesh
of Abraham through his grandson Jacob, has increased so much as to fill
almost all parts of the world.  Consequently, even it might by hyperbole
be compared to the dust for multitude, because even it alone is
innumerable by man.  Certainly no one questions that only that land is
meant which is called Canaan.  But that saying, “To thee will I give it,
and to thy seed for ever,” may move some, if by “for ever” they
understand “to eternity.”  But if in this passage they take “for ever”
thus, as we firmly hold it means that the beginning of the world to come
is to be ordered from the end of the present, there is still no
difficulty, because, although the Israelites are expelled from
Jerusalem, they still remain in other cities in the land of Canaan, and
shall remain even to the end; and when that whole land is inhabited by
Christians, they also are the very seed of Abraham.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_905"></span>[322:906](1020470.htm#fr_905) <span
id="iv.XVI.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.21-p3"></span> [Gen.
13.14-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#014)<span
id="iv.XVI.21-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[323:907](1020470.htm#fr_906) <span
id="iv.XVI.21-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.21-p4"></span> Various reading, “the express promise.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020471)
