[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020377)  [Next](1020379) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.11"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Whether One Can Both Be Living
and Dead at the Same Time.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.11-p2"></span>But if it is absurd to say that a man is
in death before he reaches death (for to what is his course running as
he passes through life, if already he is in death?), and if it outrage
common usage to speak of a man being at once alive and dead, as much as
it does so to speak of him as at once asleep and awake, it remains to be
asked when a man is dying?  For, before death comes, he is not dying but
living; and when death has come, he is not dying but dead.  The one is
before, the other after death.  When, then, is he in death so that we
can say he is dying?  For as there are three times, before death, in
death, after death, so there are three states corresponding, living,
dying, dead.  And it is very hard to define when a man is in death or
dying, when he is neither living, which is before death, nor dead, which
is after death, but dying, which is in death.  For so long as the soul
is in the body, especially if consciousness remain, the man certainly
lives; for body and soul constitute the man.  And thus, before death, he
cannot be said to be in death, but when, on the other hand, the soul has
departed, and all bodily sensation is extinct, death is past, and the
man is dead.  Between these two states the dying condition finds no
place; for if a <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="iv.XIII.11-Page_250"></span> man yet lives, death has not arrived;
if he has ceased to live, death is past.  Never, then, is he dying, that
is, comprehended in the state of death.  So also in the passing of
time,—you try to lay your finger on the present, and cannot find it,
because the present occupies no space, but is only the transition of
time from the future to the past.  Must we then conclude that there is
thus no death of the body at all?  For if there is, where is it, since
it is in no one, and no one can be in it?  Since, indeed, if there is
yet life, death is not yet; for this state is before death, not in
death:  and if life has already ceased, death is not present; for this
state is after death, not in death.  On the other hand, if there is no
death before or after, what do we mean when we say “after death,” or
“before death?”  This is a foolish way of speaking if there is no
death.  And would that we had lived so well in Paradise that in very
truth there were now no death!  But not only does it now exist, but so
grievous a thing is it, that no skill is sufficient either to explain or
to escape it.

<span id="iv.XIII.11-p3"></span>Let us, then, speak in the customary
way,—no man ought to speak otherwise,—and let us call the time before
death come, “before death;” as it is written, “Praise no man before his
death.” <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590)   And when it has
happened, let us say that “after death” this or that took place.  And of
the present time let us speak as best we can, as when we say, “He, when
dying, made his will, and left this or that to such and such
persons,”—though, of course, he could not do so unless he were living,
and did this rather before death than in death.  And let us use the same
phraseology as Scripture uses; for it makes no scruple of saying that
the dead are not after but in death.  So that verse, “For in death there
is no remembrance of thee.” <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591)  
For until the resurrection men are justly said to be in death; as every
one is said to be in sleep till he awakes.  However, though we can say
of persons in sleep that they are sleeping, we cannot speak in this way
of the dead, and say they are dying.  For, so far as regards the death
of the body, of which we are now speaking, one cannot say that those who
are already separated from their bodies continue dying.  But this, you
see, is just what I was saying,—that no words can explain how either the
dying are said to live, or how the dead are said, even after death, to
be in death.  For how can they be after death if they be in death,
especially when we do not even call them dying, as we call those in
sleep, sleeping; and those in languor, languishing; and those in grief,
grieving; and those in life, living?  And yet the dead, until they rise
again, are said to be in death, but cannot be called dying.

<span id="iv.XIII.11-p6"></span>And therefore I think it has not
unsuitably nor inappropriately come to pass, though not by the intention
of man, yet perhaps with divine purpose, that this Latin word *moritur*
cannot be declined by the grammarians according to the rule followed by
similar words.  For *oritur* gives the form *ortus est* for the perfect;
and all similar verbs form this tense from their perfect participles. 
But if we ask the perfect of *moritur*, we get the regular answer
*mortuus est*, with a double *u*.  For thus *mortuus* is pronounced,
like *fatuus, arduus, conspicuus*, and similar words, which are not
perfect participles but adjectives, and are declined without regard to
tense.  But *mortuus*, though in form an adjective, is used as perfect
participle, as if that were to be declined which cannot be declined; and
thus it has suitably come to pass that, as the thing itself cannot in
point of fact be declined, so neither can the word significant of the
act be declined.  Yet, by the aid of our Redeemer’s grace, we may manage
at least to decline the second.  For that is more grievous still, and,
indeed, of all evils the worst, since it consists not in the separation
of soul and body, but in the uniting of both in death eternal.  And
there, in striking contrast to our present conditions, men will not be
before or after death, but always in death; and thus never living, never
dead, but endlessly dying.  And never can a man be more disastrously in
death than when death itself shall be deathless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_590"></span>[250:591](1020378.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iv.XIII.11-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.11-p4"></span> [Ecclus.
11.28](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#028)<span
id="iv.XIII.11-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[250:592](1020378.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iv.XIII.11-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.11-p5"></span> [Ps.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="iv.XIII.11-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020379)
