[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020249)  [Next](1020251) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.3"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—What Apuleius Attributes to the
Demons, to Whom, Though He Does Not Deny Them Reason, He Does Not
Ascribe Virtue.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.3-p2"></span>What, then, is the difference between good
and evil demons?  For the Platonist Apuleius, in a treatise on this
whole subject, <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) while he says a
great deal about their aerial bodies, has not a word to say of the
spiritual virtues with which, if they were good, they must have been
endowed.  Not a word has he said, then, of that which could give them
happiness; but proof of their misery he has given, acknowledging that
their mind, by which they rank as reasonable beings, is not only not
imbued and fortified with virtue so as to resist all unreasonable
passions, but that it is somehow agitated with tempestuous emotions, and
is thus on a level with the mind of foolish men.  His own words are: 
“It is this class of demons the poets refer to, when, without serious
error, they feign that the gods hate and love individuals among men,
prospering and ennobling some, and opposing and distressing others. 
Therefore pity, indignation, grief, joy, every human emotion is
experienced by the demons, with the same mental disturbance, and the
same tide of feeling and thought.  These turmoils and tempests banish
them far from the tranquility of the celestial gods.”  Can there be any
doubt that in these words it is not some inferior part of their
spiritual nature, but the very mind by which the demons hold their rank
as rational beings, which he says is tossed with passion like a stormy
sea?  They cannot, then, be compared even to wise men, who with
undisturbed mind resist these perturbations to which they are exposed in
this life, and from which human infirmity is never exempt, and who do
not yield themselves to approve of or perpetrate anything which might
deflect them from the path of wisdom and law of rectitude.  They
resemble in character, though not in bodily appearance, wicked and
foolish men.  I might indeed say they are worse, inasmuch as they have
grown old in iniquity, and incorrigible by punishment.  Their mind, as
Apuleius says, is a sea tossed with tempest, having no rallying point of
truth or virtue in their soul from which they can resist their turbulent
and depraved emotions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_334"></span>[167:335](1020250.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iv.IX.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.3-p3"></span> The *De Deo Socratis*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020251)
