[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020614)  [Next](1020616) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.13"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—Whether the Time of the
Persecution or Antichrist Should Be Reckoned in the Thousand
Years.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.13-p2"></span>This last persecution by Antichrist shall
last for three years and six months, as we have already said, and as is
affirmed both in the book of Revelation and by Daniel the prophet. 
Though this time is brief, yet not without reason is it questioned
whether it is comprehended in the thousand years in which the devil is
bound and the saints reign with Christ, or whether this little season
should be added over and above to these years.  For if we say that they
are included in the thousand years, then the saints reign with Christ
during a more protracted period than the devil is bound.  For they shall
reign with their King and Conqueror mightily even in that crowning
persecution when the devil shall now be unbound and shall rage against
them with all his might.  How then does Scripture define both the
binding of the devil and the reign of the saints by the same thousand
years, if the binding of the devil ceases three years and six months
before this reign of the saints with Christ?  On the other hand, if we
say that the brief space of this persecution is not to be reckoned as a
part of the thousand years, but rather as an additional period, we shall
indeed be able to interpret the words, “The priests of God and of Christ
shall reign with Him a thousand years; and when the thousand years shall
be finished, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison;” for thus they
signify that the reign of the saints and the bondage of the devil shall
cease simultaneously, so that the time of the persecution we speak of
should be contemporaneous neither with the reign of the saints nor with
the imprisonment of Satan, but should be reckoned over and above as a
superadded portion of time.  But then in this case we are forced to
admit that the saints shall not reign with Christ during that
persecution.  But who can dare to say that His members shall not reign
with Him at that very juncture when they shall most of all, and with the
greatest fortitude, cleave to Him, and when the glory of resistance and
the crown of martyrdom shall be more conspicuous in proportion to the
hotness of the battle?  Or if it is suggested that they may be said not
to reign, because of the tribulations which they shall suffer, it will
follow that all the saints who have formerly, during the thousand years,
suffered tribulation, shall not be said to have reigned with Christ
during the period of their tribulation, and consequently even those
whose souls the author of this book says that he saw, and who were slain
for the testimony of Jesus and the word of God, did not reign with
Christ when they were suffering persecution, and they were not
themselves the kingdom of Christ, though Christ was then pre-eminently
possessing them.  This is indeed perfectly absurd, and to be scouted. 
But assuredly the victorious souls of the glorious martyrs having
overcome and finished all griefs and toils, and having laid down their
mortal members, have reigned and do reign with Christ till the thousand
years are finished, that they may afterwards reign with Him when they
have received their immortal bodies.  And therefore during these three
years and a half the souls of those who were slain for His testimony,
both those which formerly passed from the body and those which shall
pass in that last persecution, shall reign with Him till the mortal
world come to an end, and pass into that kingdom in which there shall be
no death.  And thus the reign of the saints with Christ shall last
longer than the bonds and imprisonment of the devil, because they shall
reign with their King the Son of God for these three years and a half
during which the devil is no longer bound.  It remains, therefore, that
when we read that “the priests of God and of Christ shall reign with Him
a thousand years; and when the thousand years are finished, the devil
shall be loosed from his imprisonment,” that we understand either that
the thousand years of the reign of the saints does not terminate, though
the imprisonment of the devil does,—so that both parties have their
thousand years, that is, their complete time, yet each with a different
actual duration approriate to itself, the kingdom of the saints being
longer, the imprisonment of the devil shorter, <span id="page_434">p.
434</span> <span id="iv.XX.13-Page_434"></span> —or at least that, as
three years and six months is a very short time, it is not reckoned as
either deducted from the whole time of Satan’s imprisonment, or as added
to the whole duration of the reign of the saints, as we have shown above
in the sixteenth book <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381)
regarding the round number of four hundred years, which were specified
as four hundred, though actually somewhat more; and similar expressions
are often found in the sacred writings, if one will mark them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[434:1382](1020615.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="iv.XX.13-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.13-p3"></span> Ch. 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020616)
