[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020410)  [Next](1020412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.19"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—That It is Now Necessary, as It
Was Not Before Man Sinned, to Bridle Anger and Lust by the Restraining
Influence of Wisdom.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.19-p2"></span>Hence it is that even the philosophers
who have approximated to the truth have avowed that anger and lust are
vicious mental emotions, because, even when exercised towards objects
which wisdom does not prohibit, they are moved in an ungoverned and
inordinate manner, and consequently need the regulation of mind and
reason.  And they assert that this third part of the mind is posted as
it were in a kind of citadel, to give rule to these other parts, so
that, while it rules and they serve, man’s righteousness is preserved
without a breach. <span id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746)   These parts,
then, which they acknowledge to be vicious even in a wise and temperate
man, so that the mind, by its composing and restraining influence, must
bridle and recall them from those objects towards which they are
unlawfully moved, and give them access to those which the law of wisdom
sanctions,—that anger, *e.g*., may be allowed for the enforcement of a
just authority, and lust for the duty of propagating offspring,—these
parts, I say, were not vicious in Paradise before sin, for they were
never moved in opposition to a holy will towards any object from which
it was necessary that they should be withheld by the restraining bridle
of reason.  For though now they are moved in this way, and are regulated
by a bridling and restraining power, which those who live temperately,
justly, and godly exercise, sometimes with ease, and sometimes with
greater difficulty, this is not the sound health of nature, but the
weakness which results from sin.  And how is it that shame does not hide
the acts and words dictated by anger or other emotions, as it covers the
motions of lust, unless because the members of the body which we employ
for accomplishing them are moved, not by the emotions themselves, but by
the authority of the consenting will?  For he who in his anger rails at
or even strikes some one, could not do so were not his tongue and hand
moved by the authority of the will, as also they are moved when there is
no anger.  But the organs of generation are so subjected to the rule of
lust, that they have no motion but what it communicates.  It is this we
are ashamed of; it is this which blushingly hides from the eyes of
onlookers.  And rather will a man endure a crowd of witnesses when he is
unjustly venting his anger on some one, than the eye of one man when he
innocently copulates with his wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_746"></span>[277:747](1020411.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iv.XIV.19-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.19-p3"></span> See Plato’s *Republic*, book iv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020412)
