[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020174)  [Next](1020176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.6"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Concerning the Mythic, that Is, the
Fabulous, Theology, and the Civil, Against Varro.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.6-p2"></span>O Marcus Varro! thou art the most acute,
and without doubt the most learned, but still a man, not God,—now lifted
up by the Spirit <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="iv.VI.6-Page_114"></span> of God to see and to announce divine
things, thou seest, indeed, that divine things are to be separated from
human trifles and lies, but thou fearest to offend those most corrupt
opinions of the populace, and their customs in public superstitions,
which thou thyself, when thou considerest them on all sides, perceivest,
and all your literature loudly pronounces to be abhorrent from the
nature of the gods, even of such gods as the frailty of the human mind
supposes to exist in the elements of this world.  What can the most
excellent human talent do here?  What can human learning, though
manifold, avail thee in this perplexity?  Thou desirest to worship the
natural gods; thou art compelled to worship the civil.  Thou hast found
some of the gods to be fabulous, on whom thou vomitest forth very freely
what thou thinkest, and, whether thou willest or not, thou wettest
therewith even the civil gods.  Thou sayest, forsooth, that the fabulous
are adapted to the theatre, the natural to the world, and the civil to
the city; though the world is a divine work, but cities and theatres are
the works of men, and though the gods who are laughed at in the theatre
are not other than those who are adored in the temples; and ye do not
exhibit games in honor of other gods than those to whom ye immolate
victims.  How much more freely and more subtly wouldst thou have decided
these hadst thou said that some gods are natural, others established by
men; and concerning those who have been so established, the literature
of the poets gives one account, and that of the priests another,—both of
which are, nevertheless, so friendly the one to the other, through
fellowship in falsehood, that they are both pleasing to the demons, to
whom the doctrine of the truth is hostile.

<span id="iv.VI.6-p3"></span>That theology, therefore, which they call
natural, being put aside for a moment, as it is afterwards to be
discussed, we ask if any one is really content to seek a hope for
eternal life from poetical, theatrical, scenic gods?  Perish the
thought!  The true God avert so wild and sacrilegious a madness!  What,
is eternal life to be asked from those gods whom these things pleased,
and whom these things propitiate, in which their own crimes are
represented?  No one, as I think, has arrived at such a pitch of
headlong and furious impiety.  So then, neither by the fabulous nor by
the civil theology does any one obtain eternal life.  For the one sows
base things concerning the gods by feigning them, the other reaps by
cherishing them; the one scatters lies, the other gathers them together;
the one pursues divine things with false crimes, the other incorporates
among divine things the plays which are made up of these crimes; the one
sounds abroad in human songs impious fictions concerning the gods, the
other consecrates these for the festivities of the gods themselves; the
one sings the misdeeds and crimes of the gods, the other loves them; the
one gives forth or feigns, the other either attests the true or delights
in the false.  Both are base; both are damnable.  But the one which is
theatrical teaches public abomination, and that one which is of the city
adorns itself with that abomination.  Shall eternal life be hoped for
from these, by which this short and temporal life is polluted?  Does the
society of wicked men pollute our life if they insinuate themselves into
our affections, and win our assent? and does not the society of demons
pollute the life, who are worshipped with their own crimes?—if with true
crimes, how wicked the demons! if with false, how wicked the worship!

<span id="iv.VI.6-p4"></span>When we say these things, it may perchance
seem to some one who is very ignorant of these matters that only those
things concerning the gods which are sung in the songs of the poets and
acted on the stage are unworthy of the divine majesty, and ridiculous,
and too detestable to be celebrated, whilst those sacred things which
not stage-players but priests perform are pure and free from all
unseemliness.  Had this been so, never would any one have thought that
these theatrical abominations should be celebrated in their honor, never
would the gods themselves have ordered them to be performed to them. 
But men are in nowise ashamed to perform these things in the theatres,
because similar things are carried on in the temples.  In short, when
the fore-mentioned author attempted to distinguish the civil theology
from the fabulous and natural, as a sort of third and distinct kind, he
wished it to be understood to be rather tempered by both than separated
from either.  For he says that those things which the poets write are
less than the people ought to follow, whilst what the philosophers say
is more than it is expedient for the people to pry into.  “Which,” says
he, “differ in such a way, that nevertheless not a few things from both
of them have been taken to the account of the civil theology; wherefore
we will indicate what the civil theology has in common with that of the
poet, though it ought to be more closely connected with the theology of
philosophers.”  Civil theology is therefore not quite disconnected from
that of the poets.  Nevertheless, in another place, concerning the
generations of the gods, he says that the people are more inclined
toward <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="iv.VI.6-Page_115"></span> the poets than toward the physical
theologists.  For in this place he said what ought to be done; in that
other place, what was really done.  He said that the latter had written
for the sake of utility, but the poets for the sake of amusement.  And
hence the things from the poets’ writings, which the people ought not to
follow, are the crimes of the gods; which, nevertheless, amuse both the
people and the gods.  For, for amusement’s sake, he says, the poets
write, and not for that of utility; nevertheless they write such things
as the gods will desire, and the people perform.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020176)
