[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020720)  [Next](1020722) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—A Man May Love Something More Than
His Body, But Does Not Therefore Hate His Body.</span>

<span id="v.iv.xxv-p2"></span>26.  Man, therefore, ought to be taught
the due measure of loving, that is, in what measure he may love himself
so as to be of service to himself.  For that he does love himself, and
does desire to do good to himself, nobody but a fool would doubt.  He is
to be taught, too, in what measure to love his body, so as to care for
it wisely and within due limits.  For it is equally manifest that he
loves his body also, and desires to keep it safe and sound.  And yet a
man may have something that he loves better than the safety and
soundness of his body.  For many have been found voluntarily to suffer
both pains and amputations of some of their limbs that they might obtain
other objects which they valued more highly.  But no one is to be told
not to desire the safety and health of his body because there is
something he desires more.  For the miser, though he loves money, buys
bread for himself,—that is, he gives away money that he is very fond of
and desires to heap up,—but it is because he values more highly the
bodily health which the bread sustains.  It is superfluous to argue
longer on a point so very plain, but this is just what the error of
wicked men often compels us to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020722)
