[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020507)  [Next](1020509) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.15"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.15-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.15-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Whether All the Things
Prophesied in the Psalms Concerning Christ and His Church Should Be
Taken Up in the Text of This Work.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.15-p2"></span>And now I see it may be expected of me
that I shall open up in this part of this book what David may have
prophesied in the Psalms concerning the Lord Jesus Christ or His
Church.  But although I have already done so in one instance, I am
prevented from doing as that expectation seems to demand, rather by the
abundance than the scarcity of matter.  For the necessity of shunning
prolixity forbids my setting down all things; yet I fear lest if I
select some I shall appear to many, who know these things, to have
passed by the more necessary.  Besides, the proof that is adduced ought
to be supported by the context of the whole psalm, so that at least
there may be nothing against it if everything does not support it; lest
we should seem, after the fashion of the centos, to gather for the thing
we wish, as it were, verses out of a grand poem, what shall be found to
have been written not about it, but about some other and widely
different thing.  But ere this could be pointed out in each psalm, the
whole of it must be expounded; and how great a work that would be, the
volumes of others, as well as our own, in which we have done it, show
well enough.  Let him then who will, or can, read these volumes, and he
will find out how many and great things David, at once king and prophet,
has prophesied concerning Christ and His Church, to wit, concerning the
King and the city which He has built.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020509)
