[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020332)  [Next](1020334) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.29"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.29-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.29-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—Of the Knowledge by Which the Holy
Angels Know God in His Essence, and by Which They See the Causes of His
Works in the Art of the Worker, Before They See Them in the Works of the
Artist.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.29-p2"></span>Those holy angels come to the knowledge of
God not by audible words, but by the presence to their souls of
immutable truth, *i.e*., of the only-begotten Word of God; and they know
this Word Himself, and the Father, and their Holy Spirit, and that this
Trinity is indivisible, and that the three persons of it are one
substance, and that there are not three Gods but one God; and this they
so know that it is better understood by them than we are by ourselves. 
Thus, too, they know the creature also, not in itself, but by this
better way, in the wisdom of God, as if in the art by which it was
created; and, consequently, they know themselves better in God than in
themselves, though they have also this latter knowledge.  For they were
created, and are different from their Creator.  In Him, therefore, they
have, as it were, a noonday knowledge; in themselves, a twilight
knowledge, according to our former explanations. <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499)   For there is a great difference
between knowing a thing in the design in conformity to which it was
made, and knowing it in itself,—*e.g*., the straightness of lines and
correctness of figures is known in one way when mentally conceived, in
another when described on paper; and justice is known in one way in the
unchangeable truth, in another in the spirit of a just man.  So is it
with all other things,—as, the firmament between the water above and
below, which was called the heaven; the gathering of the waters beneath,
and the laying bare of the dry land, and the production of plants and
trees; the creation of sun, moon, and stars; and of the animals out of
the waters, fowls, and fish, and monsters of the deep; and of everything
that walks or creeps on the earth, and of man himself, who excels all
that is on the earth,—all these things are known in one way by the
angels in the Word of God, in which they see the eternally abiding
causes and reasons according to which they were made, and in another way
in themselves:  in the former, with a clearer knowledge; in the latter,
with a knowledge dimmer, and rather of the bare works than of the
design.  Yet, when these works are referred to the praise and adoration
of the Creator Himself, it is as if morning dawned in the minds of those
who contemplate them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_499"></span>[222:500](1020333.htm#fr_499) <span
id="iv.XI.29-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.29-p3"></span> Ch. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1020334)
