[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020823)  [Next](1020825) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.6"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—The Sacred Writers Unite Eloquence
with Wisdom.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.6-p2"></span>9.  Here, perhaps, some one inquires
whether the authors whose divinely-inspired writings constitute the
canon, which carries with it a most wholesome authority, are to be
considered wise only, or eloquent as well.  A question which to me, and
to those who think with me, is very easily settled.  For where I
understand these writers, it seems to me not only that nothing can be
wiser, but also that nothing can be more eloquent.  And I venture to
affirm that all who truly understand what these writers say, perceive at
the same time that it could not have been properly said in any other
way.  For as there is a kind of eloquence that is more becoming in
youth, and a kind that is more becoming in old age, and nothing can be
called eloquence if it be not suitable to the person of the speaker, so
there is a kind of eloquence that is becoming in men who justly claim
the highest authority, and who are evidently inspired of God.  With this
eloquence they spoke; no other would have been suitable for them; and
this itself would be unsuitable in any other, for it is in keeping with
their character, while it mounts as far above that of others (not from
empty inflation, but from solid merit) as it seems to fall below them. 
Where, however, I do not understand these writers, though their
eloquence is then less apparent, I have no doubt but that it is of the
same kind as that I do understand.  The very obscurity, too, of these
divine and wholesome words was a necessary element in eloquence of a
kind that was designed to profit our understandings, not only by the
discovery of truth, but also by the exercise of their powers.

<span id="v.IV_1.6-p3"></span>10.  I could, however, if I had time, show
those men who cry up their own form of language as superior to that of
our authors (not because of its majesty, but because of its inflation),
that all those powers and beauties of eloquence which they make their
boast, are to be found in the sacred writings which God in His goodness
has provided to mould our characters, and to guide us from this world of
wickedness to the blessed world above.  But it is not the qualities
which these writers have in common with the heathen orators and poets
that give me such unspeakable delight in their eloquence; I am more
struck with admiration at the way in which, by an eloquence peculiarly
their own, they so use this eloquence of ours that it is not conspicuous
either by its presence or its absence:  for it did not become them
either to condemn it or to make an ostentatious display of it; and if
they had shunned it, they would have done the former; if they had made
it prominent, they might have appeared to be doing the latter.  And in
those passages where the learned do note its presence, the matters
spoken of are such, that the words in which they are put seem not so
much to be sought out by the speaker as spontaneously to suggest
themselves; as if wisdom were walking out of its house,—that is, the
breast of the wise man, and eloquence, like an inseparable attendant,
followed it without being called for. <span
id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[577:1939](1020824.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="v.IV_1.6-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.6-p4"></span> Cf. Cicero, *Orator.* 21:  “*Sed est
eloquentiæ, sicut reliquarum rerum, fundamentum sapientia.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020825)
