[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020527)  [Next](1020529) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.10"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—What Varro Reports About the
Term Areopagus, and About Deucalion’s Flood.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.10-p2"></span>Marcus Varro, however, is not willing
to credit lying fables against the gods, lest he should find something
dishonoring to their <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.10-Page_366"></span> majesty; and therefore he will not
admit that the Areopagus, the place where the Apostle Paul disputed with
the Athenians, got this name because Mars, who in Greek is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XVIII.10-p2.1"></span>ἌΑρης</span>, when he
was charged with the crime of homicide, and was judged by twelve gods in
that field, was acquitted by the sentence of six; because it was the
custom, when the votes were equal, to acquit rather than condemn. 
Against this opinion, which is much most widely published, he tries,
from the notices of obscure books, to support another reason for this
name, lest the Athenians should be thought to have called it Areopagus
from the words” Mars” and “field,” <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136) as if it were the field of Mars, to
the dishonor of the gods, forsooth, from whom he thinks lawsuits and
judgments far removed.  And he asserts that this which is said about
Mars is not less false than what is said about the three goddesses, to
wit, Juno, Minerva, and Venus, whose contest for the palm of beauty,
before Paris as judge, in order to obtain the golden apple, is not only
related, but is celebrated in songs and dances amid the applause of the
theatres, in plays meant to please the gods who take pleasure in these
crimes of their own, whether real or fabled.  Varro does not believe
these things, because they are incompatible with the nature of the gods
and of morality; and yet, in giving not a fabulous but a historic reason
for the name of Athens, he inserts in his books the strife between
Neptune and Minerva as to whose name should be given to that city, which
was so great that, when they contended by the display of prodigies, even
Apollo dared not judge between them when consulted; but, in order to end
the strife of the gods, just as Jupiter sent the three goddesses we have
named to Paris, so he sent them to men, when Minerva won by the vote,
and yet was defeated by the punishment of her own voters, for she was
unable to confer the title of Athenians on the women who were her
friends, although she could impose it on the men who were her
opponents.  In these times, when Cranaos reigned at Athens as the
successor of Cecrops, as Varro writes, but, according to our Eusebius
and Jerome, while Cecrops himself still remained, the flood occurred
which is called Deucalion’s, because it occurred chiefly in those parts
of the earth in which he reigned.  But this flood did not at all reach
Egypt or its vicinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[366:1137](1020528.htm#fr_1136) <span
id="iv.XVIII.10-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.10-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVIII.10-p3.1"></span>Ἀρης</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVIII.10-p3.2"></span>πάγος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020529)
