[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020159)  [Next](1020161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.19"></span>

<span id="iv.V.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Concerning the Difference Between
True Glory and the Desire of Domination.</span>

<span id="iv.V.19-p2"></span>There is assuredly a difference between the
desire of human glory and the desire of domination; for, though he who
has an overweening delight in human glory will be also very prone to
aspire earnestly after domination, nevertheless they who desire the true
glory even of human praise strive not to displease those who judge well
of them.  For there are many good moral qualities, of which many are
competent judges, although they are not possessed by many; and by those
good moral qualities those men press on to glory, honor and domination,
of whom Sallust says, “But they press on by the true way.”

<span id="iv.V.19-p3"></span>But whosoever, without possessing that
desire of glory which makes one fear to displease those who judge his
conduct, desires domination and power, very often seeks to obtain what
he loves by most open crimes.  Therefore he who desires glory presses on
to obtain it either by the true way, or certainly by deceit and
artifice, wishing to appear good when he is not.  Therefore to him who
possesses virtues it is a great virtue to despise glory; for contempt of
it is seen by God, but is not manifest to human judgment.  For whatever
any one does before the eyes of men in order to show himself to be a
despiser of glory, if they suspect that he is doing it in order to get
greater praise,—that is, greater glory,—he has no means of demonstrating
to the perceptions of those who suspect him that the case is really
otherwise than they suspect it to be.  But he who despises the judgment
of praisers, despises also the rashness of suspectors.  Their salvation,
indeed, he does not despise, if he is truly good; for so great is the
righteousness of that man who receives his virtues from the Spirit of
God, that he loves his very enemies, and so loves them that he desires
that his haters and detractors may be turned to righteousness, and
become his associates, and that not in an earthly but in a heavenly
country.  But with respect to his praisers, though he sets little value
on their praise, he does not set little value on their love; neither
does he elude their praise, lest he should forfeit their love.  And,
therefore, he strives earnestly to have their praises directed to Him
from whom every one receives whatever in him is truly praiseworthy.  But
he who is a despiser of glory, but is greedy of domination, exceeds the
beasts in the vices of cruelty and luxuriousness.  Such, indeed, were
certain of the Romans, who, wanting the love of esteem, wanted not the
thirst for domination; and that there were many such, history
testifies.  But it was Nero Cæsar who was the first to reach the summit,
and, as it were, the citadel, of this vice; for so great was his
luxuriousness, that one would have thought there was nothing manly to be
dreaded in him, and such his cruelty, that, had not the contrary been
known, no one would have thought there was anything effeminate in his
character.  Nevertheless power and domination are not given even to such
men save by the providence of the most high God, when He judges that the
state of human affairs is worthy of such lords.  The divine utterance is
clear on this matter; for the Wisdom of God thus speaks:  “By me kings
reign, and tyrants possess the land.” <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222)   But, that it may not be thought that
by “tyrants” is meant, not wicked and impious kings, but brave men, in
accordance with the ancient use of the word, as when Virgil says,

<span id="iv.V.19-p5"></span>“For know that treaty may not stand

<span id="iv.V.19-p6"></span>Where king greets king and joins not
hand,” <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223)

<span id="iv.V.19-p8"></span>in another place it is most unambiguously
said of God, that He “maketh the man who is an hypocrite to reign on
account of the perver <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="iv.V.19-Page_102"></span> sity of the people.” <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224)   Wherefore, though I have, according
to my ability, shown for what reason God, who alone is true and just,
helped forward the Romans, who were good according to a certain standard
of an earthly state, to the acquirement of the glory of so great an
empire, there may be, nevertheless, a more hidden cause, known better to
God than to us, depending on the diversity of the merits of the human
race.  Among all who are truly pious, it is at all events agreed that no
one without true piety,—that is, true worship of the true God—can have
true virtue; and that it is not true virtue which is the slave of human
praise.  Though, nevertheless, they who are not citizens of the eternal
city, which is called the city of God in the sacred Scriptures, are more
useful to the earthly city when they possess even that virtue than if
they had not even that.  But there could be nothing more fortunate for
human affairs than that, by the mercy of God, they who are endowed with
true piety of life, if they have the skill for ruling people, should
also have the power.  But such men, however great virtues they may
possess in this life, attribute it solely to the grace of God that He
has bestowed it on them—willing, believing, seeking.  And, at the same
time, they understand how far they are short of that perfection of
righteousness which exists in the society of those holy angels for which
they are striving to fit themselves.  But however much that virtue may
be praised and cried up, which without true piety is the slave of human
glory, it is not at all to be compared even to the feeble beginnings of
the virtue of the saints, whose hope is placed in the grace and mercy of
the true God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[101:223](1020160.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iv.V.19-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.19-p4"></span> [Prov.
8.15](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#015)<span id="iv.V.19-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[101:224](1020160.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iv.V.19-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.19-p7"></span> *Æneid,* vii. 266.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[102:225](1020160.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iv.V.19-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.19-p9"></span> [Job
34.30](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#030)<span id="iv.V.19-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020161)
