[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020068)  [Next](1020070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.26"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—That the Demons Gave in Secret
Certain Obscure Instructions in Morals, While in Public Their Own
Solemnities Inculcated All Wickedness.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.26-p2"></span>Seeing that this is so,—seeing that the
filthy and cruel deeds, the disgraceful and criminal actions of the
gods, whether real or feigned, were at their own request published, and
were consecrated, and dedicated in their honor as sacred and stated
solemnities; seeing they vowed vengeance on those who refused to exhibit
them to the eyes of all, that they might be proposed as deeds worthy of
imitation, why is it that these same demons, who by taking pleasure in
such obscenities, acknowledge themselves to be unclean spirits, and by
delighting in their own villanies and iniquities, real or imaginary, and
by requesting from the immodest, and extorting from the modest, the
celebration of these licentious acts, proclaim themselves instigators to
a criminal and lewd life;—why, I ask, are they represented as giving
some good moral precepts to a few of their own elect, initiated in the
secrecy of their shrines?  If it be so, this very thing only serves
further to demonstrate the malicious craft of these pestilent spirits. 
For so great is the influence of probity and chastity, that all men, or
almost all men, are moved by the praise of these virtues; nor is any man
so depraved by vice, but he hath some feeling of honor left in him.  So
that, unless the devil sometimes transformed himself, as Scripture says,
into an angel of light, <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) he could
not compass his deceitful purpose.  Accordingly, in public, a bold
impurity fills the ear of the people with noisy clamor; in private, a
feigned chastity speaks in scarce audible whispers to a few:  an open
stage is provided for shameful things, but on the praiseworthy the
curtain falls:  grace hides disgrace flaunts:  a wicked deed draws an
overflowing house, a virtuous speech finds scarce a hearer, as though
purity were to be blushed at, impurity boasted of.  Where else can such
confusion reign, but in devils’ temples?  Where, but in the haunts of
deceit?  For the secret precepts are given as a sop to the virtuous, who
are few in number; the wicked examples are exhibited to encourage the
vicious, who are countless.

<span id="iv.II_1.26-p4"></span>Where and when those initiated in the
mysteries of Cœlestis received any good instructions, we know not.  What
we do know is, that before her shrine, in which her image is set, and
amidst a vast crowd gathering from all quarters, and standing closely
packed together, we were intensely interested spectators of the games
which were going on, and saw, as we pleased to turn the eye, on this
side a grand display of harlots, on the other the virgin goddess; we saw
this virgin worshipped with prayer and with obscene rites.  There we saw
no shame-faced mimes, no actress over-burdened with modesty; all that
the obscene rites demanded was fully complied with.  We were plainly
shown what was pleasing to the virgin deity, and the matron who
witnessed the spectacle returned home from the temple a wiser woman. 
Some, indeed, of the more prudent women turned their faces from the
immodest movements of the players, and learned the art of wickedness by
a furtive regard.  For they were restrained, by the modest demeanor due
to men, from looking boldly at the immodest gestures; but much more were
they restrained from condemning with chaste heart the sacred rites of
her whom they adored.  And yet this licentiousness—which, if practised
in one’s home, could only be done there in secret—was practised as a
public lesson in the temple; and if any modesty remained in men, it was
occupied in marvelling that wickedness which men could not
unrestrainedly commit should be part of the religious teaching of the
gods, and that to omit its exhibition should incur the anger of the
gods.  What spirit can that be, which by a hidden inspiration stirs
men’s corruption, and goads them to adultery, and feeds on the
full-fledged iniquity, unless it be the same that finds pleasure in such
religious ceremonies, sets in the temples images of devils, and loves to
see in play the images of vices; that whispers in secret some righteous
sayings to deceive the few who are good, and scatters in public
invitations to profligacy, to gain possession of the millions who are
wicked?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[40:115](1020069.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iv.II_1.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.26-p3"></span> [2 Cor.
11.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span
id="iv.II_1.26-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020070)
