[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020389)  [Next](1020391) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.23"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—What We are to Understand by the
Animal and Spiritual Body; Or of Those Who Die in Adam, And of Those Who
are Made Alive in Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p2"></span>For as those bodies of ours, that have a
living soul, though not as yet a quickening spirit, are called
soul-informed bodies, and yet are not souls but bodies, so also those
bodies are called spiritual,—yet God forbid we should therefore suppose
them to be spirits and not bodies,—which, being quickened by the Spirit,
have the substance, but not the unwieldiness and corruption of flesh. 
Man will then be not earthly but heavenly,—not because the body will not
be that very body which was made of earth, but because by its heavenly
endowment it will be a fit inhabitant of heaven, and this not by losing
its nature, but by changing its quality.  The first man, of the earth
earthy, was made a living soul, not a quickening spirit,—which rank was
reserved for him as the reward of obedience.  And therefore his body,
which required meat and drink to satisfy hunger and thirst, and which
had no absolute and indestructible immortality, but by means of the tree
of life warded off the necessity of dying, and was thus maintained in
the flower of youth,—this body, I say, was doubtless not spiritual, but
animal; and yet it would not have died but that it provoked God’s
threatened vengeance by offending.  And though sustenance was not denied
him even outside Paradise, yet, being forbidden the tree of life, he was
delivered over to the wasting of time, at least in respect of that life
which, had he not sinned, he might have retained perpetually in
Paradise, though only in an animal body, till such time as it became
spiritual in acknowledgment of his obedience.

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p3"></span>Wherefore, although we understand that
this manifest death, which consists in the separation of soul and body,
was also signified by God when He said, “In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shalt surely die,” <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) it ought
not on that account to seem absurd that they were not dismissed from the
body on that very day on which they took the forbidden and
death-bringing fruit.  For certainly on that very day their nature was
altered for the worse and vitiated, and by their most just banishment
from the tree of life they were involved in the necessity even of bodily
death, in which necessity we are born.  And therefore the apostle does
not say, “The body indeed is doomed to die on account of sin,” but he
says, “The body indeed is dead because of sin.” Then he adds, “But if
the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you.” <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613)   Then accordingly shall the body
become a quickening spirit which is now a living soul; and yet the
apostle calls it “dead,” because already it lies under the necessity of
dying.  But in Paradise it was so made a living soul, though not a
quickening spirit, that it could not properly be called dead, for, save
through the commission of sin, it could not come under the power of
death.  Now, since God by the words, “Adam, where art thou?” pointed to
the death of the soul, which results when He abandons it, and since in
the words, “Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou return,” <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) He signified the death of the body,
which results when the soul departs from it, we are led, therefore, to
believe that He said nothing of the second death, wishing it to be kept
hidden, and reserving it for the New Testament dispensation, in which it
is most plainly revealed.  And this He did in order that, first of all,
it might be evident that this first death, which is common to all, was
the result of that sin which in one man became common to all. <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615)   But the second death is not common
to all, those being excepted who were “called according to His purpose. 
For whom He did foreknow, He also did pre <span id="page_258">p.
258</span> <span id="iv.XIII.23-Page_258"></span> destinate to be
conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the first-born among
many brethren.” <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616)   Those the
grace of God has, by a Mediator, delivered from the second death.

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p9"></span>Thus the apostle states that the first
man was made in an animal body.  For, wishing to distinguish the animal
body which now is from the spiritual, which is to be in the
resurrection, he says, “It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption:  it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory:  it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power:  it is sown a natural body, it
is raised a spiritual body.”  Then, to prove this, he goes on, “There is
a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.”  And to show what the
animated body is, he says, “Thus it was written, The first man Adam was
made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.” <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617)   He wished thus to show what the
animated body is, though Scripture did not say of the first man Adam,
when his soul was created by the breath of God, “Man was made in an
animated body,” but “Man was made a living soul.” <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618)   By these words, therefore, “The
first man was made a living soul,” the apostle wishes man’s animated
body to be understood.  But how he wishes the spiritual body to be
understood he shows when he adds, “But the last Adam was made a
quickening spirit,” plainly referring to Christ, who has so risen from
the dead that He cannot die any more.  He then goes on to say, “But that
was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and
afterward that which is spiritual.”  And here he much more clearly
asserts that he referred to the animal body when he said that the first
man was made a living soul, and to the spiritual when he said that the
last man was made a quickening spirit.  The animal body is the first,
being such as the first Adam had, and which would not have died had he
not sinned, being such also as we now have, its nature being changed and
vitiated by sin to the extent of bringing us under the necessity of
death, and being such as even Christ condescended first of all to
assume, not indeed of necessity, but of choice; but afterwards comes the
spiritual body, which already is worn by anticipation by Christ as our
head, and will be worn by His members in the resurrection of the dead.

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p12"></span>Then the apostle subjoins a notable
difference between these two men, saying, “The first man is of the
earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven.  As is the
earthy, such are they also that are earthy, and as is the heavenly, such
are they also that are heavenly.  And as we have borne the image of the
earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.” <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619)   So he elsewhere says, “As many of
you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ;” <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) but in very deed this shall be
accomplished when that which is animal in us by our birth shall have
become spiritual in our resurrection.  For, to use his words again,” We
are saved by hope.” <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621)   Now we
bear the image of the earthly man by the propagation of sin and death,
which pass on us by ordinary generation; but we bear the image of the
heavenly by the grace of pardon and life eternal, which regeneration
confers upon us through the Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ
Jesus.  And He is the heavenly Man of Paul’s passage, because He came
from heaven to be clothed with a body of earthly mortality, that He
might clothe it with heavenly immortality.  And he calls others
heavenly, because by grace they become His members, that, together with
them, He may become one Christ, as head and body.  In the same epistle
he puts this yet more clearly:  “Since by man came death, by Man came
also the resurrection of the dead.  For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive,” <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622)
—that is to say, in a spiritual body which shall be made a quickening
spirit.  Not that all who die in Adam shall be members of Christ,—for
the great majority shall be punished in eternal death,—but he uses the
word “all” in both clauses, because, as no one dies in an animal body
except in Adam, so no one is quickened a spiritual body save in Christ. 
We are not, then, by any means to suppose that we shall in the
resurrection have such a body as the first man had before he sinned, nor
that the words, “As is the earthy such are they also that are earthy,”
are to be understood of that which was brought about by sin; for we are
not to think that Adam had a spiritual body before he fell, and that, in
punishment of his sin, it was changed into an animal body.  If this be
thought, small heed has been given to the words of so great a teacher,
who says, “There is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body; as
it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul.”  Was it after
sin he was made so? or was not this the primal condition of man from
which the blessed apostle selects his testimony to show what the animal
body is?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_612"></span>[257:613](1020390.htm#fr_612) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p4"></span> [Gen.
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[257:614](1020390.htm#fr_613) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p5"></span> [Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span id="iv.XIII.23-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[257:615](1020390.htm#fr_614) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p6"></span> [Gen.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[257:616](1020390.htm#fr_615) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p7"></span> *In uno commune factum est omnibus.*

<span id="fn_616"></span>[258:617](1020390.htm#fr_616) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p8"></span> [Rom.
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span id="iv.XIII.23-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[258:618](1020390.htm#fr_617) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
15.42-45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[258:619](1020390.htm#fr_618) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p11"></span> [Gen.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[258:620](1020390.htm#fr_619) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
15.47-49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[258:621](1020390.htm#fr_620) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p14"></span> [Gal.
3.27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[258:622](1020390.htm#fr_621) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p15"></span> [Rom.
8.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[258:623](1020390.htm#fr_622) <span
id="iv.XIII.23-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.23-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span
id="iv.XIII.23-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020391)
