[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020561)  [Next](1020563) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.44"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.44-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.44-p1.1"></span>Chapter 44.—How the Threat of the
Destruction of the Ninevites is to Be Understood Which in the Hebrew
Extends to Forty Days, While in the Septuagint It is Contracted to
Three.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.44-p2"></span>But some one may say, “How shall I know
whether the prophet Jonah said to the Ninevites, ‘Yet *three* days and
Nineveh shall be overthrown,’ or *forty* days?” <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218)   For who does not see that the
prophet could not say both, when he was sent to terrify the city by the
threat of imminent ruin?  For if its destruction was to take place on
the third day, it certainly could not be on the fortieth; but if on the
fortieth, then certainly not on the third.  If, then, I am asked which
of these Jonah may have said, I rather think what is read in the Hebrew,
“Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.”  Yet the Seventy,
interpreting long afterward, could say what was different and yet
pertinent to the matter, and agree in the self-same meaning, although
under a different signification.  And this may admonish the reader not
to despise the authority of either, but to raise himself above the
history, and search for those things which the history itself was
written to set forth.  These things, indeed, took place in the city of
Nineveh, but they also signified something else too great to apply to
that city; just as, when it happened that the prophet himself was three
days in the whale’s belly, it signified besides, that He who is Lord of
all the prophets should be three days in the depths of hell.  Wherefore,
if that city is rightly held as prophetically representing the Church of
the Gentiles, to wit, as brought down by penitence, so as no longer to
be what it had been, since this was done by Christ in the Church of the
Gentiles, which Nineveh represented, Christ Himself was signified both
by the forty and by the three days:  by the forty, because He spent that
number of days with His disciples after the resurrection, and then
ascended into heaven, but by the three days, because He rose on the
third day.  So that, if the reader desires nothing else than to adhere
to the history of events, he may be aroused from his sleep by the
Septuagint interpreters, as well as the prophets, to search into the
depth of the prophecy, as if they had said, In the forty days seek Him
in whom thou mayest also find the three days,—the one thou wilt find in
His ascension, the other in His resurrection.  Because that which could
be most suitably signified by both numbers, of which one is used by
Jonah the prophet, the other by the prophecy of the Septuagint version,
the one and self-same Spirit hath spoken.  I dread prolixity, so that I
must not demonstrate this by many instances in which the seventy
interpreters may be thought to differ from the Hebrew, and yet, when
well understood, are found to agree.  For which reason I also, according
to my capacity, following the footsteps of the apostles, who themselves
have quoted prophetic testimonies from both, that is, from the Hebrew
and the Septuagint, have thought that both should be used as
authoritative, since both are one, and divine.  But let us now follow
out as we can what remains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[387:1219](1020562.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="iv.XVIII.44-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.44-p3"></span> [Jonah
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.XVIII.44-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](1020563)
