[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020635)  [Next](1020637) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Whether Bodily Suffering
Necessarily Terminates in the Destruction of the Flesh.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p2"></span>But, say they, there is no body which can
suffer and cannot also die.  How do we know this?  For who can say with
certainty that the devils do not suffer in their bodies, when they own
that they are grievously tormented?  And if it is replied that there is
no earthly body—that is to say, no solid and perceptible body, or, in
one word, no flesh—which can suffer and cannot die, is not this to tell
us only what men have gathered from experience and their bodily senses? 
For they indeed have no acquaintance with any flesh but that which is
mortal; and this is their whole argument, that what they have had no
experience of they judge quite impossible.  For we cannot call it
reasoning to make pain a presumption of death, while, in fact, it is
rather a sign of life.  For though it be a question whether that which
suffers can continue to live for ever, yet it is certain that everything
which suffers pain does live, and that pain can exist only in a living
subject.  It is necessary, therefore, that he who is pained be living,
not necessary that pain kill him; for every pain does not kill even
those mortal bodies of ours which are destined to die.  And that any
pain kills them is caused by the circumstance that the soul is so
connected with the body that it succumbs to great pain and withdraws;
for the structure of our members and vital parts is so infirm that it
cannot bear up against that violence which causes great or extreme
agony.  But in the life to come this connection of soul and body is of
such a kind, that as it is dissolved by no lapse of time, so neither is
it burst asunder by any pain.  And so, although it be true that in this
world there is no flesh which can suffer pain and yet cannot die, yet in
the world to come there shall be flesh such as now there is not, as
there will also be death such as now there is not.  For death will not
be abolished, but will be eternal, since the soul will neither be able
to enjoy God and live, nor to die and escape the pains of the body.  The
first death drives the soul from the body against her will:  the second
death holds the soul in the body against her will.  The two have this in
common, that the soul suffers against her will what her own body
inflicts.

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p3"></span>Our opponents, too, make much of this,
that in this world there is no flesh which can suffer pain and cannot
die; while they make nothing of the fact that there is something which
is greater than the body.  For the spirit, whose presence animates and
rules the body, can both suffer pain and cannot die.  Here then is
something which, though it can feel pain, is immortal.  And this
capacity, which we now see in the spirit of all, shall be hereafter in
the bodies of the damned.  Moreover, if we attend to the matter a little
more closely, we see that what is called bodily pain is rather to be
referred to the soul.  For it is the soul not the body, which is pained,
even when the pain originates with the body,—the soul feeling pain at
the point where the body is hurt.  As then we speak of bodies feeling
and living, though the feeling and life of the body are from the soul,
so also we speak of bodies being pained, though no pain can be suffered
by the body apart from the soul.  The soul, then, is pained with the
body in that part where something occurs to hurt it; and it is pained
alone, though it be in the body, when some invisible cause distresses
it, while the body is safe and sound.  Even when not associated with the
body it is pained; for certainly that rich man was suffering in hell
when he cried, “I am tormented in this flame.” <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495)   But as for the body, it suffers
no pain when it is soulless; and even when animate it can suffer only by
the soul’s suffering.  If, therefore, we might draw a just presumption
from the existence of pain to that of death, and conclude that where
pain can be felt death can occur, death would rather be the property of
the soul, for to it pain more peculiarly belongs.  But, seeing that that
which suffers most cannot die, what ground is there for supposing that
those bodies, because destined to suffer, are therefore, destined to
die?  The Platonists indeed maintained that these earthly bodies and
dying members gave rise to the fears, desires, griefs, and joys of the
soul.  “Hence,” says Virgil (*i.e*., from these earthly bodies and dying
members),

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p5"></span>“Hence wild desires and grovelling fears,

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p6"></span>And human laughter, human tears.” <span
id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496)

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p8"></span>But in the fourteenth book of this
work <span id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497) we have proved that,
according to the Platonists’ own theory, souls, even when purged from
all pollution of the body, are yet pos <span id="page_454">p. 454</span>
<span id="iv.XXI.3-Page_454"></span> sessed by a monstrous desire to
return again into their bodies.  But where desire can exist, certainly
pain also can exist; for desire frustrated, either by missing what it
aims at or losing what it had attained, is turned into pain.  And
therefore, if the soul, which is either the only or the chief sufferer,
has yet a kind of immortality of its own, it is inconsequent to say that
because the bodies of the damned shall suffer pain, therefore they shall
die.  In fine, if the body causes the soul to suffer, why can the body
not cause death as well as suffering, unless because it does not follow
that what causes pain causes death as well?  And why then is it
incredible that these fires can cause pain but not death to those bodies
we speak of, just as the bodies themselves cause pain, but not therefore
death, to the souls?  Pain is therefore no necessary presumption of
death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[453:1496](1020636.htm#fr_1495) <span
id="iv.XXI.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p4"></span> [Luke
16.24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span id="iv.XXI.3-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[453:1497](1020636.htm#fr_1496) <span
id="iv.XXI.3-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p7"></span> *Æneid*, vi. 733.

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[453:1498](1020636.htm#fr_1497) <span
id="iv.XXI.3-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.3-p9"></span> Ch. 3, 5, 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020637)
