[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020508)  [Next](1020510) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Of the Things Pertaining to
Christ and the Church, Said Either Openly or Tropically in the 45th
Psalm.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p2"></span>For whatever direct and manifest
prophetic utterances there may be about anything, it is necessary that
those which are tropical should be mingled with them; which, chiefly on
account of those of slower understanding, thrust upon the more learned
the laborious task of clearing up and expounding them.  Some of them,
indeed, on the very first blush, as soon as they are spoken, exhibit
Christ and the Church, although some things in them that are less
intelligible remain to be expounded at leisure.  We have an example of
this in that same Book of Psalms:  “My heart bubbled up a good matter: 
I utter my words to the king.  My tongue is the pen of a scribe, writing
swiftly.  Thy form is beautiful beyond the sons of men; grace is poured
out in Thy lips:  therefore God hath blessed Thee for evermore.  Gird
Thy sword about Thy thigh, O Most Mighty.  With Thy goodliness and Thy
beauty go forward, proceed prosperously, and reign, because of Thy
truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and Thy right hand shall lead
Thee forth wonderfully.  Thy sharp arrows are most powerful:  in the
heart of the king’s enemies.  The people shall fall under Thee.  Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever:  a rod of direction is the rod of
Thy kingdom.  Thou hast loved righteousness, and hast hated iniquity: 
therefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of exultation
above Thy fellows.  Myrrh and drops, and cassia from Thy vestments, from
the houses of ivory:  out of which the daughters of kings have delighted
Thee in Thine honor.” <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1083](#fn_1082)   Who
is there, no matter how slow, <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="iv.XVII.16-Page_354"></span> but must here recognize Christ whom we
preach, and in whom we believe, if he hears that He is God, whose throne
is for ever and ever, and that He is anointed by God, as God indeed
anoints, not with a visible, but with a spiritual and intelligible
chrism?  For who is so untaught in this religion, or so deaf to its far
and wide spread fame, as not to know that Christ is named from this
chrism, that is, from this anointing?  But when it is acknowledged that
this King is Christ, let each one who is already subject to Him who
reigns because of truth, meekness, and righteousness, inquire at his
leisure into these other things that are here said tropically:  how His
form is beautiful beyond the sons of men, with a certain beauty that is
the more to be loved and admired the less it is corporeal; and what His
sword, arrows, and other things of that kind may be, which are set down,
not properly, but tropically.

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p4"></span>Then let him look upon His Church,
joined to her so great Husband in spiritual marriage and divine love, of
which it is said in these words which follow, “The queen stood upon Thy
right hand in gold-embroidered vestments, girded about with variety. 
Hearken, O daughter, and look, and incline thine ear; forget also thy
people, and thy father’s house.  Because the King hath greatly desired
thy beauty; for He is the Lord thy God.  And the daughters of Tyre shall
worship Him with gifts; the rich among the people shall entreat Thy
face.  The daughter of the King has all her glory within, in golden
fringes, girded about with variety.  The virgins shall be brought after
her to the King:  her neighbors shall be brought to Thee.  They shall be
brought with gladness and exultation:  they shall be led into the temple
of the King.  Instead of thy fathers, sons shall be born to thee:  thou
shalt establish them as princes over all the earth.  They shall be
mindful of thy name in every generation and descent.  Therefore shall
the people acknowledge thee for evermore, even for ever and ever.” <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[1084](#fn_1083)   I do not think any one is so
stupid as to believe that some poor woman is here praised and described,
as the spouse, to wit, of Him to whom it is said, “Thy throne, O God, is
for ever and ever:  a rod of direction is the rod of Thy kingdom.  Thou
hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity:  therefore God, Thy God,
hath anointed Thee with the oil of exultation above Thy fellows;” <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[1085](#fn_1084) that is, plainly, Christ above
Christians.  For these are His fellows, out of the unity and concord of
whom in all nations that queen is formed, as it is said of her in
another psalm, “The city of the great King.” <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[1086](#fn_1085)   The same is Sion spiritually,
which name in Latin is interpreted *speculatio* (discovery); for she
descries the great good of the world to come, because her attention is
directed thither.  In the same way she is also Jerusalem spiritually, of
which we have already said many things.  Her enemy is the city of the
devil, Babylon, which is interpreted “confusion.”  Yet out of this
Babylon this queen is in all nations set free by regeneration, and
passes from the worst to the best King,—that is, from the devil to
Christ.  Wherefore it is said to her, “Forget thy people and thy
father’s house.”  Of this impious city those also are a portion who are
Israelites only in the flesh and not by faith, enemies also of this
great King Himself, and of His queen.  For Christ, having come to them,
and been slain by them, has the more become the King of others, whom He
did not see in the flesh.  Whence our King Himself says through the
prophecy of a certain psalm, “Thou wilt deliver me from the
contradictions of the people; Thou wilt make me head of the nations.  A
people whom I have not known hath served me:  in the hearing of the ear
it hath obeyed me.” <span id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086)  
Therefore this people of the nations, which Christ did not know in His
bodily presence, yet has believed in that Christ as announced to it; so
that it might be said of it with good reason, “In the hearing of the ear
it hath obeyed me,” for “faith is by hearing.” <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087)   This people, I say, added to
those who are the true Israelites both by the flesh and by faith, is the
city of God, which has brought forth Christ Himself according to the
flesh, since He was in these Israelites only.  For thence came the
Virgin Mary, in whom Christ assumed flesh that He might be man.  Of
which city another psalm says, “Mother Sion, shall a man say, and the
man is made in her, and the Highest Himself hath founded her.” <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088)   Who is this Highest, save God? 
And thus Christ, who is God, before He became man through Mary in that
city, Himself founded it by the patriarchs and prophets.  As therefore
was said by prophecy so long before to this queen, the city of God, what
we already can see fulfilled, “Instead of thy fathers, sons are born to
thee; thou shall make them princes over all the earth;” <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[1090](#fn_1089) so out of her sons truly are set up
even her fathers \[princes\] through all the earth, when the people,
coming together to her, confess to her with the confession of eternal
praise for ever and ever.  Beyond doubt, whatever <span id="page_355">p.
355</span> <span id="iv.XVII.16-Page_355"></span> interpretation is put
on what is here expressed somewhat darkly in figurative language, ought
to be in agreement with these most manifest things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[353:1083](1020509.htm#fr_1082) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p3"></span> [Ps.
45.1-9.](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[354:1084](1020509.htm#fr_1083) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p5"></span> [Ps.
45.9-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[354:1085](1020509.htm#fr_1084) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p6"></span> [Ps.
45.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[354:1086](1020509.htm#fr_1085) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p7"></span> [Ps.
48.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[354:1087](1020509.htm#fr_1086) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p8"></span> [Ps.
18.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[354:1088](1020509.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p9"></span> [Rom.
10.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[354:1089](1020509.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p10"></span> [Ps.
87.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[354:1090](1020509.htm#fr_1089) <span
id="iv.XVII.16-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.16-p11"></span> [Ps.
45.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)<span
id="iv.XVII.16-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020510)
