[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020048)  [Next](1020050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.6"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—That the Gods of the Pagans Never
Inculcated Holiness of Life.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.6-p2"></span>This is the reason why those divinities
quite neglected the lives and morals of the cities and nations who
worshipped them, and threw no dreadful prohibition in their way to
hinder them from becoming utterly corrupt, and to preserve them from
those terrible and detestable evils which visit not harvests and
vintages, not house and possessions, not the body which is subject to
the soul, but the soul itself, the spirit that rules the whole man.  If
there was any such prohibition, let it be produced, let it be proved. 
They will tell us that purity and probity were inculcated upon those who
were initiated in the mysteries of religion, and that secret incitements
to virtue were whispered in the ear of the *élite*; but this is an idle
boast.  Let them show or name to us the places which were at any time
consecrated to assemblages in which, instead of the obscene songs and
licentious acting of players, instead of the celebration of those most
filthy and shameless Fugalia <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) (well
called Fugalia, since they banish modesty and right feeling), the people
were commanded in the name of the gods to restrain avarice, bridle
impurity, and conquer ambition; where, in short, they might learn in
that school which Persius vehemently lashes them to, when he says:  “Be
taught, ye abandoned creatures, and ascertain the causes of things; what
we are, and for what end we are born; what is the law of our success in
life; and by what art we may turn the goal without making shipwreck;
what limit we should put to our wealth, what we may lawfully desire, and
what uses filthy lucre serves; how much we should bestow upon our
country and our family; learn, in short, what God meant thee to be, and
what place He has ordered you to fill.” <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)   Let them name to us the places where
such instructions were wont to be communicated from the gods, and where
the people who worshipped them were accustomed to resort to hear them,
as we can point to our churches built for this purpose in every land
where the Christian religion is received.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[26:95](1020049.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.II_1.6-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.6-p3"></span> *Fugalia*.  Vives is uncertain to what
feast Augustin refers.  Censorinus understands him to refer to a feast
celebrating the expulsion of the kings from Rome.  This feast, however
(celebrated on the 24th of February), was commonly called *Regifugium.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[26:96](1020049.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.II_1.6-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.6-p4"></span> Persius, *Sat.* iii. 66–72.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020050)
