[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020040)  [Next](1020042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxvi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.—Of the Sons of the Church Who
are Hidden Among the Wicked, and of False Christians Within the
Church.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxvi-p2"></span>Let these and similar answers (if any
fuller and fitter answers can be found) be given to their enemies by the
redeemed family of the Lord Christ, and by the pilgrim city of King
Christ.  But let this city bear in mind, that among her enemies lie hid
those who are destined to be fellow-citizens, that she may not think it
a fruitless labor to bear what they inflict as enemies until they become
confessors of the faith.  So, too, as long as she is a stranger in the
world, the city of God has in her communion, and bound to her by the
sacraments, some who shall not eternally dwell in the lot of the
saints.  Of these, some are not now recognized; others declare
themselves, and do not hesitate to make common cause with our enemies in
murmuring against God, whose sacramental badge they wear.  These men you
may to-day see thronging the churches with us, to-morrow crowding the
theatres with the godless.  But we have the less reason to despair of
the reclamation even of such persons, if among our most declared enemies
there are now some, unknown to themselves, who are destined to become
our friends.  In truth, these two cities are entangled together in this
world, and intermixed until the last judgment effects their separation. 
I now proceed to speak, as God shall help me, of the rise, progress, and
end of these two cities; and what I write, I write for the glory of the
city of God, that, being placed in comparison with the other, it may
shine with a brighter lustre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](1020042)
