[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020217)  [Next](1020219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.35"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.35-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.35-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.—Concerning the Hydromancy Through
Which Numa Was Befooled by Certain Images of Demons Seen in the
Water.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.35-p2"></span>For Numa himself also, to whom no prophet
of God, no holy angel was sent, was driven to have recourse to
hydromancy, that he might see the images of the gods in the water (or,
rather, appearances whereby the demons made sport of him), and might
learn from them what he ought to ordain and observe in the sacred
rites.  This kind of divination, says Varro, was introduced from the
Persians, and was used by Numa himself, and at an after time by the
philosopher Pythagoras.  In this divination, he says, they also inquire
at the inhabitants of the nether world, and make use of blood; and this
the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VII.35-p2.1"></span>νεκρομαντείαν</span>.  But whether it be
called necromancy or hydromancy it is the same thing, for in either case
the dead are supposed to foretell future things.  But by what artifices
these things are done, let themselves consider; for I am unwilling to
say that these artifices were wont to be prohibited by the laws, and to
be very severely punished even in the Gentile states, before the advent
of our Saviour.  I am unwilling, I say, to affirm this, for perhaps even
such things were then allowed.  However, it was by these arts that
Pompilius learned those sacred rites which he gave forth as facts,
whilst he concealed their causes; for even he himself was afraid of that
which he had learned.  The senate also caused the books in which those
causes were recorded to be burned.  What is it, then, to me, that Varro
attempts to adduce all sorts of fanciful physical interpretations, which
if these books had contained, they would certainly not have been
burned?  For otherwise the conscript fathers would also have burned
those books which Varro published and dedicated to the high priest
Cæsar. <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)   Now Numa is said to
have married the nymph Egeria, because (as Varro explains it in the
forementioned book) he carried forth <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) water wherewith to perform his
hydromancy.  Thus facts are wont to be converted into fables through
false colorings.  It was by that hydromancy, then, that that
over-curious Roman king learned both the sacred rites which were to be
written in the books of the priests, and also the causes of those
rites,—which latter, however, he was unwilling that any one besides
himself should know.  Wherefore he made these causes, as it were, to die
along with himself, taking care to have them written by themselves, and
removed from the knowledge of men by being buried in the earth. 
Wherefore the things which are written in those books were either
abominations of demons, so foul and noxious as to render that whole
civil theology execrable even in the eyes of such men as those senators,
who had accepted so many shameful things in the sacred rites themselves,
or they were nothing else than the accounts of dead men, whom, through
the lapse of ages, almost all the Gentile nations had come to believe to
be immortal gods; whilst those same demons were delighted even with such
rites, having presented themselves to receive worship under pretence of
being those very dead men whom they had caused to be thought immortal
gods by certain fallacious miracles, performed in order to establish
that belief.  But, by the hidden providence of the true God, these
demons were permitted to confess these things to their friend Numa,
having been gained by those arts through which necromancy could be
performed, and yet were not constrained to admonish him rather at his
death to burn than to bury the books in which they were written.  But,
in order that these books might be unknown, the demons could not resist
the plough <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="iv.VII.35-Page_143"></span> by which they were thrown up, or the pen
of Varro, through which the things which were done in reference to this
matter have come down even to our knowledge.  For they are not able to
effect anything which they are not allowed; but they are permitted to
influence those whom God, in His deep and just judgment, according to
their deserts, gives over either to be simply afflicted by them, or to
be also subdued and deceived.  But how pernicious these writings were
judged to be, or how alien from the worship of the true Divinity, may be
understood from the fact that the senate preferred to burn what
Pompilius had hid, rather than to fear what he feared, so that he could
not dare to do that.  Wherefore let him who does not desire to live a
pious life even now, seek eternal life by means of such rites.  But let
him who does not wish to have fellowship with malign demons have no fear
for the noxious superstition wherewith they are worshipped, but let him
recognize the true religion by which they are unmasked and vanquished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_293"></span>[142:294](1020218.htm#fr_293) <span
id="iv.VII.35-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.35-p3"></span> Comp. Lactantius, *Instit.* i. 6.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[142:295](1020218.htm#fr_294) <span
id="iv.VII.35-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.35-p4"></span> *Egesserit.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII](1020219)
