[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020328)  [Next](1020330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.25"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—Of the Division of Philosophy into
Three Parts.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.25-p2"></span>As far as one can judge, it is for the
same reason that philosophers have aimed at a threefold division of
science, or rather, were enabled to see that there was a threefold
division (for they did not invent, but only discovered it), of which one
part is called physical, another logical, the third ethical.  The Latin
equivalents of these names are now naturalized in the writings of many
authors, so that these divisions are called natural, rational, and
moral, on which I have touched slightly in the eighth book.  Not that I
would conclude that these philosophers, in this threefold division, had
any thought of a trinity in God, although Plato is said to have been the
first to discover and promulgate this distribution, and he saw that God
alone could be the author of nature, the bestower of intelligence, and
the kindler of love by which life becomes good and blessed.  But certain
it is that, though philosophers disagree both regarding the nature of
things, and the mode of investigating truth, and of the good to which
all our actions ought to tend, yet in these three great general
questions all their intellectual energy is spent.  And though there be a
confusing diversity of opinion, every man striving to establish his own
opinion in regard to each of these questions, yet no one of them all
doubts that nature has some cause, science some method, life some end
and aim.  Then, again, there are three things which every artificer must
possess if he is to effect anything,—nature, education, practice. 
Nature is to be judged by capacity, education by knowledge, practice by
its fruit.  I am aware that, properly speaking, fruit is what one
enjoys, use \[practice\] what one uses.  And this seems to be the
difference between them, that we are said to *enjoy* that which in
itself, and irrespective of other ends, delights us; to use that which
we seek for the sake of some end beyond.  For which reason the things of
time are to be used rather than enjoyed, that we may deserve to enjoy
things eternal; and not as those perverse creatures who would fain enjoy
money and use God,—not spending money for God’s sake, but worshipping
God for money’s sake.  However, in common parlance, we both use fruits
and enjoy uses.  For we correctly speak of the “fruits of the field,”
which certainly we all use in the present life.  And it was in
accordance with this usage that I said that there were three things to
be observed in a man, nature, education, practice.  From these the
philosophers have elaborated, as I said, the threefold division of that
science by which a blessed life is attained:  the natural having respect
to nature, the rational to education, the moral to practice.  If, then,
we were ourselves the authors of our nature, we should have generated
knowledge in ourselves, and should not require to reach it by education,
*i.e*., by learning it from others.  Our love, too, proceeding from
ourselves and returning to us, would suffice to make our life blessed,
and would stand in need of no extraneous enjoyment.  But now, since our
nature has God as its requisite author, it is certain that we must have
Him for our teacher that we may be wise; Him, too, to dispense to us
spiritual sweetness that we may be blessed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020330)
