[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020150)  [Next](1020152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.10"></span>

<span id="iv.V.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Whether Our Wills are Ruled by
Necessity.</span>

<span id="iv.V.10-p2"></span>Wherefore, neither is that necessity to be
feared, for dread of which the Stoics labored to make such distinctions
among the causes of things as should enable them to rescue certain
things from the dominion of necessity, and to subject others to it. 
Among those things which they wished not to be subject to necessity they
placed our wills, knowing that they would not be free if subjected to
necessity.  For if that is to be called our necessity which is not in
our power, but even though we be unwilling effects what it can
effect,—as, for instance, the necessity of death,—it is manifest that
our wills by which we live up-rightly or wickedly are not under such a
necessity; for we do many things which, if we were not willing, we
should certainly not do.  This is primarily true of the act of willing
itself,—for if we will, it is; if we will not, it is not,—for we should
not will if we were unwilling.  But if we define necessity to be that
according to which we say that it is necessary that anything be of such
or such a nature, or be done in such and such a manner, I know not why
we should have any dread of that necessity taking away the freedom of
our will.  For we do not put the life of God or the foreknowledge of God
under necessity if we should say that it is necessary that God should
live forever, and foreknow all things; as neither is His power
diminished when we say that He cannot die or fall into error,—for this
is in such a way impossible to Him, that if it were possible for Him, He
would be of less power.  But assuredly He is rightly called omnipotent,
though He can neither die nor fall into error.  For He is called
omnipotent on account of His doing what He wills, not on account of His
suffering what He wills not; for if that should befall Him, He would by
no means be omnipotent.  Wherefore, He cannot do some things for the
very reason that He is omnipotent.  So also, when we say that it is
necessary that, when we will, we will by free choice, in so saying we
both affirm what is true beyond doubt, and do not still subject our
wills thereby to a necessity which destroys liberty.  Our wills,
therefore, *exist as wills*, and do themselves whatever we do by
willing, and which would not be done if we were unwilling.  But when any
one suffers anything, being unwilling by the will of another, even in
that case will retains its essential validity, —we do not mean the will
of the party who <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="iv.V.10-Page_93"></span> inflicts the suffering, for we resolve it
into the power of God.  For if a will should simply exist, but not be
able to do what it wills, it would be overborne by a more powerful
will.  Nor would this be the case unless there had existed will, and
that not the will of the other party, but the will of him who willed,
but was not able to accomplish what he willed.  Therefore, whatsoever a
man suffers contrary to his own will, he ought not to attribute to the
will of men, or of angels, or of any created spirit, but rather to His
will who gives power to wills.  It is not the case, therefore, that
because God foreknew what would be in the power of our wills, there is
for that reason nothing in the power of our wills.  For he who foreknew
this did not foreknow nothing.  Moreover, if He who foreknew what would
be in the power of our wills did not foreknow nothing, but something,
assuredly, even though He did foreknow, there is something in the power
of our wills.  Therefore we are by no means compelled, either, retaining
the prescience of God, to take away the freedom of the will, or,
retaining the freedom of the will, to deny that He is prescient of
future things, which is impious.  But we embrace both.  We faithfully
and sincerely confess both.  The former, that we may believe well; the
latter, that we may live well.  For he lives ill who does not believe
well concerning God.  Wherefore, be it far from us, in order to maintain
our freedom, to deny the prescience of Him by whose help we are or shall
be free.  Consequently, it is not in vain that laws are enacted, and
that reproaches, exhortations, praises, and vituperations are had
recourse to; for these also He foreknew, and they are of great avail,
even as great as He foreknew that they would be of.  Prayers, also, are
of avail to procure those things which He foreknew that He would grant
to those who offered them; and with justice have rewards been appointed
for good deeds, and punishments for sins.  For a man does not therefore
sin because God foreknew that he would sin.  Nay, it cannot be doubted
but that it is the man himself who sins when he does sin, because He,
whose foreknowledge is infallible, foreknew not that fate, or fortune,
or something else would sin, but that the man himself would sin, who, if
he wills not, sins not.  But if he shall not will to sin, even this did
God foreknow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020152)
