[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020609)  [Next](1020611) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of the Binding and Loosing of the
Devil.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.8-p2"></span>“After that,” says John, “he must be loosed
a little season.”  If the binding and shutting up of the devil means his
being made unable to seduce the Church, must his loosing be the recovery
of this ability?  By no means.  For the Church predestined and elected
before the foundation of the world, the Church of which it is said, “The
Lord knoweth them that are His,” shall never be seduced by him.  And yet
there shall be a Church in this world even when the devil shall be
loosed, as there has been since the beginning, and shall be always, the
places of the dying being filled by new believers.  For a little after
John says that the devil, being loosed, shall draw the nations whom he
has seduced in the whole world to make war against the Church, and that
the number of these enemies shall be as the sand of the sea.  “And they
went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the
saints about, and the beloved city:  and fire came down from God out of
heaven and devoured them.  And the devil who seduced them was cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet
are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.” <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350)   This relates to the last
judgment, but I have thought fit to mention it now, lest any one might
suppose that in that short time during which the devil shall be loose
there shall be no Church upon earth, whether because the devil finds no
Church, or destroys it by manifold persecutions.  The devil, then, is
not bound during the whole time which this book embraces,—that is, from
the first coming of Christ to the end of the world, when He shall come
the second time,—not bound in this sense, that during this interval,
which goes by the name of a thousand years, he shall not seduce the
Church, for not even when loosed shall he seduce it.  For certainly if
his being bound means that he is not able or not permitted to seduce the
Church, what can the loosing of him mean but his being able or permitted
to do so?  But God forbid that such should be the case!  But the binding
of the devil is his being prevented from the exercise of his whole power
to seduce men, either by violently forcing or fraudulently deceiving
them into taking part with him.  If he were during so long a period
permitted to assail the weakness of men, very many persons, such as God
would not wish to expose to such temptation, would have their faith
overthrown, or would be prevented from believing; and that this might
not happen, he is bound.

<span id="iv.XX.8-p4"></span>But when the short time comes he shall be
loosed.  For he shall rage with the whole force of himself and his
angels for three years and six months; and those with whom he makes war
shall have power to withstand all his violence and stratagems.  And if
he were never loosed, his malicious power would be less patent, and less
proof would be given of the steadfast fortitude of the holy city:  it
would, in short, be less manifest what good use the Almighty makes of
his great evil.  For the Almighty does not absolutely seclude the saints
from his temptation, but shelters only their inner man, where faith
resides, that by outward temptation they may grow in grace.  And He
binds him that he may not, in the free and eager exercise of his malice,
hinder or destroy the faith of those countless weak persons, already
believing or yet to believe, from whom the Church must be increased and
completed; and he will in the end loose him, that the city of God may
see how mighty an adversary it has conquered, to the great glory of its
Redeemer, Helper, Deliverer.  And what are we in comparison with those
believers and saints who shall then exist, seeing that they shall be
tested by the loosing of an enemy with whom we make war at the greatest
peril even when he is bound?  Although it is also certain that even in
this intervening period there have been and are some soldiers of Christ
so wise and strong, that if they were to be alive in this mortal
condition at the time of his loosing, they would both most wisely guard
against, and most patiently endure, all his snares and assaults.

<span id="iv.XX.8-p5"></span>Now the devil was thus bound not only when
the Church began to be more and more widely extended among the nations
beyond Judea, but is now and shall be bound till the end of the world,
when he is to be loosed.  Because even now men are, and doubtless to
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="iv.XX.8-Page_429"></span>
the end of the world shall be, converted to the faith from the unbelief
in which he held them.  And this strong one is bound in each instance in
which he is spoiled of one of his goods; and the abyss in which he is
shut up is not at an end when those die who were alive when first he was
shut up in it, but these have been succeeded, and shall to the end of
the world be succeeded, by others born after them with a like hate of
the Christians, and in the depth of whose blind hearts he is continually
shut up as in an abyss.  But it is a question whether, during these
three years and six months when he shall be loose, and raging with all
his force, any one who has not previously believed shall attach himself
to the faith.  For how in that case would the words hold good, “Who
entereth into the house of a strong one to spoil his goods, unless first
he shall have bound the strong one?”  Consequently this verse seems to
compel us to believe that during that time, short as it is, no one will
be added to the Christian community, but that the devil will make war
with those who have previously become Christians, and that, though some
of these may be conquered and desert to the devil, these do not belong
to the predestinated number of the sons of God.  For it is not without
reason that John, the same apostle as wrote this Apocalypse, says in his
epistle regarding certain persons, “They went out from us, but they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have remained
with us.” <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351)   But what shall
become of the little ones?  For it is beyond all belief that in these
days there shall not be found some Christian children born, but not yet
baptized, and that there shall not also be some born during that very
period; and if there be such, we cannot believe that their parents shall
not find some way of bringing them to the laver of regeneration.  But if
this shall be the case, how shall these goods be snatched from the devil
when he is loose, since into his house no man enters to spoil his goods
unless he has first bound him?  On the contrary, we are rather to
believe that in these days there shall be no lack either of those who
fall away from, or of those who attach themselves to the Church; but
there shall be such resoluteness, both in parents to seek baptism for
their little ones, and in those who shall then first believe, that they
shall conquer that strong one, even though unbound,—that is, shall both
vigilantly comprehend, and patiently bear up against him, though
employing such wiles and putting forth such force as he never before
used; and thus they shall be snatched from him even though unbound.  And
yet the verse of the Gospel will not be untrue, “Who entereth into the
house of the strong one to spoil his goods, unless he shall first have
bound the strong one?”  For in accordance with this true saying that
order is observed—the strong one first bound, and then his goods
spoiled; for the Church is so increased by the weak and strong from all
nations far and near, that by its most robust faith in things divinely
predicted and accomplished, it shall be able to spoil the goods of even
the unbound devil.  For as we must own that, “when iniquity abounds, the
love of many waxes cold,” <span id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352) and
that those who have not been written in the book of life shall in large
numbers yield to the severe and unprecedented persecutions and
stratagems of the devil now loosed, so we cannot but think that not only
those whom that time shall find sound in the faith, but also some who
till then shall be without, shall become firm in the faith they have
hitherto rejected and mighty to conquer the devil even though unbound,
God’s grace aiding them to understand the Scriptures, in which, among
other things, there is foretold that very end which they themselves see
to be arriving.  And if this shall be so, his binding is to be spoken of
as preceding, that there might follow a spoiling of him both bound and
loosed; for it is of this it is said, “Who shall enter into the house of
the strong one to spoil his goods, unless he shall first have bound the
strong one?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[428:1351](1020610.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="iv.XX.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.8-p3"></span> [Rev.
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010)<span id="iv.XX.8-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[429:1352](1020610.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="iv.XX.8-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.8-p6"></span> [1 John
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="iv.XX.8-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[429:1353](1020610.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="iv.XX.8-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.8-p7"></span> [Matt.
24.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="iv.XX.8-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020611)
