[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020273)  [Next](1020275) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.3"></span>

<span id="iv.X.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—That the Platonists, Though Knowing
Something of the Creator of the Universe, Have Misunderstood the True
Worship of God, by Giving Divine Honor to Angels, Good or Bad.</span>

<span id="iv.X.3-p2"></span>This being so, if the Platonists, or those
who think with them, knowing God, glorified Him as God and gave thanks,
if they did not become vain in their own thoughts, if they did not
originate or yield to the popular errors, they would certainly
acknowledge that neither could the blessed immortals retain, nor we
miserable mortals reach, a happy condition without worshipping the one
God of gods, who is both theirs and ours.  To Him we owe the service
which is called in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.3-p2.1"></span>λατρεία</span>, whether we render it outwardly
or inwardly; for we are all His temple, each of us severally and all of
us together, because He condescends to inhabit each individually and the
whole harmonious body, being no greater in all than in each, since He is
neither expanded nor divided.  Our heart when it rises to Him is His
altar; the priest who intercedes for us is His Only-begotten; we
sacrifice to Him bleeding victims when we contend for His truth even
unto blood; to Him we offer the sweetest incense when we come before Him
burning with holy and pious love; to Him we devote and surrender
ourselves and His gifts in us; to Him, by solemn feasts and on appointed
days, we consecrate the memory of His benefits, lest through the lapse
of time ungrateful oblivion should steal upon us; to Him we offer on the
altar of our heart the sacrifice of humility and praise, kindled by the
fire of burning love.  It is that we may see Him, so far as He can be
seen; it is that we may cleave to Him, that we are cleansed from all
stain of sins and evil passions, and are consecrated in His name.  For
He is the fountain of our happiness, He the end of all our desires. 
Being attached to Him, or rather let me say, re-attached,—for we had
detached ourselves and lost hold of Him,—being, I say, re-attached to
Him, <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) we tend towards Him by
love, that we may rest in Him, and find our blessedness by attaining
that end.  For our good, about which philosophers have so keenly
contended, is nothing else than to be united to God.  It is, if I may
say so, by spiritually embracing Him that the intellectual soul is
filled and impregnated with true virtues.  We are enjoined to love this
good with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength.  To
this good we ought to be led by those who love us, and to lead those we
love.  Thus are fulfilled those two commandments on which hang all the
law and the prophets:  “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul;” and “Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself.” <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378)  
For, that man might be intelligent in his self-love, there was appointed
for him an end to which he might refer all his actions, that he might be
blessed.  For he who loves himself wishes nothing else than this.  And
the end set before him is “to draw near to God.” <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379)   And so, when one who has this
intelligent self-love is commanded to love his neighbor as himself, what
else is enjoined than that he shall do all in his power to commend to
him the love of God?  This is the worship of God, this is true religion,
this right piety, this the service due to God only.  If any immortal
power, then, no matter with what virtue endowed, loves us as himself, he
must desire that we find our happiness by submitting ourselves to Him,
in submission to whom he himself finds happiness.  If he does not
worship God, he is wretched, because deprived of God; if he worships
God, he cannot wish to be worshipped in God’s stead.  On the contrary,
these higher powers acquiesce heartily in the divine sentence in which
it is written, “He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the Lord
only, he shall be utterly destroyed.” <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_377"></span>[182:378](1020274.htm#fr_377) <span
id="iv.X.3-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.3-p3"></span> Augustin here remarks, in a clause that
cannot be given in English, that the word *religio* is derived from
*religere*.—So Cicero, *De Nat. Deor*. ii. 28.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[182:379](1020274.htm#fr_378) <span
id="iv.X.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.3-p4"></span> [Matt.
22.37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="iv.X.3-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[182:380](1020274.htm#fr_379) <span
id="iv.X.3-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.3-p5"></span> [Ps.
73.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)<span id="iv.X.3-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[182:381](1020274.htm#fr_380) <span
id="iv.X.3-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.3-p6"></span> [Ex.
22.20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)<span id="iv.X.3-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020275)
