[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020472)  [Next](1020474) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.24"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Of the Meaning of the Sacrifice
Abraham Was Commanded to Offer When He Supplicated to Be Taught About
Those Things He Had Believed.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p2"></span>In the same vision, God in speaking to
him also says, “I am God that brought thee out <span id="page_324">p.
324</span> <span id="iv.XVI.24-Page_324"></span> of the region of the
Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.” <span
id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909)   And when Abram asked whereby he
might know that he should inherit it, God said to him, “Take me an
heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram
of three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a pigeon.  And he took unto
him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one
against another; but the birds divided he not.  And the fowls came
down,” as it is written, “on the carcasses, and Abram sat down by them. 
But about the going down of the sun, great fear fell upon Abram; and,
lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.  And He said unto Abram,
Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land not theirs,
and they shall reduce them to servitude and shall afflict them four
hundred years:  but the nation whom they shall serve will I judge; and
afterward shall they come out hither with great substance.  And thou
shalt go to thy fathers in peace; kept in a good old age.  But in the
fourth generation they shall come hither again:  for the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full.  And when the sun was setting, there was a
flame, and a smoking furnace, and lamps of fire, that passed through
between those pieces.  In that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram,
saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land, from the river of Egypt
unto the great river Euphrates:  the Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and
the Kadmonites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,
and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Hivites, and the
Girgashites, and the Jebusites.” <span id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910)

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p5"></span>All these things were said and done in a
vision from God; but it would take long, and would exceed the scope of
this work, to treat of them exactly in detail.  It is enough that we
should know that, after it was said Abram believed in God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness, he did not fail in faith in saying,
“Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?” for the
inheritance of that land was promised to him.  Now he does not say, How
shall I know, as if he did not yet believe; but he says, “Whereby shall
I know,” meaning that some sign might be given by which he might know
the manner of those things which he had believed, just as it is not for
lack of faith the Virgin Mary says, “How shall this be, seeing I know
not a man?” <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) for she inquired as
to the way in which that should take place which she was certain would
come to pass.  And when she asked this, she was told, “The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee.” <span id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912)   Here also, in fine, a
symbol was given, consisting of three animals, a heifer, a she-goat, and
a ram, and two birds, a turtle-dove and pigeon, that he might know that
the things which he had not doubted should come to pass were to happen
in accordance with this symbol.  Whether, therefore, the heifer was a
sign that the people should be put under the law, the she-goat that the
same people was to become sinful, the ram that they should reign (and
these animals are said to be of three years old for this reason, that
there are three remarkable divisions of time, from Adam to Noah, and
from him to Abraham, and from him to David, who, on the rejection of
Saul, was first established by the will of the Lord in the kingdom of
the Israelite nation:  in this third division, which extends from
Abraham to David, that people grew up as if passing through the third
age of life), or whether they had some other more suitable meaning,
still I have no doubt whatever that spiritual things were prefigured by
them as well as by the turtle-dove and pigeon.  And it is said, “But the
birds divided he not,” because carnal men are divided among themselves,
but the spiritual not at all, whether they seclude themselves from the
busy conversation of men, like the turtle-dove, or dwell among them,
like the pigeon; for both birds are simple and harmless, signifying that
even in the Israelite people, to which that land was to be given, there
would be individuals who were children of the promise, and heirs of the
kingdom that is <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) to remain in
eternal felicity.  But the fowls coming down on the divided carcasses
represent nothing good, but the spirits of this air, seeking some food
for themselves in the division of carnal men.  But that Abraham sat down
with them, signifies that even amid these divisions of the carnal, true
believers shall persevere to the end.  And that about the going down of
the sun great fear fell upon Abraham and a horror of great darkness,
signifies that about the end of this world believers shall be in great
perturbation and tribulation, of which the Lord said in the gospel, “For
then shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the
beginning.” <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914)

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p10"></span>But what is said to Abraham, “Know of a
surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land not theirs, and they
shall reduce them to servitude, and shall afflict them 400 years,” is
most clearly a prophecy about the people <span id="page_325">p.
325</span> <span id="iv.XVI.24-Page_325"></span> of Israel which was to
be in servitude in Egypt.  Not that this people was to be in that
servitude under the oppressive Egyptians for 400 years, but it is
foretold that this should take place in the course of those 400 years. 
For as it is written of Terah the father of Abraham, “And the days of
Terah in Haran were 205 years,” <span id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915)
not because they were all spent there, but because they were completed
there, so it is said here also, “And they shall reduce them to
servitude, and shall afflict them 400 years,” for this reason, because
that number was completed, not because it was all spent in that
affliction.  The years are said to be 400 in round numbers, although
they were a little more,—whether you reckon from this time, when these
things were promised to Abraham, or from the birth of Isaac, as the seed
of Abraham, of which these things are predicted.  For, as we have
already said above, from the seventy-fifth year of Abraham, when the
first promise was made to him, down to the exodus of Israel from Egypt,
there are reckoned 430 years, which the apostle thus mentions:  “And
this I say, that the covenant confirmed by God, the law, which was made
430 years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of
none effect.” <span id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916)   So then these
430 years might be called 400, because they are not much more,
especially since part even of that number had already gone by when these
things were shown and said to Abraham in vision, or when Isaac was born
in his father’s 100th year, twenty-five years after the first promise,
when of these 430 years there now remained 405, which God was pleased to
call 400.  No one will doubt that the other things which follow in the
prophetic words of God pertain to the people of Israel.

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p13"></span>When it is added, “And when the sun was
now setting there was a flame, and lo, a smoking furnace, and lamps of
fire, which passed through between those pieces,” this signifies that at
the end of the world the carnal shall be judged by fire.  For just as
the affliction of the city of God, such as never was before, which is
expected to take place under Antichrist, was signified by Abraham’s
horror of great darkness about the going down of the sun, that is, when
the end of the world draws nigh,—so at the going down of the sun, that
is, at the very end of the world, there is signified by that fire the
day of judgment, which separates the carnal who are to be saved by fire
from those who are to be condemned in the fire.  And then the covenant
made with Abraham particularly sets forth the land of Canaan, and names
eleven tribes in it from the river of Egypt even to the great river
Euphrates.  It is not then from the great river of Egypt, that is, the
Nile, but from a small one which separates Egypt from Palestine, where
the city of Rhinocorura is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_909"></span>[324:910](1020473.htm#fr_909) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p3"></span> [Gen.
15.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007)<span id="iv.XVI.24-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[324:911](1020473.htm#fr_910) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p4"></span> [Gen.
15.9-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.XVI.24-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[324:912](1020473.htm#fr_911) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p6"></span> [Luke
1.34](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#034)<span id="iv.XVI.24-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[324:913](1020473.htm#fr_912) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p7"></span> [Luke
1.35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="iv.XVI.24-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[324:914](1020473.htm#fr_913) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p8"></span> Various reading, “who are to remain.”

<span id="fn_914"></span>[324:915](1020473.htm#fr_914) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p9"></span> [Matt.
24.21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span
id="iv.XVI.24-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[325:916](1020473.htm#fr_915) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p11"></span> [Gen.
11.32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XVI.24-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[325:917](1020473.htm#fr_916) <span
id="iv.XVI.24-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.24-p12"></span> [Gal.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.XVI.24-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020474)
