[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020648)  [Next](1020650) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—The Laws of Grace, Which Extend
to All the Epochs of the Life of the Regenerate.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.16-p2"></span>But such is God’s mercy towards the
vessels of mercy which He has prepared for glory, that even the first
age of man, that is, infancy, which submits without any resistance to
the flesh, and the second age, which is called boyhood, and which has
not yet understanding enough to undertake this warfare, and therefore
yields to almost every vicious pleasure (because though this age has the
power of speech, <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526) and may
therefore seem to have passed infancy, the mind is still too weak to
comprehend the commandment), yet if either of these ages has received
the sacraments of the Mediator, then, although the present life be
immediately brought to an end, the child, having been translated from
the power of darkness to the kingdom of Christ, shall not only be saved
from eternal punishments, but shall not even suffer purgatorial torments
after death.  For spiritual regeneration of itself suffices to prevent
any evil consequences resulting after death from the connection with
death which carnal generation forms. <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527)   But when we reach that age which
can now comprehend the commandment, and submit to the dominion of law,
we must declare war upon vices, and wage this war keenly, lest we be
landed in damnable sins.  And if vices have not gathered strength, by
habitual victory they are more easily overcome and subdued; but if they
have been used to conquer and rule, it is only with difficulty and labor
they are mastered.  And indeed this victory cannot be sincerely and
truly gained but by delighting in true righteousness, and it is faith in
Christ that gives this.  For if the law be present with its command, and
the Spirit be absent with His help, the presence of the prohibition
serves only to increase the desire to sin, and adds the guilt of
transgression.  Sometimes, indeed, patent vices are overcome by other
and hidden vices, which are reckoned virtues, though pride and a kind of
ruinous self-sufficiency are their informing principles.  Accordingly
vices are then only to be considered overcome when they are conquered by
the love of God, which God Himself alone gives, and which He gives only
through the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who
became a partaker of our mortality that He might make us partakers of
His divinity.  But few indeed are they who are so happy as to have
passed their youth without committing any damnable sins, either by
dissolute or violent conduct, or by following some godless and unlawful
opinions, but have subdued by their greatness of soul everything in them
which could make them the slaves of carnal pleasures.  The greater <span
id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span id="iv.XXI.16-Page_466"></span> number
having first become transgressors of the law that they have received,
and having allowed vice to have the ascendency in them, then flee to
grace for help, and so, by a penitence more bitter, and a struggle more
violent than it would otherwise have been, they subdue the soul to God,
and thus give it its lawful authority over the flesh, and become
victors.  Whoever, therefore, desires to escape eternal punishment, let
him not only be baptized, but also justified in Christ, and so let him
in truth pass from the devil to Christ.  And let him not fancy that
there are any purgatorial pains except before that final and dreadful
judgment.  We must not, however deny that even the eternal fire will be
proportioned to the deserts of the wicked, so that to some it will be
more, and to others less painful, whether this result be accomplished by
a variation in the temperature of the fire itself, graduated according
to every one’s merit, or whether it be that the heat remains the same,
but that all do not feel it with equal intensity of torment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[465:1527](1020649.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="iv.XXI.16-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.16-p3"></span> “Fari.”

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[465:1528](1020649.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="iv.XXI.16-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.16-p4"></span> See Aug. *Ep.* 98, *ad Bonifacium.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020650)
