[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020189)  [Next](1020191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.7"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.7-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.7-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—Whether It is Reasonable to
Separate Janus and Terminus as Two Distinct Deities.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.7-p2"></span>Who, then, is Janus, with whom Varro
commences?  He is the world.  Certainly a very brief and unambiguous
reply.  Why, then, do they say that the beginnings of things pertain to
him, but the ends to another whom they call Terminus?  For they say that
two months have been dedicated to these two gods, with reference to
beginnings and ends—January to Janus, and February to Terminus—over and
above those ten months which <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="iv.VII.7-Page_127"></span> commence with March and end with
December.  And they say that that is the reason why the Terminalia are
celebrated in the month of February, the same month in which the sacred
purification is made which they call Februum, and from which the month
derives its name. <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)   Do the
beginnings of things, therefore, pertain to the world, which is Janus,
and not also the ends, since another god has been placed over them?  Do
they not own that all things which they say begin in this world also
come to an end in this world?  What folly it is, to give him only half
power in work, when in his image they give him two faces!  Would it not
be a far more elegant way of interpreting the two-faced image, to say
that Janus and Terminus are the same, and that the one face has
reference to beginnings, the other to ends?  For one who works ought to
have respect to both.  For he who in every forthputting of activity does
not look back on the beginning, does not look forward to the end. 
Wherefore it is necessary that prospective intention be connected with
retrospective memory.  For how shall one find how to finish anything, if
he has forgotten what it was which he had begun?  But if they thought
that the blessed life is begun in this world, and perfected beyond the
world, and for that reason attributed to Janus, that is, to the world,
only the power of beginnings, they should certainly have preferred
Terminus to him, and should not have shut him out from the number of the
select gods.  Yet even now, when the beginnings and ends of temporal
things are represented by these two gods, more honor ought to have been
given to Terminus.  For the greater joy is that which is felt when
anything is finished; but things begun are always cause of much anxiety
until they are brought to an end, which end he who begins anything very
greatly longs for, fixes his mind on, expects, desires; nor does any one
ever rejoice over anything he has begun, unless it be brought to an end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[127:265](1020190.htm#fr_264) <span
id="iv.VII.7-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.7-p3"></span> An interesting account of the changes
made in the Roman year by Numa is given in Plutarch’s life of that
king.  Ovid also (*Fasti,* ii.) explains the derivation of February,
telling us that it was the last month of the old year, and took its name
from the lustrations performed then:  *Februa Romani dixere piamina
patres.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020191)
