[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020212)  [Next](1020214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.30"></span> <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="iv.VII.30-Page_140"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.30-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.30-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—How Piety Distinguishes the
Creator from the Creatures, So That, Instead of One God, There are Not
Worshipped as Many Gods as There are Works of the One Author.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.30-p2"></span>And now, to begin to go over those works
of the one true God, on account of which these have made to themselves
many and false gods, whilst they attempt to give an honorable
interpretation to their many most abominable and most infamous
mysteries,—we worship that God who has appointed to the natures created
by Him both the beginnings and the end of their existing and moving; who
holds, knows, and disposes the causes of things; who hath created the
virtue of seeds; who hath given to what creatures He would a rational
soul, which is called mind; who hath bestowed the faculty and use of
speech; who hath imparted the gift of foretelling future things to
whatever spirits it seemed to Him good; who also Himself predicts future
things, through whom He pleases, and through whom He will, removes
diseases who, when the human race is to be corrected and chastised by
wars, regulates also the beginnings, progress, and ends of these wars
who hath created and governs the most vehement and most violent fire of
this world, in due relation and proportion to the other elements of
immense nature; who is the governor of all the waters; who hath made the
sun brightest of all material lights, and hath given him suitable power
and motion; who hath not withdrawn, even from the inhabitants of the
nether world, His dominion and power; who hath appointed to mortal
natures their suitable seed and nourishment, dry or liquid; who
establishes and makes fruitful the earth; who bountifully bestows its
fruits on animals and on men; who knows and ordains, not only principal
causes, but also subsequent causes; who hath determined for the moon her
motion; who affords ways in heaven and on earth for passage from one
place to another; who hath granted also to human minds, which He hath
created, the knowledge of the various arts for the help of life and
nature; who hath appointed the union of male and female for the
propagation of offspring; who hath favored the societies of men with the
gift of terrestrial fire for the simplest and most familiar purposes, to
burn on the hearth and to give light.  These are, then, the things which
that most acute and most learned man Varro has labored to distribute
among the select gods, by I know not what physical interpretation, which
he has got from other sources, and also conjectured for himself.  But
these things the one true God makes and does, but as *the same*
God,—that is, as He who is wholly everywhere, included in no space,
bound by no chains, mutable in no part of His being, filling heaven and
earth with omnipresent power, not with a needy nature.  Therefore He
governs all things in such a manner as to allow them to perform and
exercise their own proper movements.  For although they can be nothing
without Him, they are not what He is.  He does also many things through
angels; but only from Himself does He beatify angels.  So also, though
He send angels to men for certain purposes, He does not for all that
beatify men by the good inherent in the angels, but by Himself, as He
does the angels themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1020214)
