[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020666)  [Next](1020668) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.6"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—That Rome Made Its Founder Romulus
a God Because It Loved Him; But the Church Loved Christ Because It
Believed Him to Be God.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.6-p2"></span>Let us here recite the passage in which
Tully expresses his astonishment that the apotheosis of Romulus should
have been credited.  I shall insert his words as they stand:  “It is
most worthy of remark in Romulus, that other men who are said to have
become gods lived in less educated ages, when there was a greater
propensity to the fabulous, and when the uninstructed were easily
persuaded to believe anything.  But the age of Romulus was barely six
hundred years ago, and already literature and science had dispelled the
errors that attach to an uncultured age.”  And a little after he says of
the same Romulus words to this effect: <span id="page_483">p. 483</span>
<span id="iv.XXII.6-Page_483"></span> “From this we may perceive that
Homer had flourished long before Romulus, and that there was now so much
learning in individuals, and so generally diffused an enlightenment,
that scarcely any room was left for fable.  For antiquity admitted
fables, and sometimes even very clumsy ones; but this age \[of Romulus\]
was sufficiently enlightened to reject whatever had not the air of
truth.”  Thus one of the most learned men, and certainly the most
eloquent, M. Tullius Cicero, says that it is surprising that the
divinity of Romulus was believed in, because the times were already so
enlightened that they would not accept a fabulous fiction.  But who
believed that Romulus was a god except Rome, which was itself small and
in its infancy?  Then afterwards it was necessary that succeeding
generations should preserve the tradition of their ancestors; that,
drinking in this superstition with their mother’s milk, the state might
grow and come to such power that it might dictate this belief, as from a
point of vantage, to all the nations over whom its sway extended.  And
these nations, though they might not believe that Romulus was a god, at
least said so, that they might not give offence to their sovereign state
by refusing to give its founder that title which was given him by Rome,
which had adopted this belief, not by a love of error, but an error of
love.  But though Christ is the founder of the heavenly and eternal
city, yet it did not believe Him to be God because it was founded by
Him, but rather it is founded by Him, in virtue of its belief.  Rome,
after it had been built and dedicated, worshipped its founder in a
temple as a god; but this Jerusalem laid Christ, its God, as its
foundation, that the building and dedication might proceed.  The former
city loved its founder, and therefore believed him to be a god; the
latter believed Christ to be God, and therefore loved Him.  There was an
antecedent cause for the love of the former city, and for its believing
that even a false dignity attached to the object of its love; so there
was an antecedent cause for the belief of the latter, and for its loving
the true dignity which a proper faith, not a rash surmise, ascribed to
its object.  For, not to mention the multitude of very striking miracles
which proved that Christ is God, there were also divine prophecies
heralding Him, prophecies most worthy of belief, which being already
accomplished, we have not, like the fathers, to wait for their
verification.  Of Romulus, on the other hand, and of his building Rome
and reigning in it, we read or hear the narrative of what did take
place, not prediction which beforehand said that such things should be. 
And so far as his reception among the gods is concerned, history only
records that this was believed, and does not state it as a fact; for no
miraculous signs testified to the truth of this.  For as to that wolf
which is said to have nursed the twin-brothers, and which is considered
a great marvel, how does this prove him to have been divine?  For even
supposing that this nurse was a real wolf and not a mere courtezan, yet
she nursed both brothers, and Remus is not reckoned a god.  Besides,
what was there to hinder any one from asserting that Romulus or
Hercules, or any such man, was a god?  Or who would rather choose to die
than profess belief in his divinity?  And did a single nation worship
Romulus among its gods, unless it were forced through fear of the Roman
name?  But who can number the multitudes who have chosen death in the
most cruel shapes rather than deny the divinity of Christ?  And thus the
dread of some slight indignation, which it was supposed, perhaps
groundlessly, might exist in the minds of the Romans, constrained some
states who were subject to Rome to worship Romulus as a god; whereas the
dread, not of a slight mental shock, but of severe and various
punishments, and of death itself, the most formidable of all, could not
prevent an immense multitude of martyrs throughout the world from not
merely worshipping but also confessing Christ as God.  The city of
Christ, which, although as yet a stranger upon earth, had countless
hosts of citizens, did not make war upon its godless persecutors for the
sake of temporal security, but preferred to win eternal salvation by
abstaining from war.  They were bound, imprisoned, beaten, tortured,
burned, torn in pieces, massacred, and yet they multiplied.  It was not
given to them to fight for their eternal salvation except by despising
their temporal salvation for their Saviour’s sake.

<span id="iv.XXII.6-p3"></span>I am aware that Cicero, in the third book
of his *De Republica*, if I mistake not, argues that a first-rate power
will not engage in war except either for honor or for safety.  What he
has to say about the question of safety, and what he means by safety, he
explains in another place, saying, “Private persons frequently evade, by
a speedy death, destitution, exile, bonds, the scourge, and the other
pains which even the most insensible feel.  But to states, death, which
seems to emancipate individuals from all punishments, is itself a
punishment; for a state should be so constituted as to be eternal.  And
thus death is not natural to a republic as to a man, to whom death is
not only necessary, but often even desirable.  But when a state is
destroyed, <span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.6-Page_484"></span> obliterated, annihilated, it is as if
(to compare great things with small) this whole world perished and
collapsed.”  Cicero said this because he, with the Platonists, believed
that the world would not perish.  It is therefore agreed that, according
to Cicero, a state should engage in war for the safety which preserves
the state permanently in existence though its citizens change; as the
foliage of an olive or laurel, or any tree of this kind, is perennial,
the old leaves being replaced by fresh ones.  For death, as he says, is
no punishment to individuals, but rather delivers them from all other
punishments, but it is a punishment to the state.  And therefore it is
reasonably asked whether the Saguntines did right when they chose that
their whole state should perish rather than that they should break faith
with the Roman republic; for this deed of theirs is applauded by the
citizens of the earthly republic.  But I do not see how they could
follow the advice of Cicero, who tell us that no war is to be undertaken
save for safety or for honor; neither does he say which of these two is
to be preferred, if a case should occur in which the one could not be
preserved without the loss of the other.  For manifestly, if the
Saguntines chose safety, they must break faith; if they kept faith, they
must reject safety; as also it fell out.  But the safety of the city of
God is such that it can be retained, or rather acquired, by faith and
with faith; but if faith be abandoned, no one can attain it.  It is this
thought of a most steadfast and patient spirit that has made so many
noble martyrs, while Romulus has not had, and could not have, so much as
one to die for his divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020668)
