[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020694)  [Next](1020696) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span> <span id="page_519">p. 519</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_519"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>Showing that to teach rules for the
interpretation of Scripture is not a superfluous task.

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c20"><span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>There</span> are certain rules for the
interpretation of Scripture which I think might with great advantage be
taught to earnest students of the word, that they may profit not only
from reading the works of others who have laid open the secrets of the
sacred writings, but also from themselves opening such secrets to
others.  These rules I propose to teach to those who are able and
willing to learn, if God our Lord do not withhold from me, while I
write, the thoughts He is wont to vouchsafe to me in my meditations on
this subject.  But before I enter upon this undertaking, I think it well
to meet the objections of those who are likely to take exception to the
work, or who would do so, did I not conciliate them beforehand.  And if,
after all, men should still be found to make objections, yet at least
they will not prevail with others (over whom they might have influence,
did they not find them forearmed against their assaults), to turn them
back from a useful study to the dull sloth of ignorance.

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span>2.  There are some, then, likely to object to
this work of mine, because they have failed to understand the rules here
laid down.  Others, again, will think that I have spent my labor to no
purpose, because, though they understand the rules, yet in their
attempts to apply them and to interpret Scripture by them, they have
failed to clear up the point they wish cleared up; and these, because
they have received no assistance from this work themselves, will give it
as their opinion that it can be of no use to anybody.  There is a third
class of objectors who either really do understand Scripture well, or
think they do, and who, because they know (or imagine) that they have
attained a certain power of interpreting the sacred books without
reading any directions of the kind that I propose to lay down here, will
cry out that such rules are not necessary for any one, but that
everything rightly done towards clearing up the obscurities of Scripture
could be better done by the unassisted grace of God.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>3.  To reply briefly to all these.  To those
who do not understand what is here set down, my answer is, that I am not
to be blamed for their want of understanding.  It is just as if they
were anxious to see the new or the old moon, or some very obscure star,
and I should point it out with my finger:  if they had not sight enough
to see even my finger, they would surely have no right to fly into a
passion with me on that account.  As for those who, even though they
know and understand my directions, fail to penetrate the meaning of
obscure passages in Scripture, they may stand for those who, in the case
I have imagined, are just able to see my finger, but cannot see the
stars at which it is pointed.  And so both these classes had better give
up blaming me, and pray instead that God would grant them the sight of
their eyes.  For though I can move my finger to point out an object, it
is out of my power to open men’s eyes that they may see either the fact
that I am pointing, or the object at which I point.

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>4.  But now as to those who talk vauntingly
of Divine Grace, and boast that they understand and can explain
Scripture without the aid of such directions as those I now propose to
lay down, and who think, therefore, that what I have undertaken to write
is entirely superfluous.  I would such persons could calm themselves so
far as to remember that, however justly they may rejoice in God’s great
gift, yet it was from human teachers they themselves learnt to read. 
Now, they would hardly think it right that they should for that reason
be held in contempt by the Egyptian monk Antony, a just and holy man,
who, not being able to read himself, is said to have committed the
Scriptures to memory through hearing them read by others, and by dint of
wise meditation to have arrived at a <span id="page_520">p. 520</span>
<span id="v.iii-Page_520"></span> thorough understanding of them; or by
that barbarian slave Christianus, of whom I have lately heard from very
respectable and trustworthy witnesses, who, without any teaching from
man, attained a full knowledge of the art of reading simply through
prayer that it might be revealed to him; after three days’ supplication
obtaining his request that he might read through a book presented to him
on the spot by the astonished bystanders.

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>5.  But if any one thinks that these stories
are false, I do not strongly insist on them.  For, as I am dealing with
Christians who profess to understand the Scriptures without any
directions from man (and if the fact be so, they boast of a real
advantage, and one of no ordinary kind), they must surely grant that
every one of us learnt his own language by hearing it constantly from
childhood, and that any other language we have learnt,—Greek, or Hebrew,
or any of the rest,—we have learnt either in the same way, by hearing it
spoken, or from a human teacher.  Now, then, suppose we advise all our
brethren not to teach their children any of these things, because on the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit the apostles immediately began to speak
the language of every race; and warn every one who has not had a like
experience that he need not consider himself a Christian, or may at
least doubt whether he has yet received the Holy Spirit?  No, no; rather
let us put away false pride and learn whatever can be learnt from man;
and let him who teaches another communicate what he has himself received
without arrogance and without jealousy.  And do not let us tempt Him in
whom we have believed, lest, being ensnared by such wiles of the enemy
and by our own perversity, we may even refuse to go to the churches to
hear the gospel itself, or to read a book, or to listen to another
reading or preaching, in the hope that we shall be carried up to the
third heaven, “whether in the body or out of the body,” as the apostle
says, <span id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) and there hear
unspeakable words, such as it is not lawful for man to utter, or see the
Lord Jesus Christ and hear the gospel from His own lips rather than from
those of men.

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span>6.  Let us beware of such dangerous
temptations of pride, and let us rather consider the fact that the
Apostle Paul himself, although stricken down and admonished by the voice
of God from heaven, was yet sent to a man to receive the sacraments and
be admitted into the Church; <span id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708)
and that Cornelius the centurion, although an angel announced to him
that his prayers were heard and his alms had in remembrance, was yet
handed over to Peter for instruction, and not only received the
sacraments from the apostle’s hands, but was also instructed by him as
to the proper objects of faith, hope, and love. <span
id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709)   And without doubt it was
*possible* to have done everything through the instrumentality of
angels, but the condition of our race would have been much more degraded
if God had not chosen to make use of men as the ministers of His word to
their fellow-men.  For how could that be true which is written, “The
temple of God is holy, which temple ye are,” <span
id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710) if God gave forth no oracles from
His human temple, but communicated everything that He wished to be
taught to men by voices from heaven, or through the ministration of
angels?  Moreover, love itself, which binds men together in the bond of
unity, would have no means of pouring soul into soul, and, as it were,
mingling them one with another, if men never learnt anything from their
fellow-men.

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span>7.  And we know that the eunuch who was
reading Isaiah the prophet, and did not understand what he read, was not
sent by the apostle to an angel, nor was it an angel who explained to
him what he did not understand, nor was he inwardly illuminated by the
grace of God without the interposition of man; on the contrary, at the
suggestion of God, Philip, who *did* understand the prophet, came to
him, and sat with him, and in human words, and with a human tongue,
opened to him the Scriptures. <span id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711)
  Did not God talk with Moses, and yet he, with great wisdom and entire
absence of jealous pride, accepted the plan of his father-in-law, a man
of an alien race, for ruling and administering the affairs of the great
nation entrusted to him? <span id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712)  
For Moses knew that a wise plan, in whatever mind it might originate,
was to be ascribed not to the man who devised it, but to Him who is the
Truth, the unchangeable God.

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span>8.  In the last place, every one who boasts
that he, through divine illumination, understands the obscurities of
Scripture, though not instructed in any rules of interpretation, at the
same time believes, and rightly believes, that this power is not his
own, in the sense of originating with himself, but is the gift of God. 
For so he seeks God’s glory, not his own.  But reading and
understanding, as he does, without the aid of any human interpreter, why
does he himself undertake to interpret for others?  Why does he not
rather send them direct to God, that they too may learn by the inward
teaching of the Spirit without the help of man?  The truth is, he fears
to incur the re <span id="page_521">p. 521</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_521"></span> proach:  “Thou wicked and slothful servant,
thou oughtest to have put my money to the exchangers.” <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713)   Seeing, then, that these men
teach others, either through speech or writing, what they understand,
surely they cannot blame me if I likewise teach not only what they
understand, but also the rules of interpretation they follow.  For no
one ought to consider anything as his own, except perhaps what is
false.  All truth is of Him who says, “I am the truth.” <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714)   For what have we that we did not
receive? and if we have received it, why do we glory, as if we had not
received it? <span id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715)

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span>9.  He who reads to an audience pronounces
aloud the words he sees before him:  he who teaches reading, does it
that others may be able to read for themselves.  Each, however,
communicates to others what he has learnt himself.  Just so, the man who
explains to an audience the passages of Scripture he understands is like
one who reads aloud the words before him.  On the other hand, the man
who lays down rules for interpretation is like one who teaches reading,
that is, shows others how to read for themselves.  So that, just as he
who knows how to read is not dependent on some one else, when he finds a
book, to tell him what is written in it, so the man who is in possession
of the rules which I here attempt to lay down, if he meet with an
obscure passage in the books which he reads, will not need an
interpreter to lay open the secret to him, but, holding fast by certain
rules, and following up certain indications, will arrive at the hidden
sense without any error, or at least without falling into any gross
absurdity.  And so although it will sufficiently appear in the course of
the work itself that no one can justly object to this undertaking of
mine, which has no other object than to be of service, yet as it seemed
convenient to reply at the outset to any who might make preliminary
objections, such is the start I have thought good to make on the road I
am about to traverse in this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[520:1708](1020695.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> [2 Cor.
12.2-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[520:1709](1020695.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span> [Acts
9.3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)<span id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[520:1710](1020695.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="v.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span> [Acts
10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#000)<span id="v.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[520:1711](1020695.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="v.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="v.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[520:1712](1020695.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="v.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span> [Acts
8.26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026)<span id="v.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[520:1713](1020695.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="v.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span> [Ex.
18.13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013)<span id="v.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[521:1714](1020695.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="v.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span> [Matt.
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span id="v.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[521:1715](1020695.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="v.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="v.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[521:1716](1020695.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="v.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span> [1 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="v.iii-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](1020696)
