[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020355)  [Next](1020357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.17"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.17-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.17-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—What Defence is Made by Sound
Faith Regarding God’s Unchangeable Counsel and Will, Against the
Reasonings of Those Who Hold that the Works of God are Eternally
Repeated in Revolving Cycles that Restore All Things as They
Were.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.17-p2"></span>Of this, too, I have no doubt, that
before the first man was created, there never had been a man at all,
neither this same man himself recurring by I know not what cycles, and
having made I know not how many revolutions, nor any other of similar
nature.  From this belief I am not frightened by philosophical
arguments, among which that is reckoned the most acute which is founded
on the assertion that the infinite cannot be comprehended by any mode of
knowledge.  Consequently, they argue, God has in his own mind finite
conceptions of all finite things which He makes.  Now it cannot be
supposed that His goodness was ever idle; for if it were, there should
be ascribed to Him an awakening to activity in time, from a past
eternity of inactivity, as if He repented of an idleness that had no
beginning, and proceeded, therefore, to make a beginning of work.  This
being the case, they say it must be that the same things are always
repeated, and that as they pass, so they are destined always to return,
whether amidst all these changes the world remains the same,—the world
which has always been, and yet was created,—or that the world in these
revolutions is perpetually dying out and being renewed; otherwise, if we
point to a time when the works of God were begun, it would be believed
that He considered His past eternal leisure to be inert and indolent,
and therefore condemned and altered it as displeasing to Himself.  Now
if God is supposed to have been indeed always making temporal things,
but different from one another, and one after the other, so, that He
thus came at last to make man, whom He had never made before, then it
may seem that He made man not with knowledge (for they suppose no
knowledge can comprehend the infinite succession of creatures), but at
the dictate of the hour, as it struck him at the moment, with a sudden
and accidental change of mind.  On the other hand, say they, if those
cycles be admitted, and if we suppose that the same temporal things are
repeated, while the world either remains identical through all these
rotations, or else dies away and is renewed, then there is ascribed to
God neither the slothful ease of a past eternity, nor a rash and
unforeseen creation.  And if the same things be not thus repeated in
cycles, then they cannot by any science or prescience be comprehended in
their endless diversity.  Even though reason could not refute, faith
would smile at these argumentations, with which the godless endeavor to
turn our simple piety from the right way, that we may walk with them “in
a circle.”  But by the help of the Lord our God, even reason, and that
readily enough, shatters these revolving circles which conjecture
frames.  For that which specially leads these men astray to refer their
own circles to the straight path of truth, is, that they measure by
their own human, changeable, and narrow intellect the divine mind, which
is absolutely unchangeable, infinitely capacious, and without succession
of thought, counting all things without number.  So that saying of the
apostle comes true of them, for, “comparing themselves with themselves,
they do not understand.” <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553)   For
because they do, in virtue of a new purpose, whatever new thing has
occurred to them to be done (their minds being changeable), they
conclude it is so with God; and thus compare, not God,—for they cannot
conceive God, but think of one like themselves when they think of
Him,—not God, but themselves, and not with Him, but with themselves. 
For our part, we dare not believe that God is affected in one way when
He works, in another when He rests.  Indeed, to say that He is affected
at all, is an abuse of language, since it implies that there comes to be
something in His nature which was not there before.  For he who is
affected is acted upon, and whatever is acted upon is changeable.  His
leisure, therefore, is no laziness, indolence, inactivity; as in His
work is no <span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="iv.XII.17-Page_238"></span> labor, effort, industry.  He can act
while He reposes, and repose while He acts.  He can begin a new work
with (not a new, but) an eternal design; and what He has not made
before, He does not now begin to make because He repents of His former
repose.  But when one speaks of His former repose and subsequent
operation (and I know not how men can understand these things), this
“former” and “subsequent” are applied only to the things created, which
formerly did not exist, and subsequently came into existence.  But in
God the former purpose is not altered and obliterated by the subsequent
and different purpose, but by one and the same eternal and unchangeable
will He effected regarding the things He created, both that formerly, so
long as they were not, they should not be, and that subsequently, when
they began to be, they should come into existence.  And thus, perhaps,
He would show, in a very striking way, to those who have eyes for such
things, how independent He is of what He makes, and how it is of His own
gratuitous goodness He creates, since from eternity He dwelt without
creatures in no less perfect a blessedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_553"></span>[237:554](1020356.htm#fr_553) <span
id="iv.XII.17-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.17-p3"></span> [2 Cor.
10.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XII.17-p3.1"></span>.  Here, and in *Enar*. *in Ps.* xxxiv. and
also in *Cont. Faust.* xxii. 47, Augustin follows the Greek, and not the
Vulgate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020357)
