[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020585)  [Next](1020587) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.13"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—Of the Universal Peace Which the
Law of Nature Preserves Through All Disturbances, and by Which Every One
Reaches His Desert in a Way Regulated by the Just Judge.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.13-p2"></span>The peace of the body then consists in
the duly proportioned arrangement of its parts.  The peace of the
irrational soul is the harmonious repose of the appetites, and that of
the rational soul the harmony of knowledge and action.  The peace of
body and soul is the well-ordered and harmonious life and health of the
living creature.  Peace between man and God is the well-ordered
obedience of faith to eternal law.  Peace between man and man is
well-ordered concord.  Domestic peace is the well-ordered concord
between those of the family who rule and those who obey.  Civil peace is
a similar concord among the citizens.  The peace of the celestial city
is the perfectly ordered and harmonious enjoyment of God, and of one
another in God.  The peace of all things is the tranquillity of order. 
Order is the distribution which allots things equal and unequal, each to
its own place.  And hence, though the miserable, in so far as they are
such, do certainly not enjoy peace, but are severed from that
tranquillity of order in which there is no disturbance, nevertheless,
inasmuch as they are deservedly and justly miserable, they are by their
very misery connected with order.  They are not, indeed, conjoined with
the blessed, but they are disjoined from them by the law of order.  And
though they are disquieted, their circumstances are notwithstanding
adjusted to them, and consequently they have some tranquillity of order,
and therefore some peace.  But they are wretched because, although not
wholly miserable, they are not in that place where any mixture of misery
is impossible.  They would, however, be more wretched if they had not
that peace which arises from being in harmony with the natural order of
things.  When they suffer, their peace is in so far disturbed; but their
peace continues in so far as they do not suffer, and in so far as their
nature continues to exist.  As, then, there may be life without pain,
while there cannot be pain without some kind of life, so there may be
peace without war, but there cannot be war without some kind of peace,
because war supposes the existence of some natures to wage it, and these
natures cannot exist without peace of one kind or other.

<span id="iv.XIX.13-p3"></span>And therefore there is a nature in which
evil does not or even cannot exist; but there cannot be a nature in
which there is no good.  Hence not even the nature of the devil himself
is evil, in so far as it is nature, but it was made evil by being
perverted.  Thus he did not abide in the truth, <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) but could not escape the judgment
of the Truth; he did not abide in the tranquillity of order, but did not
therefore escape the power of the Ordainer.  The good imparted by God to
his nature did not screen him from the justice of God by which order was
preserved in his punishment; neither did God punish the good which He
had created, but the evil which the devil had committed.  God did not
take back all He had imparted to his nature, but something He took and
something He left, that there might remain enough to be sensible of the
loss of what was taken.  And this very sensibility to pain is evidence
of the good which has been taken away and the good which has been left. 
For, were nothing good left, there could be no pain on account of the
good which had been lost.  For he who sins is still worse if he rejoices
in his loss of righteousness.  But he who is in pain, if he derives no
benefit from it, mourns at least the loss of health.  And as
righteousness and health are both good things, and as the loss of any
good thing is matter of grief, not of joy,—if, at least, there is no
compensation, as spiritual righteousness may compensate for the loss of
bodily health,—certainly it is more suitable for <span id="page_410">p.
410</span> <span id="iv.XIX.13-Page_410"></span> a wicked man to grieve
in punishment than to rejoice in his fault.  As, then, the joy of a
sinner who has abandoned what is good is evidence of a bad will, so his
grief for the good he has lost when he is punished is evidence of a good
nature.  For he who laments the peace his nature has lost is stirred to
do so by some relics of peace which make his nature friendly to itself. 
And it is very just that in the final punishment the wicked and godless
should in anguish bewail the loss of the natural advantages they
enjoyed, and should perceive that they were most justly taken from them
by that God whose benign liberality they had despised.  God, then, the
most wise Creator and most just Ordainer of all natures, who placed the
human race upon earth as its greatest ornament, imparted to men some
good things adapted to this life, to wit, temporal peace, such as we can
enjoy in this life from health and safety and human fellowship, and all
things needful for the preservation and recovery of this peace, such as
the objects which are accommodated to our outward senses, light, night,
the air, and waters suitable for us, and everything the body requires to
sustain, shelter, heal, or beautify it:  and all under this most
equitable condition, that every man who made a good use of these
advantages suited to the peace of this mortal condition, should receive
ampler and better blessings, namely, the peace of immortality,
accompanied by glory and honor in an endless life made fit for the
enjoyment of God and of one another in God; but that he who used the
present blessings badly should both lose them and should not receive the
others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[409:1282](1020586.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="iv.XIX.13-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.13-p4"></span> [John
8.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="iv.XIX.13-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020587)
