[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020830)  [Next](1020832) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.13"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—The Hearer Must Be Moved as Well
as Instructed.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.13-p2"></span>29.  But for the sake of those who are so
fastidious that they do not care for truth unless it is put in the form
of a pleasing discourse, no small place has been assigned in <span
id="page_584">p. 584</span> <span id="v.IV_1.13-Page_584"></span>
eloquence to the art of pleasing.  And yet even this is not enough for
those stubborn-minded men who both understand and are pleased with the
teacher’s discourse, without deriving any profit from it.  For what does
it profit a man that he both confesses the truth and praises the
eloquence, if he does not yield his consent, when it is only for the
sake of securing his consent that the speaker in urging the truth gives
careful attention to what he says?  If the truths taught are such that
to believe or to know them is enough, to give one’s assent implies
nothing more than to confess that they are true.  When, however, the
truth taught is one that must be carried into practice, and that is
taught for the very purpose of being practiced, it is useless to be
persuaded of the truth of what is said, it is useless to be pleased with
the manner in which it is said, if it be not so learnt as to be
practiced.  The eloquent divine, then, when he is urging a practical
truth, must not only teach so as to give instruction, and please so as
to keep up the attention, but he must also sway the mind so as to subdue
the will.  For if a man be not moved by the force of truth, though it is
demonstrated to his own confession, and clothed in beauty of style,
nothing remains but to subdue him by the power of eloquence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020832)
