[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020106)  [Next](1020108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.2"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—Of Those Things Which are Contained
in Books Second and Third.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.2-p2"></span>We had promised, then, that we would say
<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="iv.IV.2-Page_65"></span>
something against those who attribute the calamities of the Roman
republic to our religion, and that we would recount the evils, as many
and great as we could remember or might deem sufficient, which that
city, or the provinces belonging to its empire, had suffered before
their sacrifices were prohibited, all of which would beyond doubt have
been attributed to us, if our religion had either already shone on them,
or had thus prohibited their sacrilegious rites.  These things we have,
as we think, fully disposed of in the second and third books, treating
in the second of evils in morals, which alone or chiefly are to be
accounted evils; and in the third, of those which only fools dread to
undergo—namely, those of the body or of outward things—which for the
most part the good also suffer.  But those evils by which they
themselves become evil, they take, I do not say patiently, but with
pleasure.  And how few evils have I related concerning that one city and
its empire!  Not even all down to the time of Cæsar Augustus.  What if I
had chosen to recount and enlarge on those evils, not which men have
inflicted on each other; such as the devastations and destructions of
war, but which happen in earthly things, from the elements of the world
itself.  Of such evils Apuleius speaks briefly in one passage of that
book which he wrote, *De Mundo*, saying that all earthly things are
subject to change, overthrow, and destruction. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)   For, to use his own words, by
excessive earthquakes the ground has burst asunder, and cities with
their inhabitants have been clean destroyed:  by sudden rains whole
regions have been washed away; those also which formerly had been
continents, have been insulated by strange and new-come waves, and
others, by the subsiding of the sea, have been made passable by the foot
of man:  by winds and storms cities have been overthrown; fires have
flashed forth from the clouds, by which regions in the East being burnt
up have perished; and on the western coasts the like destructions have
been caused by the bursting forth of waters and floods.  So, formerly,
from the lofty craters of Etna, rivers of fire kindled by God have
flowed like a torrent down the steeps.  If I had wished to collect from
history wherever I could, these and similar instances, where should I
have finished what happened even in those times before the name of
Christ had put down those of their idols, so vain and hurtful to true
salvation?  I promised that I should also point out which of their
customs, and for what cause, the true God, in whose power all kingdoms
are, had deigned to favor to the enlargement of their empire; and how
those whom they think gods can have profited them nothing, but much
rather hurt them by deceiving and beguiling them; so that it seems to me
I must now speak of these things, and chiefly of the increase of the
Roman empire.  For I have already said not a little, especially in the
second book, about the many evils introduced into their manners by the
hurtful deceits of the demons whom they worshipped as gods.  But
throughout all the three books already completed, where it appeared
suitable, we have set forth how much succor God, through the name of
Christ, to whom the barbarians beyond the custom of war paid so much
honor, has bestowed on the good and bad, according as it is written,
“Who maketh His sun to rise on the good and the evil, and giveth rain to
the just and the unjust.” <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[65:161](1020107.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.IV.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.2-p3"></span> Comp. Bacon’s *Essay on the Vicissitudes
of Things*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[65:162](1020107.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.IV.2-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.2-p4"></span> [Matt.
5.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iv.IV.2-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020108)
