[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020096)  [Next](1020098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.24"></span>

<span id="iv.III.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Of the Civil Dissension
Occasioned by the Sedition of the Gracchi.</span>

<span id="iv.III.24-p2"></span>The civil wars originated in the
seditions which the Gracchi excited regarding the agrarian laws; for
they were minded to divide among the people the lands which were
wrongfully possessed by the nobility.  But to reform an abuse of so long
standing was an enterprise full of peril, or rather, as the event
proved, of destruction.  For what disasters accompanied the death of the
older Gracchus! what slaughter ensued when, shortly after, the younger
brother met the same fate!  For noble and ignoble were indiscriminately
massacred; and this not by legal authority and procedure, but by mobs
and armed rioters.  After the death of the younger Gracchus, the consul
Lucius Opimius, who had given battle to him within the city, and had
defeated and put to the sword both himself and his confederates, and had
massacred many of the citizens, instituted a judicial examination of
others, and is reported to have put to death as many as 3000 men.  From
this it may be gathered how many fell in the riotous encounters, when
the result even of a judicial investigation was so bloody.  The assassin
of Gracchus himself sold his head to the consul for its weight in gold,
such being the previous agreement.  In this massacre, too, Marcus
Fulvius, a man of consular rank, with all his children, was put to
death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020098)
