[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020757)  [Next](1020759) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Superstition of Astrologers.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxi-p2"></span>32.  Nor can we exclude from this kind of
superstition those who were called *genethliaci*, on account of their
attention to birthdays, but are now commonly called *mathematici*.  For
these, too, although they may seek with pains for the true position of
the stars at the time of our birth, and may sometimes even find it out,
yet in so far as they attempt thence to predict our actions, or the
consequences of our actions, grievously err, and sell inexperienced men
into a miserable bondage.  For when any freeman goes to an as <span
id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span id="v.v.xxi-Page_546"></span> trologer
of this kind, he gives money that he may come away the slave either of
Mars or of Venus, or rather, perhaps, of all the stars to which those
who first fell into this error, and handed it on to posterity, have
given the names either of beasts on account of their likeness to beasts,
or of men with a view to confer honor on those men.  And this is not to
be wondered at, when we consider that even in times more recent and
nearer our own, the Romans made an attempt to dedicate the star which we
call Lucifer to the name and honor of Cæsar.  And this would, perhaps,
have been done, and the name handed down to distant ages, only that his
ancestress Venus had given her name to this star before him, and could
not by any law transfer to her heirs what she had never possessed, nor
sought to possess, in life.  For where a place was vacant, or not held
in honor of any of the dead of former times, the usual proceeding in
such cases was carried out.  For example, we have changed the names of
the months Quintilis and Sextilis to July and August, naming them in
honor of the men Julius Cæsar and Augustus Cæsar; and from this instance
any one who cares can easily see that the stars spoken of above formerly
wandered in the heavens without the names they now bear.  But as the men
were dead whose memory people were either compelled by royal power or
impelled by human folly to honor, they seemed to think that in putting
their names upon the stars they were raising the dead men themselves to
heaven.  But whatever they may be called by men, still there are stars
which God has made and set in order after His own pleasure, and they
have a fixed movement, by which the seasons are distinguished and
varied.  And when any one is born, it is easy to observe the point at
which this movement has arrived, by use of the rules discovered and laid
down by those who are rebuked by Holy Writ in these terms:  “For if they
were able to know so much that they could weigh the world, how did they
not more easily find out the Lord thereof?” <span
id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[546:1804](1020758.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="v.v.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxi-p3"></span> [Wisd.
13.9](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#009)<span id="v.v.xxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020759)
