[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020627)  [Next](1020629) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Of the Sacrifices Offered to God
by the Saints, Which are to Be Pleasing to Him, as in the Primitive Days
and Former Years.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p2"></span>And it was with the design of showing that
His city shall not then follow this custom, that God said that the sons
of Levi should offer sacrifices in righteousness,—not therefore in sin,
and consequently not for sin.  And hence we see how vainly the Jews
promise themselves a return of the old times of sacrificing according to
the law of the old testament, grounding on the words which follow, “And
the sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasing to the Lord, as
in the primitive days, and as in former years.”  For in the times of the
law they offered sacrifices not in righteousness but in sins, offering
especially and primarily for sins, so much so that even the priest
himself, whom we must suppose to have been their most righteous man, was
accustomed to offer, according to God’s commandments, first for his own
sins, and then for the sins of the people.  And therefore we must
explain how we are to understand the words, “as in the primitive days,
and as in former years;” for perhaps he alludes to the time in which our
first parents were in paradise.  Then, indeed, intact and pure from all
stain and blemish of sin, they offered themselves to God as the purest
sacrifices.  But since they were banished thence on account of their
transgression, and human nature was condemned in them, with the
exception of the one Mediator and those who have been baptized, and are
as yet infants, “there is none clean from stain, not even the babe whose
life has been but for a day upon the earth.” <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460)   But if it be replied that those
who offer in faith may be said to offer in righteousness, because the
righteous lives by faith, <span id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461) —he
deceives himself, however, if he says that he has no sin, and therefore
he does not say so, because he lives by faith,—will any man say this
time of faith can be placed on an equal footing with that consummation
when they who offer sacrifices in righteousness shall be purified by the
fire of the last judgment?  And consequently, since it must be believed
that after such a cleansing the righteous shall retain no sin, assuredly
that time, so far as regards its freedom from sin, can be compared to no
other period, unless to that during which our first parents lived in
paradise in the most innocent happiness before their transgression.  It
is this period, then, which is properly understood when it is said, “as
in the primitive days, and as in former years.”  For in Isaiah, too,
after the new heavens and the new earth have been promised, among other
elements in the blessedness of the saints which are there depicted by
allegories and figures, from giving an adequate explanation of which I
am prevented by a desire to avoid prolixity, it is said, “According to
the days of the tree of <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="iv.XX.26-Page_447"></span> life shall be the days of my
people.” <span id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462)   And who that has
looked at Scripture does not know where God planted the tree of life,
from whose fruit He excluded our first parents when their own iniquity
ejected them from paradise, and round which a terrible and fiery fence
was set?

<span id="iv.XX.26-p6"></span>But if any one contends that those days of
the tree of life mentioned by the prophet Isaiah are the present times
of the Church of Christ, and that Christ Himself is prophetically called
the Tree of Life, because He is Wisdom, and of wisdom Solomon says, “It
is a tree of life to all who embrace it;” <span
id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463) and if they maintain that our first
parents did not pass *years* in paradise, but were driven from it so
soon that none of their children were begotten there, and that therefore
that time cannot be alluded to in words which run, “as in the primitive
days, and as in former years,” I forbear entering on this question, lest
by discussing everything I become prolix, and leave the whole subject in
uncertainty.  For I see another meaning, which should keep us from
believing that a restoration of the primitive days and former years of
the legal sacrifices could have been promised to us by the prophet as a
great boon.  For the animals selected as victims under the old law were
required to be immaculate, and free from all blemish whatever, and
symbolized holy men free from all sin, the only instance of which
character was found in Christ.  As, therefore, after the judgment those
who are worthy of such purification shall be purified even by fire, and
shall be rendered thoroughly sinless, and shall offer themselves to God
in righteousness, and be indeed victims immaculate and free from all
blemish whatever, they shall then certainly be, “as in the primitive
days, and as in former years,” when the purest victims were offered, the
shadow of this future reality.  For there shall then be in the body and
soul of the saints the purity which was symbolized in the bodies of
these victims.

<span id="iv.XX.26-p8"></span>Then, with reference to those who are
worthy not of cleansing but of damnation, He says, “And I will draw near
to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against evildoers and
against adulterers;” and after enumerating other damnable crimes, He
adds, “For I am the Lord your God, and I am not changed.”  It is as if
He said, Though your fault has changed you for the worse, and my grace
has changed you for the better, I am not changed.  And he says that He
Himself will be a witness, because in His judgment He needs no
witnesses; and that He will be “swift,” either because He is to come
suddenly, and the judgment which seemed to lag shall be very swift by
His unexpected arrival, or because He will convince the consciences of
men directly and without any prolix harangue.  “For,” as it is written,
“in the thoughts of the wicked His examination shall be
conducted.” <span id="fr_1464"></span>[1465](#fn_1464)   And the apostle
says, “The thoughts accusing or else excusing, in the day in which God
shall judge the hidden things of men, according to my gospel in Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_1465"></span>[1466](#fn_1465)   Thus, then, shall
the Lord be a swift witness, when He shall suddenly bring back into the
memory that which shall convince and punish the conscience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[446:1461](1020628.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iv.XX.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p3"></span> [Job
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)<span id="iv.XX.26-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[446:1462](1020628.htm#fr_1461) <span
id="iv.XX.26-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p4"></span> [Rom.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="iv.XX.26-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[447:1463](1020628.htm#fr_1462) <span
id="iv.XX.26-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p5"></span> [Isa.
65.22](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#022)<span id="iv.XX.26-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[447:1464](1020628.htm#fr_1463) <span
id="iv.XX.26-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p7"></span> [Prov.
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018)<span id="iv.XX.26-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[447:1465](1020628.htm#fr_1464) <span
id="iv.XX.26-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p9"></span> [Wisd.
1.9](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#009)<span id="iv.XX.26-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[447:1466](1020628.htm#fr_1465) <span
id="iv.XX.26-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.26-p10"></span> [Rom.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)<span id="iv.XX.26-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020629)
