[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020242)  [Next](1020244) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.24"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—How Hermes Openly Confessed the
Error of His Forefathers, the Coming Destruction of Which He
Nevertheless Bewailed.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p2"></span>After a long interval, Hermes again
comes back to the subject of the gods which men have made, saying as
follows:  “But enough on this subject.  Let us return to man and to
reason, that divine gift on account of which man has been called a
rational animal.  For the things which have been said concerning man,
wonderful though they are, are less wonderful than those which have been
said concerning reason.  For man to discover the divine nature, and to
make it, surpasses the wonder of all other wonderful things.  Because,
therefore, our forefathers erred very far with respect to the knowledge
of the gods, through incredulity and through want of attention to their
worship and service, they invented this art of making gods; and this art
once invented, they associated with it a suitable virtue borrowed from
universal nature, and being incapable of making souls, they evoked those
of demons or of angels, and united them with these holy images and
divine mysteries, in order that through these souls the images might
have power to do good or harm to men.”  I know not whether the demons
themselves could have been made, even by adjuration, to confess as he
has confessed in these words:  “Because our forefathers erred very far
with respect to the knowledge of the gods, through incredulity and
through want of attention to their worship and service, they invented
the art of making gods.”  Does he say that it was a moderate degree of
error which resulted in their discovery of the art of making gods, or
was he content to say “they erred?”  No; he must needs add “very far,”
and say, “*They erred very far*.”  It was this great error and
incredulity, then, of their forefathers who did not attend to the
worship and service of the gods, which was the origin of the art of
making gods.  And yet this wise man grieves over the ruin of this art at
some future time, as if it were a divine religion.  Is he not verily
compelled by divine influence, on the one hand, to reveal the past error
of his forefathers, and by a diabolical influence, on the other hand, to
bewail the future punishment of demons?  For if their forefathers, by
erring very far with respect to the knowledge of the gods, through
incredulity and aversion of mind from their worship and service,
invented the art of making gods, what wonder is it that all that is done
by this detestable art, which is opposed to the divine religion, should
be taken away by that religion, when truth corrects error, faith refutes
incredulity, and conversion rectifies aversion?

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p3"></span>For if he had only said, without
mentioning the cause, that his forefathers had discovered the art of
making gods, it would have been our duty, if we paid any regard to what
is right and pious, to consider and to see that they could never have
attained to this art if they had not erred from the truth, if they had
believed those things which are worthy of God, if they had attended to
divine worship and service.  However, if we alone should say that the
causes of this art were to be found in the great error and incredulity
of men, and aversion of the mind erring from and unfaithful to divine
religion, the impudence of those who resist the truth were in some way
to be borne with; but when he who admires in man, above all other
things, this power which it has been granted him to practise, and
sorrows because a time is coming when all those figments of gods
invented by men shall even be commanded by the laws to be taken
away,—when even this man confesses nevertheless, and explains the causes
which led to the discovery of this art, saying that their ancestors,
through great error and incredulity, and through not attending to the
worship and service of the gods, invented this art of making gods,—what
ought we to say, or rather to do, but to give to the Lord our God all
the thanks we are able, because He has taken <span id="page_162">p.
162</span> <span id="iv.VIII.24-Page_162"></span> away those things by
causes the contrary of those which led to their institution?  For that
which the prevalence of error instituted, the way of truth took away;
that which incredulity instituted, faith took away; that which aversion
from divine worship and service instituted, conversion to the one true
and holy God took away.  Nor was this the case only in Egypt, for which
country alone the spirit of the demons lamented in Hermes, but in all
the earth, which sings to the Lord a new song, <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) as the truly holy and truly prophetic
Scriptures have predicted, in which it is written, “Sing unto the Lord a
new song; sing unto the Lord, all the earth.”  For the title of this
psalm is, “When the house was built after the captivity.”  For a house
is being built to the Lord in all the earth, even the city of God, which
is the holy Church, after that captivity in which demons held captive
those men who, through faith in God, became living stones in the house.
For although man made gods, it did not follow that he who made them was
not held captive by them, when, by worshipping them, he was drawn into
fellowship with them,—into the fellowship not of stolid idols, but of
cunning demons; for what are idols but what they are represented to be
in the same scriptures, “They have eyes, but they do not see,” <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) and, though artistically fashioned,
are still without life and sensation?  But unclean spirits, associated
through that wicked art with these same idols, have miserably taken
captive the souls of their worshippers, by bringing them down into
fellowship with themselves.  Whence the apostle says, “We know that an
idol is nothing, but those things which the Gentiles sacrifice they
sacrifice to demons, and not to God; and I would not ye should have
fellowship with demons.” <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328)   After
this captivity, therefore, in which men were held by malign demons, the
house of God is being built in all the earth; whence the title of that
psalm in which it is said, “Sing unto the Lord a new song; sing unto the
Lord, all the earth.  Sing unto the Lord, bless His name; declare well
His salvation from day to day.  Declare His glory among the nations,
among all people His wonderful things.  For great is the Lord, and much
to be praised:  He is terrible above all gods.  For all the gods of the
nations are demons:  but the Lord made the heavens.” <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329)

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p8"></span>Wherefore he who sorrowed because a time
was coming when the worship of idols should be abolished, and the
domination of the demons over those who worshipped them, wished, under
the influence of a demon, that that captivity should always continue, at
the cessation of which that psalm celebrates the building of the house
of the Lord in all the earth.  Hermes foretold these things with grief,
the prophet with joyfulness; and because the Spirit is victorious who
sang these things through the ancient prophets, even Hermes himself was
compelled in a wonderful manner to confess, that those very things which
he wished not to be removed, and at the prospect of whose removal he was
sorrowful, had been instituted, not by prudent, faithful, and religious,
but by erring and unbelieving men, averse to the worship and service of
the gods.  And although he calls them gods, nevertheless, when he says
that they were made by such men as we certainly ought not to be, he
shows, whether he will or not, that they are not to be worshipped by
those who do not resemble these image-makers, that is, by prudent,
faithful, and religious men, at the same time also making it manifest
that the very men who made them involved themselves in the worship of
those as gods who were not gods.  For true is the saying of the prophet,
“If a man *make* gods, lo, they are no gods.” <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330)   Such gods, therefore, acknowledged
by such worshippers and made by such men, did Hermes call “gods made by
men,” that is to say, demons, through some art of I know not what
description, bound by the chains of their own lusts to images.  But,
nevertheless, he did not agree with that opinion of the Platonic
Apuleius, of which we have already shown the incongruity and absurdity,
namely, that they were interpreters and intercessors between the gods
whom God made, and men whom the same God made, bringing to God the
prayers of men, and from God the gifts given in answer to these
prayers.  For it is exceedingly stupid to believe that gods whom men
have made have more influence with gods whom God has made than men
themselves have, whom the very same God has made.  And consider, too,
that it is a demon which, bound by a man to an image by means of an
impious art, has been made a god, but a god to such a man only, not to
every man.  What kind of god, therefore, is that which no man would make
but one erring, incredulous, and averse to the true God?  Moreover, if
the demons which are worshipped in the temples, being introduced by some
kind of strange art into images, that is, into visible representations
of themselves, by those men who by this art made gods when they were
straying away from, and were averse to the worship and service of the
gods,—if, I say, those demons <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="iv.VIII.24-Page_163"></span> are neither mediators nor interpreters
between men and the gods, both on account of their own most wicked and
base manners, and because men, though erring, incredulous, and averse
from the worship and service of the gods, are nevertheless beyond doubt
better than the demons whom they themselves have evoked, then it remains
to be affirmed that what power they possess they possess as demons,
doing harm by bestowing pretended benefits,—harm all the greater for the
deception,—or else openly and undisguisedly doing evil to men.  They
cannot, however, do anything of this kind unless where they are
permitted by the deep and secret providence of God, and then only so far
as they are permitted.  When, however, they are permitted, it is not
because they, being midway between men and the gods, have through the
friendship of the gods great power over men; for these demons cannot
possibly be friends to the good gods who dwell in the holy and heavenly
habitation, by whom we mean holy angels and rational creatures, whether
thrones, or dominations, or principalities, or powers, from whom they
are as far separated in disposition and character as vice is distant
from virtue, wickedness from goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_326"></span>[162:327](1020243.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iv.VIII.24-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p4"></span> [Ps.
96.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)<span
id="iv.VIII.24-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[162:328](1020243.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iv.VIII.24-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p5"></span> [Ps.
115.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005)<span
id="iv.VIII.24-p5.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[162:329](1020243.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iv.VIII.24-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020)<span id="iv.VIII.24-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[162:330](1020243.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iv.VIII.24-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p7"></span> [Ps.
96.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)<span
id="iv.VIII.24-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[162:331](1020243.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iv.VIII.24-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.24-p9"></span> [Jer.
16.20](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#020)<span
id="iv.VIII.24-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020244)
