[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020442)  [Next](1020444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.22"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Of the Fall of the Sons of God Who
Were Captivated by the Daughters of Men, Whereby All, with the Exception
of Eight Persons, Deservedly Perished in the Deluge.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.22-p2"></span>When the human race, in the exercise of
this freedom of will, increased and advanced, there arose a mixture and
confusion of the <span id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span
id="iv.XV.22-Page_303"></span> two cities by their participation in a
common iniquity.  And this calamity, as well as the first, was
occasioned by woman, though not in the same way; for these women were
not themselves betrayed, neither did they persuade the men to sin, but
having belonged to the earthly city and society of the earthly, they had
been of corrupt manners from the first, and were loved for their bodily
beauty by the sons of God, or the citizens of the other city which
sojourns in this world.  Beauty is indeed a good gift of God; but that
the good may not think it a great good, God dispenses it even to the
wicked.  And thus, when the good that is great and proper to the good
was abandoned by the sons of God, they fell to a paltry good which is
not peculiar to the good, but common to the good and the evil; and when
they were captivated by the daughters of men, they adopted the manners
of the earthly to win them as their brides, and forsook the godly ways
they had followed in their own holy society.  And thus beauty, which is
indeed God’s handiwork, but only a temporal, carnal, and lower kind of
good, is not fitly loved in preference to God, the eternal, spiritual,
and unchangeable good.  When the miser prefers his gold to justice, it
is through no fault of the gold, but of the man; and so with every
created thing.  For though it be good, it may be loved with an evil as
well as with a good love:  it is loved rightly when it is loved
ordinately; evilly, when inordinately.  It is this which some one has
briefly said in these verses in praise of the Creator: <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839)   “These are Thine, they are good,
because Thou art good who didst create them.  There is in them nothing
of ours, unless the sin we commit when we forget the order of things,
and instead of Thee love that which Thou hast made.”

<span id="iv.XV.22-p4"></span>But if the Creator is truly loved, that
is, if He Himself is loved and not another thing in His stead, He cannot
be evilly loved; for love itself is to be ordinately loved, because we
do well to love that which, when we love it, makes us live well and
virtuously.  So that it seems to me that it is a brief but true
definition of virtue to say, it is the order of love; and on this
account, in the Canticles, the bride of Christ, the city of God, sings,
“Order love within me.” <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840)   It was
the order of this love, then, this charity or attachment, which the sons
of God disturbed when they forsook God, and were enamored of the
daughters of men. <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)   And by these
two names (sons of God and daughters of men) the two cities are
sufficiently distinguished.  For though the former were by nature
children of men, they had come into possession of another name by
grace.  For in the same Scripture in which the sons of God are said to
have loved the daughters of men, they are also called angels of God;
whence many suppose that they were not men but angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_839"></span>[303:840](1020443.htm#fr_839) <span
id="iv.XV.22-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.22-p3"></span> Or, according to another reading, “Which
I briefly said in these verses in praise of a taper.”

<span id="fn_840"></span>[303:841](1020443.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iv.XV.22-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.22-p5"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#004)<span id="iv.XV.22-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[303:842](1020443.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iv.XV.22-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.22-p6"></span> See *De Doct. Christ.* i. 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020444)
