[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020658)  [Next](1020660) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—What It is to Have Christ for a
Foundation, and Who They are to Whom Salvation as by Fire is
Promised.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p2"></span>But, say they, the catholic Christians
have Christ for a foundation, and they have not fallen away from union
with Him, no matter how depraved a life they have built on this
foundation, as wood, hay, stubble; and accordingly the well-directed
faith by which Christ is their foundation will suffice to deliver them
some time from the continuance of that fire, though it be with loss,
since those things they have built on it shall be burned.  Let the
Apostle James summarily reply to them:  “If any man say he has faith,
and have not works, can faith save him?” <span
id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570)   And who then is it, they ask, of
whom the Apostle Paul says, “But he himself shall be saved, yet so as by
fire?” <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571)   Let us join them in
their inquiry; and one thing is very certain, that it is not he of whom
James speaks, else we should make the two apostles contradict one
another, if the one says, “Though a man’s works be evil, his faith will
save him as by fire,” while the other says, “If he have not good works,
can his faith save him?”

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p5"></span>We shall then ascertain who it is who can
be saved by fire, if we first discover what it is to have Christ for a
foundation.  And this we may very readily learn from the image itself. 
In a building the foundation is first.  Whoever, then, has Christ in his
heart, so that no earthly or temporal things—not even those that are
legitimate and allowed—are preferred to Him, has Christ as a
foundation.  But if these things be preferred, then even though a man
seem to have faith in Christ, yet Christ is not the foundation to that
man; and much more if he, in contempt of wholesome precepts, seek
forbidden gratifications, is he clearly convicted of putting Christ not
first but last, since he has despised Him as his ruler, and has
preferred to fulfill his own wicked lusts, in contempt of Christ’s
commands and allowances.  Accordingly, if any Christian man loves a
harlot, and, attaching himself to her, becomes one body, he has not now
Christ for a foundation.  But if any one loves his own wife, and loves
her as Christ would have him love her, who can doubt that he has Christ
for a foundation?  But if he loves her in the world’s fashion, carnally,
as the disease of lust prompts him, and as the Gentiles love who know
not God, even this the apostle, or rather Christ by the apostle, allows
as a venial fault.  And therefore even such a man may have Christ for a
foundation.  For so long as he does not prefer such an affection or
pleasure to Christ, Christ is his foundation, though on it he builds
wood, hay, <span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="iv.XXI.26-Page_474"></span> stubble; and therefore he shall be saved
as by fire.  For the fire of affliction shall burn such luxurious
pleasures and earthly loves, though they be not damnable, because
enjoyed in lawful wedlock.  And of this fire the fuel is bereavement,
and all those calamities which consume these joys.  Consequently the
superstructure will be loss to him who has built it, for he shall not
retain it, but shall be agonized by the loss of those things in the
enjoyment of which he found pleasure.  But by this fire he shall be
saved through virtue of the foundation, because even if a persecutor
demanded whether he would retain Christ or these things, he would prefer
Christ.  Would you hear, in the apostle’s own words, who he is who
builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones?  “He that is
unmarried,” he says, “careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how
he may please the Lord.” <span id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572)  
Would you hear who he is that buildeth wood, hay, stubble?  “But he that
is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may
please his wife. <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573)   “Every
man’s work shall be made manifest:  for the day shall declare it,”—the
day, no doubt, of tribulation—“because,” says he, “it shall be revealed
by fire.” <span id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574)   He calls
tribulation fire, just as it is elsewhere said, “The furnace proves the
vessels of the potter, and the trial of affliction righteous men.” <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575)   And “The fire shall try every
man’s work of what sort it is.  If any man’s work abide”—for a man’s
care for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord,
abides—“which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward,”—that
is, he shall reap the fruit of his care.  “But if any man’s work shall
be burned, he shall suffer loss,”—for what he loved he shall not
retain:—“ but he himself shall be saved,”—for no tribulation shall have
moved him from that stable foundation,—“yet so as by fire;” <span
id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576) for that which he possessed with
the sweetness of love he does not lose without the sharp sting of pain. 
Here, then, as seems to me, we have a fire which destroys neither, but
enriches the one, brings loss to the other, proves both.

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p11"></span>But if this passage \[of Corinthians\]
is to interpret that fire of which the Lord shall say to those on His
left hand, “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,” <span
id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) so that among these we are to
believe there are those who build on the foundation wood, hay, stubble,
and that they, through virtue of the good foundation, shall after a time
be liberated from the fire that is the award of their evil deserts, what
then shall we think of those on the right hand, to whom it shall be
said, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you,” <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578) unless that they are
those who have built on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones?
 But if the fire of which our Lord speaks is the same as that of which
the apostle says, “Yet so as by fire,” then both—that is to say, both
those on the right as well as those on the left—are to be cast into it. 
For that fire is to try both, since it is said, “For the day of the Lord
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire
shall try every man’s work of what sort it is.” <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579)   If, therefore, the fire shall try
both, in order that if any man’s work abide—*i.e*., if the
superstructure be not consumed by the fire—he may receive a reward, and
that if his work is burned he may suffer loss, certainly that fire is
not the eternal fire itself.  For into this latter fire only those on
the left hand shall be cast, and that with final and everlasting doom;
but that former fire proves those on the right hand.  But some of them
it so proves that it does not burn and consume the structure which is
found to have been built by them on Christ as the foundation; while
others of them it proves in another fashion, so as to burn what they
have built up, and thus cause them to suffer loss, while they themselves
are saved because they have retained Christ, who was laid as their sure
foundation, and have loved Him above all.  But if they are saved, then
certainly they shall stand at the right hand, and shall with the rest
hear the sentence, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you;” and not at the left hand, where those shall be who
shall not be saved, and shall therefore hear the doom, “Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire.”  For from that fire no man shall be
saved, because they all shall go away into eternal punishment, where
their worms shall not die, nor their fire be quenched, in which they
shall be tormented day and night for ever.

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p15"></span>But if it be said that in the interval
of time between the death of this body and that last day of judgment and
retribution which shall follow the resurrection, the bodies of the dead
shall be exposed to a fire of such a nature that it shall not affect
those who have not in this life indulged in such pleasures and pursuits
as shall be consumed like wood, hay, stubble, but shall affect those
others who have carried with them structures of that kind; if <span
id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span id="iv.XXI.26-Page_475"></span> it be
said that such worldliness, being venial, shall be consumed in the fire
of tribulation either here only, or here and hereafter both, or here
that it may not be hereafter,—this I do not contradict, because possibly
it is true.  For perhaps even the death of the body is itself a part of
this tribulation, for it results from the first transgression, so that
the time which follows death takes its color in each case from the
nature of the man’s building.  The persecutions, too, which have crowned
the martyrs, and which Christians of all kinds suffer, try both
buildings like a fire, consuming some, along with the builders
themselves, if Christ is not found in them as their foundation, while
others they consume without the builders, because Christ is found in
them, and they are saved, though with loss; and other buildings still
they do not consume, because such materials as abide for ever are found
in them.  In the end of the world there shall be in the time of
Antichrist tribulation such as has never before been.  How many edifices
there shall then be, of gold or of hay, built on the best foundation,
Christ Jesus, which that fire shall prove, bringing joy to some, loss to
others, but without destroying either sort, because of this stable
foundation!  But whosoever prefers, I do not say his wife, with whom he
lives for carnal pleasure, but any of those relatives who afford no
delight of such a kind, and whom it is right to love,—whosoever prefers
these to Christ, and loves them after a human and carnal fashion, has
not Christ as a foundation, and will therefore not be saved by fire, nor
indeed at all; for he shall not possibly dwell with the Saviour, who
says very explicitly concerning this very matter, “He that loveth father
or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or
daughter more than me is not worthy of me.” <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580)   But he who loves his relations
carnally, and yet so that he does not prefer them to Christ, but would
rather want them than Christ if he were put to the proof, shall be saved
by fire, because it is necessary that by the loss of these relations he
suffer pain in proportion to his love.  And he who loves father, mother,
sons, daughters, according to Christ, so that he aids them in obtaining
His kingdom and cleaving to Him, or loves them because they are members
of Christ, God forbid that this love should be consumed as wood, hay,
stubble, and not rather be reckoned a structure of gold, silver,
precious stones.  For how can a man love those more than Christ whom he
loves only for Christ’s sake?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[473:1571](1020659.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p3"></span> [Jas.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014)<span id="iv.XXI.26-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[473:1572](1020659.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.XXI.26-p4.1"></span>.  \[This is the chief passage quoted in
favor of purgatory.  See note on p. 470.  The Apostle uses a figurative
term for narrow escape from perdition.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[474:1573](1020659.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
7.32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)<span id="iv.XXI.26-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[474:1574](1020659.htm#fr_1573) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p7"></span> [1 Cor.
7.33](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#033)<span id="iv.XXI.26-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[474:1575](1020659.htm#fr_1574) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)<span id="iv.XXI.26-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[474:1576](1020659.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p9"></span> [Ecclus.
27.5](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#005)<span id="iv.XXI.26-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[474:1577](1020659.htm#fr_1576) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span id="iv.XXI.26-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[474:1578](1020659.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p12"></span> [Matt.
25.41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="iv.XXI.26-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[474:1579](1020659.htm#fr_1578) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p13"></span> [Matt.
25.34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span
id="iv.XXI.26-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[474:1580](1020659.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.XXI.26-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[475:1581](1020659.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="iv.XXI.26-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.26-p16"></span> [Matt.
10.37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span
id="iv.XXI.26-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020660)
