[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020134)  [Next](1020136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.30"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.30-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.30-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—What Kind of Things Even Their
Worshippers Have Owned They Have Thought About the Gods of the
Nations.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.30-p2"></span>Cicero the augur laughs at auguries, and
reproves men for regulating the purposes of life by the cries of crows
and jackdaws. <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)   But it will be
said that an academic philosopher, who argues that all things are
uncertain, is unworthy to have any authority in these matters.  In the
second book of his *De Natura Deorum*, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) he introduces Lucilius Balbus, who,
after showing that superstitions have their origin in physical and
philosophical truths, expresses his indignation at the setting up of
images and fabulous notions, speaking thus:  “Do you not therefore see
that from true and useful physical discoveries the reason may be drawn
away to fabulous and imaginary gods?  This gives birth to false opinions
and turbulent errors, and superstitions well-nigh old-wifeish.  For both
the forms of the gods, and their ages, and clothing, and ornaments, are
made familiar to us; their genealogies, too, their marriages, kinships,
and all things about them, are debased to the likeness of human
weakness.  They are even introduced as having perturbed minds; for we
have accounts of the lusts, cares, and angers of the gods.  Nor, indeed,
as the fables go, have the gods been without their wars and battles. 
And that not only when, as in Homer, some gods on either side have
defended two opposing armies, but they have even carried on wars on
their own account, as with the Titans or with the Giants.  Such things
it is quite absurd either to say or to believe:  they are utterly
frivolous and groundless.”  Behold, now, what is confessed by those who
defend the gods of the nations.  Afterwards he goes on to say that some
things belong to superstition, but others to religion, which he thinks
good to teach according to the Stoics.  “For not only the philosophers,”
he says, “but also our forefathers, have made a distinction between
superstition and religion.  For those,” he says, “who spent whole days
in prayer, and offered sacrifice, that their children might outlive
them, are called superstitious.” <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)
  Who does not see that he is trying, while he fears the public
prejudice, to praise the religion of the ancients, and that he wishes to
disjoin it from superstition, but cannot find out how to do so?  For if
those who prayed and sacrificed all day were called superstitious by the
ancients, were those also called so who instituted (what he blames) the
<span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span id="iv.IV.30-Page_81"></span>
images of the gods of diverse age and distinct clothing, and invented
the genealogies of gods, their marriages, and kinships?  When,
therefore, these things are found fault with as superstitious, he
implicates in that fault the ancients who instituted and worshipped such
images.  Nay, he implicates himself, who, with whatever eloquence he may
strive to extricate himself and be free, was yet under the necessity of
venerating these images; nor dared he so much as whisper in a discourse
to the people what in this disputation he plainly sounds forth.  Let us
Christians, therefore, give thanks to the Lord our God—not to heaven and
earth, as that author argues, but to Him who has made heaven and earth;
because these superstitions, which that Balbus, like a babbler, <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) scarcely reprehends, He, by the most
deep lowliness of Christ, by the preaching of the apostles, by the faith
of the martyrs dying for the truth and living with the truth, has
overthrown, not only in the hearts of the religious, but even in the
temples of the superstitious, by their own free service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[80:182](1020135.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.IV.30-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.30-p3"></span> *De Divin.*ii. 37.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[80:183](1020135.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.IV.30-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.30-p4"></span> Cic. *De Nat. Deorum,* lib. ii. c. 28.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[80:184](1020135.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.IV.30-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.30-p5"></span> Superstition, from *superstes*.  Against
his etymology of Cicero, see Lact. *Inst. Div*. iv. 28.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[81:185](1020135.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iv.IV.30-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.30-p6"></span> Balbus, from *balbutiens*, stammering,
babbling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1020136)
