[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020571)  [Next](1020573) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.54"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p1.1"></span>Chapter 54.—Of the Very Foolish Lie of the
Pagans, in Feigning that the Christian Religion Was Not to Last Beyond
Three Hundred and Sixty-Five Years.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p2"></span>I might collect these and many similar
arguments, if that year had not already passed by which lying divination
has promised, and deceived vanity has believed.  But as a few years ago
three hundred and sixty-five years were completed since the time when
the worship of the name of Christ was established by His presence in the
flesh, and by the apostles, what other proof need we seek to refute that
falsehood?  For, not to place the beginning of this period at the
nativity of Christ, because as an infant and boy He had no disciples,
yet, when He began to have them, beyond doubt the Christian doctrine and
religion then became known through His bodily presence, that is, after
He was baptized in the river Jordan by the ministry of John.  For on
<span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.54-Page_395"></span> this account that prophecy went before
concerning Him:  “He shall reign from sea even to sea, and from the
river even to the ends of the earth.” <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254)   But since, before He suffered and
rose from the dead, the faith had not yet been defined to all, but was
defined in the resurrection of Christ (for so the Apostle Paul speaks to
the Athenians, saying, “But now He announces to men that all everywhere
should repent, because He hath appointed a day in which to judge the
world in equity, by the Man in whom He hath defined the faith to all
men, raising Him from the dead” <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) ), it is better that, in settling
this question, we should start from that point, especially because the
Holy Spirit was then given, just as He behoved to be given after the
resurrection of Christ in that city from which the second law, that is,
the new testament, ought to begin.  For the first, which is called the
old testament was given from Mount Sinai through Moses.  But concerning
this which was to be given by Christ it was predicted, “Out of Sion
shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem;” <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) whence He Himself said that
repentance in His name behoved to be preached among all nations, but yet
beginning at Jerusalem. <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257)  
There, therefore, the worship of this name took its rise, that Jesus
should be believed in, who died and rose again.  There this faith blazed
up with such noble beginnings, that several thousand men, being
converted to the name of Christ with wonderful alacrity, sold their
goods for distribution among the needy, thus, by a holy resolution and
most ardent charity, coming to voluntary poverty, and prepared
themselves, amid the Jews who raged and thirsted for their blood, to
contend for the truth even to death, not with armed power, but with more
powerful patience.  If this was accomplished by no magic arts, why do
they hesitate to believe that the other could be done throughout the
whole world by the same divine power by which this was done?  But
supposing Peter wrought that enchantment so that so great a multitude of
men at Jerusalem was thus kindled to worship the name of Christ, who had
either seized and fastened Him to the cross, or reviled Him when
fastened there, we must still inquire when the three hundred and
sixty-five years must be completed, counting from that year.  Now Christ
died when the Gemini were consuls, on the eighth day before the kalends
of April.  He rose the third day, as the apostles have proved by the
evidence of their own senses.  Then forty days after, He ascended into
heaven.  Ten days after, that is, on the fiftieth after his
resurrection, He sent the Holy Spirit; then three thousand men believed
when the apostles preached Him.  Then, therefore, arose the worship of
that name, as we believe, and according to the real truth, by the
efficacy of the Holy Spirit, but, as impious vanity has feigned or
thought, by the magic arts of Peter.  A little afterward, too, on a
wonderful sign being wrought, when at Peter’s own word a certain beggar,
so lame from his mother’s womb that he was carried by others and laid
down at the gate of the temple, where he begged alms, was made whole in
the name of Jesus Christ, and leaped up, five thousand men believed, and
thenceforth the Church grew by sundry accessions of believers.  Thus we
gather the very day with which that year began, namely, that on which
the Holy Spirit was sent, that is, during the ides of May.  And, on
counting the consuls, the three hundred and sixty-five years are found
completed on the same ides in the consulate of Honorius and
Eutychianus.  Now, in the following year, in the consulate of Mallius
Theodorus, when, according to that oracle of the demons or figment of
men, there ought already to have been no Christian religion, it was not
necessary to inquire, what perchance was done in other parts of the
earth.  But, as we know, in the most noted and eminent city, Carthage,
in Africa, Gaudentius and Jovius, officers of the Emperor Honorius, on
the fourteenth day before the kalends of April, overthrew the temples
and broke the images of the false gods.  And from that time to the
present, during almost thirty years, who does not see how much the
worship of the name of Christ has increased, especially after many of
those became Christians who had been kept back from the faith by
thinking that divination true, but saw when that same number of years
was completed that it was empty and ridiculous?  We, therefore, who are
called and are Christians, do not believe in Peter, but in Him whom
Peter believed,—being edified by Peter’s sermons about Christ, not
poisoned by his incantations; and not deceived by his enchantments, but
aided by his good deeds.  Christ Himself, who was Peter’s Master in the
doctrine which leads to eternal life, is our Master too.

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p7"></span>But let us now at last finish this
book, after thus far treating of, and showing as far as seemed
sufficient, what is the mortal course of the two cities, the heavenly
and the earthly, which are mingled together from the beginning down to
the end.  Of these, the earthly one has made to herself of whom she
would, <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.54-Page_396"></span> either from any other quarter, or even
from among men, false gods whom she might serve by sacrifice; but she
which is heavenly and is a pilgrim on the earth does not make false
gods, but is herself made by the true God of whom she herself must be
the true sacrifice.  Yet both alike either enjoy temporal good things,
or are afflicted with temporal evils, but with diverse faith, diverse
hope, and diverse love, until they must be separated by the last
judgment, and each must receive her own end, of which there is no end. 
About these ends of both we must next treat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[395:1255](1020572.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p3"></span> [Ps.
72.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[395:1256](1020572.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p4"></span> [Acts
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[395:1257](1020572.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p5"></span> [Isa.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[395:1258](1020572.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.54-p6"></span> [Luke
24.47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span
id="iv.XVIII.54-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIX](1020573)
