[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020279)  [Next](1020281) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.9"></span>

<span id="iv.X.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Of the Illicit Arts Connected with
Demonolatry, and of Which the Platonist Porphyry Adopts Some, and
Discards Others.</span>

<span id="iv.X.9-p2"></span>These miracles, and many others of the same
nature, which it were tedious to mention, were wrought for the purpose
of commending the worship of the one true God, and prohibiting the
worship of a multitude of false gods.  Moreover, they were wrought by
simple faith and godly confidence, not by the incantations and charms
composed under the influence of a criminal tampering with the unseen
world, of an art which they call either magic, or by the more abominable
title necromancy, <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) or the more
honorable designation theurgy; for they wish to discriminate between
those whom the people call magicians, who practise necromancy, and are
addicted to illicit arts and condemned, and those others who seem to
them to be worthy of praise for their practice of theurgy,—the truth,
however, being that both classes are the slaves of the deceitful rites
of the demons whom they invoke under the names of angels.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span id="iv.X.9-Page_186"></span>

<span id="iv.X.9-p4"></span>For even Porphyry promises some kind of
purgation of the soul by the help of theurgy, though he does so with
some hesitation and shame, and denies that this art can secure to any
one a return to God; so that you can detect his opinion vacillating
between the profession of philosophy and an art which he feels to be
presumptuous and sacrilegious.  For at one time he warns us to avoid it
as deceitful, and prohibited by law, and dangerous to those who practise
it; then again, as if in deference to its advocates, he declares it
useful for cleansing one part of the soul, not, indeed, the intellectual
part, by which the truth of things intelligible, which have no sensible
images, is recognized, but the spiritual part, which takes cognizance of
the images of things material.  This part, he says, is prepared and
fitted for intercourse with spirits and angels, and for the vision of
the gods, by the help of certain theurgic consecrations, or, as they
call them, mysteries.  He acknowledges, however, that these theurgic
mysteries impart to the intellectual soul no such purity as fits it to
see its God, and recognize the things that truly exist.  And from this
acknowledgment we may infer what kind of gods these are, and what kind
of vision of them is imparted by theurgic consecrations, if by it one
cannot see the things which truly exist.  He says, further, that the
rational, or, as he prefers calling it, the intellectual soul, can pass
into the heavens without the spiritual part being cleansed by theurgic
art, and that this art cannot so purify the spiritual part as to give it
entrance to immortality and eternity.  And therefore, although he
distinguishes angels from demons, asserting that the habitation of the
latter is in the air, while the former dwell in the ether and empyrean,
and although he advises us to cultivate the friendship of some demon,
who may be able after our death to assist us, and elevate us at least a
little above the earth,—for he owns that it is by another way we must
reach the heavenly society of the angels,—he at the same time distinctly
warns us to avoid the society of demons, saying that the soul, expiating
its sin after death, execrates the worship of demons by whom it was
entangled.  And of theurgy itself, though he recommends it as
reconciling angels and demons, he cannot deny that it treats with powers
which either themselves envy the soul its purity, or serve the arts of
those who do envy it.  He complains of this through the mouth of some
Chaldæan or other:  “A good man in Chaldæa complains,” he says, “that
his most strenuous efforts to cleanse his soul were frustrated, because
another man, who had influence in these matters, and who envied him
purity, had prayed to the powers, and bound them by his conjuring not to
listen to his request.  Therefore,” adds Porphyry, “what the one man
bound, the other could not loose.”  And from this he concludes that
theurgy is a craft which accomplishes not only good but evil among gods
and men; and that the gods also have passions, and are perturbed and
agitated by the emotions which Apuleius attributed to demons and men,
but from which he preserved the gods by that sublimity of residence,
which, in common with Plato, he accorded to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_402"></span>[185:403](1020280.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iv.X.9-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.9-p3"></span> *Goetia*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020281)
