[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020022)  [Next](1020024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Of Suicide Committed Through
Fear of Punishment or Dishonor.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p2"></span>And consequently, even if some of these
virgins killed themselves to avoid such disgrace, who that has any human
feeling would refuse to forgive them?  And as for those who would not
put an end to their lives, lest they might seem to escape the crime of
another by a sin of their own, he who lays this to their charge as a
great wickedness is himself not guiltless of the fault of folly.  For if
it is not lawful to take the law into our own hands, and slay even a
guilty person, whose death no public sentence has warranted, then
certainly he who kills himself is a homicide, and so much the guiltier
of his own death, as he was more innocent of that offence for which he
doomed himself to die.  Do we justly execrate the deed of Judas, and
does truth itself pronounce that by hanging himself he rather aggravated
than expiated the guilt of that most iniquitous betrayal, since, by
despairing of God’s mercy in his sorrow that wrought death, he left to
himself no place for a healing penitence?  How much more ought he to
abstain from laying violent hands on himself who has done nothing worthy
of such a punishment!  For Judas, when he killed himself, killed a
wicked man; but he passed from this life chargeable not only with the
death of Christ, but with his own:  for though he killed himself on
account of his crime, his killing himself was another crime.  Why, then,
should a man who has done no ill do ill to himself, and by killing
himself kill the innocent to escape another’s guilty act, and perpetrate
upon himself a sin of his own, that the sin of another may not be
perpetrated on him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020024)
