[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020124)  [Next](1020126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.20"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Concerning Virtue and Faith, Which
the Pagans Have Honored with Temples and Sacred Rites, Passing by Other
Good Qualities, Which Ought Likewise to Have Been Worshipped, If Deity
Was Rightly Attributed to These.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.20-p2"></span>They have made Virtue also a goddess,
which, indeed, if it could be a goddess, had been preferable to many. 
And now, because it is not a goddess, but a gift of God, let *it* be
obtained by prayer from Him, by whom alone it can be given, and the
whole crowd of false gods vanishes.  But why is Faith believed to be a
goddess, and why does she herself receive temple and altar?  For whoever
prudently acknowledges her makes his own self an abode for her.  But how
do they know what faith is, of which it is the prime and greatest
function that the true God may be believed in?  But why had not virtue
sufficed?  Does it not include faith also?  Forasmuch as they have
thought proper to distribute virtue into four divisions—prudence,
justice, fortitude, and temperance—and as each of these divisions has
its own virtues, faith is among the parts of justice, and has the chief
place with as many of us as know what that saying means, “The just shall
live by faith.” <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)   But if Faith
is a goddess, I wonder why these keen lovers of a multitude of gods have
wronged so many other goddesses, by passing them by, when they could
have dedicated temples and altars to them likewise.  Why has temperance
not deserved to be a goddess, when some Roman princes have obtained no
small glory on account of her?  Why, in fine, is fortitude not a
goddess, who aided Mucius when he thrust his right hand into the flames;
who aided Curtius, when for the sake of his country he threw himself
headlong into the yawning earth; who aided Decius the sire, and Decius
the son, when they devoted themselves for the army?—though we might
question whether these men had *true* fortitude, if this concerned our
present discussion.  Why have prudence and wisdom merited no place among
the gods?  Is it because they are all worshipped under the general name
of Virtue itself?  Then they could thus worship the true God also, of
whom all the other gods are thought to be parts.  But in that one name
of virtue is comprehended both faith and chastity, which yet have
obtained separate altars in temples of their own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[74:175](1020125.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iv.IV.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.20-p3"></span> [Hab.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="iv.IV.20-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020126)
