[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020446)  [Next](1020448) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—That the Ark Which Noah Was
Ordered to Make Figures In Every Respect Christ and the Church.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.26-p2"></span>Moreover, inasmuch as God commanded Noah,
a just man, and, as the truthful Scripture says, a man perfect in his
generation,—not indeed with the perfection of the citizens of the city
of God in that immortal condition in which they equal the angels, but in
so far as they can be perfect in their sojourn in this world,—inasmuch
as God commanded him, I say, to make an ark, in which he might be
rescued from the destruction of the flood, along with his family,
*i.e*., his wife, sons, and daughters-in-law, and along with the animals
who, in obedience to God’s command, came to him into the ark:  this is
certainly a figure of the city of God sojourning in this world; that is
to say, of the church, which is rescued by the wood on which hung the
Mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus. <span
id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853)   For even its very dimensions, in
length, breadth, and height, represent the human body in which He came,
as it had been foretold.  For the length of the human body, from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, is six times its breadth from
side to side, and ten times its depth or thickness, measuring from back
to front:  that is to say, if you measure a man as he lies on his back
or on his face, he is six times as long from head to foot as he is broad
from side to side, and ten times as long as he is high from the ground. 
And therefore the ark was made 300 cubits in length, 50 in breadth, and
30 in height.  And its having a door made in the side of it certainly
signified the wound which was made when the side of the Crucified was
pierced with the spear; for by this those who come to Him enter; for
thence flowed the sacraments by which those who believe are initiated. 
And the fact that it was ordered to be made of squared timbers,
signifies the immoveable steadiness of the life of the saints; for
however you turn a cube, it still stands.  And the other peculiarities
of the ark’s construction are signs of features of the church.

<span id="iv.XV.26-p4"></span>But we have not now time to pursue this
subject; and, indeed, we have already dwelt upon it in the work we wrote
against Faustus the Manichean, who denies that there is anything
prophesied of Christ in the Hebrew books.  It may be that one man’s
exposition excels another’s, and that ours is not the best; but all that
is said must be referred to this city of God we speak of, which sojourns
in this wicked world as in a deluge, at least if the expositor would not
widely miss the meaning of the author.  For example, the interpretation
I have given in the work against Faustus, of the words, “with lower,
second, and third stories shalt thou make it,” is, that because the
church is gathered out of all nations, it is said to have two stories,
to represent the two kinds of men,—the circumcision, to wit, and the
uncircumcision, or, as the apostle otherwise calls them, Jews and
Gentiles; and to have three stories, because all the nations were
replenished from the three sons of Noah.  Now any one may object to this
interpretation, and may give another which harmonizes with the rule of
faith.  For as the ark was to have rooms not only on the lower, but also
on the upper stories, which were called “third stories,” that there
might be a habitable space on the third floor from the basement, some
one may interpret these to mean the three graces commended by the
apostle.—faith, hope, and charity.  Or even more suitably they may be
supposed to represent those three harvests in the gospel, thirty-fold,
sixty-fold, an hundred-fold,—chaste marriage dwelling in the ground
floor, chaste widowhood in the upper, and chaste virginity in the top
story.  Or any better interpretation may be given, so long as the
reference to this city is maintained.  And the same statement I would
make of all the remaining particulars in this passage which require
exposition, viz., that although different explanations <span
id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span id="iv.XV.26-Page_307"></span> are
given, yet they must all agree with the one harmonious catholic faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_853"></span>[306:854](1020447.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iv.XV.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.26-p3"></span> [1 Tim.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iv.XV.26-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020448)
