[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020522)  [Next](1020524) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.5"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Of Apis King of Argos, Whom the
Egyptians Called Serapis, and Worshipped with Divine Honors.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.5-p2"></span>In these times Apis king of Argos
crossed over into Egypt in ships, and, on dying there, was made Serapis,
the chief god of all the Egyptians.  Now Varro gives this very ready
reason why, after his death, he was called, not Apis, but Serapis.  The
ark in which he was placed when dead, which every one now calls a
sarcophagus, was then called in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVIII.5-p2.1"></span>σορὸς</span>, and they began to worship him
when buried in it before his temple was built; and <span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.5-Page_364"></span> from
Soros and Apis he was called first \[Sorosapis, or\] Sorapis, and then
Serapis, by changing a letter, as easily happens.  It was decreed
regarding him also, that whoever should say he had been a man should be
capitally punished.  And since in every temple where Isis and Serapis
were worshipped there was also an image which, with finger pressed on
the lips, seemed to warn men to keep silence, Varro thinks this
signifies that it should be kept secret that they had been human.  But
that bull which, with wonderful folly, deluded Egypt nourished with
abundant delicacies in honor of him, was not called Serapis, but Apis,
because they worshipped him alive without a sarcophagus.  On the death
of that bull, when they sought and found a calf of the same color,—that
is, similarly marked with certain white spots,—they believed it was
something miraculous, and divinely provided for them.  Yet it was no
great thing for the demons, in order to deceive them, to show to a cow
when she was conceiving and pregnant the image of such a bull, which she
alone could see, and by it attract the breeding passion of the mother,
so that it might appear in a bodily shape in her young, just as Jacob so
managed with the spotted rods that the sheep and goats were born
spotted.  For what men can do with real colors and substances, the
demons can very easily do by showing unreal forms to breeding animals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020524)
