[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020688)  [Next](1020690) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.28"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—What Plato or Labeo, or Even
Varro, Might Have Contributed to the True Faith of the Resurrection, If
They Had Adopted One Another’s Opinions into One Scheme.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.28-p2"></span>Some Christians, who have a liking for
Plato on account of his magnificent style and the truths which he now
and then uttered, say that he even held an opinion similar to our own
regarding the resurrection of the dead.  Cicero, however, alluding to
this in his *Republic*, asserts that Plato meant it rather as a playful
fancy than as a reality; for he introduces a man <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667) who had come to life again, and
gave a narrative of his experience in corroboration of the doctrines of
Plato.  Labeo, too, says that two men died on one day, and met at a
cross-road, and that, being afterwards ordered to return to their
bodies, they agreed to be friends for life, and were so till they died
again.  But the resurrection which these writers instance resembles that
of those persons whom we have ourselves known to rise again, and who
came back indeed to this life, but not so as never to die again.  Marcus
Varro, however, in his work *On the Origin of the Roman People*, records
something more remarkable; I think his own words should be given. 
“Certain astrologers,” he says, “have written that men are destined to a
new birth, which the Greeks call *palingenesy*.  This will take place
after four hundred and forty years have elapsed; and then the same soul
and the same body, which were formerly united in the person, shall again
be reunited.”  This Varro, indeed, or those nameless astrologers,—for he
does not give us the names of the men whose statement he cites,—have
affirmed what is indeed not altogether true; for once the souls have
returned to the bodies they wore, they shall never afterwards leave
them.  Yet what they say upsets and demolishes much of that idle talk of
our adversaries about the impossibility of the resurrection. <span
id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span id="iv.XXII.28-Page_507"></span> For
those who have been or are of this opinion, have not thought it possible
that bodies which have dissolved into air, or dust, or ashes, or water,
or into the bodies of the beasts or even of the men that fed on them,
should be restored again to that which they formerly were.  And
therefore, if Plato and Porphyry, or rather, if their disciples now
living, agree with us that holy souls shall return to the body, as Plato
says, and that, nevertheless, they shall not return to misery, as
Porphyry maintains, —if they accept the consequence of these two
propositions which is taught by the Christian faith, that they shall
receive bodies in which they may live eternally without suffering any
misery,—let them also adopt from Varro the opinion that they shall
return to the same bodies as they were formerly in, and thus the whole
question of the eternal resurrection of the body shall be resolved out
of their own mouths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[506:1668](1020689.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="iv.XXII.28-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.28-p3"></span> In the *Republic*, x.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020690)
