[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020188)  [Next](1020190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.6"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Concerning the Opinion of Varro,
that God is the Soul of the World, Which Nevertheless, in Its Various
Parts, Has Many Souls Whose Nature is Divine.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.6-p2"></span>The same Varro, then, still speaking by
anticipation, says that he thinks that God is the soul of the world
(which the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VII.6-p2.1"></span>κόσμος</span>), and that this world itself is
God; but as a wise man, though he consists of body and mind, is
nevertheless called wise on account of his mind, so the world is called
God on account of mind, although it consists of mind and body. Here he
seems, in some fashion at least, to acknowledge one God; but that he may
introduce more, he adds that the world is divided into two parts, heaven
and earth, which are again divided each into two parts, heaven into
ether and air, earth into water and land, of all which the ether is the
highest, the air second, the water third, and the earth the lowest.  All
these four parts, he says, are full of souls; those which are in the
ether and air being immortal, and those which are in the water and on
the earth mortal.  From the highest part of the heavens to the orbit of
the moon there are souls, namely, the stars and planets; and these are
not only understood to be gods, but are seen to be such.  And between
the orbit of the moon and the commencement of the region of clouds and
winds there are aerial souls; but these are seen with the mind, not with
the eyes, and are called Heroes, and Lares, and Genii.  This is the
natural theology which is briefly set forth in these anticipatory
statements, and which satisfied not Varro only, but many philosophers
besides.  This I must discuss more carefully, when, with the help of
God, I shall have completed what I have yet to say concerning the civil
theology, as far as it concerns the select gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020190)
