[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020731)  [Next](1020733) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 36.—That Interpretation of Scripture
Which Builds Us Up in Love is Not Perniciously Deceptive Nor Mendacious,
Even Though It Be Faulty.  The Interpreter, However, Should Be
Corrected.</span>

<span id="v.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>40.  Whoever, then, thinks that he
understands the Holy Scriptures, or any part of them, but puts such an
interpretation upon them as does not tend to build up this twofold love
of God and our neighbor, does not yet understand them as he ought.  If,
on the other hand, a man draws a meaning from them that may be used for
the building up of love, even though he does not happen upon the precise
meaning which the author whom he reads intended to express in that
place, his error is not pernicious, and he is wholly clear from the
charge of deception.  For there is involved in deception the intention
to say what is false; and we find plenty of people who intend to
deceive, but nobody who wishes to be deceived.  Since, then, the man who
knows practises deceit, and the ignorant man is practised upon, it is
quite clear that in any particular case the man who is deceived is a
better man than he who deceives, seeing that it is better to suffer than
to commit injustice.  Now every man who lies commits an injustice; and
if any man thinks that a lie is ever useful, he must think that
injustice is sometimes useful.  For no liar keeps faith in the matter
about which he lies.  He wishes, of course, that the man to whom he lies
should place confidence in him; and yet he betrays his confidence by
lying to him.  Now every man who breaks faith is unjust.  Either, then,
injustice is sometimes useful (which is impossible), or a lie is never
useful.

<span id="v.iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>41.  Whoever takes another meaning out
of Scripture than the writer intended, goes astray, but not through any
falsehood in Scripture.  Nevertheless, as I was going to say, if his
mistaken interpretation tends to build up love, which is the end of the
commandment, he goes astray in much the same way as a man who by mistake
quits the high road, but yet reaches through the fields the same place
to which the road leads.  He is to be corrected, however, and to be
shown how much better it is not to quit the straight road, lest, if he
get into a habit of going astray, he may sometimes take cross roads, or
even go in the wrong direction altogether.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](1020733)
