[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020595)  [Next](1020597) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.23"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Porphyry’s Account of the
Responses Given by the Oracles of the gods Concerning Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p2"></span>For in his book called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIX.23-p2.1"></span>ἐκ λογίων
φιλοσοφίας</span>, in which he collects and comments upon the responses
which he pretends were uttered by the gods concerning divine things, he
says—I give his own words as they have been translated from the Greek: 
“To one who inquired what god he should propitiate in order to recall
his wife from Christianity, Apollo replied in the following verses.” 
Then the following words are given as those of Apollo:  “You will
probably find it easier to write lasting characters on the water, or
lightly fly like a bird through the air, than to restore right feeling
in your impious wife once she has polluted herself.  Let her remain as
she pleases in her foolish deception, and sing false laments to her dead
God, who was condemned by right-minded judges, and perished
ignominiously by a violent death.”  Then after these verses of Apollo
(which we have given in a Latin version that does not preserve the
metrical form), he goes on to say:  “In these verses Apollo exposed the
incurable corruption of the Christians, saying that the Jews, rather
than the Christians, recognized God.”  See how he misrepresents <span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="iv.XIX.23-Page_416"></span>
Christ, giving the Jews the preference to the Christians in the
recognition of God.  This was his explanation of Apollo’s verses, in
which he says that Christ was put to death by right-minded or just
judges,—in other words, that He deserved to die.  I leave the
responsibility of this oracle regarding Christ on the lying interpreter
of Apollo, or on this philosopher who believed it or possibly himself
invented it; as to its agreement with Porphyry’s opinions or with other
oracles, we shall in a little have something to say.  In this passage,
however, he says that the Jews, as the interpreters of God, judged
justly in pronouncing Christ to be worthy of the most shameful death. 
He should have listened, then, to this God of the Jews to whom he bears
this testimony, when that God says, “He that sacrificeth to any other
god save to the Lord alone shall be utterly destroyed.”  But let us come
to still plainer expressions, and hear how great a God Porphyry thinks
the God of the Jews is.  Apollo, he says, when asked whether word,
*i.e*., reason, or law is the better thing, replied in the following
verses.  Then he gives the verses of Apollo, from which I select the
following as sufficient:  “God, the Generator, and the King prior to all
things, before whom heaven and earth, and the sea, and the hidden places
of hell tremble, and the deities themselves are afraid, for their law is
the Father whom the holy Hebrews honor.”  In this oracle of his god
Apollo, Porphyry avowed that the God of the Hebrews is so great that the
deities themselves are afraid before Him.  I am surprised, therefore,
that when God said, He that sacrificeth to other gods shall be utterly
destroyed, Porphyry himself was not afraid lest he should be destroyed
for sacrificing to other gods.

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p3"></span>This philosopher, however, has also some
good to say of Christ, oblivious, as it were, of that contumely of his
of which we have just been speaking; or as if his gods spoke evil of
Christ only while asleep, and recognized Him to be good, and gave Him
His deserved praise, when they awoke.  For, as if he were about to
proclaim some marvellous thing passing belief, he says, “What we are
going to say will certainly take some by surprise.  For the gods have
declared that Christ was very pious, and has become immortal, and that
they cherish his memory:  that the Christians, however, are polluted,
contaminated, and involved in error.  And many other such things,” he
says, “do the gods say against the Christians.”  Then he gives specimens
of the accusations made, as he says, by the gods against them, and then
goes on:  “But to some who asked Hecate whether Christ were a God, she
replied, You know the condition of the disembodied immortal soul, and
that if it has been severed from wisdom it always errs.  The soul you
refer to is that of a man foremost in piety:  they worship it because
they mistake the truth.”  To this so-called oracular response he adds
the following words of his own:  “Of this very pious man, then, Hecate
said that the soul, like the souls of other good men, was after death
dowered with immortality, and that the Christians through ignorance
worship it.  And to those who ask why he was condemned to die, the
oracle of the goddess replied, The body, indeed, is always exposed to
torments, but the souls of the pious abide in heaven.  And the soul you
inquire about has been the fatal cause of error to other souls which
were not fated to receive the gifts of the gods, and to have the
knowledge of immortal Jove.  Such souls are therefore hated by the gods;
for they who were fated not to receive the gifts of the gods, and not to
know God, were fated to be involved in error by means of him you speak
of.  He himself, however, was good, and heaven has been opened to him as
to other good men.  You are not, then, to speak evil of him, but to pity
the folly of men:  and through him men’s danger is imminent.”

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p4"></span>Who is so foolish as not to see that
these oracles were either composed by a clever man with a strong animus
against the Christians, or were uttered as responses by impure demons
with a similar design,—that is to say, in order that their praise of
Christ may win credence for their vituperation of Christians; and that
thus they may, if possible, close the way of eternal salvation, which is
identical with Christianity?  For they believe that they are by no means
counter working their own hurtful craft by promoting belief in Christ,
so long as their calumniation of Christians is also accepted; for they
thus secure that even the man who thinks well of Christ declines to
become a Christian, and is therefore not delivered from their own rule
by the Christ he praises.  Besides, their praise of Christ is so
contrived that whosoever believes in Him as thus represented will not be
a true Christian but a Photinian heretic, recognizing only the humanity,
and not also the divinity of Christ, and will thus be precluded from
salvation and from deliverance out of the meshes of these devilish
lies.  For our part, we are no better pleased with Hecate’s praises of
Christ than with Apollo’s calumniation of Him.  Apollo says that Christ
was put to death by right-minded judges, implying that <span
id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span id="iv.XIX.23-Page_417"></span> He was
unrighteous.  Hecate says that He was a most pious man, but no more. 
The intention of both is the same, to prevent men from becoming
Christians, because if this be secured, men shall never be rescued from
their power.  But it is incumbent on our philosopher, or rather on those
who believe in these pretended oracles against the Christians, first of
all, if they can, to bring Apollo and Hecate to the same mind regarding
Christ, so that either both may condemn or both praise Him.  And even if
they succeeded in this, we for our part would notwithstanding repudiate
the testimony of demons, whether favorable or adverse to Christ.  But
when our adversaries find a god and goddess of their own at variance
about Christ the one praising, the other vituperating Him, they can
certainly give no credence, if they have any judgment, to mere men who
blaspheme the Christians.

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p5"></span>When Porphyry or Hecate praises Christ,
and adds that He gave Himself to the Christians as a fatal gift, that
they might be involved in error, he exposes, as he thinks, the causes of
this error.  But before I cite his words to that purpose, I would ask,
If Christ did thus give Himself to the Christians to involve them in
error, did He do so willingly, or against His will?  If willingly, how
is He righteous?  If against His will, how is He blessed?  However, let
us hear the causes of this error.  “There are,” he says,” in a certain
place very small earthly spirits, subject to the power of evil demons. 
The wise men of the Hebrews, among whom was this Jesus, as you have
heard from the oracles of Apollo cited above, turned religious persons
from these very wicked demons and minor spirits, and taught them rather
to worship the celestial gods, and especially to adore God the Father. 
This,” he said, “the gods enjoin; and we have already shown how they
admonish the soul to turn to God, and command it to worship Him.  But
the ignorant and the ungodly, who are not destined to receive favors
from the gods, nor to know the immortal Jupiter, not listening to the
gods and their messages, have turned away from all gods, and have not
only refused to hate, but have venerated the prohibited demons. 
Professing to worship God, they refuse to do those things by which alone
God is worshipped.  For God, indeed, being the Father of all, is in need
of nothing; but for us it is good to adore Him by means of justice,
chastity, and other virtues, and thus to make life itself a prayer to
Him, by inquiring into and imitating His nature.  For inquiry,” says he,
“purifies and imitation deifies us, by moving us nearer to Him.”  He is
right in so far as he proclaims God the Father, and the conduct by which
we should worship Him.  Of such precepts the prophetic books of the
Hebrews are full, when they praise or blame the life of the saints.  But
in speaking of the Christians he is in error, and caluminates them as
much as is desired by the demons whom he takes for gods, as if it were
difficult for any man to recollect the disgraceful and shameful actions
which used to be done in the theatres and temples to please the gods,
and to compare with these things what is heard in our churches, and what
is offered to the true God, and from this comparison to conclude where
character is edified, and where it is ruined.  But who but a diabolical
spirit has told or suggested to this man so manifest and vain a lie, as
that the Christians reverenced rather than hated the demons, whose
worship the Hebrews prohibited?  But that God, whom the Hebrew sages
worshipped, forbids sacrifice to be offered even to the holy angels of
heaven and divine powers, whom we, in this our pilgrimage, venerate and
love as our most blessed fellow-citizens.  For in the law which God gave
to His Hebrew people He utters this menace, as in a voice of thunder: 
“He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the Lord only, he shall be
utterly destroyed.” <span id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298)   And
that no one might suppose that this prohibition extends only to the very
wicked demons and earthly spirits, whom this philosopher calls very
small and inferior,—for even these are in the Scripture called gods, not
of the Hebrews, but of the nations, as the Septuagint translators have
shown in the psalm where it is said, “For all the gods of the nations
are demons,” <span id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299) —that no one
might suppose, I say, that sacrifice to these demons was prohibited, but
that sacrifice might be offered to all or some of the celestials, it was
immediately added, “save unto the Lord alone.” <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300)   The God of the Hebrews, then, to
whom this renowned philosopher bears this signal testimony, gave to His
Hebrew people a law, composed in the Hebrew language, and not obscure
and unknown, but published now in every nation, and in this law it is
written, “He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the Lord alone, he
shall be utterly destroyed.”  What need is there to seek further proofs
in the law or the prophets of this same thing?  *Seek*, we need not say,
for the passages are neither few nor difficult to find; but what need to
collect and apply to my argument the <span id="page_418">p. 418</span>
<span id="iv.XIX.23-Page_418"></span> proofs which are thickly sown and
obvious, and by which it appears clear as day that sacrifice may be paid
to none but the supreme and true God?  Here is one brief but decided,
even menacing, and certainly true utterance of that God whom the wisest
of our adversaries so highly extol.  Let this be listened to, feared,
fulfilled, that there may be no disobedient soul cut off.  “He that
sacrifices,” He says, not because He needs anything, but because it
behoves us to be His possession.  Hence the Psalmist in the Hebrew
Scriptures sings, “I have said to the Lord, Thou art my God, for Thou
needest not my good.” <span id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301)   For
we ourselves, who are His own city, are His most noble and worthy
sacrifice, and it is this mystery we celebrate in our sacrifices, which
are well known to the faithful, as we have explained in the preceding
books.  For through the prophets the oracles of God declared that the
sacrifices which the Jews offered as a shadow of that which was to be
would cease, and that the nations, from the rising to the setting of the
sun, would offer one sacrifice.  From these oracles, which we now see
accomplished, we have made such selections as seemed suitable to our
purpose in this work.  And therefore, where there is not this
righteousness whereby the one supreme God rules the obedient city
according to His grace, so that it sacrifices to none but Him, and
whereby, in all the citizens of this obedient city, the soul
consequently rules the body and reason the vices in the rightful order,
so that, as the individual just man, so also the community and people of
the just, live by faith, which works by love, that love whereby man
loves God as He ought to be loved, and his neighbor as himself,—there, I
say, there is not an assemblage associated by a common acknowledgment of
right, and by a community of interests.  But if there is not this, there
is not a people, if our definition be true, and therefore there is no
republic; for where there is no people there can be no republic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[417:1299](1020596.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="iv.XIX.23-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p6"></span> [Ex.
22.20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)<span
id="iv.XIX.23-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[417:1300](1020596.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="iv.XIX.23-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p7"></span> [Ps.
96.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="iv.XIX.23-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[417:1301](1020596.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="iv.XIX.23-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p8"></span> Augustin here warns his readers against
a possible misunderstanding of the Latin word for alone (*soli*), which
might be rendered “the sun.”

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[418:1302](1020596.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="iv.XIX.23-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.23-p9"></span> [Ps.
16.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span id="iv.XIX.23-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020597)
