[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020520)  [Next](1020522) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—What Kings Reigned in Assyria and
Sicyon When, According to the Promise, Isaac Was Born to Abraham in His
Hundredth Year, and When the Twins Esau and Jacob Were Born of Rebecca
to Isaac in His Sixtieth Year.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.3-p2"></span>In his times also, by the promise of
God, Isaac, the son of Abraham, was born to his <span id="page_363">p.
363</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.3-Page_363"></span> father when he was a
hundred years old, of Sarah his wife, who, being barren and old, had
already lost hope of issue.  Aralius was then the fifth king of the
Assyrians.  To Isaac himself, in his sixtieth year, were born twin-sons,
Esau and Jacob, whom Rebecca his wife bore to him, their grandfather
Abraham, who died on completing a hundred and seventy years, being still
alive, and reckoning his hundred and sixtieth year. <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134)   At that time there reigned as the
seventh kings,—among the Assyrians, that more ancient Xerxes, who was
also called Balæus; and among the Sicyons, Thuriachus, or, as some write
his name, Thurimachus.  The kingdom of Argos, in which Inachus reigned
first, arose in the time of Abraham’s grandchildren.  And I must not
omit what Varro relates, that the Sicyons were also wont to sacrifice at
the tomb of their seventh king Thuriachus.  In the reign of Armamitres
in Assyria and Leucippus in Sicyon as the eighth kings, and of Inachus
as the first in Argos, God spoke to Isaac, and promised the same two
things to him as to his father,—namely, the land of Canaan to his seed,
and the blessing of all nations in his seed.  These same things were
promised to his son, Abraham’s grandson, who was at first called Jacob,
afterwards Israel, when Belocus was the ninth king of Assyria, and
Phoroneus, the son of Inachus, reigned as the second king of Argos,
Leucippus still continuing king of Sicyon.  In those times, under the
Argive king Phoroneus, Greece was made more famous by the institution of
certain laws and judges.  On the death of Phoroneus, his younger brother
Phegous built a temple at his tomb, in which he was worshipped as God,
and oxen were sacrificed to him.  I believe they thought him worthy of
so great honor, because in his part of the kingdom (for their father had
divided his territories between them, in which they reigned during his
life) he had founded chapels for the worship of the gods, and had taught
them to measure time, by months and years, and to that extent to keep
count and reckoning of events.  Men still uncultivated, admiring him for
these novelties, either fancied he was, or resolved that he should be
made, a god after his death.  Io also is said to have been the daughter
of Inachus, who was afterwards called Isis, when she was worshipped in
Egypt as a great goddess; although others write that she came as a queen
out of Ethiopia, and because she ruled extensively and justly, and
instituted for her subjects letters and many useful things, such divine
honor was given her there after she died, that if any one said she had
been human, he was charged with a capital crime.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[363:1135](1020521.htm#fr_1134) <span
id="iv.XVIII.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.3-p3"></span> In the Hebrew text, [Gen.
25.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007)<span
id="iv.XVIII.3-p3.1"></span>, a hundred and seventy-five years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020522)
