[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020251)  [Next](1020253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.5"></span> <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="iv.IX.5-Page_169"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—That the Passions Which Assail the
Souls of Christians Do Not Seduce Them to Vice, But Exercise Their
Virtue.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.5-p2"></span>We need not at present give a careful and
copious exposition of the doctrine of Scripture, the sum of Christian
knowledge, regarding these passions.  It subjects the mind itself to
God, that He may rule and aid it, and the passions, again, to the mind,
to moderate and bridle them, and turn them to righteous uses.  In our
ethics, we do not so much inquire whether a pious soul is angry, as why
he is angry; not whether he is sad, but what is the cause of his
sadness; not whether he fears, but what he fears.  For I am not aware
that any right thinking person would find fault with anger at a
wrongdoer which seeks his amendment, or with sadness which intends
relief to the suffering, or with fear lest one in danger be destroyed. 
The Stoics, indeed, are accustomed to condemn compassion. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340)   But how much more honorable had it
been in that Stoic we have been telling of, had he been disturbed by
compassion prompting him to relieve a fellow-creature, than to be
disturbed by the fear of shipwreck!  Far better and more humane, and
more consonant with pious sentiments, are the words of Cicero in praise
of Cæsar, when he says, “Among your virtues none is more admirable and
agreeable than your compassion.” <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341)
  And what is compassion but a fellow-feeling for another’s misery,
which prompts us to help him if we can?  And this emotion is obedient to
reason, when compassion is shown without violating right, as when the
poor are relieved, or the penitent forgiven.  Cicero, who knew how to
use language, did not hesitate to call this a virtue, which the Stoics
are not ashamed to reckon among the vices, although, as the book of the
eminent Stoic, Epictetus, quoting the opinions of Zeno and Chrysippus,
the founders of the school, has taught us, they admit that passions of
this kind invade the soul of the wise man, whom they would have to be
free from all vice.  Whence it follows that these very passions are not
judged by them to be vices, since they assail the wise man without
forcing him to act against reason and virtue; and that, therefore, the
opinion of the Peripatetics or Platonists and of the Stoics is one and
the same.  But, as Cicero says, <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)
mere logomachy is the bane of these pitiful Greeks, who thirst for
contention rather than for truth.  However, it may justly be asked,
whether our subjection to these affections, even while we follow virtue,
is a part of the infirmity of this life?  For the holy angels feel no
anger while they punish those whom the eternal law of God consigns to
punishment, no fellow-feeling with misery while they relieve the
miserable, no fear while they aid those who are in danger; and yet
ordinary language ascribes to them also these mental emotions, because,
though they have none of our weakness, their acts resemble the actions
to which these emotions move us; and thus even God Himself is said in
Scripture to be angry, and yet without any perturbation.  For this word
is used of the effect of His vengeance, not of the disturbing mental
affection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_340"></span>[169:341](1020252.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iv.IX.5-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.5-p3"></span> Seneca, *De Clem*. ii. 4 and 5.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[169:342](1020252.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iv.IX.5-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.5-p4"></span> *Pro. Lig.* c. 12.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[169:343](1020252.htm#fr_342) <span
id="iv.IX.5-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.5-p5"></span> *De Oratore,*i. 11, 47.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020253)
