[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020171)  [Next](1020173) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.3"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Varro’s Distribution of His Book
Which He Composed Concerning the Antiquities of Human and Divine
Things.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.3-p2"></span>He wrote forty-one books of antiquities. 
These he divided into human and divine things.  Twenty-five he devoted
to human things, sixteen to divine things; following this plan in that
division,—namely, to give six books to each of the four divisions of
human things.  For he directs his attention to these considerations: 
who perform, where they perform, when they perform, what they perform. 
Therefore in the first six books he wrote concerning men; in the second
six, concerning places; in the third six, concerning times; in the
fourth and last six, concerning things.  Four times six, however, make
only twenty-four.  But he placed at the head of them one separate work,
which spoke of all these things conjointly.

<span id="iv.VI.3-p3"></span>In divine things, the same order he
preserved throughout, as far as concerns those things which are
performed to the gods.  For sacred things are performed by men in places
and times.  These four things I have mentioned he embraced in twelve
books, allotting three to each.  For he wrote the first three concerning
men, the following three concerning places, the third three concerning
times, and the fourth three concerning sacred rites,—showing who should
perform, where they should perform, when they should perform, what they
should perform, with most subtle distinction.  But because it was
necessary to say—and that especially was expected—to whom they should
perform sacred rites, he wrote concerning the gods themselves the last
three books; and these five times three made fifteen.  But they are in
all, as we have said, sixteen.  For he put also at the beginning of
these one distinct book, speaking by way of introduction of all which
follows; which being finished, he proceeded to subdivide the first three
in that five-fold distribution which pertain to men, making the first
concerning high priests, the second concerning augurs, the third
concerning the fifteen men presiding over the sacred ceremonies. <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)   The second three he made concerning
places, speaking in one of them concerning their chapels, in the second
concerning their temples, and in the third concerning religious places. 
The next three which follow these, and pertain to times,—that is, to
festival days,—he distributed so as to make one concerning holidays, the
other concerning the circus games, and the third concerning scenic
plays.  Of the fourth three, pertaining to sacred things, he devoted one
to consecrations, another to private, the last to public, sacred rites. 
In the three which remain, the gods themselves follow this pompous
train, as it were, for whom all this culture has been expended.  In the
first book are the certain gods, in the second the uncertain, in the
third, and last of all, the chief and select gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[111:238](1020172.htm#fr_237) <span
id="iv.VI.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.3-p4"></span> Tarquin the Proud, having bought the books
of the sibyl, appointed two men to preserve and interpret them (Dionys.
Halic. *Antiq.* iv. 62.  These were afterwards increased to ten, while
the plebeians were contended for larger privileges; and subsequently
five more were added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020173)
