[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020301)  [Next](1020303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.31"></span>

<span id="iv.X.31-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.31-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—Against the Arguments on Which the
Platonists Ground Their Assertion that the Human Soul is Co-Eternal with
God.</span>

<span id="iv.X.31-p2"></span>Why, then, do we not rather believe the
divinity in those matters, which human talent cannot fathom?  Why do we
not credit the assertion of divinity, that the soul is not co-eternal
with God, but is created, and once was not?  For the Platonists seemed
to themselves to allege an adequate reason for their rejection of this
doctrine, when they affirmed that nothing could be everlasting which had
not always existed.  Plato, however, in writing concerning the world and
the gods in it, whom the Supreme made, most expressly states that they
had a beginning and yet would have no end, but, by the sovereign will of
the Creator, would endure eternally.  But, by way of interpreting this,
the Platonists have discovered that he meant a beginning, not of time,
but of cause.  “For as if a foot,” they say, “had been always from
eternity in dust, there would always have been a print underneath it;
and yet no one would doubt that this print was made by the pressure of
the foot, nor that, though the one was made by the other, neither was
prior to the other; so,” they say, “the world and the gods created in it
have always been, their Creator always existing, and yet they were
made.”  If, then, the soul has always existed, are we to say that its
wretchedness has always existed?  For if there is something in it which
was not from eternity, but began in time, why is it impossible that the
soul itself, though not previously existing, should begin to be in
time?  Its blessedness, too, which, as he owns, is to be more stable,
and indeed endless, after the soul’s experience of evils,—this
undoubtedly has a beginning in time, and yet is to be always, though
previously it had no existence.  This whole argumentation, therefore, to
establish that nothing can be endless except that which has had no
beginning, falls to the ground.  For here we find the blessedness of the
soul, which has a beginning, and yet has no end.  And, therefore, let
the incapacity of man give place to the authority of God; and let us
take our belief regarding the true religion from the ever-blessed
spirits, who do not seek for themselves that honor which they know to be
due <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="iv.X.31-Page_202"></span> to their God and ours, and who do not
command us to sacrifice save only to Him, whose sacrifice, as I have
often said already, and must often say again, we and they ought together
to be, offered through that Priest who offered Himself to death a
sacrifice for us, in that human nature which He assumed, and according
to which He desired to be our Priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1020303)
