[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020557)  [Next](1020559) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.40"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.40-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.40-p1.1"></span>Chapter 40.—About the Most Mendacious
Vanity of the Egyptians, in Which They Ascribe to Their Science an
Antiquity of a Hundred Thousand Years.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.40-p2"></span>In vain, then, do some babble with most
empty presumption, saying that Egypt has understood the reckoning of the
stars for more than a hundred thousand years.  For in what books have
they collected that number who learned letters from Isis their mistress,
not much more than two thousand years ago?  Varro, who has declared
this, is no small authority in history, and it does not disagree with
the truth of the divine books.  For as it is not yet six thousand years
since the first man, who is called Adam, are not those to be ridiculed
rather than refuted who try to persuade us of anything regarding a space
of time so different from, and contrary to, the ascertained truth?  For
what historian of the past should we credit more than him who has also
predicted things to come which we now see fulfilled?  And the very
disagreement of the historians among themselves furnishes a good reason
why we ought rather to believe him who does not contradict the divine
history which we hold.  But, on the other hand, the citizens of the
impious city, scattered everywhere through the earth, when they read the
most learned writers, none of whom seems to be of contemptible
authority, and find them disagreeing among themselves about affairs most
remote from the memory of our age, cannot find out whom they ought to
trust.  But we, being sustained by divine authority in the history of
our religion, have no doubt that whatever is opposed to it is most
false, whatever may be the case regarding other things in secular books,
which, whether true or false, yield nothing of moment to our living
rightly and happily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](1020559)
