[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020758)  [Next](1020760) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22 .—The Folly of Observing the Stars
in Order to Predict the Events of a Life.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxii-p2"></span>33.  But to desire to predict the
characters, the acts, and the fate of those who are born from such an
observation, is a great delusion and great madness.  And among those at
least who have any sort of acquaintance with matters of this kind
(which, indeed, are only fit to be unlearnt again), this superstition is
refuted beyond the reach of doubt.  For the observation is of the
position of the stars, which they call constellations, at the time when
the person was born about whom these wretched men are consulted by their
still more wretched dupes.  Now it may happen that, in the case of
twins, one follows the other out of the womb so closely that there is no
interval of time between them that can be apprehended and marked in the
position of the constellations.  Whence it necessarily follows that
twins are in many cases born under the same stars, while they do not
meet with equal fortune either in what they do or what they suffer, but
often meet with fates so different that one of them has a most fortunate
life, the other a most unfortunate.  As, for example, we are told that
Esau and Jacob were born twins, and in such close succession, that
Jacob, who was born last, was found to have laid hold with his hand upon
the heel of his brother, who preceded him. <span
id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804)   Now, assuredly, the day and hour
of the birth of these two could not be marked in any way that would not
give both the same constellation.  But what a difference there was
between the characters, the actions, the labors, and the fortunes of
these two, the Scriptures bear witness, which are now so widely spread
as to be in the mouth of all nations.

<span id="v.v.xxii-p4"></span>34.  Nor is it to the point to say that
the very smallest and briefest moment of time that separates the birth
of twins, produces great effects in nature, and in the extremely rapid
motion of the heavenly bodies.  For, although I may grant that it does
produce the greatest effects, yet the astrologer cannot discover this in
the constellations, and it is by looking into these that he professes to
read the fates.  If, then, he does not discover the difference when he
examines the constellations, which must, of course, be the same whether
he is consulted about Jacob or his brother, what does it profit him that
there is a difference in the heavens, which he rashly and carelessly
brings into disrepute, when there is no difference in his chart, which
he looks into anxiously but in vain?  And so these notions also, which
have their origin in certain signs of things being arbitrarily fixed
upon by the presumption of men, are to be referred to the same class as
if they were leagues and covenants with devils.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[546:1805](1020759.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="v.v.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxii-p3"></span> [Gen.
25.24](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#024)<span id="v.v.xxii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020760)
