[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020230)  [Next](1020232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.12"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—That Even the Platonists, Though
They Say These Things Concerning the One True God, Nevertheless Thought
that Sacred Rites Were to Be Performed in Honor of Many Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.12-p2"></span>But we need not determine from what
source he learned these things,—whether it was from the books of the
ancients who preceded him, or, as is more likely, from the words of the
apostle:  “Because that which is known of God, has been manifested among
them, for God hath manifested it to them.  For His invisible things from
the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by those
things which have been made, also His eternal power and Godhead.” <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)   From whatever source he may have
derived this knowledge, then, I think I have made it sufficiently plain
that I have not chosen the Platonic philosophers undeservedly as the
parties with whom to discuss; because the question we have just taken up
concerns the natural theology,—the question, namely, whether sacred
rites are to be performed to one God, or to many, for the sake of the
happiness which is to be after death.  I have specially chosen them
because their juster thoughts concerning the one God who made heaven and
earth, have made them illustrious among philosophers.  This has given
them such superiority to all others in the judgment of posterity, that,
though Aristotle, the disciple of Plato, a man of eminent abilities,
inferior in eloquence to Plato, yet far superior to many in that
respect, had founded the Peripatetic sect,—so called because they were
in the habit of walking about during their disputations,—and though he
had, through the greatness of his fame, gathered very many disciples
into his school, even during the life of his master; and though Plato at
his death was succeeded in his school, which was called the Academy, by
Speusippus, his sister’s son, and Xenocrates, his beloved disciple, who,
together with their successors, were called from this name of the
school, Academics; nevertheless the most illustrious recent
philosophers, who have chosen to follow Plato, have been unwilling to be
called Peripatetics, or Academics, but have preferred the name of
Platonists.  Among these were the renowned Plotinus, Iamblichus, and
Porphyry, who were Greeks, and the African Apuleius, who was learned
both in the Greek and Latin tongues.  All these, however, and the rest
who were of the same school, and also Plato himself, thought that sacred
rites ought to be performed in honor of many gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_310"></span>[152:311](1020231.htm#fr_310) <span
id="iv.VIII.12-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.12-p3"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.VIII.12-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020232)
