[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020375)  [Next](1020377) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.9"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Whether We Should Say that The
Moment of Death, in Which Sensation Ceases, Occurs in the Experience of
the Dying or in that of the Dead.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.9-p2"></span>The point of time in which the souls of
the good and evil are separated from the body, are we to say it is after
death, or in death rather?  If it is after death, then it is not death
which is good or evil, since death is done with and past, but it is the
life which the soul has now entered on.  Death was an evil when it was
present, that is to say, when it was being suffered by the dying; for to
them it brought with it a severe and grievous experience, which the good
make a good use of.  But when death is past, how can that which no
longer is be either good or evil?  Still further, if we examine the
matter more closely, we shall see that even that sore and grievous pain
which the dying experience is not death itself.  For so long as they
have any sensation, they are certainly still alive; and, if still alive,
must rather be said to be in a state previous to death than in death. 
For when death actually comes, it robs us of all bodily sensation, <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span id="iv.XIII.9-Page_249"></span> which,
while death is only approaching is painful.  And thus it is difficult to
explain how we speak of those who are not yet dead, but are agonized in
their last and mortal extremity, as being in the article of death.  Yet
what else can we call them than dying persons? for when death which was
imminent shall have actually come, we can no longer call them dying but
dead.  No one, therefore, is dying unless living; since even he who is
in the last extremity of life, and, as we say, giving up the ghost, yet
lives.  The same person is therefore at once dying and living, but
drawing near to death, departing from life; yet in life, because his
spirit yet abides in the body; not yet in death, because not yet has his
spirit forsaken the body.  But if, when it has forsaken it, the man is
not even then in death, but after death, who shall say when he is in
death?  On the one hand, no one can be called dying, if a man cannot be
dying and living at the same time; and as long as the soul is in the
body, we cannot deny that he is living.  On the other hand, if the man
who is approaching death be rather called dying, I know not who is
living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020377)
