[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020685)  [Next](1020687) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.25"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—Of the Obstinacy of Those
Individuals Who Impugn the Resurrection of the Body, Though, as Was
Predicted, the Whole World Believes It.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.25-p2"></span>The foremost of the philosophers agree
with us about the spiritual felicity enjoyed by the blessed in the life
to come; it is only the <span id="page_505">p. 505</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.25-Page_505"></span> resurrection of the flesh they call in
question, and with all their might deny.  But the mass of men, learned
and unlearned, the world’s wise men and its fools, have believed, and
have left in meagre isolation the unbelievers, and have turned to
Christ, who in His own resurrection demonstrated the reality of that
which seems to our adversaries absurd.  For the world has believed this
which God predicted, as it was also predicted that the world would
believe,—a prediction not due to the sorceries of Peter, <span
id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665) since it was uttered so long
before.  He who has predicted these things, as I have already said, and
am not ashamed to repeat, is the God before whom all other divinities
tremble, as Porphyry himself owns, and seeks to prove, by testimonies
from the oracles of these gods, and goes so far as to call Him God the
Father and King.  Far be it from us to interpret these predictions as
they do who have not believed, along with the whole world, in that which
it was predicted the world would believe in.  For why should we not
rather understand them as the world does, whose belief was predicted,
and leave that handful of unbelievers to their idle talk and obstinate
and solitary infidelity?  For if they maintain that they interpret them
differently only to avoid charging Scripture with folly, and so doing an
injury to that God to whom they bear so notable a testimony, is it not a
much greater injury they do Him when they say that His predictions must
be understood otherwise than the world believed them, though He Himself
praised, promised, accomplished this belief on the world’s part?  And
why cannot He cause the body to rise again, and live for ever? or is it
not to be believed that He will do this, because it is an undesirable
thing, and unworthy of God?  Of His omnipotence, which effects so many
great miracles, we have already said enough.  If they wish to know what
the Almighty cannot do, I shall tell them He cannot lie.  Let us
therefore believe what He can do, by refusing to believe what He cannot
do.  Refusing to believe that He can lie, let them believe that He will
do what He has promised to do; and let them believe it as the world has
believed it, whose faith He predicted, whose faith He praised, whose
faith He promised, whose faith He now points to.  But how do they prove
that the resurrection is an undesirable thing?  There shall then be no
corruption, which is the only evil thing about the body.  I have already
said enough about the order of the elements, and the other fanciful
objections men raise; and in the thirteenth book I have, in my own
judgment, sufficiently illustrated the facility of movement which the
incorruptible body shall enjoy, judging from the ease and vigor we
experience even now, when the body is in good health.  Those who have
either not read the former books, or wish to refresh their memory, may
read them for themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[505:1666](1020686.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="iv.XXII.25-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.25-p3"></span> *Vide*Book xviii. c. 53.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020687)
