[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020436)  [Next](1020438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Of Marriage Between
Blood-Relations, in Regard to Which the Present Law Could Not Bind the
Men of the Earliest Ages.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.16-p2"></span>As, therefore, the human race,
subsequently to the first marriage of the man who was made of dust, and
his wife who was made out of his side, required the union of males and
females in order that it might multiply, and as there were no human
beings except those who had been born of these two, men took their
sisters for wives,—an act which was as certainly dictated by necessity
in these ancient days as afterwards it was condemned by the prohibitions
of religion.  For it is very reasonable and just that men, among whom
concord is honorable and useful, should be bound together by various
relationships; and one man should not himself sustain many
relationships, but that the various relationships should be distributed
among several, and should thus serve to bind together the greatest
number in the same social interests.  “Father” and “father-in-law” are
the names of two relationships.  When, therefore, a man has one person
for his father, another for his father-in-law, friendship extends itself
to a larger number.  But Adam in his single person was obliged to hold
both relations to his sons and daughters, for brothers and sisters were
united in marriage.  So too Eve his wife was both mother and
mother-in-law to her children of both sexes; while, had there been two
women, one the mother, the other the mother-in-law, the family affection
would have had a wider field.  Then the sister herself by becoming a
wife sustained in her single person two relationships, which, had they
been distributed among individuals, one being sister, and another being
wife, the family tie would have embraced a greater number of persons. 
But there was then no material for effecting this, since there were no
human beings but the brothers and sisters born of those two first
parents.  Therefore, when an abundant population made it possible, men
ought to choose for wives women who were not already their sisters; for
not only would there then be no necessity for marrying sisters, but,
were it done, it would be most abominable.  For if the grandchildren of
the first pair, being now able to choose their cousins for wives,
married their sisters, then it would no longer be only two but three
relationships that were held by one man, while each of these
relationships ought to have been held by a separate individual, so as to
bind together by family affection a larger number.  For one man would in
that case be both father, and father-in-law, and uncle <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) to his own children (brother and
sister now man and wife); and his wife would be mother, aunt, and
mother-in-law to them; and they themselves would be not only brother and
sister, and man and wife, but cousins also, being the children of
brother and sister.  Now, all these relationships, which combined three
men into one, would have embraced nine persons had each relationship
been held by one individual, so that a man had one person for his
sister, another his wife, another his cousin, another his father,
another his uncle, another his father-in-law, another his mother,
another his aunt, another his mother-in-law; and thus the social bond
would not have been tightened to bind a few, but loosened to embrace a
larger number of relations.

<span id="iv.XV.16-p4"></span>And we see that, since the human race has
increased and multiplied, this is so strictly observed even among the
profane worshippers of many and false gods, that though their laws
perversely allow a brother to marry his sister, <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) yet custom, with a finer morality,
prefers to forego this license; and though it was quite allowable in the
earliest ages of the human race to marry one’s sister, it is now
abhorred as a thing which no circumstances could justify.  For custom
has very great power either to attract or to shock human feeling.  And
in this matter, while it restrains concupiscence <span id="page_298">p.
298</span> <span id="iv.XV.16-Page_298"></span> within due bounds, the
man who neglects and disobeys it is justly branded as abominable.  For
if it is iniquitous to plough beyond our own boundaries through the
greed of gain, is it not much more iniquitous to transgress the
recognized boundaries of morals through sexual lust?  And with regard to
marriage in the next degree of consanguinity, marriage between cousins,
we have observed that in our own time the customary morality has
prevented this from being frequent, though the law allows it.  It was
not prohibited by divine law, nor as yet had human law prohibited it;
nevertheless, though legitimate, people shrank from it, because it lay
so close to what was illegitimate, and in marrying a cousin seemed
almost to marry a sister,—for cousins are so closely related that they
are called brothers and sisters, <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819)
and are almost really so.  But the ancient fathers, fearing that near
relationship might gradually in the course of generations diverge, and
become distant relationship, or cease to be relationship at all,
religiously endeavored to limit it by the bond of marriage before it
became distant, and thus, as it were, to call it back when it was
escaping them.  And on this account, even when the world was full of
people, though they did not choose wives from among their sisters or
half-sisters, yet they preferred them to be of the same stock as
themselves.  But who doubts that the modern prohibition of the marriage
even of cousins is the more seemly regulation—not merely on account of
the reason we have been urging, the multiplying of relationships, so
that one person might not absorb two, which might be distributed to two
persons, and so increase the number of people bound together as a
family, but also because there is in human nature I know not what
natural and praiseworthy shamefacedness which restrains us from desiring
that connection which, though for propagation, is yet lustful and which
even conjugal modesty blushes over, with any one to whom consanguinity
bids us render respect?

<span id="iv.XV.16-p7"></span>The sexual intercourse of man and woman,
then, is in the case of mortals a kind of seed-bed of the city; but
while the earthly city needs for its population only generation, the
heavenly needs also regeneration to rid it of the taint of generation. 
Whether before the deluge there was any bodily or visible sign of
regeneration, such as was afterwards enjoined upon Abraham when he was
circumcised, or what kind of sign it was, the sacred history does not
inform us.  But it does inform us that even these earliest of mankind
sacrificed to God, as appeared also in the case of the two first
brothers; Noah, too, is said to have offered sacrifices to God when he
had come forth from the ark after the deluge.  And concerning this
subject we have already said in the foregoing books that the devils
arrogate to themselves divinity, and require sacrifice that they may be
esteemed gods, and delight in these honors on no other account than
this, because they know that true sacrifice is due to the true God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_817"></span>[297:818](1020437.htm#fr_817) <span
id="iv.XV.16-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.16-p3"></span> His own children being the children of
his sister, and therefore his nephews.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[297:819](1020437.htm#fr_818) <span
id="iv.XV.16-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.16-p5"></span> This was allowed by the Egyptians and
Athenians, never by the Romans.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[298:820](1020437.htm#fr_819) <span
id="iv.XV.16-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.16-p6"></span> Both in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, though
not uniformly, nor in Latin commonly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020438)
