[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020765)  [Next](1020767) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxix-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—To What Extent Natural Science is
an Exegetical Aid.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxix-p2"></span>45.  There is also a species of narrative
resembling description, in which not a past but an existing state of
things is made known to those who are ignorant of it.  To this species
belongs all that has been written about the situation of places, and the
nature of animals, trees, herbs, stones, and other bodies.  And of this
species I have treated above, and have shown that this kind of knowledge
is serviceable in solving the difficulties of Scripture, not that these
objects are to be used conformably to certain signs as nostrums or the
instruments of superstition; for that kind of knowledge I have already
set aside as distinct from the lawful and free kind now spoken of.  For
it is one thing to say:  If you bruise down <span id="page_550">p.
550</span> <span id="v.v.xxix-Page_550"></span> this herb and drink it,
it will remove the pain from your stomach; and another to say:  If you
hang this herb round your neck, it will remove the pain from your
stomach.  In the former case the wholesome mixture is approved of, in
the latter the superstitious charm is condemned; although indeed, where
incantations and invocations and marks are not used, it is frequently
doubtful whether the thing that is tied or fixed in any way to the body
to cure it, acts by a natural virtue, in which case it may be freely
used; or acts by a sort of charm, in which case it becomes the Christian
to avoid it the more carefully, the more efficacious it may seem to be. 
But when the reason why a thing is of virtue does not appear, the
intention with which it is used is of great importance, at least in
healing or in tempering bodies, whether in medicine or in agriculture.

<span id="v.v.xxix-p3"></span>46.  The knowledge of the stars, again, is
not a matter of narration, but of description.  Very few of these,
however, are mentioned in Scripture.  And as the course of the moon,
which is regularly employed in reference to celebrating the anniversary
of our Lord’s passion, is known to most people; so the rising and
setting and other movements of the rest of the heavenly bodies are
thoroughly known to very few.  And this knowledge, although in itself it
involves no superstition, renders very little, indeed almost no
assistance, in the interpretation of Holy Scripture, and by engaging the
attention unprofitably is a hindrance rather; and as it is closely
related to the very pernicious error of the diviners of the fates, it is
more convenient and becoming to neglect it.  It involves, moreover, in
addition to a description of the present state of things, something like
a narrative of the past also; because one may go back from the present
position and motion of the stars, and trace by rule their past
movements.  It involves also regular anticipations of the future, not in
the way of forebodings and omens, but by way of sure calculation; not
with the design of drawing any information from them as to our own acts
and fates, in the absurd fashion of the *genethliaci*, but only as to
the motions of the heavenly bodies themselves.  For, as the man who
computes the moon’s age can tell, when he has found out her age today,
what her age was any number of years ago, or what will be her age any
number of years hence, in just the same way men who are skilled in such
computations are accustomed to answer like questions about every one of
the heavenly bodies.  And I have stated what my views are about all this
knowledge, so far as regards its utility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1020767)
