[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020291)  [Next](1020293) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.21"></span>

<span id="iv.X.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21 .—Of the Power Delegated to Demons
for the Trial and Glorification of the Saints, Who Conquer Not by
Propitiating the Spirits of the Air, But by Abiding in God.</span>

<span id="iv.X.21-p2"></span>The power delegated to the demons at
certain appointed and well-adjusted seasons, that they may give
expression to their hostility to the city of God by stirring up against
it the men who are under their influence, and may not only receive
sacrifice from those who willingly offer it, but may also extort it from
the unwilling by violent persecution;—this power is found to be not
merely harmless, but even useful to the Church, completing as it does
the number of martyrs, whom the city of God esteems as all the more
illustrious and honored citizens, because they have striven even to
blood against the sin of impiety.  If the ordinary language of the
Church allowed it, we might more elegantly call these men our heroes. 
For this name is said to be derived from Juno, who in Greek is called
Hêrê, and hence, according to the Greek myths, one of her sons was
called Heros.  And these fables mystically signified that Juno was
mistress of the air, which they suppose to be inhabited by the demons
and the heroes, understanding by heroes the souls of the well-deserving
dead.  But for a quite opposite reason would we call our martyrs
heroes,—supposing, as I said, that the usage of ecclesiastical language
would admit of it,—not because they lived along with the demons in the
air, but because they conquered these demons or powers of the air, and
among them Juno herself, be she what she may, not unsuitably
represented, as she commonly is by the poets, as hostile to virtue, and
jealous of men of mark aspiring to the heavens.  Virgil, however,
unhappily gives way, and yields to her; for, though he represents her as
saying, “I am conquered by Æneas,” <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) Helenus gives Æneas himself this
religious advice:

<span id="iv.X.21-p4"></span>“Pay vows to Juno:  overbear

<span id="iv.X.21-p5"></span>Her queenly soul with gift and
prayer.” <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)

<span id="iv.X.21-p7"></span>In conformity with this opinion, Porphyry—
<span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span id="iv.X.21-Page_194"></span>
expressing, however, not so much his own views as other people’s—says
that a good god or genius cannot come to a man unless the evil genius
has been first of all propitiated, implying that the evil deities had
greater power than the good; for, until they have been appeased and give
place, the good can give no assistance; and if the evil deities oppose,
the good can give no help; whereas the evil can do injury without the
good being able to prevent them.  This is not the way of the true and
truly holy religion; not thus do our martyrs conquer Juno, that is to
say, the powers of the air, who envy the virtues of the pious.  Our
heroes, if we could so call them, overcome Hêrê, not by suppliant gifts,
but by divine virtues.  As Scipio, who conquered Africa by his valor, is
more suitably styled Africanus than if he had appeased his enemies by
gifts, and so won their mercy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_413"></span>[193:414](1020292.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iv.X.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.21-p3"></span> *Æn.*, vii. 310.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[193:415](1020292.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iv.X.21-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.21-p6"></span> *Æn*., iii. 438, 439.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020293)
