[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020668)  [Next](1020670) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of Miracles Which Were Wrought
that the World Might Believe in Christ, and Which Have Not Ceased Since
the World Believed.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p2"></span>Why, they say, are those miracles, which
you affirm were wrought formerly, wrought no longer?  I might, indeed,
reply that miracles were necessary before the world believed, in order
that it might believe.  And whoever now-a-days demands to see prodigies
that he may believe, is himself a great prodigy, because he does not
believe, though the whole world does.  But they make these objections
for the sole purpose of insinuating that even those former miracles were
never wrought.  How, then, is it that everywhere Christ is celebrated
with such firm belief in His resurrection and ascension?  How is it that
in enlightened times, in which every impossibility is rejected, the
world has, without any miracles, believed things marvellously
incredible?  Or will they say that these things were credible, and
therefore were credited?  Why then do they themselves not believe?  Our
argument, therefore, is a summary one—either incredible things which
were not witnessed have caused the world to believe other incredible
things which both occurred and were witnessed, or this matter was so
credible that it needed no miracles in proof of it, and therefore
convicts these unbelievers of unpardonable scepticism.  This I might say
for the sake of refuting these most frivolous objectors.  But we cannot
deny that many miracles were wrought to confirm that one grand and
health-giving miracle of Christ’s ascension to heaven with the flesh in
which He rose.  For these most trustworthy books of ours contain in one
narrative both the miracles that were wrought and the creed which they
were wrought to confirm.  The miracles were published that they might
produce faith, and the faith which they produced brought them into <span
id="page_485">p. 485</span> <span id="iv.XXII.8-Page_485"></span>
greater prominence.  For they are read in congregations that they may be
believed, and yet they would not be so read unless they were believed. 
For even now miracles are wrought in the name of Christ, whether by His
sacraments or by the prayers or relics of His saints; but they are not
so brilliant and conspicuous as to cause them to be published with such
glory as accompanied the former miracles.  For the canon of the sacred
writings, which behoved to be closed, <span
id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613) causes those to be everywhere
recited, and to sink into the memory of all the congregations; but these
modern miracles are scarcely known even to the whole population in the
midst of which they are wrought, and at the best are confined to one
spot.  For frequently they are known only to a very few persons, while
all the rest are ignorant of them, especially if the state is a large
one; and when they are reported to other persons in other localities,
there is no sufficient authority to give them prompt and unwavering
credence, although they are reported to the faithful by the faithful.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p4"></span>The miracle which was wrought at Milan
when I was there, and by which a blind man was restored to sight, could
come to the knowledge of many; for not only is the city a large one, but
also the emperor was there at the time, and the occurrence was witnessed
by an immense concourse of people that had gathered to the bodies of the
martyrs Protasius and Gervasius, which had long lain concealed and
unknown, but were now made known to the bishop Ambrose in a dream, and
discovered by him.  By virtue of these remains the darkness of that
blind man was scattered, and he saw the light of day. <span
id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614)

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p6"></span>But who but a very small number are aware
of the cure which was wrought upon Innocentius, ex-advocate of the
deputy prefecture, a cure wrought at Carthage, in my presence, and under
my own eyes?  For when I and my brother Alypius, <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) who were not yet clergymen, <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) though already servants of God,
came from abroad, this man received us, and made us live with him, for
he and all his household were devotedly pious.  He was being treated by
medical men for fistulæ, of which he had a large number intricately
seated in the rectum.  He had already undergone an operation, and the
surgeons were using every means at their command for his relief.  In
that operation he had suffered long-continued and acute pain; yet, among
the many folds of the gut, one had escaped the operators so entirely,
that, though they ought to have laid it open with the knife, they never
touched it.  And thus, though all those that had been opened were cured,
this one remained as it was, and frustrated all their labor.  The
patient, having his suspicions awakened by the delay thus occasioned,
and fearing greatly a second operation, which another medical man—one of
his own domestics—had told him he must undergo, though this man had not
even been allowed to witness the first operation, and had been banished
from the house, and with difficulty allowed to come back to his enraged
master’s presence,—the patient, I say, broke out to the surgeons,
saying, “Are you going to cut me again?  Are you, after all, to fulfill
the prediction of that man whom you would not allow even to be
present?”  The surgeons laughed at the unskillful doctor, and soothed
their patient’s fears with fair words and promises.  So several days
passed, and yet nothing they tried did him good.  Still they persisted
in promising that they would cure that fistula by drugs, without the
knife.  They called in also another old practitioner of great repute in
that department, Ammonius (for he was still alive at that time); and he,
after examining the part, promised the same result as themselves from
their care and skill.  On this great authority, the patient became
confident, and, as if already well, vented his good spirits in facetious
remarks at the expense of his domestic physician, who had predicted a
second operation.  To make a long story short, after a number of days
had thus uselessly elapsed, the surgeons, wearied and confused, had at
last to confess that he could only be cured by the knife.  Agitated with
excessive fear, he was terrified, and grew pale with dread; and when he
collected himself and was able to speak, he ordered them to go away and
never to return.  Worn out with weeping, and driven by necessity, it
occurred to him to call in an Alexandrian, who was at that time esteemed
a wonderfully skillful operator, that he might perform the operation his
rage would not suffer them to do.  But when he had come, and examined
with a professional eye the traces <span id="page_486">p. 486</span>
<span id="iv.XXII.8-Page_486"></span> of their careful work, he acted
the part of a good man, and persuaded his patient to allow those same
hands the satisfaction of finishing his cure which had begun it with a
skill that excited his admiration, adding that there was no doubt his
only hope of a cure was by an operation, but that it was thoroughly
inconsistent with his nature to win the credit of the cure by doing the
little that remained to be done, and rob of their reward men whose
consummate skill, care, and diligence he could not but admire when be
saw the traces of their work.  They were therefore again received to
favor; and it was agreed that, in the presence of the Alexandrian, they
should operate on the fistula, which, by the consent of all, could now
only be cured by the knife.  The operation was deferred till the
following day.  But when they had left, there arose in the house such a
wailing, in sympathy with the excessive despondency of the master, that
it seemed to us like the mourning at a funeral, and we could scarcely
repress it.  Holy men were in the habit of visiting him daily;
Saturninus of blessed memory, at that time bishop of Uzali, and the
presbyter Gelosus, and the deacons of the church of Carthage; and among
these was the bishop Aurelius, who alone of them all survives,—a man to
be named by us with due reverence,—and with him I have often spoken of
this affair, as we conversed together about the wonderful works of God,
and I have found that he distinctly remembers what I am now relating. 
When these persons visited him that evening according to their custom,
he besought them, with pitiable tears, that they would do him the honor
of being present next day at what he judged his funeral rather than his
suffering.  For such was the terror his former pains had produced, that
he made no doubt he would die in the hands of the surgeons.  They
comforted him, and exhorted him to put his trust in God, and nerve his
will like a man.  Then we went to prayer; but while we, in the usual
way, were kneeling and bending to the ground, he cast himself down, as
if some one were hurling him violently to the earth, and began to pray;
but in what a manner, with what earnestness and emotion, with what a
flood of tears, with what groans and sobs, that shook his whole body,
and almost prevented him speaking, who can describe!  Whether the others
prayed, and had not their attention wholly diverted by this conduct, I
do not know.  For myself, I could not pray at all.  This only I briefly
said in my heart:  “O Lord, what prayers of Thy people dost Thou hear if
Thou hearest not these?”  For it seemed to me that nothing could be
added to this prayer, unless he expired in praying.  We rose from our
knees, and, receiving the blessing of the bishop, departed, the patient
beseeching his visitors to be present next morning, they exhorting him
to keep up his heart.  The dreaded day dawned.  The servants of God were
present, as they had promised to be; the surgeons arrived; all that the
circumstances required was ready; the frightful instruments are
produced; all look on in wonder and suspense.  While those who have most
influence with the patient are cheering his fainting spirit, his limbs
are arranged on the couch so as to suit the hand of the operator; the
knots of the bandages are untied; the part is bared; the surgeon
examines it, and, with knife in hand, eagerly looks for the sinus that
is to be cut.  He searches for it with his eyes; he feels for it with
his finger; he applies every kind of scrutiny:  he finds a perfectly
firm cicatrix!  No words of mine can describe the joy, and praise, and
thanksgiving to the merciful and almighty God which was poured from the
lips of all, with tears of gladness.  Let the scene be imagined rather
than described!

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p9"></span>In the same city of Carthage lived
Innocentia, a very devout woman of the highest rank in the state.  She
had cancer in one of her breasts, a disease which, as physicians say, is
incurable.  Ordinarily, therefore, they either amputate, and so separate
from the body the member on which the disease has seized, or, that the
patient’s life may be prolonged a little, though death is inevitable
even if somewhat delayed, they abandon all remedies, following, as they
say, the advice of Hippocrates.  This the lady we speak of had been
advised to by a skillful physician, who was intimate with her family;
and she betook herself to God alone by prayer.  On the approach of
Easter, she was instructed in a dream to wait for the first woman that
came out from the baptistery <span id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617)
after being baptized, and to ask her to make the sign of Christ upon her
sore.  She did so, and was immediately cured.  The physician who had
advised her to apply no remedy if she wished to live a little longer,
when he had examined her after this, and found that she who, on his
former examination, was afflicted with that disease was now perfectly
cured, eagerly asked her what remedy she had used, anxious, as we may
well believe, to discover the drug which should defeat the decision of
Hippocrates.  But when she told him what had happened, he is said to
have replied, with reli <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.8-Page_487"></span> gious politeness, though with a
contemptuous tone, and an expression which made her fear he would utter
some blasphemy against Christ, “I thought you would make some great
discovery to me.”  She, shuddering at his indifference, quickly replied,
“What great thing was it for Christ to heal a cancer, who raised one who
had been four days dead?”  When, therefore, I had heard this, I was
extremely indignant that so great a miracle wrought in that well-known
city, and on a person who was certainly not obscure, should not be
divulged, and I considered that she should be spoken to, if not
reprimanded on this score.  And when she replied to me that she had not
kept silence on the subject, I asked the women with whom she was best
acquainted whether they had ever heard of this before.  They told me
they knew nothing of it.  “See,” I said, “what your not keeping silence
amounts to, since not even those who are so familiar with you know of
it.”  And as I had only briefly heard the story, I made her tell how the
whole thing happened, from beginning to end, while the other women
listened in great astonishment, and glorified God.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p11"></span>A gouty doctor of the same city, when he
had given in his name for baptism, and had been prohibited the day
before his baptism from being baptized that year, by black woolly-haired
boys who appeared to him in his dreams, and whom he understood to be
devils, and when, though they trod on his feet, and inflicted the
acutest pain he had ever yet experienced, he refused to obey them, but
overcame them, and would not defer being washed in the laver of
regeneration, was relieved in the very act of baptism, not only of the
extraordinary pain he was tortured with, but also of the disease itself,
so that, though he lived a long time afterwards, he never suffered from
gout; and yet who knows of this miracle?  We, however, do know it, and
so, too, do the small number of brethren who were in the neighborhood,
and to whose ears it might come.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p12"></span>An old comedian of Curubis <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) was cured at baptism not only of
paralysis, but also of hernia, and, being delivered from both
afflictions, came up out of the font of regeneration as if he had had
nothing wrong with his body.  Who outside of Curubis knows of this, or
who but a very few who might hear it elsewhere?  But we, when we heard
of it, made the man come to Carthage, by order of the holy bishop
Aurelius, although we had already ascertained the fact on the
information of persons whose word we could not doubt.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p14"></span>Hesperius, of a tribunitian family, and
a neighbor of our own, <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) has a
farm called Zubedi in the Fussalian district; <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) and, finding that his family, his
cattle, and his servants were suffering from the malice of evil spirits,
he asked our presbyters, during my absence, that one of them would go
with him and banish the spirits by his prayers.  One went, offered there
the sacrifice of the body of Christ, praying with all his might that
that vexation might cease.  It did cease forthwith, through God’s
mercy.  Now he had received from a friend of his own some holy earth
brought from Jerusalem, where Christ, having been buried, rose again the
third day.  This earth he had hung up in his bedroom to preserve himself
from harm.  But when his house was purged of that demoniacal invasion,
he began to consider what should be done with the earth; for his
reverence for it made him unwilling to have it any longer in his
bedroom.  It so happened that I and Maximinus bishop of Synita, and then
my colleague, were in the neighborhood.  Hesperius asked us to visit
him, and we did so.  When he had related all the circumstances, he
begged that the earth might be buried somewhere, and that the spot
should be made a place of prayer where Christians might assemble for the
worship of God.  We made no objection:  it was done as he desired. 
There was in that neighborhood a young countryman who was paralytic,
who, when he heard of this, begged his parents to take him without delay
to that holy place.  When he had been brought there, he prayed, and
forthwith went away on his own feet perfectly cured.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p17"></span>There is a country-seat called
Victoriana, less than thirty miles from Hippo-regius.  At it there is a
monument to the Milanese martyrs, Protasius and Gervasius.  Thither a
young man was carried, who, when he was watering his horse one summer
day at noon in a pool of a river, had been taken possession of by a
devil.  As he lay at the monument, near death, or even quite like a dead
person, the lady of the manor, with her maids and religious attendants,
entered the place for evening prayer and praise, as her custom was, and
they began to sing hymns.  At this sound the young man, as if
electrified, was thoroughly aroused, and with frightful screaming seized
the altar, and held it as if he did not dare or were not able to let it
go, and as if he were fixed or tied to it; and the devil in him, with
loud lamentation, besought that he might be spared, and confessed where
and when and how he took possession of the youth. <span id="page_488">p.
488</span> <span id="iv.XXII.8-Page_488"></span> At last, declaring that
he would go out of him, he named one by one the parts of his body which
he threatened to mutilate as he went out and with these words he
departed from the man.  But his eye, falling out on his cheek, hung by a
slender vein as by a root, and the whole of the pupil which had been
black became white.  When this was witnessed by those present (others
too had now gathered to his cries, and had all joined in prayer for
him), although they were delighted that he had recovered his sanity of
mind, yet, on the other hand, they were grieved about his eye, and said
he should seek medical advice.  But his sister’s husband, who had
brought him there, said, “God, who has banished the devil, is able to
restore his eye at the prayers of His saints.”  Therewith he replaced
the eye that was fallen out and hanging, and bound it in its place with
his handkerchief as well as he could, and advised him not to loose the
bandage for seven days.  When he did so, he found it quite healthy. 
Others also were cured there, but of them it were tedious to speak.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p18"></span>I know that a young woman of Hippo was
immediately dispossessed of a devil, on anointing herself with oil,
mixed with the tears of the prebsyter who had been praying for her.  I
know also that a bishop once prayed for a demoniac young man whom he
never saw, and that he was cured on the spot.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p19"></span>There was a fellow-townsman of ours at
Hippo, Florentius, an old man, religious and poor, who supported himself
as a tailor.  Having lost his coat, and not having means to buy another,
he prayed to the Twenty Martyrs, <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621) who have a very celebrated memorial
shrine in our town, begging in a distinct voice that he might be
clothed.  Some scoffing young men, who happened to be present, heard
him, and followed him with their sarcasm as he went away, as if he had
asked the martyrs for fifty pence to buy a coat.  But he, walking on in
silence, saw on the shore a great fish, gasping as if just cast up, and
having secured it with the good-natured assistance of the youths, he
sold it for curing to a cook of the name of Catosus, a good Christian
man, telling him how he had come by it, and receiving for it three
hundred pence, which he laid out in wool, that his wife might exercise
her skill upon, and make into a coat for him.  But, on cutting up the
fish, the cook found a gold ring in its belly; and forthwith, moved with
compassion, and influenced, too, by religious fear, gave it up to the
man, saying, “See how the Twenty Martyrs have clothed you.”

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p21"></span>When the bishop Projectus was bringing
the relics of the most glorious martyr Stephen to the waters of Tibilis,
a great concourse of people came to meet him at the shrine.  There a
blind woman entreated that she might be led to the bishop who was
carrying the relics.  He gave her the flowers he was carrying.  She took
them, applied them to her eyes, and forthwith saw.  Those who were
present were astounded, while she, with every expression of joy,
preceded them, pursuing her way without further need of a guide.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p22"></span>Lucillus bishop of Sinita, in the
neighborhood of the colonial town of Hippo, was carrying in procession
some relics of the same martyr, which had been deposited in the castle
of Sinita.  A fistula under which he had long labored, and which his
private physician was watching an opportunity to cut, was suddenly cured
by the mere carrying of that sacred fardel, <span
id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) —at least, afterwards there was no
trace of it in his body.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p24"></span>Eucharius, a Spanish priest, residing at
Calama, was for a long time a sufferer from stone.  By the relics of the
same martyr, which the bishop Possidius brought him, he was cured. 
Afterwards the same priest, sinking under another disease, was lying
dead, and already they were binding his hands.  By the succor of the
same martyr he was raised to life, the priest’s cloak having been
brought from the oratory and laid upon the corpse.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p25"></span>There was there an old nobleman named
Martial, who had a great aversion to the Christian religion, but whose
daughter was a Christian, while her husband had been baptized that same
year.  When he was ill, they besought him with tears and prayers to
become a Christian, but he positively refused, and dismissed them from
his presence in a storm of indignation.  It occurred to the son-in-law
to go to the oratory of St. Stephen, and there pray for him with all
earnestness that God might give him a right mind, so that he should not
delay believing in Christ.  This he did with great groaning and tears,
and the burning fervor of sincere piety; then, as he left the place, he
took some of the flowers that were lying there, and, as it was already
night, laid them by his father’s head, who so slept.  And lo! before
dawn, he cries out for some one to run for the bishop; but he happened
at that time to be with me at Hippo.  So when he had heard that he was
from home, he asked the presbyters to come.  They came.  To the joy and
amazement of all, he declared that he believed, and he was baptized.  As
long as he remained in life, these <span id="page_489">p. 489</span>
<span id="iv.XXII.8-Page_489"></span> words were ever on his lips: 
“Christ, receive my spirit,” though he was not aware that these were the
last words of the most blessed Stephen when he was stoned by the Jews. 
They were his last words also, for not long after he himself also gave
up the ghost.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p26"></span>There, too, by the same martyr, two men,
one a citizen, the other a stranger, were cured of gout; but while the
citizen was absolutely cured, the stranger was only informed what he
should apply when the pain returned; and when he followed this advice,
the pain was at once relieved.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p27"></span>Audurus is the name of an estate, where
there is a church that contains a memorial shrine of the martyr
Stephen.  It happened that, as a little boy was playing in the court,
the oxen drawing a wagon went out of the track and crushed him with the
wheel, so that immediately he seemed at his last gasp.  His mother
snatched him up, and laid him at the shrine, and not only did he revive,
but also appeared uninjured.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p28"></span>A religious female, who lived at
Caspalium, a neighboring estate, when she was so ill as to be despaired
of, had her dress brought to this shrine, but before it was brought back
she was gone.  However, her parents wrapped her corpse in the dress,
and, her breath returning, she became quite well.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p29"></span>At Hippo a Syrian called Bassus was
praying at the relics of the same martyr for his daughter, who was
dangerously ill.  He too had brought her dress with him to the shrine. 
But as he prayed, behold, his servants ran from the house to tell him
she was dead.  His friends, however, intercepted them, and forbade them
to tell him, lest he should bewail her in public.  And when he had
returned to his house, which was already ringing with the lamentations
of his family, and had thrown on his daughter’s body the dress he was
carrying, she was restored to life.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p30"></span>There, too, the son of a man, Irenæus,
one of our tax-gatherers, took ill and died.  And while his body was
lying lifeless, and the last rites were being prepared, amidst the
weeping and mourning of all, one of the friends who were consoling the
father suggested that the body should be anointed with the oil of the
same martyr.  It was done, and he revived.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p31"></span>Likewise Eleusinus, a man of tribunitian
rank among us, laid his infant son, who had died, on the shrine of the
martyr, which is in the suburb where he lived, and, after prayer, which
he poured out there with many tears, he took up his child alive.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p32"></span>What am I to do?  I am so pressed by the
promise of finishing this work, that I cannot record all the miracles I
know; and doubtless several of our adherents, when they read what I have
narrated, will regret that I have omitted so many which they, as well as
I, certainly know.  Even now I beg these persons to excuse me, and to
consider how long it would take me to relate all those miracles, which
the necessity of finishing the work I have undertaken forces me to
omit.  For were I to be silent of all others, and to record exclusively
the miracles of healing which were wrought in the district of Calama and
of Hippo by means of this martyr—I mean the most glorious Stephen—they
would fill many volumes; and yet all even of these could not be
collected, but only those of which narratives have been written for
public recital.  For when I saw, in our own times, frequent signs of the
presence of divine powers similar to those which had been given of old,
I desired that narratives might be written, judging that the multitude
should not remain ignorant of these things.  It is not yet two years
since these relics were first brought to Hippo-regius, and though many
of the miracles which have been wrought by it have not, as I have the
most certain means of knowing, been recorded, those which have been
published amount to almost seventy at the hour at which I write.  But at
Calama, where these relics have been for a longer time, and where more
of the miracles were narrated for public information, there are
incomparably more.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p33"></span>At Uzali, too, a colony near Utica, many
signal miracles were, to my knowledge, wrought by the same martyr, whose
relics had found a place there by direction of the bishop Evodius, long
before we had them at Hippo.  But there the custom of publishing
narratives does not obtain, or, I should say, did not obtain, for
possibly it may now have been begun.  For, when I was there recently, a
woman of rank, Petronia, had been miraculously cured of a serious
illness of long standing, in which all medical appliances had failed,
and, with the consent of the above-named bishop of the place, I exhorted
her to publish an account of it that might be read to the people.  She
most promptly obeyed, and inserted in her narrative a circumstance which
I cannot omit to mention, though I am compelled to hasten on to the
subjects which this work requires me to treat.  She said that she had
been persuaded by a Jew to wear next her skin, under all her clothes, a
hair girdle, and on this girdle a ring, which, instead of a gem, had a
stone which had been found in the kidneys of an ox.  Girt with this
charm, she was making her way to the threshold of the holy martyr.  But,
after leaving Carthage, and when she had been lodging in her own <span
id="page_490">p. 490</span> <span id="iv.XXII.8-Page_490"></span>
demesne on the river Bagrada, and was now rising to continue her
journey, she saw her ring lying before her feet. In great surprise she
examined the hair girdle, and when she found it bound, as it had been,
quite firmly with knots, she conjectured that the ring had been worn
through and dropped off; but when she found that the ring was itself
also perfectly whole, she presumed that by this great miracle she had
received somehow a pledge of her cure, whereupon she untied the girdle,
and cast it into the river, and the ring along with it.  This is not
credited by those who do not believe either that the Lord Jesus Christ
came forth from His mother’s womb without destroying her virginity, and
entered among His disciples when the doors were shut; but let them make
strict inquiry into this miracle, and if they find it true, let them
believe those others.  The lady is of distinction, nobly born, married
to a nobleman.  She resides at Carthage.  The city is distinguished, the
person is distinguished, so that they who make inquiries cannot fail to
find satisfaction.  Certainly the martyr himself, by whose prayers she
was healed, believed on the Son of her who remained a virgin; on Him who
came in among the disciples when the doors were shut; in fine,—and to
this tends all that we have been retailing,—on Him who ascended into
heaven with the flesh in which He had risen; and it is because he laid
down his life for this faith that such miracles were done by his means.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p34"></span>Even now, therefore, many miracles are
wrought, the same God who wrought those we read of still performing
them, by whom He will and as He will; but they are not as well known,
nor are they beaten into the memory, like gravel, by frequent reading,
so that they cannot fall out of mind.  For even where, as is now done
among ourselves, care is taken that the pamphlets of those who receive
benefit be read publicly, yet those who are present hear the narrative
but once, and many are absent; and so it comes to pass that even those
who are present forget in a few days what they heard, and scarcely one
of them can be found who will tell what he heard to one who he knows was
not present.

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p35"></span>One miracle was wrought among ourselves,
which, though no greater than those I have mentioned, was yet so signal
and conspicuous, that I suppose there is no inhabitant of Hippo who did
not either see or hear of it, none who could possibly forget it.  There
were seven brothers and three sisters of a noble family of the
Cappadocian Cæsarea, who were cursed by their mother, a new-made widow,
on account of some wrong they had done her, and which she bitterly
resented, and who were visited with so severe a punishment from Heaven,
that all of them were seized with a hideous shaking in all their limbs. 
Unable, while presenting this loathsome appearance, to endure the eyes
of their fellow-citizens, they wandered over almost the whole Roman
world, each following his own direction.  Two of them came to Hippo, a
brother and a sister, Paulus and Palladia, already known in many other
places by the fame of their wretched lot.  Now it was about fifteen days
before Easter when they came, and they came daily to church, and
specially to the relics of the most glorious Stephen, praying that God
might now be appeased, and restore their former health.  There, and
wherever they went, they attracted the attention of every one.  Some who
had seen them elsewhere, and knew the cause of their trembling, told
others as occasion offered.  Easter arrived, and on the Lord’s day, in
the morning, when there was now a large crowd present, and the young man
was holding the bars of the holy place where the relics were, and
praying, suddenly he fell down, and lay precisely as if asleep, but not
trembling as he was wont to do even in sleep.  All present were
astonished.  Some were alarmed, some were moved with pity; and while
some were for lifting him up, others prevented them, and said they
should rather wait and see what would result.  And behold! he rose up,
and trembled no more, for he was healed, and stood quite well, scanning
those who were scanning him.  Who then refrained himself from praising
God?  The whole church was filled with the voices of those who were
shouting and congratulating him.  Then they came running to me, where I
was sitting ready to come into the church.  One after another they
throng in, the last comer telling me as news what the first had told me
already; and while I rejoiced and inwardly gave God thanks, the young
man himself also enters, with a number of others, falls at my knees, is
raised up to receive my kiss.  We go in to the congregation:  the church
was full, and ringing with the shouts of joy, “Thanks to God!  Praised
be God!” every one joining and shouting on all sides, “I have healed the
people,” and then with still louder voice shouting again.  Silence being
at last obtained, the customary lessons of the divine Scriptures were
read.  And when I came to my sermon, I made a few remarks suitable to
the occasion and the happy and joyful feeling, not desiring them to
listen to me, but rather to consider the eloquence of God in this divine
work.  The man dined with us, and gave us a careful ac <span
id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span id="iv.XXII.8-Page_491"></span> count
of his own, his mother’s, and his family’s calamity.  Accordingly, on
the following day, after delivering my sermon, I promised that next day
I would read his narrative to the people. <span
id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623)   And when I did so, the third day
after Easter Sunday, I made the brother and sister both stand on the
steps of the raised place from which I used to speak; and while they
stood there their pamphlet was read. <span
id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624)   The whole congregation, men and
women alike, saw the one standing without any unnatural movement, the
other trembling in all her limbs; so that those who had not before seen
the man himself saw in his sister what the divine compassion had removed
from him.  In him they saw matter of congratulation, in her subject for
prayer.  Meanwhile, their pamphlet being finished, I instructed them to
withdraw from the gaze of the people; and I had begun to discuss the
whole matter somewhat more carefully, when lo! as I was proceeding,
other voices are heard from the tomb of the martyr, shouting new
congratulations.  My audience turned round, and began to run to the
tomb.  The young woman, when she had come down from the steps where she
had been standing, went to pray at the holy relics, and no sooner had
she touched the bars than she, in the same way as her brother,
collapsed, as if falling asleep, and rose up cured.  While, then, we
were asking what had happened, and what occasioned this noise of joy,
they came into the basilica where we were, leading her from the martyr’s
tomb in perfect health.  Then, indeed, such a shout of wonder rose from
men and women together, that the exclamations and the tears seemed like
never to come to an end.  She was led to the place where she had a
little before stood trembling.  They now rejoiced that she was like her
brother, as before they had mourned that she remained unlike him; and as
they had not yet uttered their prayers in her behalf, they perceived
that their intention of doing so had been speedily heard.  They shouted
God’s praises without words, but with such a noise that our ears could
scarcely bear it.  What was there in the hearts of these exultant people
but the faith of Christ, for which Stephen had shed his blood?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[485:1614](1020669.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p3"></span> Another reading has *diffamatum*,
“published.”

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[485:1615](1020669.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p5"></span> A somewhat fuller account of this
miracle is given by Augustin in the *Confessions*, ix. 16.  See also
*Serm.* 286, and Ambrose, *Ep.* 22.  A translation of this epistle in
full is given in Isaac Taylor’s *Ancient Christianity*, ii. 242, where
this miracle is taken as a specimen of the so-called miracles of that
age, and submitted to a detailed examination.  The result arrived at
will be gathered from the following sentence:  “In the Nicene Church, so
lax were the notions of common morality, and in so feeble a manner did
the fear of God influence the conduct of leading men, that, on occasions
when the Church was to be served, and her assailants to be confounded,
they did not scruple to take upon themselves the contrivance and
execution of the most degrading impostures.”—P. 270.  It is to be
observed, however, that Augustin was, at least in this instance, one of
the deceived.  \[On Augustin’s views on post-apostolic miracles see
Card. Newman, Essay on *Miracles*, Nitzsch, *Augustinus Lehre vom
Wunder* (Berlin, 1865) and Schaff, *Church History*, vol. iii. 460,
sqq.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[485:1616](1020669.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p7"></span> Alypius was a countryman of Augustin,
and one of his most attached friends.  See the *Confessions*, passim.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[485:1617](1020669.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p8"></span> Cleros.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[486:1618](1020669.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p10"></span> Easter and Whitsuntide were the common
seasons for administering baptism, though no rule was laid down till
towards the end of the sixth century.  Tertullian thinks these the most
appropriate times, but says that every time is suitable.  See Turtull,
*de Baptismo*, c. 19.

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[487:1619](1020669.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p13"></span> A town near Carthage.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[487:1620](1020669.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p15"></span> This may possibly mean a Christian.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[487:1621](1020669.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p16"></span> Near Hippo.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[488:1622](1020669.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p20"></span> Augustin’s 325th sermon is in honor of
these martyrs.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[488:1623](1020669.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p23"></span> See Isaac Taylor’s *Ancient
Christianity*, ii. 354.

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[491:1624](1020669.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p36"></span> See Augustin’s *Sermons*, 321.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[491:1625](1020669.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="iv.XXII.8-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.8-p37"></span> *Sermon,* 322.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020670)
