[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020443)  [Next](1020445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.23"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Whether We are to Believe that
Angels, Who are of a Spiritual Substance, Fell in Love with the Beauty
of Women, and Sought Them in Marriage, and that from This Connection
Giants Were Born.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p2"></span>In the third book of this work (c. 5) we
made a passing reference to this question, but did not decide whether
angels, inasmuch as they are spirits, could have bodily intercourse with
women.  For it is written, “Who maketh His angels spirits,” <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) that is, He makes those who are by
nature spirits His angels by appointing them to the duty of bearing His
messages.  For the Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XV.23-p3.2"></span>ἄγγελος</span>, which in Latin appears as
“angelus,” means a messenger.  But whether the Psalmist speaks of their
bodies when he adds, “and His ministers a flaming fire,” or means that
God’s ministers ought to blaze with love as with a spiritual fire, is
doubtful.  However, the same trustworthy Scripture testifies that angels
have appeared to men in such bodies as could not only be seen, but also
touched.  There is, too, a very general rumor, which many have verified
by their own experience, or which trustworthy persons who have heard the
experience of others corroborate, that sylvans and fauns, who are
commonly called “incubi,” had often made wicked assaults upon women, and
satisfied their lust upon them; and that certain devils, called Duses by
the Gauls, are constantly attempting and effecting this impurity is so
generally affirmed, that it were impudent to deny it. <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843)   From these assertions, indeed, I
dare not determine whether there be some spirits embodied in an aerial
substance (for this element, even when agitated by a fan, is sensibly
felt by the body), and who are capable of lust and of mingling sensibly
with women; but certainly I could by no means believe that God’s holy
angels could at that time have so fallen, nor can I think that it is of
them the Apostle Peter said, “For if God spared not the angels that
sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into <span
id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="iv.XV.23-Page_304"></span> chains
of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.” <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)   I think he rather speaks of these
who first apostatized from God, along with their chief the devil, who
enviously deceived the first man under the form of a serpent.  But the
same holy Scripture affords the most ample testimony that even godly men
have been called angels; for of John it is written:  “Behold, I send my
messenger (angel) before Thy face, who shall prepare Thy way.” <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845)   And the prophet Malachi, by a
peculiar grace specially communicated to him, was called an angel. <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846)

<span id="iv.XV.23-p8"></span>But some are moved by the fact that we
have read that the fruit of the connection between those who are called
angels of God and the women they loved were not men like our own breed,
but giants; just as if there were not born even in our own time (as I
have mentioned above) men of much greater size than the ordinary
stature.  Was there not at Rome a few years ago, when the destruction of
the city now accomplished by the Goths was drawing near, a woman, with
her father and mother, who by her gigantic size over-topped all others? 
Surprising crowds from all quarters came to see her, and that which
struck them most was the circumstance that neither of her parents were
quite up to the tallest ordinary stature.  Giants therefore might well
be born, even before the sons of God, who are also called angels of God,
formed a connection with the daughters of men, or of those living
according to men, that is to say, before the sons of Seth formed a
connection with the daughters of Cain.  For thus speaks even the
canonical Scripture itself in the book in which we read of this; its
words are:  “And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face
of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God
saw the daughters of men that they were fair \[good\]; and they took
them wives of all which they chose.  And the Lord God said, My Spirit
shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh:  yet his
days shall be an hundred and twenty years.  There were giants in the
earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in
unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same
became the giants, men of renown.” <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847)   These words of the divine book
sufficiently indicate that already there were giants in the earth in
those days, in which the sons of God took wives of the children of men,
when they loved them because they were good, that is, fair.  For it is
the custom of this Scripture to call those who are beautiful in
appearance “good.”  But after this connection had been formed, then too
were giants born.  For the words are:  “There were giants in the earth
in those days, *and also after that*, when the sons of God came in unto
the daughters of men.”  Therefore there were giants both before, “in
those days,” and “also after that.”  And the words, “they bare children
to them,” show plainly enough that before the sons of God fell in this
fashion they begat children to God, not to themselves,—that is to say,
not moved by the lust of sexual intercourse, but discharging the duty of
propagation, intending to produce not a family to gratify their own
pride, but citizens to people the city of God; and to these they as
God’s angels would bear the message, that they should place their hope
in God, like him who was born of Seth, the son of resurrection, and who
hoped to call on the name of the Lord God, in which hope they and their
offspring would be co-heirs of eternal blessings, and brethren in the
family of which God is the Father.

<span id="iv.XV.23-p10"></span>But that those angels were not angels in
the sense of not being men, as some suppose, Scripture itself decides,
which unambiguously declares that they were men.  For when it had first
been stated that “the angels of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, and they took them wives of all which they chose,” it was
immediately added, “And the Lord God said, My Spirit shall not always
strive with these men, for that they also are flesh.”  For by the Spirit
of God they had been made angels of God, and sons of God; but declining
towards lower things, they are called men, a name of nature, not of
grace; and they are called flesh, as deserters of the Spirit, and by
their desertion deserted \[by Him\].  The Septuagint indeed calls them
both angels of God and sons of God, though all the copies do not show
this, some having only the name” sons of God.”  And Aquila, whom the
Jews prefer to the other interpreters, <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) has translated neither angels of God
nor sons of God, but sons of gods.  But both are correct.  For they were
both sons of God, and thus brothers of their own fathers, who were
children of the same God; and they were sons of gods, because begotten
by gods, together with whom they themselves also were gods, according to
that expression of the psalm: <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="iv.XV.23-Page_305"></span> “I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you
are children of the Most High.” <span id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849)
  For the Septuagint translators are justly believed to have received
the Spirit of prophecy; so that, if they made any alterations under His
authority, and did not adhere to a strict translation, we could not
doubt that this was divinely dictated.  However, the Hebrew word may be
said to be ambiguous, and to be susceptible of either translation, “sons
of God,” or “sons of gods.”

<span id="iv.XV.23-p13"></span>Let us omit, then, the fables of those
scriptures which are called apocryphal, because their obscure origin was
unknown to the fathers from whom the authority of the true Scriptures
has been transmitted to us by a most certain and well-ascertained
succession.  For though there is some truth in these apocryphal
writings, yet they contain so many false statements, that they have no
canonical authority.  We cannot deny that Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
left some divine writings, for this is asserted by the Apostle Jude in
his canonical epistle.  But it is not without reason that these writings
have no place in that canon of Scripture which was preserved in the
temple of the Hebrew people by the diligence of successive priests; for
their antiquity brought them under suspicion, and it was impossible to
ascertain whether these were his genuine writings, and they were not
brought forward as genuine by the persons who were found to have
carefully preserved the canonical books by a successive transmission. 
So that the writings which are produced under his name, and which
contain these fables about the giants, saying that their fathers were
not men, are properly judged by prudent men to be not genuine; just as
many writings are produced by heretics under the names both of other
prophets, and more recently, under the names of the apostles, all of
which, after careful examination, have been set apart from canonical
authority under the title of Apocrypha.  There is therefore no doubt
that, according to the Hebrew and Christian canonical Scriptures, there
were many giants before the deluge, and that these were citizens of the
earthly society of men, and that the sons of God, who were according to
the flesh the sons of Seth, sunk into this community when they forsook
righteousness.  Nor need we wonder that giants should be born even from
these.  For all of their children were not giants; but there were more
then than in the remaining periods since the deluge.  And it pleased the
Creator to produce them, that it might thus be demonstrated that neither
beauty, nor yet size and strength, are of much moment to the wise man,
whose blessedness lies in spiritual and immortal blessings, in far
better and more enduring gifts, in the good things that are the peculiar
property of the good, and are not shared by good and bad alike.  It is
this which another prophet confirms when he says, “These were the
giants, famous from the beginning, that were of so great stature, and so
expert in war.  Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave He the way
of knowledge unto them; but they were destroyed because they had no
wisdom, and perished through their own foolishness.” <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_842"></span>[303:843](1020444.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p3"></span> [Ps.
104.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)<span id="iv.XV.23-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[303:844](1020444.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p4"></span> On these kinds of devils, see the note of
Vives *in loc.*, or Lecky’s *Hist. of Rationalism*, i. 26, who quotes
from Maury’s *Histoire de la Magie*, that the Dusii were Celtic spirits,
and are the origin of our “Deuce.”

<span id="fn_844"></span>[304:845](1020444.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p5"></span> [2 Pet.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)<span id="iv.XV.23-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[304:846](1020444.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p6"></span> [Mark
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002)<span id="iv.XV.23-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[304:847](1020444.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p7"></span> [Mal.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iv.XV.23-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[304:848](1020444.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p9"></span> [Gen.
6.1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XV.23-p9.1"></span>.  Lactantius (*Inst.* ii. 15), Sulpicius
Severus (*Hist.* i. 2), and others suppose from this passage that angels
had commerce with the daughters of men.  See further references in the
commentary of Pererius *in loc*.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[304:849](1020444.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p11"></span> Aquila lived in the time of Hadrian, to
whom he is said to have been related.  He was excommunicated from the
Church for the practice of astrology; and is best known by his
translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek, which he executed with
great care and accuracy, though he has been charged with falsifying
passages to support the Jews in their opposition to Christianity.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[305:850](1020444.htm#fr_849) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p12"></span> [Ps.
82.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iv.XV.23-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[305:851](1020444.htm#fr_850) <span
id="iv.XV.23-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.23-p14"></span> [Baruch
3.26-28](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#026)<span
id="iv.XV.23-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020445)
