[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020369)  [Next](1020371) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Whether Death, Which by the Sin of
Our First Parents Has Passed Upon All Men, is the Punishment of Sin,
Even to the Good.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.3-p2"></span>But a question not to be shirked arises: 
Whether in very truth death, which separates soul and body, is good to
the good? <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578)   For if it be, how
has it come to pass that such a thing should be the punishment of sin? 
For the first men would not have suffered death had they not sinned. 
How, then, can that be good to the good, which could not have happened
except to the evil?  Then, again, if it could only happen to the evil,
to the good it ought not to be good, but non-existent.  For why should
there be any punishment where there is nothing to punish?  Wherefore we
must say that the first men were indeed so created, that if they had not
sinned, they would not have experienced any kind of death; but that,
having become sinners, they were so punished with death, that whatsoever
sprang from their stock should also be punished with the same death. 
For nothing else could be born of them than that which they themselves
had been.  Their nature was deteriorated in proportion to the greatness
of the condemnation of their sin, so that what existed as punishment in
those who first sinned, became a natural consequence in their children. 
For man is not produced by man, as he was from the dust.  For dust was
the material out of which man was made:  man is the parent by whom man
is begotten.  Wherefore earth and flesh are not the same thing, though
flesh be made of earth.  But as man the parent is, such is man the
offspring.  In the first man, therefore, there existed the whole human
nature, which was to be transmitted by the woman to posterity, when that
conjugal union received the divine sentence of its own condemnation; and
what man was made, not when created, but when he sinned and was
punished, this he propagated, so far as the origin of sin and death are
concerned.  For neither by sin nor its punishment was he himself reduced
to that infantine and helpless infirmity of body and mind which we see
in children.  For God ordained that infants should begin the world as
the young of beasts begin it, since their parents had fallen to the
level of the beasts in the fashion of their life and of their death; as
it is written, “Man when he was in honor understood not; he became like
the beasts that have no understanding.” <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579)   Nay more, infants, we see, are even
feebler in the use and movement of their limbs, and more infirm to
choose and refuse, than the most tender offspring of other animals; as
if the force that dwells in human nature were destined to surpass all
other living things so much the more eminently, as its energy has been
longer restrained, and the time of its exercise delayed, just as an
arrow flies the higher the further back it has been drawn.  To this
infantine imbecility <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) the first
man did not fall by his lawless presumption and just sentence; but human
nature was in his person vitiated and altered to such an extent, that he
suffered in his members the warring of disobedient lust, and became
subject to the necessity of dying.  And what he himself had become by
sin and punishment, such he generated those whom he begot; that is to
say, subject to sin and death.  And if infants are delivered from this
bondage of sin by the Redeemer’s grace, they can suffer only this death
which separates soul and body; but being redeemed from the obligation of
sin, they do not pass to that second endless and penal death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_578"></span>[246:579](1020370.htm#fr_578) <span
id="iv.XIII.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.3-p3"></span> On this question compare the 24th and
25th epistles of Jerome, *de obitu Leæ*, and *de obitu Blesillæ filiæ*. 
Coquæus.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[246:580](1020370.htm#fr_579) <span
id="iv.XIII.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.3-p4"></span> [Ps.
49.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XIII.3-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[246:581](1020370.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iv.XIII.3-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.3-p5"></span> On which see further in *de Peccat.
Mer*. i. 67, et seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020371)
