[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020493)  [Next](1020495) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Of the Prophetic Age.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.XVII.1-p2.1"></span>By</span> the favor of God we have treated
distinctly of His promises made to Abraham, that both the nation of
Israel according to the flesh, and all nations according to faith,
should be his seed, and the City of God, proceeding according to the
order of time, will point <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) out
how they were fulfilled.  Having therefore in the previous book come
down to the reign of David, we shall now treat of what remains, so far
as may seem sufficient for the object of this work, beginning at the
same reign.  Now, from the time when holy Samuel began to prophesy, and
ever onward until the people of Israel was led captive into Babylonia,
and until, according to the prophecy of holy Jeremiah, on Israel’s
return thence after seventy years, the house of God was built anew, this
whole period is the prophetic age.  For although both the patriarch Noah
himself, in whose days the whole earth was destroyed by the flood, and
others before and after him down to this time when there began to be
kings over the people of God, may not underservedly be styled prophets,
on account of certain things pertaining to the city of God and the
kingdom of heaven, which they either predicted or in any way signified
should come to pass, and especially since we read that some of them, as
Abraham and Moses, were expressly so styled, yet those are most and
chiefly called the days of the prophets from the time when Samuel began
to prophesy, who at God’s command first anointed Saul to be king, and,
on his rejection, David himself, whom others of his issue should succeed
as long as it was fitting they should do so.  If, therefore, I wished to
rehearse all that the prophets have predicted concerning Christ, while
the city of God, with its members dying and being born in constant
succession, ran its course through those times, this work would extend
beyond all bounds.  First, because the Scripture itself, even when, in
treating in order of the kings and of their deeds and the events of
their reigns, it seems to be occupied in narrating as with historical
diligence the affairs transacted, will be found, if the things handled
by it are considered with the aid of the Spirit of God, either more, or
certainly not less, intent on foretelling things to come than on
relating things past.  And who that thinks even a little about it does
not know how laborious and prolix a work it would be, and how many
volumes it would require to search this out by thorough investigation
and demonstrate it by argument?  And then, because of that which without
dispute pertains to prophecy, there are so many things concerning Christ
and the kingdom of heaven, which is the city of God, that to explain
these a larger discussion would be necessary than the due proportion of
this work admits of.  Therefore I shall, if I can, so limit myself, that
in carrying through this work, I may, with God’s help, neither say what
is superfluous nor omit what is necessary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_979"></span>[337:980](1020494.htm#fr_979) <span
id="iv.XVII.1-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.1-p3"></span> Has pointed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020495)
