[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020021)  [Next](1020023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xvii"></span> <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-Page_12"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Of the Violation of the
Consecrated and Other Christian Virgins, to Which They Were Subjected in
Captivity and to Which Their Own Will Gave No Consent; And Whether This
Contaminated Their Souls.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p2"></span>But they fancy they bring a conclusive
charge against Christianity, when they aggravate the horror of captivity
by adding that not only wives and unmarried maidens, but even
consecrated virgins, were violated.  But truly, with respect to this, it
is not Christian faith, nor piety, nor even the virtue of chastity,
which is hemmed into any difficulty; the only difficulty is so to treat
the subject as to satisfy at once modesty and reason.  And in discussing
it we shall not be so careful to reply to our accusers as to comfort our
friends.  Let this, therefore, in the first place, be laid down as an
unassailable position, that the virtue which makes the life good has its
throne in the soul, and thence rules the members of the body, which
becomes holy in virtue of the holiness of the will; and that while the
will remains firm and unshaken, nothing that another person does with
the body, or upon the body, is any fault of the person who suffers it,
so long as he cannot escape it without sin.  But as not only pain may be
inflicted, but lust gratified on the body of another, whenever anything
of this latter kind takes place, shame invades even a thoroughly pure
spirit from which modesty has not departed,—shame, lest that act which
could not be suffered without some sensual pleasure, should be believed
to have been committed also with some assent of the will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020023)
