[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020500)  [Next](1020502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of the Promises Made to David in
His Son, Which are in No Wise Fulfilled in Solomon, But Most Fully in
Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p2"></span>And now I see I must show what,
pertaining to the matter I treat of, God promised to David himself, who
succeeded Saul in the kingdom, whose change prefigured that final change
on account of which all things were divinely spoken, all things were
committed to writing.  When many things had gone prosperously with king
David, he thought to make a house for God, even that temple of most
excellent renown which was afterwards built by king Solomon his son. 
While he was thinking of this, the word of the Lord came to Nathan the
prophet, which he brought to the king, in which, after God had said that
a house should not be built unto Him by David himself, and that in all
that long time He had never commanded any of His people to build Him a
house of cedar, he says, “And now thus shalt thou say unto my servant
David, Thus saith God Almighty, I took thee from the sheep-cote that
thou mightest be for a ruler over my people in Israel:  and I was with
thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies from
before thy face, and have made thee a name, according to the name of the
great ones who are over the earth.  And I will appoint a place for my
people Israel, and will plant him, and he shall dwell apart, and shall
be troubled no more; and the son of wickedness shall not humble him any
more, as from the beginning, from the days when I appointed judges over
my people Israel.  And I will give thee rest from all thine enemies, and
the Lord will tell \[hath told\] thee, because thou shall build an house
for Him.  And it shall come to pass when thy days be fulfilled, and thou
shall sleep with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee,
which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will prepare his kingdom. 
He shall build me an house for my name; and I will order his throne even
to eternity.  I will be his Father, and he shall be my son.  And if he
commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the
stripes of the sons of men:  but my mercy I will not take away from him,
as I took it away from those whom I put away from before my face.  And
his house shall be faithful, and his kingdom even for evermore before
me, and his throne shall be set up even for evermore.” <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041)

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p4"></span>He who thinks this grand promise was
fulfilled in Solomon greatly errs; for he attends to the saying, “He
shall build me an house,” but he does not attend to the saying, “His
house shall be faithful, and his kingdom for evermore before me.”  Let
him therefore attend and behold the house of Solomon full of strange
women worshipping false gods, and the king himself, aforetime wise,
seduced by them, and cast down into the same idolatry:  and let him not
dare to think that God either promised this falsely, or was unable to
foreknow that Solomon and his house would become what they did.  But we
ought not to be in doubt here, or to see the fulfillment of these things
save in Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to
the flesh, <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) lest we should
vainly and uselessly look for some other here, like the carnal Jews. 
For even they understand this much, that the son whom they read of in
that place as promised to David was not Solomon; so that, with wonderful
blindness to Him who was promised and is now declared with so great
manifestation, they say they hope for another.  Indeed, even in Solomon
there appeared some image of the future event, in that he built the
temple, and had peace according to his name (for Solomon means
“pacific”), and in the beginning of his reign was wonderfully
praiseworthy; but while, as a shadow of Him that should come, he
foreshowed Christ our Lord, he did not also in his own person resemble
Him.  Whence some things concerning him are so written as if they were
prophesied of himself, while the Holy Scripture, prophesying even by
events, somehow delineates in him the figure of things to come.  For,
besides the books of divine history, in which his reign is narrated, the
72d Psalm also is inscribed in the title with his name, in which so many
things are said which cannot at all apply to him, but which apply to the
Lord Christ with such evident fitness as makes it quite apparent that in
the one the figure is in some way shadowed forth, but in the other the
truth itself is presented.  For it is known within what bounds the
kingdom of Solomon was enclosed; and yet in that psalm, not to speak of
other things, we read, “He shall have dominion from sea even to sea, and
from the river to the ends of the earth,” <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043) which we see fulfilled in Christ. 
Truly he took the beginning of His reigning from the river where John
baptized; for, when pointed out by him, He began to be acknowledged by
the disciples, who called Him not only Master, but also Lord.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span id="iv.XVII.8-Page_349"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p7"></span>Nor was it for any other reason that,
while his father David was still living, Solomon began to reign, which
happened to none other of their kings, except that from this also it
might be clearly apparent that it was not himself this prophecy spoken
to his father signified beforehand, saying, “And it shall come to pass
when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, that
I will raise up thy seed which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I
will prepare His kingdom.”  How, therefore, shall it be thought on
account of what follows, “He shall build me an house,” that this Solomon
is prophesied, and not rather be understood on account of what precedes,
“When thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I
will raise up thy seed after thee,” that another pacific One is
promised, who is foretold as about to be raised up, not before David’s
death, as he was, but after it?  For however long the interval of time
might be before Jesus Christ came, beyond doubt it was after the death
of king David, to whom He was so promised, that He behoved to come, who
should build an house of God, not of wood and stone, but of men, such as
we rejoice He does build.  For to this house, that is, to believers, the
apostle saith, “The temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.” <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[348:1042](1020501.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="iv.XVII.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p3"></span> [2 Sam.
7.8-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#008)<span
id="iv.XVII.8-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[348:1043](1020501.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="iv.XVII.8-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p5"></span> [Rom.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="iv.XVII.8-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[348:1044](1020501.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="iv.XVII.8-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p6"></span> [Ps.
72.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span id="iv.XVII.8-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[349:1045](1020501.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="iv.XVII.8-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.8-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="iv.XVII.8-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020502)
