[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020684)  [Next](1020686) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.24"></span> <span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.24-Page_502"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Of the Blessings with Which the
Creator Has Filled This Life, Obnoxious Though It Be to the
Curse.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p2"></span>But we must now contemplate the rich and
countless blessings with which the goodness of God, who cares for all He
has created, has filled this very misery of the human race, which
reflects His retributive justice.  That first blessing which He
pronounced before the fall, when He said, “Increase, and multiply, and
replenish the earth,” <span id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657)   He
did not inhibit after man had sinned, but the fecundity originally
bestowed remained in the condemned stock; and the vice of sin, which has
involved us in the necessity of dying, has yet not deprived us of that
wonderful power of seed, or rather of that still more marvellous power
by which seed is produced, and which seems to be as it were inwrought
and inwoven in the human body.  But in this river, as I may call it, or
torrent of the human race, both elements are carried along
together,—both the evil which is derived from him who begets, and the
good which is bestowed by Him who creates us.  In the original evil
there are two things, sin and punishment; in the original good, there
are two other things, propagation and conformation.  But of the evils,
of which the one, sin, arose from our audacity, and the other,
punishment, from God’s judgment, we have already said as much as suits
our present purpose.  I mean now to speak of the blessings which God has
conferred or still confers upon our nature, vitiated and condemned as it
is.  For in condemning it He did not withdraw all that He had given it,
else it had been annihilated; neither did He, in penally subjecting it
to the devil, remove it beyond His own power; for not even the devil
himself is outside of God’s government, since the devil’s nature
subsists only by the supreme Creator who gives being to all that in any
form exists.

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p4"></span>Of these two blessings, then, which we
have said flow from God’s goodness, as from a fountain, towards our
nature, vitiated by sin and condemned to punishment, the one,
propagation, was conferred by God’s benediction when He made those first
works, from which He rested on the seventh day.  But the other,
conformation, is conferred in that work of His wherein “He worketh
hitherto.” <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658)   For were He to
withdraw His efficacious power from things, they should neither be able
to go on and complete the periods assigned to their measured movements,
nor should they even continue in possession of that nature they were
created in.  God, then, so created man that He gave him what we may call
fertility, whereby he might propagate other men, giving them a
congenital capacity to propagate their kind, but not imposing on them
any necessity to do so.  This capacity God withdraws at pleasure from
individuals, making them barren; but from the whole race He has not
withdrawn the blessing of propagation once conferred.  But though not
withdrawn on account of sin, this power of propagation is not what it
would have been had there been no sin.  For since “man placed in honor
fell, he has become like the beasts,” <span
id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) and generates as they do, though
the little spark of reason, which was the image of God in him, has not
been quite quenched.  But if conformation were not added to propagation,
there would be no reproduction of one’s kind.  For even though there
were no such thing as copulation, and God wished to fill the earth with
human inhabitants, He might create all these as He created one without
the help of human generation.  And, indeed, even as it is, those who
copulate can generate nothing save by the creative energy of God.  As,
therefore, in respect of that spiritual growth whereby a man is formed
to piety and righteousness, the apostle says, “Neither is he that
planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the
increase,” <span id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) so also it must be
said that it is not he that generates that is anything, but God that
giveth the essential form; that it is not the mother who carries and
nurses the fruit of her womb that is anything, but God that giveth the
increase.  For He alone, by that energy wherewith “He worketh hitherto,”
causes the seed to develop, and to evolve from certain secret and
invisible folds into the visible forms of beauty which we see.  He
alone, coupling and connecting in some wonderful fashion the spiritual
and corporeal natures, the one to command, the other to obey, makes a
living being.  And this work of His is so great and wonderful, that not
only man, who is a rational animal, and consequently more excellent than
all other animals of the earth, but even the most diminutive insect,
cannot be considered attentively without astonishment and without
praising the Creator.

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p8"></span>It is He, then, who has given to the
human soul a mind, in which reason and understanding lie as it were
asleep during infancy, and as if they were not, destined, however, to be
awakened and exercised as years increase, so as to become capable of
knowledge and of receiving instruction, fit to understand what is true
and to love what is good.  It is by this capacity the soul drinks in
wisdom, and <span id="page_503">p. 503</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.24-Page_503"></span> becomes endowed with those virtues by
which, in prudence, fortitude, temperance, and righteousness, it makes
war upon error and the other inborn vices, and conquers them by fixing
its desires upon no other object than the supreme and unchangeable
Good.  And even though this be not uniformly the result, yet who can
competently utter or even conceive the grandeur of this work of the
Almighty, and the unspeakable boon He has conferred upon our rational
nature, by giving us even the capacity of such attainment?  For over and
above those arts which are called virtues, and which teach us how we may
spend our life well, and attain to endless happiness,—arts which are
given to the children of the promise and the kingdom by the sole grace
of God which is in Christ,—has not the genius of man invented and
applied countless astonishing arts, partly the result of necessity,
partly the result of exuberant invention, so that this vigor of mind,
which is so active in the discovery not merely of superfluous but even
of dangerous and destructive things, betokens an inexhaustible wealth in
the nature which can invent, learn, or employ such arts?  What
wonderful—one might say stupefying—advances has human industry made in
the arts of weaving and building, of agriculture and navigation!  With
what endless variety are designs in pottery, painting, and sculpture
produced, and with what skill executed!  What wonderful spectacles are
exhibited in the theatres, which those who have not seen them cannot
credit!  How skillful the contrivances for catching, killing, or taming
wild beasts!  And for the injury of men, also, how many kinds of
poisons, weapons, engines of destruction, have been invented, while for
the preservation or restoration of health the appliances and remedies
are infinite!  To provoke appetite and please the palate, what a variety
of seasonings have been concocted!  To express and gain entrance for
thoughts, what a multitude and variety of signs there are, among which
speaking and writing hold the first place! what ornaments has eloquence
at command to delight the mind! what wealth of song is there to
captivate the ear! how many musical instruments and strains of harmony
have been devised!  What skill has been attained in measures and
numbers! with what sagacity have the movements and connections of the
stars been discovered!  Who could tell the thought that has been spent
upon nature, even though, despairing of recounting it in detail, he
endeavored only to give a general view of it?  In fine, even the defence
of errors and misapprehensions, which has illustrated the genius of
heretics and philosophers, cannot be sufficiently declared.  For at
present it is the nature of the human mind which adorns this mortal life
which we are extolling, and not the faith and the way of truth which
lead to immortality.  And since this great nature has certainly been
created by the true and supreme God, who administers all things He has
made with absolute power and justice, it could never have fallen into
these miseries, nor have gone out of them to miseries eternal, —saving
only those who are redeemed,—had not an exceeding great sin been found
in the first man from whom the rest have sprung.

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p9"></span>Moreover, even in the body, though it
dies like that of the beasts, and is in many ways weaker than theirs,
what goodness of God, what providence of the great Creator, is
apparent!  The organs of sense and the rest of the members, are not they
so placed, the appearance, and form, and stature of the body as a whole,
is it not so fashioned, as to indicate that it was made for the service
of a reasonable soul?  Man has not been created stooping towards the
earth, like the irrational animals; but his bodily form, erect and
looking heavenwards, admonishes him to mind the things that are above. 
Then the marvellous nimbleness which has been given to the tongue and
the hands, fitting them to speak, and write, and execute so many duties,
and practise so many arts, does it not prove the excellence of the soul
for which such an assistant was provided?  And even apart from its
adaptation to the work required of it, there is such a symmetry in its
various parts, and so beautiful a proportion maintained, that one is at
a loss to decide whether, in creating the body, greater regard was paid
to utility or to beauty.  Assuredly no part of the body has been created
for the sake of utility which does not also contribute something to its
beauty.  And this would be all the more apparent, if we knew more
precisely how all its parts are connected and adapted to one another,
and were not limited in our observations to what appears on the surface;
for as to what is covered up and hidden from our view, the intricate web
of veins and nerves, the vital parts of all that lies under the skin, no
one can discover it.  For although, with a cruel zeal for science, some
medical men, who are called anatomists, have dissected the bodies of the
dead, and sometimes even of sick persons who died under their knives,
and have inhumanly pried into the secrets of the human body to learn the
nature of the disease and its exact seat, and how it might be cured, yet
those relations of which I speak, and which form the concord, <span
id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661) <span id="page_504">p. 504</span>
<span id="iv.XXII.24-Page_504"></span> or, as the Greeks call it,
“harmony,” of the whole body outside and in, as of some instrument, no
one has been able to discover, because no one has been audacious enough
to seek for them.  But if these could be known, then even the inward
parts, which seem to have no beauty, would so delight us with their
exquisite fitness, as to afford a profounder satisfaction to the
mind—and the eyes are but its ministers—than the obvious beauty which
gratifies the eye.  There are some things, too, which have such a place
in the body, that they obviously serve no useful purpose, but are solely
for beauty, as *e.g*. the teats on a man’s breast, or the beard on his
face; for that this is for ornament, and not for protection, is proved
by the bare faces of women, who ought rather, as the weaker sex, to
enjoy such a defence.  If, therefore, of all those members which are
exposed to our view, there is certainly not one in which beauty is
sacrificed to utility, while there are some which serve no purpose but
only beauty, I think it can readily be concluded that in the creation of
the human body comeliness was more regarded than necessity.  In truth,
necessity is a transitory thing; and the time is coming when we shall
enjoy one another’s beauty without any lust,—a condition which will
specially redound to the praise of the Creator, who, as it is said in
the psalm, has “put on praise and comeliness.” <span
id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662)

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p12"></span>How can I tell of the rest of creation,
with all its beauty and utility, which the divine goodness has given to
man to please his eye and serve his purposes, condemned though he is,
and hurled into these labors and miseries?  Shall I speak of the
manifold and various loveliness of sky, and earth, and sea; of the
plentiful supply and wonderful qualities of the light; of sun, moon, and
stars; of the shade of trees; of the colors and perfume of flowers; of
the multitude of birds, all differing in plumage and in song; of the
variety of animals, of which the smallest in size are often the most
wonderful,—the works of ants and bees astonishing us more than the huge
bodies of whales?  Shall I speak of the sea, which itself is so grand a
spectacle, when it arrays itself as it were in vestures of various
colors, now running through every shade of green, and again becoming
purple or blue?  Is it not delightful to look at it in storm, and
experience the soothing complacency which it inspires, by suggesting
that we ourselves are not tossed and shipwrecked? <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663)   What shall I say of the
numberless kinds of food to alleviate hunger, and the variety of
seasonings to stimulate appetite which are scattered everywhere by
nature, and for which we are not indebted to the art of cookery?  How
many natural appliances are there for preserving and restoring health! 
How grateful is the alternation of day and night! how pleasant the
breezes that cool the air! how abundant the supply of clothing furnished
us by trees and animals!  Who can enumerate all the blessings we enjoy?
 If I were to attempt to detail and unfold only these few which I have
indicated in the mass, such an enumeration would fill a volume.  And all
these are but the solace of the wretched and condemned, not the rewards
of the blessed.  What then shall these rewards be, if such be the
blessings of a condemned state?  What will He give to those whom He has
predestined to life, who has given such things even to those whom He has
predestined to death?  What blessings will He in the blessed life shower
upon those for whom, even in this state of misery, He has been willing
that His only-begotten Son should endure such sufferings even to death? 
Thus the apostle reasons concerning those who are predestined to that
kingdom:  “He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us
all, how shall He not with Him also give us all things?” <span
id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664)   When this promise is fulfilled,
what shall we be?  What blessings shall we receive in that kingdom,
since already we have received as the pledge of them Christ’s dying?  In
what condition shall the spirit of man be, when it has no longer any
vice at all; when it neither yields to any, nor is in bondage to any,
nor has to make war against any, but is perfected, and enjoys
undisturbed peace with itself?  Shall it not then know all things with
certainty, and without any labor or error, when unhindered and joyfully
it drinks the wisdom of God at the fountain-head?  What shall the body
be, when it is in every respect subject to the spirit, from which it
shall draw a life so sufficient, as to stand in need of no other
nutriment?  For it shall no longer be animal, but spiritual, having
indeed the substance of flesh, but without any fleshly corruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[502:1658](1020685.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span
id="iv.XXII.24-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[502:1659](1020685.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p5"></span> [John
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.XXII.24-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[502:1660](1020685.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p6"></span> [Ps.
49.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020)<span
id="iv.XXII.24-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[502:1661](1020685.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p7"></span> [1 Cor.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.XXII.24-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[503:1662](1020685.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p10"></span> *Coaptatio*, a word coined by
Augustin, and used by him again in the *De Trin.* iv. 2.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[504:1663](1020685.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p11"></span> [Ps.
104.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XXII.24-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[504:1664](1020685.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p13"></span> He apparently has in view the
celebrated passage in the opening of the second book of Lucretius.  The
uses made of this passage are referred to by Lecky, *Hist. of European
Morals*, i. 74.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[504:1665](1020685.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="iv.XXII.24-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.24-p14"></span> [Rom.
8.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XXII.24-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020686)
