[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020149)  [Next](1020151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.9"></span>

<span id="iv.V.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Concerning the Foreknowledge of God
and the Free Will of Man, in Opposition to the Definition of
Cicero.</span>

<span id="iv.V.9-p2"></span>The manner in which Cicero addresses himself
to the task of refuting the Stoics, shows that he did not think he could
effect anything against them in argument unless he had first demolished
divination. <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)   And this he
attempts to accomplish by denying that there is any knowledge of future
things, and maintains with all his might that there is no such knowledge
either in God or man, and that there is no prediction of events.  Thus
he both denies the foreknowledge of God, and attempts by vain arguments,
and by opposing to himself certain oracles very easy to be refuted, to
overthrow all prophecy, even such as is clearer than the light (though
even these oracles are not refuted by him).

<span id="iv.V.9-p4"></span>But, in refuting these conjectures of the
mathematicians, his argument is triumphant, because truly these are such
as destroy and refute themselves.  Nevertheless, they are far more
tolerable who assert the fatal influence of the stars than they who deny
the foreknowledge of future events.  For, to confess that God exists,
and at the same time to deny that He has foreknowledge of future things,
is the most manifest folly.  This Cicero himself saw, and therefore
attempted to assert the doctrine embodied in the words of Scripture,
“The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)   That, however, he did not do in his
own person, for he saw how odious and offensive such an opinion would
be; and therefore, in his book on the nature of the gods, <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) he makes Cotta dispute concerning this
against the Stoics, and preferred to give his own opinion in favor of
Lucilius Balbus, to whom he assigned the defence of the Stoical
position, rather than in favor of Cotta, who maintained that no divinity
exists.  However, in his book on divination, he in his own person most
openly opposes the doctrine of the prescience of future things.  But all
this he seems to do in order that he may not grant the doctrine of fate,
and by so doing destroy free will.  For he thinks that, the knowledge of
future things being once conceded, fate follows as so necessary a
consequence that it cannot be denied.

<span id="iv.V.9-p7"></span>But, let these perplexing debatings and
disputations of the philosophers go on as they may, we, in order that we
may confess the most high and true God Himself, do confess His will,
supreme power, and prescience.  Neither let us be afraid lest, after
all, we do not do by will that which we do by will, because He, whose
foreknowledge is infallible, foreknew that we would do it.  It was this
which Cicero was afraid of, and therefore opposed foreknowledge.  The
Stoics also maintained that all things do not come to pass by necessity,
although they contended that all things happen according to destiny. 
What is it, then, that Cicero feared in the prescience of future
things?  Doubtless it was this,—that if all future things have been
foreknown, they will happen in the order in which they have been
foreknown; and if they come to pass in this order, there is a certain
order of things foreknown by God; and if a certain order of things, then
a certain order of causes, for nothing can happen which is not preceded
by some efficient cause.  But if there is a certain order of causes
according to which everything happens which does happen, then by fate,
says he, all things happen which do happen.  But if this be so, then is
there nothing in our own power, and there is no such thing as freedom of
will; and if we grant that, says he, the whole economy of human life is
subverted.  In vain are laws enacted.  In vain are reproaches, praises,
chidings, exhortations had recourse to; and there is no justice whatever
in the appointment of rewards for the good, and punishments for the
wicked.  And that consequences so disgraceful, and absurd, and
pernicious to humanity may not follow, Cicero chooses to reject the
foreknowledge of future things, and shuts up the religious mind to this
alternative, to make choice between two things, either that something is
in our own power, or that there is foreknowledge,—both of which cannot
be true; but if the one is affirmed, the other is thereby denied.  He
therefore, like a truly great and wise man, and one who consulted very
much and very <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="iv.V.9-Page_91"></span> skillfully for the good of humanity, of
those two chose the freedom of the will, to confirm which he denied the
foreknowledge of future things; and thus, wishing to make men free he
makes them sacrilegious.  But the religious mind chooses both, confesses
both, and maintains both by the faith of piety.  But how so? says
Cicero; for the knowledge of future things being granted, there follows
a chain of consequences which ends in this, that there can be nothing
depending on our own free wills.  And further, if there is anything
depending on our wills, we must go backwards by the same steps of
reasoning till we arrive at the conclusion that there is no
foreknowledge of future things.  For we go backwards through all the
steps in the following order:—If there is free will, all things do not
happen according to fate; if all things do not happen according to fate,
there is not a certain order of causes; and if there is not a certain
order of causes, neither is there a certain order of things foreknown by
God,—for things cannot come to pass except they are preceded by
efficient causes,—but, if there is no fixed and certain order of causes
foreknown by God, all things cannot be said to happen according as He
foreknew that they would happen.  And further, if it is not true that
all things happen just as they have been foreknown by Him, there is not,
says he, in God any foreknowledge of future events.

<span id="iv.V.9-p8"></span>Now, against the sacrilegious and impious
darings of reason, we assert both that God knows all things before they
come to pass, and that we do by our free will whatsoever we know and
feel to be done by us only because we will it.  But that all things come
to pass by fate, we do not say; nay we affirm that nothing comes to pass
by fate; for we demonstrate that the name of fate, as it is wont to be
used by those who speak of fate, meaning thereby the position of the
stars at the time of each one’s conception or birth, is an unmeaning
word, for astrology itself is a delusion.  But an order of causes in
which the highest efficiency is attributed to the will of God, we
neither deny nor do we designate it by the name of fate, unless,
perhaps, we may understand fate to mean that which is spoken, deriving
it from *fari*, to speak; for we cannot deny that it is written in the
sacred Scriptures, “God hath spoken once; these two things have I heard,
that power belongeth unto God.  Also unto Thee, O God, belongeth mercy: 
for Thou wilt render unto every man according to his works.” <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196)   Now the expression, “Once hath He
spoken,” is to be understood as meaning “*immovably*,” that is,
unchangeably hath He spoken, inasmuch as He knows unchangeably all
things which shall be, and all things which He will do.  We might, then,
use the word fate in the sense it bears when derived from *fari*, to
speak, had it not already come to be understood in another sense, into
which I am unwilling that the hearts of men should unconsciously slide. 
But it does not follow that, though there is for God a certain order of
all causes, there must therefore be nothing depending on the free
exercise of our own wills, for our wills themselves are included in that
order of causes which is certain to God, and is embraced by His
foreknowledge, for human wills are also causes of human actions; and He
who foreknew all the causes of things would certainly among those causes
not have been ignorant of our wills.  For even that very concession
which Cicero himself makes is enough to refute him in this argument. 
For what does it help him to say that nothing takes place without a
cause, but that every cause is not fatal, there being a fortuitous
cause, a natural cause, and a voluntary cause?  It is sufficient that he
confesses that whatever happens must be preceded by a cause.  For we say
that those causes which are called fortuitous are not a mere name for
the absence of causes, but are only latent, and we attribute them either
to the will of the true God, or to that of spirits of some kind or
other.  And as to natural causes, we by no means separate them from the
will of Him who is the author and framer of all nature.  But now as to
voluntary causes.  They are referable either to God, or to angels, or to
men, or to animals of whatever description, if indeed those instinctive
movements of animals devoid of reason, by which, in accordance with
their own nature, they seek or shun various things, are to be called
wills.  And when I speak of the wills of angels, I mean either the wills
of good angels, whom we call the angels of God, or of the wicked angels,
whom we call the angels of the devil, or demons.  Also by the wills of
men I mean the wills either of the good or of the wicked.  And from this
we conclude that there are no efficient causes of all things which come
to pass unless voluntary causes, that is, such as belong to that nature
which is the spirit of life.  For the air or wind is called spirit, but,
inasmuch as it is a body, it is not the spirit of life.  The spirit of
life, therefore, which quickens all things, and is the creator of every
body, and of every created spirit, is God Himself, the uncreated
spirit.  In His supreme will resides the power <span id="page_92">p.
92</span> <span id="iv.V.9-Page_92"></span> which acts on the wills of
all created spirits, helping the good, judging the evil, controlling
all, granting power to some, not granting it to others.  For, as He is
the creator of all natures, so also is He the bestower of all powers,
not of all wills; for wicked wills are not from Him, being contrary to
nature, which is from Him.  As to bodies, they are more subject to
wills:  some to our wills, by which I mean the wills of all living
mortal creatures, but more to the wills of men than of beasts.  But all
of them are most of all subject to the will of God, to whom all wills
also are subject, since they have no power except what He has bestowed
upon them.  The cause of things, therefore, which makes but is made, is
God; but all other causes both make and are made.  Such are all created
spirits, and especially the rational.  Material causes, therefore, which
may rather be said to be made than to make, are not to be reckoned among
efficient causes, because they can only do what the wills of spirits do
by them.  How, then, does an order of causes which is certain to the
foreknowledge of God necessitate that there should be nothing which is
dependent on our wills, when our wills themselves have a very important
place in the order of causes?  Cicero, then, contends with those who
call this order of causes fatal, or rather designate this order itself
by the name of fate; to which we have an abhorrence, especially on
account of the word, which men have become accustomed to understand as
meaning what is not true.  But, whereas he denies that the order of all
causes is most certain, and perfectly clear to the prescience of God, we
detest his opinion more than the Stoics do.  For he either denies that
God exists,—which, indeed, in an assumed personage, he has labored to
do, in his book *De Natura Deorum*,—or if he confesses that He exists,
but denies that He is prescient of future things, what is that but just
“the fool saying in his heart there is no God?”  For one who is not
prescient of all future things is not God.  Wherefore our wills also
have just so much power as God willed and foreknew that they should
have; and therefore whatever power they have, they have it within most
certain limits; and whatever they are to do, they are most assuredly to
do, for He whose foreknowledge is infallible foreknew that they would
have the power to do it, and would do it.  Wherefore, if I should choose
to apply the name of fate to anything at all, I should rather say that
fate belongs to the weaker of two parties, will to the stronger, who has
the other in his power, than that the freedom of our will is excluded by
that order of causes, which, by an unusual application of the word
peculiar to themselves, the Stoics call *Fate*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[90:194](1020150.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.V.9-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.9-p3"></span> *De Divinat.*ii.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[90:195](1020150.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.V.9-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.9-p5"></span> [Ps.
14.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="iv.V.9-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[90:196](1020150.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.V.9-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.V.9-p6"></span> Book iii.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[91:197](1020150.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.V.9-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.9-p9"></span> [Ps.
62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012)<span id="iv.V.9-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020151)
