[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020761)  [Next](1020763) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—In Human Institutions Which are Not
Superstitious, There are Some Things Superfluous and Some Convenient and
Necessary.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxv-p2"></span>38.  But when all these have been cut away
and rooted out of the mind of the Christian we must then look at human
institutions which are not superstitious, that is, such as are not set
up in association with devils, but by men in association with one
another.  For all arrangements that are in force among men, because they
have agreed among themselves that they should be in force, are human
institutions; and of these, some are matters of superfluity and luxury,
some of convenience and necessity.  For if those signs which the actors
make in dancing were of force by nature, and not by the arrangement and
agreement of men, the public crier would not in former times have
announced to the people of Carthage, while the pantomime was dancing,
what it was he meant to express,—a thing still remembered by many old
men from whom we have frequently heard it. <span
id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810)   And we may well believe this,
because even now, if any one who is unaccustomed to such follies goes
into the theatre, unless some one tells him what these movements mean,
he will give his whole attention to them in vain.  Yet all men aim at a
certain degree of likeness in their choice of signs, that the signs may
as far as possible be like the things they signify.  But because one
thing may resemble another in many ways, such signs are not always of
the same significance among men, except when they have mutually agreed
upon them.

<span id="v.v.xxv-p4"></span>39.  But in regard to pictures and statues,
and other works of this kind, which are intended as representations of
things, nobody makes a mistake, especially if they are executed by
skilled artists, but every one, as soon as he sees the likenesses,
recognizes the things they are likenesses of.  And this whole class are
to be reckoned among the superfluous devices of men, unless when it is a
matter of importance to inquire in regard to any of them, for what
reason, where, when, and by whose authority it was made.  Finally, the
thousands of fables and fictions, in whose lies men take delight, are
human devices, and nothing is to be considered more peculiarly man’s own
and derived from himself than anything that is false and lying.  Among
the convenient and necessary arrangements of men with men are to be
reckoned whatever differences they choose to make in bodily dress and
ornament for the purpose of distinguishing sex or rank; and the
countless varieties of signs without which human intercourse either
could not be carried on at all, or would be carried on at great
inconvenience; and the arrangements as to weights and measures, and the
stamping and weighing of coins, which are peculiar to each state and
people, and other things of the same kind.  Now these, if they were not
devices of men, would not be different in different nations, and could
not be changed among particular nations at the discretion of their
respective sovereigns.

<span id="v.v.xxv-p5"></span>40.  This whole class of human
arrangements, which are of convenience for the necessary intercourse of
life, the Christian is not by any means to neglect, but on the contrary
should pay a sufficient degree of attention to them, and keep them in
memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[548:1811](1020762.htm#fr_1810) <span
id="v.v.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxv-p3"></span> See Tylor’s *Early History of Mankind*,
pp. 42, 43.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020763)
