[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020717)  [Next](1020719) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—God Alone to Be Enjoyed.</span>

<span id="v.iv.xxii-p2"></span>20.  Among all these things, then, those
only are the true objects of enjoyment which we have spoken of as
eternal and unchangeable.  The rest are for use, that we may be able to
arrive at the full enjoyment of the former.  We, however, who enjoy and
use other things are things ourselves.  For a great thing truly is man,
made after the image and similitude of God, not as respects the mortal
body in which he is clothed, but as respects the rational soul by which
he is exalted in honor above the beasts.  And so it becomes an important
question, whether men ought to enjoy, or to use, themselves, or to do
both.  For we are commanded to love one another:  but it is a question
whether man is to be loved by man for his own sake, or for the sake of
something else.  If it is for his own sake, we enjoy him; if it is for
the sake of something else, we use him.  It seems to me, then, that he
is to be loved for the sake of something else.  For if a thing is to be
loved for its own sake, then in the enjoyment of it consists a happy
life, the hope of which at least, if not yet the reality, is our comfort
in the present time.  But a curse is pronounced on him who places his
hope in man. <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731)

<span id="v.iv.xxii-p4"></span>21.  Neither ought any one to have joy in
himself, if you look at the matter clearly, because no one ought to love
even himself for his own sake, but for the sake of Him who is the true
object of enjoyment.  For a man is never in so good a state as when his
whole life is a journey towards the unchangeable life, and his
affections are entirely fixed upon that.  If, however, he loves himself
for his own sake, he does not look at himself in relation to God, but
turns his mind in upon him <span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="v.iv.xxii-Page_528"></span> self, and so is not occupied with
anything that is unchangeable.  And thus he does not enjoy himself at
his best, because he is better when his mind is fully fixed upon, and
his affections wrapped up in, the unchangeable good, than when he turns
from that to enjoy even himself.  Wherefore if you ought not to love
even yourself for your own sake, but for His in whom your love finds its
most worthy object, no other man has a right to be angry if you love him
too for God’s sake.  For this is the law of love that has been laid down
by Divine authority:  “Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself;” but,
“Thou shall love God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind:” <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732)   so that you
are to concentrate all your thoughts, your whole life and your whole
intelligence upon Him from whom you derive all that you bring.  For when
He says, “With all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind,” He means that no part of our life is to be unoccupied, and to
afford room, as it were, for the wish to enjoy some other object, but
that whatever else may suggest itself to us as an object worthy of love
is to be borne into the same channel in which the whole current of our
affections flows.  Whoever, then, loves his neighbor aright, ought to
urge upon him that he too should love God with his whole heart, and
soul, and mind.  For in this way, loving his neighbor as himself, a man
turns the whole current of his love both for himself and his neighbor
into the channel of the love of God, which suffers no stream to be drawn
off from itself by whose diversion its own volume would be diminished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[527:1732](1020718.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="v.iv.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxii-p3"></span> [Jer.
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[528:1733](1020718.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="v.iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxii-p5"></span> [Matt.
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037), [Lev.
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018), [Deut.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020719)
