[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020415)  [Next](1020417) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.24"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—That If Men Had Remained Innocent
and Obedient in Paradise, the Generative Organs Should Have Been in
Subjection to the Will as the Other Members are.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.24-p2"></span>The man, then, would have sown the seed,
and the woman received it, as need required, the generative organs being
moved by the will, not excited by lust.  For we move at will not only
those members which are furnished with joints of solid bone, as the
hands, feet, and fingers, but we move also at will those which are
composed of slack and soft nerves:  we can put them in motion, or
stretch them out, or bend and twist them, or contract and stiffen them,
as we do with the muscles of the mouth and face.  The lungs, which are
the very tenderest of the viscera except the brain, and are therefore
carefully sheltered in the cavity of the chest, yet for all purposes of
inhaling and exhaling the breath, and of uttering and modulating the
voice, are obedient to the will when we breathe, exhale, speak, shout,
or sing, just as the bellows obey the smith or the organist.  I will not
press the fact that some animals have a natural power to move a single
spot of the skin with which their whole body is covered, if they have
felt on it anything they wish to drive off,—a power so great, that by
this shivering tremor of the skin they can not only shake off flies that
have settled on them, but even spears that have fixed in their flesh. 
Man, it is true, has not this power; but is this any reason for
supposing that God could not give it to such creatures as He wished to
possess it?  And therefore man himself also might very well have enjoyed
absolute power over his members had he not forfeited it by his
disobedience; for it was not difficult for God to form him so that what
is now moved in his body only by lust should have been moved only at
will.

<span id="iv.XIV.24-p3"></span>We know, too, that some men are
differently constituted from others, and have some rare and remarkable
faculty of doing with their body what other men can by no effort do,
and, indeed, scarcely believe when they hear of others doing.  There are
persons who can move their ears, either one at a time, or both
together.  There are some who, without moving the head, can bring the
hair down upon the forehead, and move the whole scalp backwards and
forwards at pleasure.  Some, by lightly pressing their stomach, bring up
an incredible quantity and variety of things they have swallowed, and
produce whatever they please, quite whole, as if out of a bag.  Some so
accurately mimic the voices of birds and beasts and other men, that,
unless they are seen, the difference cannot be told.  Some have such
command of their bowels, that they can break wind continuously at
pleasure, so as to produce the effect of singing.  I myself have known a
man who was accustomed to sweat whenever he wished.  It is well known
that some weep when they please, and shed a flood of tears.  But far
more incredible is that which some of our brethren saw quite recently. 
There was a presbyter called Restitutus, in the parish of the
Calamensian <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) Church, who, as
often as he pleased (and he was asked to do this by those who desired to
witness so remarkable a phenomenon), on some one imitating the wailings
of mourners, became so insensible, and lay in a state so like death,
that not only had he no feeling when they pinched and pricked him, but
even when fire was applied to him, and he was <span id="page_281">p.
281</span> <span id="iv.XIV.24-Page_281"></span> burned by it, he had no
sense of pain except afterwards from the wound.  And that his body
remained motionless, not by reason of his self-command, but because he
was insensible, was proved by the fact that he breathed no more than a
dead man; and yet he said that, when any one spoke with more than
ordinary distinctness, he heard the voice, but as if it were a long way
off.  Seeing, then, that even in this mortal and miserable life the body
serves some men by many remarkable movements and moods beyond the
ordinary course of nature, what reason is there for doubting that,
before man was involved by his sin in this weak and corruptible
condition, his members might have served his will for the propagation of
offspring without lust?  Man has been given over to himself because he
abandoned God, while he sought to be self-satisfying; and disobeying
God, he could not obey even himself.  Hence it is that he is involved in
the obvious misery of being unable to live as he wishes.  For if he
lived as he wished, he would think himself blessed; but he could not be
so if he lived wickedly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_757"></span>[280:758](1020416.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iv.XIV.24-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.24-p4"></span> The position of Calama is described by
Augustin as between Constantine and Hippo, but nearer Hippo.—*Contra
I.it. Petil.* ii. 228.  A full description of it is given in Poujoulat’s
*Histoire de S. Augustin,* i. 340, who says it was one of the most
important towns of Numidia, eighteen leagues south of Hippo, and
represented by the modern Ghelma.  It is to its bishop, Possidius, we
owe the contemporary *Life of Augustin*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020417)
