[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020008)  [Next](1020010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—That the Romans Did Not Show Their
Usual Sagacity When They Trusted that They Would Be Benefited by the
Gods Who Had Been Unable to Defend Troy.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>And these be the gods to whose protecting
care the Romans were delighted to entrust their city!  O too, too
piteous mistake!  And they are enraged at us when we speak thus about
their gods, though, so far from being enraged at their own writers, they
part with money to learn what they say; and, indeed, the very teachers
of these authors are reckoned worthy of a salary from the public purse,
and of other honors.  There is Virgil, who is read by boys, in order
that this great poet, this most famous and approved of all poets, may
impregnate their virgin minds, and may not readily be forgotten by them,
according to that saying of Horace,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>“The fresh cask long keeps its first
tang.” <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>Well, in this Virgil, I say, Juno is
introduced as hostile to the Trojans, and stirring up Æolus, the king of
the winds, against them in the words,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>“A race I hate now ploughs the sea,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>Transporting Troy to Italy,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>And home-gods conquered” <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) …

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>And ought prudent men to have entrusted
the defence of Rome to these conquered gods?  But it will be said, this
was only the saying of Juno, who, like an angry woman, did not know what
she was saying.  What, then, says Æneas himself,—Æneas who is so often
designated “pious?”  Does he not say,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>“Lo! Panthus, ’scaped from death by
flight,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>Priest of Apollo on the height,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>His conquered gods with trembling hands

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>He bears, and shelter swift
demands?” <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span>Is it not clear that the gods (whom he
does not scruple to call “conquered”) were rather entrusted to Æneas
than he to them, when it is said to him,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>“The gods of her domestic shrines

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span>Your country to your care
consigns?” <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>If, then, Virgil says that the gods were
such as these, and were conquered, and that when conquered they could
not escape except under the protection of a man, what a madness is it to
suppose that Rome had been wisely entrusted to these guardians, and
could not have been taken unless it had lost them!  Indeed, to worship
conquered gods as protectors and champions, what is this but to worship,
not good divinities, but evil omens? <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)   Would it not be wiser to believe, not
that Rome would never have fallen into so great a calamity had not they
first perished, but rather that they would have perished long since had
not Rome preserved them as long as she could?  For who does not see,
when he thinks of it, what a foolish assumption it is that they could
not be vanquished under vanquished defenders, and that they only
perished because they had lost their guardian gods, when, indeed, the
only cause of their perishing was that they chose for their protectors
gods condemned to perish?  The poets, therefore, when they composed and
sang these things about the conquered gods, had no intention to invent
falsehoods, but uttered, as honest men, what the truth extorted from
them.  This, however, will be carefully and copiously discussed in
another and more fitting place.  Meanwhile I will briefly, and to the
best of my ability, explain what I meant to say about these ungrateful
men who blasphemously impute to Christ the calamities which they
deservedly suffer in consequence of their own wicked ways, while that
which is for Christ’s sake spared them in spite of their wickedness they
do not even take the trouble to notice; and in their mad and blasphemous
insolence, they use against His name those very lips wherewith they
falsely claimed that same name that their lives might be spared.  In the
places consecrated to Christ, where for His sake no enemy would injure
them, they restrained their tongues that they might be safe and
protected; but no sooner do they emerge from these sanctuaries, than
they unbridle these tongues to hurl against Him curses full of hate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[3:38](1020009.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span> Horace, *Ep*. I. ii. 69.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[3:39](1020009.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span> *Æneid*, i. 71.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[3:40](1020009.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span> *Ibid*, ii. 319.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[3:41](1020009.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span> *Ibid*. 293.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[3:42](1020009.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span> *Non numina bona, sed omina mala*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020010)
