[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020105)  [Next](1020107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Of the Things Which Have Been
Discussed in the First Book.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.IV.1-p2.1"></span>Having</span> begun to speak of the city of
God, I have thought it necessary first of all to reply to its enemies,
who, eagerly pursuing earthly joys and gaping after transitory things,
throw the blame of all the sorrow they suffer in them—rather through the
compassion of God in admonishing than His severity in punishing—on the
Christian religion, which is the one salutary and true religion.  And
since there is among them also an unlearned rabble, they are stirred up
as by the authority of the learned to hate us more bitterly, thinking in
their inexperience that things which have happened unwontedly in their
days were not wont to happen in other times gone by; and whereas this
opinion of theirs is confirmed even by those who know that it is false,
and yet dissemble their knowledge in order that they may seem to have
just cause for murmuring against us, it was necessary, from books in
which their authors recorded and published the history of bygone times
that it might be known, to demonstrate that it is far otherwise than
they think; and at the same time to teach that the false gods, whom they
openly worshipped, or still worship in secret, are most unclean spirits,
and most malignant and deceitful demons, even to such a pitch that they
take delight in crimes which, whether real or only fictitious, are yet
their own, which it has been their will to have celebrated in honor of
them at their own festivals; so that human infirmity cannot be called
back from the perpetration of damnable deeds, so long as authority is
furnished for imitating them that seems even divine.  These things we
have proved, not from our own conjectures, but partly from recent
memory, because we ourselves have seen such things celebrated, and to
such deities, partly from the writings of those who have left these
things on record to posterity, not as if in reproach but as in honor of
their own gods.  Thus Varro, a most learned man among them, and of the
weightiest authority, when he made separate books concerning things
human and things divine, distributing some among the human, others among
the divine, according to the special dignity of each, placed the scenic
plays not at all among things human, but among things divine; though,
certainly, if only there were good and honest men in the state, the
scenic plays ought not to be allowed even among things human.  And this
he did not on his own authority, but because, being born and educated at
Rome, he found them among the divine things.  Now as we briefly stated
in the end of the first book what we intended afterwards to discuss, and
as we have disposed of a part of this in the next two books, we see what
our readers will expect us now to take up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020107)
