[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020745)  [Next](1020747) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.v.ix-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—How We Should Proceed in Studying
Scripture.</span>

<span id="v.v.ix-p2"></span>14.  In all these books those who fear God
and are of a meek and pious disposition seek the will of God.  And in
pursuing this search the first rule to be observed is, as I said, to
know these books, if not yet with the understanding, still to read them
so as to commit them to memory, or at least so as not to remain wholly
ignorant of them.  Next, those matters that are plainly laid down in
them, whether rules of life or rules of faith, are to be searched into
more carefully and more diligently; and the more of these a man
discovers, the more capacious does his understanding become.  For among
the things that are plainly laid down in Scripture are to be found all
matters that concern faith and the manner of life,—to wit, hope and
love, of which I have spoken in the previous book.  After this, when we
have made ourselves to a certain extent familiar with the language of
Scripture, we may proceed to open up and investigate the obscure
passages, and in doing so draw examples from the plainer expressions to
throw light upon the more obscure, and use the evidence of passages
about which there is no doubt to remove all hesitation in regard to the
doubtful passages.  And in this matter memory counts for a great deal;
but if the memory be defective, no rules can supply the want.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020747)
