[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf01011) 
[Next](daf01013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIDQC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 1*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1776\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III: The Constitution In The Age Of The Antonines. Part II.

The tender respect of Augustus for a free constitution which he had
destroyed, can only be explained by an attentive consideration of the
character of that subtle tyrant. A cool head, an unfeeling heart, and a
cowardly disposition, prompted him at the age of nineteen to assume the
mask of hypocrisy, which he never afterwards laid aside. With the same
hand, and probably with the same temper, he signed the proscription of
Cicero, and the pardon of Cinna. His virtues, and even his vices, were
artificial; and according to the various dictates of his interest, he
was at first the enemy, and at last the father, of the Roman world.
 <span id="fr_261"></span>[26](#fn_261) When he framed the artful system
of the Imperial authority, his moderation was inspired by his fears. He
wished to deceive the people by an image of civil liberty, and the
armies by an image of civil government.

I. The death of Caesar was ever before his eyes. He had lavished wealth
and honors on his adherents; but the most favored friends of his uncle
were in the number of the conspirators. The fidelity of the legions
might defend his authority against open rebellion; but their vigilance
could not secure his person from the dagger of a determined republican;
and the Romans, who revered the memory of Brutus,  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[27](#fn_262) would applaud the imitation of his
virtue. Caesar had provoked his fate, as much as by the ostentation of
his power, as by his power itself. The consul or the tribune might have
reigned in peace. The title of king had armed the Romans against his
life. Augustus was sensible that mankind is governed by names; nor was
he deceived in his expectation, that the senate and people would submit
to slavery, provided they were respectfully assured that they still
enjoyed their ancient freedom. A feeble senate and enervated people
cheerfully acquiesced in the pleasing illusion, as long as it was
supported by the virtue, or even by the prudence, of the successors of
Augustus. It was a motive of self-preservation, not a principle of
liberty, that animated the conspirators against Caligula, Nero, and
Domitian. They attacked the person of the tyrant, without aiming their
blow at the authority of the emperor.

There appears, indeed, one memorable occasion, in which the senate,
after seventy years of patience, made an ineffectual attempt to
re-assume its long-forgotten rights. When the throne was vacant by the
murder of Caligula, the consuls convoked that assembly in the Capitol,
condemned the memory of the Caesars, gave the watchword liberty to the
few cohorts who faintly adhered to their standard, and during
eight-and-forty hours acted as the independent chiefs of a free
commonwealth. But while they deliberated, the praetorian guards had
resolved. The stupid Claudius, brother of Germanicus, was already in
their camp, invested with the Imperial purple, and prepared to support
his election by arms. The dream of liberty was at an end; and the senate
awoke to all the horrors of inevitable servitude. Deserted by the
people, and threatened by a military force, that feeble assembly was
compelled to ratify the choice of the praetorians, and to embrace the
benefit of an amnesty, which Claudius had the prudence to offer, and the
generosity to observe.  <span id="fr_263"></span>[28](#fn_263)

II\. The insolence of the armies inspired Augustus with fears of a still
more alarming nature. The despair of the citizens could only attempt,
what the power of the soldiers was, at any time, able to execute. How
precarious was his own authority over men whom he had taught to violate
every social duty! He had heard their seditious clamors; he dreaded
their calmer moments of reflection. One revolution had been purchased by
immense rewards; but a second revolution might double those rewards. The
troops professed the fondest attachment to the house of Caesar; but the
attachments of the multitude are capricious and inconstant. Augustus
summoned to his aid whatever remained in those fierce minds of Roman
prejudices; enforced the rigor of discipline by the sanction of law;
and, interposing the majesty of the senate between the emperor and the
army, boldly claimed their allegiance, as the first magistrate of the
republic.

During a long period of two hundred and twenty years from the
establishment of this artful system to the death of Commodus, the
dangers inherent to a military government were, in a great measure,
suspended. The soldiers were seldom roused to that fatal sense of their
own strength, and of the weakness of the civil authority, which was,
before and afterwards, productive of such dreadful calamities. Caligula
and Domitian were assassinated in their palace by their own domestics:
 <span id="fr_264"></span>[\*\_0026](#fn_264) the convulsions which
agitated Rome on the death of the former, were confined to the walls of
the city. But Nero involved the whole empire in his ruin. In the space
of eighteen months, four princes perished by the sword; and the Roman
world was shaken by the fury of the contending armies. Excepting only
this short, though violent eruption of military license, the two
centuries from Augustus  <span id="fr_265"></span>[29](#fn_265) to
Commodus passed away unstained with civil blood, and undisturbed by
revolutions. The emperor was elected by the authority of the senate, and
the consent of the soldiers.  <span id="fr_266"></span>[30](#fn_266) The
legions respected their oath of fidelity; and it requires a minute
inspection of the Roman annals to discover three inconsiderable
rebellions, which were all suppressed in a few months, and without even
the hazard of a battle.  <span id="fr_267"></span>[31](#fn_267)

In elective monarchies, the vacancy of the throne is a moment big with
danger and mischief. The Roman emperors, desirous to spare the legions
that interval of suspense, and the temptation of an irregular choice,
invested their designed successor with so large a share of present
power, as should enable him, after their decease, to assume the
remainder, without suffering the empire to perceive the change of
masters. Thus Augustus, after all his fairer prospects had been snatched
from him by untimely deaths, rested his last hopes on Tiberius, obtained
for his adopted son the censorial and tribunitian powers, and dictated a
law, by which the future prince was invested with an authority equal to
his own, over the provinces and the armies.  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[32](#fn_268) Thus Vespasian subdued the generous
mind of his eldest son. Titus was adored by the eastern legions, which,
under his command, had recently achieved the conquest of Judaea. His
power was dreaded, and, as his virtues were clouded by the intemperance
of youth, his designs were suspected. Instead of listening to such
unworthy suspicions, the prudent monarch associated Titus to the full
powers of the Imperial dignity; and the grateful son ever approved
himself the humble and faithful minister of so indulgent a father.
 <span id="fr_269"></span>[33](#fn_269)

The good sense of Vespasian engaged him indeed to embrace every measure
that might confirm his recent and precarious elevation. The military
oath, and the fidelity of the troops, had been consecrated, by the
habits of a hundred years, to the name and family of the Caesars; and
although that family had been continued only by the fictitious rite of
adoption, the Romans still revered, in the person of Nero, the grandson
of Germanicus, and the lineal successor of Augustus. It was not without
reluctance and remorse, that the praetorian guards had been persuaded to
abandon the cause of the tyrant.  <span id="fr_270"></span>[34](#fn_270)
The rapid downfall of Galba, Otho, and Vitellus, taught the armies to
consider the emperors as the creatures of their will, and the
instruments of their license. The birth of Vespasian was mean: his
grandfather had been a private soldier, his father a petty officer of
the revenue;  <span id="fr_271"></span>[35](#fn_271) his own merit had
raised him, in an advanced age, to the empire; but his merit was rather
useful than shining, and his virtues were disgraced by a strict and even
sordid parsimony. Such a prince consulted his true interest by the
association of a son, whose more splendid and amiable character might
turn the public attention from the obscure origin, to the future
glories, of the Flavian house. Under the mild administration of Titus,
the Roman world enjoyed a transient felicity, and his beloved memory
served to protect, above fifteen years, the vices of his brother
Domitian.

Nerva had scarcely accepted the purple from the assassins of Domitian,
before he discovered that his feeble age was unable to stem the torrent
of public disorders, which had multiplied under the long tyranny of his
predecessor. His mild disposition was respected by the good; but the
degenerate Romans required a more vigorous character, whose justice
should strike terror into the guilty. Though he had several relations,
he fixed his choice on a stranger. He adopted Trajan, then about forty
years of age, and who commanded a powerful army in the Lower Germany;
and immediately, by a decree of the senate, declared him his colleague
and successor in the empire.  <span id="fr_272"></span>[36](#fn_272) It
is sincerely to be lamented, that whilst we are fatigued with the
disgustful relation of Nero's crimes and follies, we are reduced to
collect the actions of Trajan from the glimmerings of an abridgment, or
the doubtful light of a panegyric. There remains, however, one panegyric
far removed beyond the suspicion of flattery. Above two hundred and
fifty years after the death of Trajan, the senate, in pouring out the
customary acclamations on the accession of a new emperor, wished that he
might surpass the felicity of Augustus, and the virtue of Trajan.  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[37](#fn_273)

We may readily believe, that the father of his country hesitated whether
he ought to intrust the various and doubtful character of his kinsman
Hadrian with sovereign power. In his last moments the arts of the
empress Plotina either fixed the irresolution of Trajan, or boldly
supposed a fictitious adoption;  <span id="fr_274"></span>[38](#fn_274)
the truth of which could not be safely disputed, and Hadrian was
peaceably acknowledged as his lawful successor. Under his reign, as has
been already mentioned, the empire flourished in peace and prosperity.
He encouraged the arts, reformed the laws, asserted military discipline,
and visited all his provinces in person. His vast and active genius was
equally suited to the most enlarged views, and the minute details of
civil policy. But the ruling passions of his soul were curiosity and
vanity. As they prevailed, and as they were attracted by different
objects, Hadrian was, by turns, an excellent prince, a ridiculous
sophist, and a jealous tyrant. The general tenor of his conduct deserved
praise for its equity and moderation. Yet in the first days of his
reign, he put to death four consular senators, his personal enemies, and
men who had been judged worthy of empire; and the tediousness of a
painful illness rendered him, at last, peevish and cruel. The senate
doubted whether they should pronounce him a god or a tyrant; and the
honors decreed to his memory were granted to the prayers of the pious
Antoninus.  <span id="fr_275"></span>[39](#fn_275)

The caprice of Hadrian influenced his choice of a successor. After
revolving in his mind several men of distinguished merit, whom he
esteemed and hated, he adopted Aelius Verus a gay and voluptuous
nobleman, recommended by uncommon beauty to the lover of Antinous.
 <span id="fr_276"></span>[40](#fn_276) But whilst Hadrian was
delighting himself with his own applause, and the acclamations of the
soldiers, whose consent had been secured by an immense donative, the new
Caesar  <span id="fr_277"></span>[41](#fn_277) was ravished from his
embraces by an untimely death. He left only one son. Hadrian commended
the boy to the gratitude of the Antonines. He was adopted by Pius; and,
on the accession of Marcus, was invested with an equal share of
sovereign power. Among the many vices of this younger Verus, he
possessed one virtue; a dutiful reverence for his wiser colleague, to
whom he willingly abandoned the ruder cares of empire. The philosophic
emperor dissembled his follies, lamented his early death, and cast a
decent veil over his memory.

As soon as Hadrian's passion was either gratified or disappointed, he
resolved to deserve the thanks of posterity, by placing the most exalted
merit on the Roman throne. His discerning eye easily discovered a
senator about fifty years of age, clameless in all the offices of life;
and a youth of about seventeen, whose riper years opened a fair prospect
of every virtue: the elder of these was declared the son and successor
of Hadrian, on condition, however, that he himself should immediately
adopt the younger. The two Antonines (for it is of them that we are now
peaking,) governed the Roman world forty-two years, with the same
invariable spirit of wisdom and virtue. Although Pius had two sons,
 <span id="fr_278"></span>[42](#fn_278) he preferred the welfare of Rome
to the interest of his family, gave his daughter Faustina, in marriage
to young Marcus, obtained from the senate the tribunitian and
proconsular powers, and, with a noble disdain, or rather ignorance of
jealousy, associated him to all the labors of government. Marcus, on the
other hand, revered the character of his benefactor, loved him as a
parent, obeyed him as his sovereign,  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[43](#fn_279) and, after he was no more, regulated
his own administration by the example and maxims of his predecessor.
Their united reigns are possibly the only period of history in which the
happiness of a great people was the sole object of government.

Titus Antoninus Pius has been justly denominated a second Numa. The same
love of religion, justice, and peace, was the distinguishing
characteristic of both princes. But the situation of the latter opened a
much larger field for the exercise of those virtues. Numa could only
prevent a few neighboring villages from plundering each other's
harvests. Antoninus diffused order and tranquillity over the greatest
part of the earth. His reign is marked by the rare advantage of
furnishing very few materials for history; which is, indeed, little more
than the register of the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind. In
private life, he was an amiable, as well as a good man. The native
simplicity of his virtue was a stranger to vanity or affectation. He
enjoyed with moderation the conveniences of his fortune, and the
innocent pleasures of society;  <span id="fr_280"></span>[44](#fn_280)
and the benevolence of his soul displayed itself in a cheerful serenity
of temper.

The virtue of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was of severer and more
laborious kind.  <span id="fr_281"></span>[45](#fn_281) It was the
well-earned harvest of many a learned conference, of many a patient
lecture, and many a midnight lucubration. At the age of twelve years he
embraced the rigid system of the Stoics, which taught him to submit his
body to his mind, his passions to his reason; to consider virtue as the
only good, vice as the only evil, all things external as things
indifferent.  <span id="fr_282"></span>[46](#fn_282) His meditations,
composed in the tumult of the camp, are still extant; and he even
condescended to give lessons of philosophy, in a more public manner than
was perhaps consistent with the modesty of sage, or the dignity of an
emperor.  <span id="fr_283"></span>[47](#fn_283) But his life was the
noblest commentary on the precepts of Zeno. He was severe to himself,
indulgent to the imperfections of others, just and beneficent to all
mankind. He regretted that Avidius Cassius, who excited a rebellion in
Syria, had disappointed him, by a voluntary death,  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[\*\_0027](#fn_284) of the pleasure of converting an
enemy into a friend;; and he justified the sincerity of that sentiment,
by moderating the zeal of the senate against the adherents of the
traitor.  <span id="fr_285"></span>[48](#fn_285) War he detested, as the
disgrace and calamity of human nature;  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[!!\_0027](#fn_286) but when the necessity of a just
defence called upon him to take up arms, he readily exposed his person
to eight winter campaigns, on the frozen banks of the Danube, the
severity of which was at last fatal to the weakness of his constitution.
His memory was revered by a grateful posterity, and above a century
after his death, many persons preserved the image of Marcus Antoninus
among those of their household gods.  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[49](#fn_287)

If a man were called to fix the period in the history of the world,
during which the condition of the human race was most happy and
prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that which elapsed from
the death of Domitian to the accession of Commodus. The vast extent of
the Roman empire was governed by absolute power, under the guidance of
virtue and wisdom. The armies were restrained by the firm but gentle
hand of four successive emperors, whose characters and authority
commanded involuntary respect. The forms of the civil administration
were carefully preserved by Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines,
who delighted in the image of liberty, and were pleased with considering
themselves as the accountable ministers of the laws. Such princes
deserved the honor of restoring the republic, had the Romans of their
days been capable of enjoying a rational freedom.

The labors of these monarchs were overpaid by the immense reward that
inseparably waited on their success; by the honest pride of virtue, and
by the exquisite delight of beholding the general happiness of which
they were the authors. A just but melancholy reflection imbittered,
however, the noblest of human enjoyments. They must often have
recollected the instability of a happiness which depended on the
character of single man. The fatal moment was perhaps approaching, when
some licentious youth, or some jealous tyrant, would abuse, to the
destruction, that absolute power, which they had exerted for the benefit
of their people. The ideal restraints of the senate and the laws might
serve to display the virtues, but could never correct the vices, of the
emperor. The military force was a blind and irresistible instrument of
oppression; and the corruption of Roman manners would always supply
flatterers eager to applaud, and ministers prepared to serve, the fear
or the avarice, the lust or the cruelty, of their master. These gloomy
apprehensions had been already justified by the experience of the
Romans. The annals of the emperors exhibit a strong and various picture
of human nature, which we should vainly seek among the mixed and
doubtful characters of modern history. In the conduct of those monarchs
we may trace the utmost lines of vice and virtue; the most exalted
perfection, and the meanest degeneracy of our own species. The golden
age of Trajan and the Antonines had been preceded by an age of iron. It
is almost superfluous to enumerate the unworthy successors of Augustus.
Their unparalleled vices, and the splendid theatre on which they were
acted, have saved them from oblivion. The dark, unrelenting Tiberius,
the furious Caligula, the feeble Claudius, the profligate and cruel
Nero, the beastly Vitellius,  <span id="fr_288"></span>[50](#fn_288) and
the timid, inhuman Domitian, are condemned to everlasting infamy. During
fourscore years (excepting only the short and doubtful respite of
Vespasian's reign)  <span id="fr_289"></span>[51](#fn_289) Rome groaned
beneath an unremitting tyranny, which exterminated the ancient families
of the republic, and was fatal to almost every virtue and every talent
that arose in that unhappy period.

Under the reign of these monsters, the slavery of the Romans was
accompanied with two peculiar circumstances, the one occasioned by their
former liberty, the other by their extensive conquests, which rendered
their condition more completely wretched than that of the victims of
tyranny in any other age or country. From these causes were derived, 1.
The exquisite sensibility of the sufferers; and, 2. The impossibility of
escaping from the hand of the oppressor.

I. When Persia was governed by the descendants of Sefi, a race of
princes whose wanton cruelty often stained their divan, their table, and
their bed, with the blood of their favorites, there is a saying recorded
of a young nobleman, that he never departed from the sultan's presence,
without satisfying himself whether his head was still on his shoulders.
The experience of every day might almost justify the scepticism of
Rustan.  <span id="fr_290"></span>[52](#fn_290) Yet the fatal sword,
suspended above him by a single thread, seems not to have disturbed the
slumbers, or interrupted the tranquillity, of the Persian. The monarch's
frown, he well knew, could level him with the dust; but the stroke of
lightning or apoplexy might be equally fatal; and it was the part of a
wise man to forget the inevitable calamities of human life in the
enjoyment of the fleeting hour. He was dignified with the appellation of
the king's slave; had, perhaps, been purchased from obscure parents, in
a country which he had never known; and was trained up from his infancy
in the severe discipline of the seraglio.  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[53](#fn_291) His name, his wealth,his honors, were
the gift of a master, who might, without injustice, resume what he had
bestowed. Rustan's knowledge, if he possessed any, could only serve to
confirm his habits by prejudices. His language afforded not words for
any form of government, except absolute monarchy. The history of the
East informed him, that such had ever been the condition of mankind.
 <span id="fr_292"></span>[54](#fn_292) The Koran, and the interpreters
of that divine book, inculcated to him, that the sultan was the
descendant of the prophet, and the vicegerent of heaven; that patience
was the first virtue of a Mussulman, and unlimited obedience the great
duty of a subject.

The minds of the Romans were very differently prepared for slavery.
Oppressed beneath the weight of their own corruption and of military
violence, they for a long while preserved the sentiments, or at least
the ideas, of their free-born ancestors. The education of Helvidius and
Thrasea, of Tacitus and Pliny, was the same as that of Cato and Cicero.
From Grecian philosophy, they had imbibed the justest and most liberal
notions of the dignity of human nature, and the origin of civil society.
The history of their own country had taught them to revere a free, a
virtuous, and a victorious commonwealth; to abhor the successful crimes
of Caesar and Augustus; and inwardly to despise those tyrants whom they
adored with the most abject flattery. As magistrates and senators they
were admitted into the great council, which had once dictated laws to
the earth, whose authority was so often prostituted to the vilest
purposes of tyranny. Tiberius, and those emperors who adopted his
maxims, attempted to disguise their murders by the formalities of
justice, and perhaps enjoyed a secret pleasure in rendering the senate
their accomplice as well as their victim. By this assembly, the last of
the Romans were condemned for imaginary crimes and real virtues. Their
infamous accusers assumed the language of independent patriots, who
arraigned a dangerous citizen before the tribunal of his country; and
the public service was rewarded by riches and honors.  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[55](#fn_293) The servile judges professed to assert
the majesty of the commonwealth, violated in the person of its first
magistrate,  <span id="fr_294"></span>[56](#fn_294) whose clemency they
most applauded when they trembled the most at his inexorable and
impending cruelty.  <span id="fr_295"></span>[57](#fn_295) The tyrant
beheld their baseness with just contempt, and encountered their secret
sentiments of detestation with sincere and avowed hatred for the whole
body of the senate.

II\. The division of Europe into a number of independent states,
connected, however, with each other by the general resemblance of
religion, language, and manners, is productive of the most beneficial
consequences to the liberty of mankind. A modern tyrant, who should find
no resistance either in his own breast, or in his people, would soon
experience a gentle restrain form the example of his equals, the dread
of present censure,d the advice of his allies, and the apprehension of
his enemies. The object of his displeasure, escaping from the narrow
limits of his dominions, would easily obtain, in a happier climate, a
secure refuge, a new fortune adequate to his merit, the freedom of
complaint, and perhaps the means of revenge. But the empire of the
Romans filled the world, and when the empire fell into the hands of a
single person, he wold became a safe and dreary prison for his enemies.
The slave of Imperial despotism, whether he was condemned to drags his
gilded chain in rome and the senate, or to were out a life of exile on
the barren rock of Seriphus, or the frozen bank of the Danube, expected
his fate in silent despair.  <span id="fr_296"></span>[58](#fn_296) To
resist was fatal, and it was impossible to fly. On every side he was
encompassed with a vast extent of sea and land, which he could never
hope to traverse without being discovered, seized, and restored to his
irritated master. Beyond the frontiers, his anxious view could discover
nothing, except the ocean, inhospitable deserts, hostile tribes of
barbarians, of fierce manners and unknown language, or dependent kings,
who would gladly purchase the emperor's protection by the sacrifice of
an obnoxious fugitive.  <span id="fr_297"></span>[59](#fn_297) "Wherever
you are," said Cicero to the exiled Marcellus, "remember that you are
equally within the power of the conqueror."  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[60](#fn_298)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_261"></span>[26](daf01012.htm#fr_261) As Octavianus
advanced to the banquet of the Caesars, his color changed like that of
the chameleon; pale at first, then red, afterwards black, he at last
assumed the mild livery of Venus and the Graces, (Caesars, p. 309.) This
image, employed by Julian in his ingenious fiction, is just and elegant;
but when he considers this change of character as real and ascribes it
to the power of philosophy, he does too much honor to philosophy and to
Octavianus.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[27](daf01012.htm#fr_262) Two centuries after
the establishment of monarchy, the emperor Marcus Antoninus recommends
the character of Brutus as a perfect model of Roman virtue.

Note: In a very ingenious essay, Gibbon has ventured to call in question
the preeminent virtue of Brutus. Misc Works, iv. 95. - M.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[28](daf01012.htm#fr_263) It is much to be
regretted that we have lost the part of Tacitus which treated of that
transaction. We are forced to content ourselves with the popular rumors
of Josephus, and the imperfect hints of Dion and Suetonius.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[\*\_0026](daf01012.htm#fr_264) Caligula
perished by a conspiracy formed by the officers of the praetorian
troops, and Domitian would not, perhaps, have been assassinated without
the participation of the two chiefs of that guard in his death. - W.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[29](daf01012.htm#fr_265) Augustus restored the
ancient severity of discipline. After the civil wars, he dropped the
endearing name of Fellow-Soldiers, and called them only Soldiers,
(Sueton. in August. c. 25.) See the use Tiberius made of the Senate in
the mutiny of the Pannonian legions, (Tacit. Annal. i.)

<span id="fn_266"></span>[30](daf01012.htm#fr_266) These words seem to
have been the constitutional language. See Tacit. Annal. xiii. 4.

Note: This panegyric on the soldiery is rather too liberal. Claudius was
obliged to purchase their consent to his coronation: the presents which
he made, and those which the praetorians received on other occasions,
considerably embarrassed the finances. Moreover, this formidable guard
favored, in general, the cruelties of the tyrants. The distant revolts
were more frequent than Gibbon thinks: already, under Tiberius, the
legions of Germany would have seditiously constrained Germanicus to
assume the Imperial purple. On the revolt of Claudius Civilis, under
Vespasian, the legions of Gaul murdered their general, and offered their
assistance to the Gauls who were in insurrection. Julius Sabinus made
himself be proclaimed emperor, &c. The wars, the merit, and the severe
discipline of Trajan, Hadrian, and the two Antonines, established, for
some time, a greater degree of subordination. - W

<span id="fn_267"></span>[31](daf01012.htm#fr_267) The first was
Camillus Scribonianus, who took up arms in Dalmatia against Claudius,
and was deserted by his own troops in five days, the second, L.
Antonius, in Germany, who rebelled against Domitian; and the third,
Avidius Cassius, in the reign of M. Antoninus. The two last reigned but
a few months, and were cut off by their own adherents. We may observe,
that both Camillus and Cassius colored their ambition with the design of
restoring the republic; a task, said Cassius peculiarly reserved for his
name and family.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[32](daf01012.htm#fr_268) Velleius Paterculus,
l. ii. c. 121. Sueton. in Tiber. c. 26.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[33](daf01012.htm#fr_269) Sueton. in Tit. c. 6.
Plin. in Praefat. Hist. Natur.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[34](daf01012.htm#fr_270) This idea is
frequently and strongly inculcated by Tacitus. See Hist. i. 5, 16, ii.
76.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[35](daf01012.htm#fr_271) The emperor
Vespasian, with his usual good sense, laughed at the genealogists, who
deduced his family from Flavius, the founder of Reate, (his native
country,) and one of the companions of Hercules Suet in Vespasian, c.
12.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[36](daf01012.htm#fr_272) Dion, l. lxviii. p.
1121. Plin. Secund. in Panegyric.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[37](daf01012.htm#fr_273) Felicior Augusto,
Melior Trajano. Eutrop. viii. 5.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[38](daf01012.htm#fr_274) Dion (l. lxix. p.
1249) affirms the whole to have been a fiction, on the authority of his
father, who, being governor of the province where Trajan died, had very
good opportunities of sifting this mysterious transaction. Yet Dodwell
(Praelect. Camden. xvii.) has maintained that Hadrian was called to the
certain hope of the empire, during the lifetime of Trajan.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[39](daf01012.htm#fr_275) Dion, (l. lxx. p.
1171.) Aurel. Victor.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[40](daf01012.htm#fr_276) The deification of
Antinous, his medals, his statues, temples, city, oracles, and
constellation, are well known, and still dishonor the memory of Hadrian.
Yet we may remark, that of the first fifteen emperors, Claudius was the
only one whose taste in love was entirely correct. For the honors of
Antinous, see Spanheim, Commentaire sui les Caesars de Julien, p. 80.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[41](daf01012.htm#fr_277) Hist. August. p. 13.
Aurelius Victor in Epitom.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[42](daf01012.htm#fr_278) Without the help of
medals and inscriptions, we should be ignorant of this fact, so
honorable to the memory of Pius. Note: Gibbon attributes to Antoninus
Pius a merit which he either did not possess, or was not in a situation
to display.

1\. He was adopted only on the condition that he would adopt, in his
turn, Marcus Aurelius and L. Verus.

2\. His two sons died children, and one of them, M. Galerius, alone,
appears to have survived, for a few years, his father's coronation.
Gibbon is also mistaken when he says (note 42) that "without the help of
medals and inscriptions, we should be ignorant that Antoninus had two
sons." Capitolinus says expressly, (c. 1,) Filii mares duo,
duae-foeminae; we only owe their names to he medals. Pagi. Cont. Baron,
i. 33, edit Paris. - W.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[43](daf01012.htm#fr_279) During the
twenty-three years of Pius's reign, Marcus was only two nights absent
from the palace, and even those were at different times. Hist. August.
p. 25.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[44](daf01012.htm#fr_280) He was fond of the
theatre, and not insensible to the charms of the fair sex. Marcus
Antoninus, i. 16. Hist. August. p. 20, 21. Julian in Caesar.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[45](daf01012.htm#fr_281) The enemies of Marcus
charged him with hypocrisy, and with a want of that simplicity which
distinguished Pius and even Verus. (Hist. August. 6, 34.) This
suspicions, unjust as it was, may serve to account for the superior
applause bestowed upon personal qualifications, in preference to the
social virtues. Even Marcus Antoninus has been called a hypocrite; but
the wildest scepticism never insinuated that Caesar might probably be a
coward, or Tully a fool. Wit and valor are qualifications more easily
ascertained than humanity or the love of justice.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[46](daf01012.htm#fr_282) Tacitus has
characterized, in a few words, the principles of the portico: Doctores
sapientiae secutus est, qui sola bona quae honesta, main tantum quae
turpia; potentiam, nobilitatem, aeteraque extra... bonis neque malis
adnumerant. Tacit. Hist. iv. 5.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[47](daf01012.htm#fr_283) Before he went on the
second expedition against the Germans, he read lectures of philosophy to
the Roman people, during three days. He had already done the same in the
cities of Greece and Asia. Hist. August. in Cassio, c. 3.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[\*\_0027](daf01012.htm#fr_284) Cassius was
murdered by his own partisans. Vulcat. Gallic. in Cassio, c. 7. Dion,
lxxi. c. 27. - W.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[48](daf01012.htm#fr_285) Dion, l. lxxi. p.
1190. Hist. August. in Avid. Cassio. Note: See one of the newly
discovered passages of Dion Cassius. Marcus wrote to the senate, who
urged the execution of the partisans of Cassius, in these words: "I
entreat and beseech you to preserve my reign unstained by senatorial
blood. None of your order must perish either by your desire or mine."
Mai. Fragm. Vatican. ii. p. 224. - M.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[!!\_0027](daf01012.htm#fr_286) Marcus would
not accept the services of any of the barbarian allies who crowded to
his standard in the war against Avidius Cassius. "Barbarians," he said,
with wise but vain sagacity, "must not become acquainted with the
dissensions of the Roman people." Mai. Fragm Vatican l. 224. - M.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[49](daf01012.htm#fr_287) Hist. August. in
Marc. Antonin. c. 18.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[50](daf01012.htm#fr_288) Vitellius consumed in
mere eating at least six millions of our money in about seven months. It
is not easy to express his vices with dignity, or even decency. Tacitus
fairly calls him a hog, but it is by substituting for a coarse word a
very fine image. "At Vitellius, umbraculis hortorum abditus, ut ignava
animalia, quibus si cibum suggeras, jacent torpentque, praeterita,
instantia, futura, pari oblivione dimiserat. Atque illum nemore Aricino
desidem et marcentum," &c. Tacit. Hist. iii. 36, ii. 95. Sueton. in
Vitell. c. 13. Dion. Cassius, l xv. p. 1062.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[51](daf01012.htm#fr_289) The execution of
Helvidius Priscus, and of the virtuous Eponina, disgraced the reign of
Vespasian.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[52](daf01012.htm#fr_290) Voyage de Chardin en
Perse, vol. iii. p. 293.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[53](daf01012.htm#fr_291) The practice of
raising slaves to the great offices of state is still more common among
the Turks than among the Persians. The miserable countries of Georgia
and Circassia supply rulers to the greatest part of the East.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[54](daf01012.htm#fr_292) Chardin says, that
European travellers have diffused among the Persians some ideas of the
freedom and mildness of our governments. They have done them a very ill
office.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[55](daf01012.htm#fr_293) They alleged the
example of Scipio and Cato, (Tacit. Annal. iii. 66.) Marcellus Epirus
and Crispus Vibius had acquired two millions and a half under Nero.
Their wealth, which aggravated their crimes, protected them under
Vespasian. See Tacit. Hist. iv. 43. Dialog. de Orator. c. 8. For one
accusation, Regulus, the just object of Pliny's satire, received from
the senate the consular ornaments, and a present of sixty thousand
pounds.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[56](daf01012.htm#fr_294) The crime of majesty
was formerly a treasonable offence against the Roman people. As tribunes
of the people, Augustus and Tiberius applied tit to their own persons,
and extended it to an infinite latitude. Note: It was Tiberius, not
Augustus, who first took in this sense the words crimen laesae
majestatis. Bachii Trajanus, 27. - W.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[57](daf01012.htm#fr_295) After the virtuous
and unfortunate widow of Germanicus had been put to death, Tiberius
received the thanks of the senate for his clemency. she had not been
publicly strangled; nor was the body drawn with a hook to the Gemoniae,
where those of common male factors were exposed. See Tacit. Annal. vi.
25. Sueton. in Tiberio c. 53.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[58](daf01012.htm#fr_296) Seriphus was a small
rocky island in the Aegean Sea, the inhabitants of which were despised
for their ignorance and obscurity. The place of Ovid's exile is well
known, by his just, but unmanly lamentations. It should seem, that he
only received an order to leave rome in so many days, and to transport
himself to Tomi. Guards and jailers were unnecessary.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[59](daf01012.htm#fr_297) Under Tiberius, a
Roman knight attempted to fly to the Parthians. He was stopped in the
straits of Sicily; but so little danger did there appear in the example,
that the most jealous of tyrants disdained to punish it. Tacit. Annal.
vi. 14.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[60](daf01012.htm#fr_298) Cicero ad Familiares,
iv. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus. Part
I.](daf01013)
