[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf01037) 
[Next](daf01039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIDQC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 1*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1776\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII: Reigns Of Tacitus, Probus, Carus And His Sons. Part III.

The vacancy of the throne was not productive of any disturbance. The
ambition of the aspiring generals was checked by their natural fears,
and young Numerian, with his absent brother Carinus, were unanimously
acknowledged as Roman emperors. The public expected that the successor
of Carus would pursue his father's footsteps, and, without allowing the
Persians to recover from their consternation, would advance sword in
hand to the palaces of Susa and Ecbatana.  <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[77](#fn_1187) But the legions, however strong in
numbers and discipline, were dismayed by the most abject superstition.
Notwithstanding all the arts that were practised to disguise the manner
of the late emperor's death, it was found impossible to remove the
opinion of the multitude, and the power of opinion is irresistible.
Places or persons struck with lightning were considered by the ancients
with pious horror, as singularly devoted to the wrath of Heaven.  <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[78](#fn_1188) An oracle was remembered, which
marked the River Tigris as the fatal boundary of the Roman arms. The
troops, terrified with the fate of Carus and with their own danger,
called aloud on young Numerian to obey the will of the gods, and to lead
them away from this inauspicious scene of war. The feeble emperor was
unable to subdue their obstinate prejudice, and the Persians wondered at
the unexpected retreat of a victorious enemy.  <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[79](#fn_1189)

The intelligence of the mysterious fate of the late emperor was soon
carried from the frontiers of Persia to Rome; and the senate, as well as
the provinces, congratulated the accession of the sons of Carus. These
fortunate youths were strangers, however, to that conscious superiority,
either of birth or of merit, which can alone render the possession of a
throne easy, and as it were natural. Born and educated in a private
station, the election of their father raised them at once to the rank of
princes; and his death, which happened about sixteen months afterwards,
left them the unexpected legacy of a vast empire. To sustain with temper
this rapid elevation, an uncommon share of virtue and prudence was
requisite; and Carinus, the elder of the brothers, was more than
commonly deficient in those qualities. In the Gallic war he discovered
some degree of personal courage;  <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[80](#fn_1190) but from the moment of his arrival at
Rome, he abandoned himself to the luxury of the capital, and to the
abuse of his fortune. He was soft, yet cruel; devoted to pleasure, but
destitute of taste; and though exquisitely susceptible of vanity,
indifferent to the public esteem. In the course of a few months, he
successively married and divorced nine wives, most of whom he left
pregnant; and notwithstanding this legal inconstancy, found time to
indulge such a variety of irregular appetites, as brought dishonor on
himself and on the noblest houses of Rome. He beheld with inveterate
hatred all those who might remember his former obscurity, or censure his
present conduct. He banished, or put to death, the friends and
counsellors whom his father had placed about him, to guide his
inexperienced youth; and he persecuted with the meanest revenge his
school-fellows and companions who had not sufficiently respected the
latent majesty of the emperor. With the senators, Carinus affected a
lofty and regal demeanor, frequently declaring, that he designed to
distribute their estates among the populace of Rome. From the dregs of
that populace he selected his favorites, and even his ministers. The
palace, and even the Imperial table, were filled with singers, dancers,
prostitutes, and all the various retinue of vice and folly. One of his
doorkeepers  <span id="fr_1192"></span>[81](#fn_1191) he intrusted with
the government of the city. In the room of the Praetorian praefect, whom
he put to death, Carinus substituted one of the ministers of his looser
pleasures. Another, who possessed the same, or even a more infamous,
title to favor, was invested with the consulship. A confidential
secretary, who had acquired uncommon skill in the art of forgery,
delivered the indolent emperor, with his own consent from the irksome
duty of signing his name.

When the emperor Carus undertook the Persian war, he was induced, by
motives of affection as well as policy, to secure the fortunes of his
family, by leaving in the hands of his eldest son the armies and
provinces of the West. The intelligence which he soon received of the
conduct of Carinus filled him with shame and regret; nor had he
concealed his resolution of satisfying the republic by a severe act of
justice, and of adopting, in the place of an unworthy son, the brave and
virtuous Constantius, who at that time was governor of Dalmatia. But the
elevation of Constantius was for a while deferred; and as soon as the
father's death had released Carinus from the control of fear or decency,
he displayed to the Romans the extravagancies of Elagabalus, aggravated
by the cruelty of Domitian.  <span id="fr_1193"></span>[82](#fn_1192)

The only merit of the administration of Carinus that history could
record, or poetry celebrate, was the uncommon splendor with which, in
his own and his brother's name, he exhibited the Roman games of the
theatre, the circus, and the amphitheatre. More than twenty years
afterwards, when the courtiers of Diocletian represented to their frugal
sovereign the fame and popularity of his munificent predecessor, he
acknowledged that the reign of Carinus had indeed been a reign of
pleasure.  <span id="fr_1194"></span>[83](#fn_1193) But this vain
prodigality, which the prudence of Diocletian might justly despise, was
enjoyed with surprise and transport by the Roman people. The oldest of
the citizens, recollecting the spectacles of former days, the triumphal
pomp of Probus or Aurelian, and the secular games of the emperor Philip,
acknowledged that they were all surpassed by the superior magnificence
of Carinus.  <span id="fr_1195"></span>[84](#fn_1194)

The spectacles of Carinus may therefore be best illustrated by the
observation of some particulars, which history has condescended to
relate concerning those of his predecessors. If we confine ourselves
solely to the hunting of wild beasts, however we may censure the vanity
of the design or the cruelty of the execution, we are obliged to confess
that neither before nor since the time of the Romans so much art and
expense have ever been lavished for the amusement of the people.  <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[85](#fn_1195) By the order of Probus, a great
quantity of large trees, torn up by the roots, were transplanted into
the midst of the circus. The spacious and shady forest was immediately
filled with a thousand ostriches, a thousand stags, a thousand fallow
deer, and a thousand wild boars; and all this variety of game was
abandoned to the riotous impetuosity of the multitude. The tragedy of
the succeeding day consisted in the massacre of a hundred lions, an
equal number of lionesses, two hundred leopards, and three hundred
bears.  <span id="fr_1197"></span>[86](#fn_1196) The collection prepared
by the younger Gordian for his triumph, and which his successor
exhibited in the secular games, was less remarkable by the number than
by the singularity of the animals. Twenty zebras displayed their elegant
forms and variegated beauty to the eyes of the Roman people.  <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[87](#fn_1197) Ten elks, and as many camelopards,
the loftiest and most harmless creatures that wander over the plains of
Sarmatia and Aethiopia, were contrasted with thirty African hyaenas and
ten Indian tigers, the most implacable savages of the torrid zone. The
unoffending strength with which Nature has endowed the greater
quadrupeds was admired in the rhinoceros, the hippopotamus of the Nile,
 <span id="fr_1199"></span>[88](#fn_1198) and a majestic troop of
thirty-two elephants.  <span id="fr_1200"></span>[89](#fn_1199) While
the populace gazed with stupid wonder on the splendid show, the
naturalist might indeed observe the figure and properties of so many
different species, transported from every part of the ancient world into
the amphitheatre of Rome. But this accidental benefit, which science
might derive from folly, is surely insufficient to justify such a wanton
abuse of the public riches. There occurs, however, a single instance in
the first Punic war, in which the senate wisely connected this amusement
of the multitude with the interest of the state. A considerable number
of elephants, taken in the defeat of the Carthaginian army, were driven
through the circus by a few slaves, armed only with blunt javelins.
 <span id="fr_1201"></span>[90](#fn_1200) The useful spectacle served to
impress the Roman soldier with a just contempt for those unwieldy
animals; and he no longer dreaded to encounter them in the ranks of war.

The hunting or exhibition of wild beasts was conducted with a
magnificence suitable to a people who styled themselves the masters of
the world; nor was the edifice appropriated to that entertainment less
expressive of Roman greatness. Posterity admires, and will long admire,
the awful remains of the amphitheatre of Titus, which so well deserved
the epithet of Colossal.  <span id="fr_1202"></span>[91](#fn_1201) It
was a building of an elliptic figure, five hundred and sixty-four feet
in length, and four hundred and sixty-seven in breadth, founded on
fourscore arches, and rising, with four successive orders of
architecture, to the height of one hundred and forty feet.  <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[92](#fn_1202) The outside of the edifice was
encrusted with marble, and decorated with statues. The slopes of the
vast concave, which formed the inside, were filled and surrounded with
sixty or eighty rows of seats of marble likewise, covered with cushions,
and capable of receiving with ease about fourscore thousand spectators.
 <span id="fr_1204"></span>[93](#fn_1203) Sixty-four vomitories (for by
that name the doors were very aptly distinguished) poured forth the
immense multitude; and the entrances, passages, and staircases were
contrived with such exquisite skill, that each person, whether of the
senatorial, the equestrian, or the plebeian order, arrived at his
destined place without trouble or confusion.  <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[94](#fn_1204) Nothing was omitted, which, in any
respect, could be subservient to the convenience and pleasure of the
spectators. They were protected from the sun and rain by an ample
canopy, occasionally drawn over their heads. The air was continally
refreshed by the playing of fountains, and profusely impregnated by the
grateful scent of aromatics. In the centre of the edifice, the arena, or
stage, was strewed with the finest sand, and successively assumed the
most different forms. At one moment it seemed to rise out of the earth,
like the garden of the Hesperides, and was afterwards broken into the
rocks and caverns of Thrace. The subterraneous pipes conveyed an
inexhaustible supply of water; and what had just before appeared a level
plain, might be suddenly converted into a wide lake, covered with armed
vessels, and replenished with the monsters of the deep.  <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[95](#fn_1205) In the decoration of these scenes,
the Roman emperors displayed their wealth and liberality; and we read on
various occasions that the whole furniture of the amphitheatre consisted
either of silver, or of gold, or of amber.  <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[96](#fn_1206) The poet who describes the games of
Carinus, in the character of a shepherd, attracted to the capital by the
fame of their magnificence, affirms that the nets designed as a defence
against the wild beasts, were of gold wire; that the porticos were
gilded; and that the belt or circle which divided the several ranks of
spectators from each other was studded with a precious mosaic of
beautiful stones.  <span id="fr_1208"></span>[97](#fn_1207)

In the midst of this glittering pageantry, the emperor Carinus, secure
of his fortune, enjoyed the acclamations of the people, the flattery of
his courtiers, and the songs of the poets, who, for want of a more
essential merit, were reduced to celebrate the divine graces of his
person.  <span id="fr_1209"></span>[98](#fn_1208) In the same hour, but
at the distance of nine hundred miles from Rome, his brother expired;
and a sudden revolution transferred into the hands of a stranger the
sceptre of the house of Carus.  <span id="fr_1210"></span>[99](#fn_1209)

The sons of Carus never saw each other after their father's death. The
arrangements which their new situation required were probably deferred
till the return of the younger brother to Rome, where a triumph was
decreed to the young emperors for the glorious success of the Persian
war.  <span id="fr_1211"></span>[100](#fn_1210) It is uncertain whether
they intended to divide between them the administration, or the
provinces, of the empire; but it is very unlikely that their union would
have proved of any long duration. The jealousy of power must have been
inflamed by the opposition of characters. In the most corrupt of times,
Carinus was unworthy to live: Numerian deserved to reign in a happier
period. His affable manners and gentle virtues secured him, as soon as
they became known, the regard and affections of the public. He possessed
the elegant accomplishments of a poet and orator, which dignify as well
as adorn the humblest and the most exalted station. His eloquence,
however it was applauded by the senate, was formed not so much on the
model of Cicero, as on that of the modern declaimers; but in an age very
far from being destitute of poetical merit, he contended for the prize
with the most celebrated of his contemporaries, and still remained the
friend of his rivals; a circumstance which evinces either the goodness
of his heart, or the superiority of his genius.  <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[101](#fn_1211) But the talents of Numerian were
rather of the contemplative than of the active kind. When his father's
elevation reluctantly forced him from the shade of retirement, neither
his temper nor his pursuits had qualified him for the command of armies.
His constitution was destroyed by the hardships of the Persian war; and
he had contracted, from the heat of the climate,  <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[102](#fn_1212) such a weakness in his eyes, as
obliged him, in the course of a long retreat, to confine himself to the
solitude and darkness of a tent or litter. The administration of all
affairs, civil as well as military, was devolved on Arrius Aper, the
Praetorian praefect, who to the power of his important office added the
honor of being father-in-law to Numerian. The Imperial pavilion was
strictly guarded by his most trusty adherents; and during many days,
Aper delivered to the army the supposed mandates of their invisible
sovereign.  <span id="fr_1214"></span>[103](#fn_1213)

It was not till eight months after the death of Carus, that the Roman
army, returning by slow marches from the banks of the Tigris, arrived on
those of the Thracian Bosphorus. The legions halted at Chalcedon in
Asia, while the court passed over to Heraclea, on the European side of
the Propontis.  <span id="fr_1215"></span>[104](#fn_1214) But a report
soon circulated through the camp, at first in secret whispers, and at
length in loud clamors, of the emperor's death, and of the presumption
of his ambitious minister, who still exercised the sovereign power in
the name of a prince who was no more. The impatience of the soldiers
could not long support a state of suspense. With rude curiosity they
broke into the Imperial tent, and discovered only the corpse of
Numerian.  <span id="fr_1216"></span>[105](#fn_1215) The gradual decline
of his health might have induced them to believe that his death was
natural; but the concealment was interpreted as an evidence of guilt,
and the measures which Aper had taken to secure his election became the
immediate occasion of his ruin Yet, even in the transport of their rage
and grief, the troops observed a regular proceeding, which proves how
firmly discipline had been reestablished by the martial successors of
Gallienus. A general assembly of the army was appointed to be held at
Chalcedon, whither Aper was transported in chains, as a prisoner and a
criminal. A vacant tribunal was erected in the midst of the camp, and
the generals and tribunes formed a great military council. They soon
announced to the multitude that their choice had fallen on Diocletian,
commander of the domestics or body-guards, as the person the most
capable of revenging and succeeding their beloved emperor. The future
fortunes of the candidate depended on the chance or conduct of the
present hour. Conscious that the station which he had filled exposed him
to some suspicions, Diocletian ascended the tribunal, and raising his
eyes towards the Sun, made a solemn profession of his own innocence, in
the presence of that all-seeing Deity.  <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[106](#fn_1216) Then, assuming the tone of a
sovereign and a judge, he commanded that Aper should be brought in
chains to the foot of the tribunal. "This man," said he, "is the
murderer of Numerian;" and without giving him time to enter on a
dangerous justification, drew his sword, and buried it in the breast of
the unfortunate praefect. A charge supported by such decisive proof was
admitted without contradiction, and the legions, with repeated
acclamations, acknowledged the justice and authority of the emperor
Diocletian.  <span id="fr_1218"></span>[107](#fn_1217)

Before we enter upon the memorable reign of that prince, it will be
proper to punish and dismiss the unworthy brother of Numerian. Carinus
possessed arms and treasures sufficient to support his legal title to
the empire. But his personal vices overbalanced every advantage of birth
and situation. The most faithful servants of the father despised the
incapacity, and dreaded the cruel arrogance, of the son. The hearts of
the people were engaged in favor of his rival, and even the senate was
inclined to prefer a usurper to a tyrant. The arts of Diocletian
inflamed the general discontent; and the winter was employed in secret
intrigues, and open preparations for a civil war. In the spring, the
forces of the East and of the West encountered each other in the plains
of Margus, a small city of Maesia, in the neighborhood of the Danube.
 <span id="fr_1219"></span>[108](#fn_1218) The troops, so lately
returned from the Persian war, had acquired their glory at the expense
of health and numbers; nor were they in a condition to contend with the
unexhausted strength of the legions of Europe. Their ranks were broken,
and, for a moment, Diocletian despaired of the purple and of life. But
the advantage which Carinus had obtained by the valor of his soldiers,
he quickly lost by the infidelity of his officers. A tribune, whose wife
he had seduced, seized the opportunity of revenge, and, by a single
blow, extinguished civil discord in the blood of the adulterer.  <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[109](#fn_1219)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[77](daf01038.htm#fr_1188) See Nemesian.
Cynegeticon, v. 71, &c.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[78](daf01038.htm#fr_1189) See Festus and his
commentators on the word Scribonianum. Places struck by lightning were
surrounded with a wall; things were buried with mysterious ceremony.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[79](daf01038.htm#fr_1190) Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 250. Aurelius Victor seems to believe the prediction, and to
approve the retreat.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[80](daf01038.htm#fr_1191) Nemesian.
Cynegeticon, v 69. He was a contemporary, but a poet.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[81](daf01038.htm#fr_1192) Cancellarius. This
word, so humble in its origin, has, by a singular fortune, risen into
the title of the first great office of state in the monarchies of
Europe. See Casaubon and Salmasius, ad Hist. August, p. 253.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[82](daf01038.htm#fr_1193) Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 253, 254. Eutropius, x. 19. Vic to Junior. The reign of
Diocletian indeed was so long and prosperous, that it must have been
very unfavorable to the reputation of Carinus.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[83](daf01038.htm#fr_1194) Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 254. He calls him Carus, but the sense is sufficiently
obvious, and the words were often confounded.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[84](daf01038.htm#fr_1195) See Calphurnius,
Eclog. vii. 43. We may observe, that the spectacles of Probus were still
recent, and that the poet is seconded by the historian.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[85](daf01038.htm#fr_1196) The philosopher
Montaigne (Essais, l. iii. 6) gives a very just and lively view of Roman
magnificence in these spectacles.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[86](daf01038.htm#fr_1197) Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 240.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[87](daf01038.htm#fr_1198) They are called
Onagri; but the number is too inconsiderable for mere wild asses. Cuper
(de Elephantis Exercitat. ii. 7) has proved from Oppian, Dion, and an
anonymous Greek, that zebras had been seen at Rome. They were brought
from some island of the ocean, perhaps Madagascar.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[88](daf01038.htm#fr_1199) Carinus gave a
hippopotamus, (see Calphurn. Eclog. vi. 66.) In the latter spectacles, I
do not recollect any crocodiles, of which Augustus once exhibited
thirty-six. Dion Cassius, l. lv. p. 781.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[89](daf01038.htm#fr_1200) Capitolin. in Hist.
August. p. 164, 165. We are not acquainted with the animals which he
calls archeleontes; some read argoleontes others agrioleontes: both
corrections are very nugatory

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[90](daf01038.htm#fr_1201) Plin. Hist. Natur.
viii. 6, from the annals of Piso.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[91](daf01038.htm#fr_1202) See Maffei, Verona
Illustrata, p. iv. l. i. c. 2.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[92](daf01038.htm#fr_1203) Maffei, l. ii. c.
2. The height was very much exaggerated by the ancients. It reached
almost to the heavens, according to Calphurnius, (Eclog. vii. 23,) and
surpassed the ken of human sight, according to Ammianus Marcellinus
(xvi. 10.) Yet how trifling to the great pyramid of Egypt, which rises
500 feet perpendicular

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[93](daf01038.htm#fr_1204) According to
different copies of Victor, we read 77,000, or 87,000 spectators; but
Maffei (l. ii. c. 12) finds room on the open seats for no more than
34,000. The remainder were contained in the upper covered galleries.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[94](daf01038.htm#fr_1205) See Maffei, l. ii.
c. 5 - 12. He treats the very difficult subject with all possible
clearness, and like an architect, as well as an antiquarian.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[95](daf01038.htm#fr_1206) Calphurn. Eclog
vii. 64, 73. These lines are curious, and the whole eclogue has been of
infinite use to Maffei. Calphurnius, as well as Martial, (see his first
book,) was a poet; but when they described the amphitheatre, they both
wrote from their own senses, and to those of the Romans.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[96](daf01038.htm#fr_1207) Consult Plin. Hist.
Natur. xxxiii. 16, xxxvii. 11.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[97](daf01038.htm#fr_1208) Balteus en gemmis,
en inlita porticus auro Certatim radiant, &c. Calphurn. vii.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[98](daf01038.htm#fr_1209) Et Martis vultus et
Apollinis esse putavi, says Calphurnius; but John Malala, who had
perhaps seen pictures of Carinus, describes him as thick, short, and
white, tom. i. p. 403.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[99](daf01038.htm#fr_1210) With regard to the
time when these Roman games were celebrated, Scaliger, Salmasius, and
Cuper have given themselves a great deal of trouble to perplex a very
clear subject.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[100](daf01038.htm#fr_1211) Nemesianus (in the
Cynegeticon) seems to anticipate in his fancy that auspicious day.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[101](daf01038.htm#fr_1212) He won all the
crowns from Nemesianus, with whom he vied in didactic poetry. The senate
erected a statue to the son of Carus, with a very ambiguous inscription,
"To the most powerful of orators." See Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 251.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[102](daf01038.htm#fr_1213) A more natural
cause, at least, than that assigned by Vopiscus, (Hist. August. p. 251,)
incessantly weeping for his father's death.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[103](daf01038.htm#fr_1214) In the Persian
war, Aper was suspected of a design to betray Carus. Hist. August. p.
250.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[104](daf01038.htm#fr_1215) We are obliged to
the Alexandrian Chronicle, p. 274, for the knowledge of the time and
place where Diocletian was elected emperor.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[105](daf01038.htm#fr_1216) Hist. August. p.
251. Eutrop. ix. 88. Hieronym. in Chron. According to these judicious
writers, the death of Numerian was discovered by the stench of his dead
body. Could no aromatics be found in the Imperial household?

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[106](daf01038.htm#fr_1217) Aurel. Victor.
Eutropius, ix. 20. Hieronym. in Chron.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[107](daf01038.htm#fr_1218) Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 252. The reason why Diocletian killed Aper, (a wild boar,)
was founded on a prophecy and a pun, as foolish as they are well known.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[108](daf01038.htm#fr_1219) Eutropius marks
its situation very accurately; it was between the Mons Aureus and
Viminiacum. M. d'Anville (Geographic Ancienne, tom. i. p. 304) places
Margus at Kastolatz in Servia, a little below Belgrade and Semendria.

Not: Kullieza - Eton Atlas - M.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[109](daf01038.htm#fr_1220) Hist. August. p.
254. Eutropius, ix. 20. Aurelius Victor et Epitome

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Reign Of Diocletian And This Three Associates. Part
I.](daf01039)
