[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma06)  [Next](sma08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### CHAPTER V.

<span class="small">Organization of the Society--Names given to the
Ismaïlites--Origin of the name Assassin--Marco Polo's description of the
Paradise of the Old Man of the Mountain--Description of it given by
Arabian writers--Instances of the obedience of the Fedavee.</span>

HAVING traced thus far the history of this celebrated society, having
shown its origin, and how it grew out of the claims of the descendants
of Ali to the khalifat, mixed with the mystic tenets which seem to have
been ultimately derived from India, we proceed to describe its
organization, and its secret doctrines, as they are related by oriental
historians.

Hassan Sabah clearly perceived that the plan of the society at Cairo was
defective as a mean of acquiring temporal power. The Dais might exert
themselves, and proselytes might be gained; but till possession was
obtained of some strongholds, and a mode of striking terror into princes
devised, nothing effectual could be achieved. He first, therefore, as we
have seen, made himself master of Alamoot and the other strong places,
and then added to the Dais and the Refeek another class, named Fedavee
(*Devoted*), whose task it was to yield implicit obedience to the
mandate of their chief, and, without inquiry or hesitation, plunge their
dangers into the bosom of whatever victim was pointed out to them, even
though their own lives should be the immediate sacrifice. The ordinary
dress of the Fedavee was (like that of all the sects opposed to the
house of Abbas) white; their caps, girdles, or boots, were red. Hence
they were named the White (*Mubeiyazah*),

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

and the Red (*Muhammeré* <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29).md); but they
could with ease assume any guise, even that of the Christian monk, to
accomplish their murderous designs.

The gradations in the society were these. At the head of it stood Hassan
himself and his successors, with the title of Seydna, or Sidna <span
id="fr_30"></span>[†](#fn_30) (*Our Lord*.md), and Sheikh-al-Jebal
(*Mountain Chief*), a name derived from that of the territory which was
the chief seat of the power of the society. This last, owing to the
ambiguity of the word sheikh (which, like seigneur and signore,
signifies either an elder or chief), has been ridiculously translated by
the early European historians *Old Man of the Mountain*. Under him were
the Dai-’l-Kebir (*Great Missionaries*), of which there were three, for
the three provinces of Jebal, Kuhistan and Syria <span
id="fr_31"></span>[‡](#fn_31.md). Then came the Dais, next the Refeek, then
the Fedavee, and lastly the Lazik, or aspirants.

Hassan was perfectly aware that without the compressing power of
positive religion no society can well be held together. Whatever,
therefore, his private opinions may have been, he resolved to impose on
the bulk of his followers the most rigid obedience to the positive
precepts of Islam, and, as we have seen, actually put his own son to
death for a breach of one of them.

Hassan is said to have rejected two of the degrees of the Ismaïlite
society at Cairo, and to have reduced them to seven, the original number
in the plan of Abdallah Maimoon, the first projector of this secret
society. Besides these seven degrees, through which the aspirants
gradually rose to knowledge, Hassan,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

in what Hammer terms the breviary of the order, drew up seven
regulations or rules for the conduct of the teachers in his society. 1.
The first of these, named Ashinai-Risk (*Knowledge of duty*), inculcated
the requisite knowledge of human nature for selecting fit persons for
admission. To this belonged the proverbial expressions said to have been
current among the Dais, similar to those used by the ancient
Pythagoreans, such as *Sow not on barren ground* (that is, Waste not
your labour on incapable persons). *Speak not in a house where there is
a lamp*, (that is, Be silent in the presence of a lawyer). 2. The second
rule was called Teënis (*Gaining of confidence*), and taught to win the
candidates by flattering their passions and inclinations. 3. The third,
of which the name is not given, taught to involve them in doubts and
difficulties by pointing out the absurdities of the Koran, and of
positive religion. 4. When the aspirant had gone thus far, the solemn
oath of silence and obedience, and of communicating his doubts to his
teacher alone, was to be imposed an the disciple; and then (5.) he was
to be informed that the doctrines and opinions of the society were those
of the greatest men in church and state. 6. The Tessees (*Confirmation*)
directed to put the pupil again through all he had learned, and to
confirm him in it. And, (7.) finally, the Teëvil (*Instruction in
allegory*) gave the allegorical mode of interpreting the Koran, and
drawing whatever sense might suit their purposes from its pages. Any one
who had gone through this course of instruction, and was thus become
perfectly imbued with the spirit of the society, was regarded as an
accomplished Dai, and employed in the important office of making
proselytes and extending its influence.

We must again express our opinion that the minute accounts which are
given to us by some writers, respecting the rules and doctrines of
secret associations,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

should be received with a considerable degree of hesitation, owing to
the character and the means of information of those from whom we receive
them. In the present case our authority is a very suspicious one. We are
told that when Alamoot was taken by Hoolekoo Khan, the Mongol prince, he
gave his vizir, the learned Ata-Melek (*King's father*) Jowani,
permission to examine the library, and to select such books as were
worthy of being preserved. The vizir took out the Korans and some other
books of value in his eyes; the rest, among which are said to have been
the archives and the secret rules and doctrines of the society, he
committed, after looking cursorily through them, to the flames. In an
historical work of his own he gave the result of his discoveries in
those books, and he is the authority from which Mirkhond and other
writers have derived the accounts which they have transmitted to us. It
is quite clear, therefore, that the vizir of Hoolakoo was at liberty to
invent what atrocities he pleased of the sect which was destroyed by his
master, and that his testimony is consequently to be received with
suspicion. On the other hand it receives some confirmation from its
agreement with the account of the society at Cairo given by Macrisi, and
is not repugnant to the spirit of Soofeïsm.

This last doctrine, which is a kind of mystic Pantheism, viewing God in
all and all in God, may produce, like fatalism, piety or its opposite.
In the eyes of one who thus views God, all the distinctions
[between](errata.htm#3.md) vice and virtue become fleeting and uncertain,
and crime may gradually lose its atrocity, and be regarded as only a
mean for the production of a good end. That the Ismaïlite Fedavee
murdered innocent persons without compunction, when ordered so to do by
his superiors, is an undoubted fact, and there is no absurdity in
supposing that he and they may have

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

thought that in so doing they were acting right, and promoting the cause
of truth. Such sanctifying of crime is not confined to the East; the
maxim that the end sanctions the means is of too convenient a nature not
to have prevailed in all parts of the world; and the assassins of Henry
III. and Henry IV. of France displayed all the sincerity and constancy
of the Ismaïlite Fedavees. Without, therefore, regarding the heads of
the Ismaïlites, with Hammer, mere ruthless and impious murderers, who
trampled under foot religion and morals with all their obligations, we
may assent to the opinion of their leading doctrine being Soofeïsm
carried to its worst consequences.

The followers of Hassan Sabah were called the Eastern Ismaïlites, to
distinguish them from those of Africa. They were also named the
Batiniyeh (*Internal or Secret*), from the secret meaning which they
drew from the text of the Koran, and Moolhad, or Moolahid (*Impious*) on
account of the imputed impiety of their doctrines,--names common to
there with most of the preceding sects. It is under this last
appellation that they were known to Marco Polo, the Venetian traveller.
The name, however, by which they are best known in Europe, and which we
shall henceforth chiefly employ, is that of Assassins. This name is very
generally derived from that of the founder of their society; but M. De
Sacy has made it probable that the oriental term Hashisheen, of which
the Crusaders made Assassins, comes from Hashish, a species of hemp,
from which intoxicating opiates were made, which the Fedavee were in the
habit of taking previously to engaging in their daring enterprises, or
employed as a medium of procuring delicious visions of the paradise
promised to them by the Sheikh-al-Jebal.

It is a curious question how Hassan Sabah contrived

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

to infuse into the Fedavee the recklessness of life, joined with the
spirit of implicit obedience to the commands of their superiors, which
they so invariably displayed. We are told <span
id="fr_32"></span>[\*](#fn_32.md) that the system adopted for this purpose
was to obtain, by purchase or otherwise, from their parents, stout and
healthy children. These were reared up in implicit obedience to the will
of the Sheikh, and, to fit them for their future office, carefully
instructed in various languages. The most agreeable spots were selected
for their abode, they were indulged in the gratification of their
senses, and, in the midst of their enjoyments, some persons were
directed to inflame their imaginations by glowing descriptions of the
far superior delights laid up in the celestial paradise for those who
should be admitted to repose in its bowers; a happiness only to be
attained by a glorious death met in obedience to the commands of the
Sheikh. When such ideas had been impressed on their minds, the glorious
visions ever floated before their eyes, the impression was kept up by
the use of the opiate above-mentioned, and the young enthusiast panted
for the hour when death, obtained in obeying the order of the Sheikh,
should open to him the gates of paradise to admit him to the enjoyment
of bliss never to end.

The celebrated Venetian, Marco Polo, who traversed the most remote parts
of the East in the 13th century, gave on his return to Europe an account
of the regions which he had visited, which filled the minds of men with
wonder and amazement. As is usual in such cases this was followed or
accompanied by unbelief, and it is only by the inquiries and discoveries
of modern travellers that the veracity of Marco Polo, like that of
Herodotus, has been established and placed beyond doubt.

Among other wonderful narratives which we meet

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

in the travels of Marco Polo is the account which he gives of the people
whom he calls Mulehetites (that is, Moolahid), and their prince the Old
Man of the Mountain. He describes correctly the nature of this society,
and gives the following romantic narrative of the mode employed by that
prince to infuse the principle of implicit obedience into the minds of
his followers <span id="fr_33"></span>[\*](#fn_33.md).

"In a beautiful valley," says he, "enclosed between two lofty mountains,
he had formed a luxurious garden, stored with every delicious fruit and
every fragrant shrub that could be procured. Palaces of various sizes
and forms were erected in different parts of the grounds, ornamented
with works of gold, with paintings, and with furniture of rich silks. By
means of small conduits contained in these buildings streams of wine,
milk, honey, and some of pure water, were seen to flow in every
direction. The inhabitants of these palaces were elegant and beautiful
damsels, accomplished in the arts of singing, playing upon all sorts of
musical instruments, dancing, and especially those of dalliance and
amorous allurement. Clothed in rich dresses, they were seen continually
sporting and amusing themselves in the garden and pavilions, their
female guardians being confined within doors, and never suffered to
appear. The object which the chief had in view in forming a garden of
this fascinating kind was this: that Mahomet having promised to those
who should obey his will the enjoyments of paradise, where every species
of sensual gratification should be found in the society of beautiful
nymphs, he was desirous of its being understood by his followers that he
also was a prophet, and a compeer of Mahomet, and had the power of
admitting to paradise such as he should choose to favour. In order that
none without his licence should find their way into this delicious
valley, he caused a strong and inexpugnable

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

castle to be erected at the opening of it, through which the entry was
by a secret passage. At his court, likewise, this chief entertained a
number of youths, from the age of twelve to twenty years, selected from
the inhabitants of the surrounding mountains, who showed a disposition
for martial exercises, and appeared to possess the quality of daring
courage. To them he was in the daily practice of discoursing on the
subject of the paradise announced by the Prophet and of his own, of
granting admission, and at certain times he caused draughts of a
soporific nature to be administered to ten or a dozen of the youths, and
when half dead with sleep he had them conveyed to the several apartments
of the palaces in the garden. Upon awakening from this state of lethargy
their senses were struck with all the delightful objects that have been
described, and each perceived himself surrounded by lovely damsels,
singing, playing, and attracting his regards by the most fascinating
caresses, serving him also with delicious viands and exquisite wines,
until, intoxicated with excess of enjoyment, amidst actual rivers of
milk and wine, he believed himself assuredly in paradise, and felt an
unwillingness to relinquish its delights. When four or five days had
thus been passed, they were thrown once more into a state of somnolency
and carried out of the garden. Upon their being introduced to his
presence, and questioned by him as to where they had been, their answer
was, 'In paradise, through the favour of your highness;' and then,
before the whole court, who listened to them with eager curiosity and
astonishment, they gave a circumstantial account of the scenes to which
they had been witnesses. The chief thereupon addressing them said, 'We
have the assurance of our Prophet that he who defends his lord shall
inherit paradise, and if you show yourselves devoted to the obedience of
my orders, that happy lot

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

awaits you.' Animated to enthusiasm by words of this nature all deemed
themselves happy to receive the commands of their master, and were
forward to die in his service."

This romantic narrative, more suited to a place among the wonders of the
"Thousand and One Nights" than to admission into sober history, has been
very generally rejected by judicious inquirers such as De Sacy and
Wilkin, the able historians of the Crusades; but it has found credence
with Hammer, to whose work we are indebted for the far greater part of
the present details on the subject of the Assassins. This industrious
scholar has, as he thinks, found a proof of its truth in the
circumstance of similar narratives occurring in the works of some
Arabian writers which treat of the settlements of the society in Syria,
forgetting that a fabulous legend is often more widely diffused than
sober truth. All, therefore, that can be safely inferred from this
collection of authorities is that the same marvellous tale which the
Venetian traveller heard in the north of Persia was also current in
Syria and Egypt. Its truth must be established by a different species of
proof.

In the Siret-al-Hakem (*Memoirs of Hakem*), a species of Arabian
historic romance, the following account of the gardens at Massyat, the
chief seat of the Assassins in Syria, was discovered by Hammer <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34.md):--

"Our narrative now returns to Ismaïl the chief of the Ismaïlites. He
took with him his people laden with gold, silver, pearls, and other
effects, taken away from the inhabitants of the coasts, and which he had
received in the island of Cyprus, and on the part of the king of Egypt,
Dhaher, the son of Hakem-biëmr-Illah. Having bidden farewell to the
sultan of Egypt at Tripolis, they proceeded to Massyat, when

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the inhabitants of the castles and fortresses assembled to enjoy
themselves, along with the chief [Ismaïl](errata.htm#4.md) and his people.
They put on the rich dresses with which the sultan had supplied them,
and adorned the castle of Massyat with everything that was good and
fine. Ismaïl made his entry into Massyat with the Devoted (*Fedavee*),
as no one has ever done at Massyat before him or after him. He stopped
there some time to take into his service some more persons whom he might
make Devoted both in heart and body.

"With this view he had caused to be made a vast garden, into which he
had water conducted. In the middle of this garden he built a kiosk
raised to the height of four stories. On each of the four sides were
richly-ornamented windows joined by four arches, in which were painted
stars of gold and silver. He put into it roses, porcelain, glasses, and
drinking-vessels of gold and silver. He had with him Mamlooks (*i.e.*
slaves), ten males and ten females, who were come with him from the
region of the Nile, and who had scarcely attained the age of puberty. He
clothed them in silks and in the finest stuffs, and he gave unto them
bracelets of gold and of silver. The columns were overlaid with musk and
with amber, and in the four arches of the windows he set four caskets,
in which was the purest musk. The columns were polished, and this place
was the retreat of the slaves. He divided the garden into four parts. In
the first of these were pear-trees, apple-trees, vines, cherries,
mulberries, plums, and other kinds of fruit-trees. In the second were
oranges, lemons, olives, pomegranates, and other fruits. In the third
were cucumbers, melons, leguminous plants, &c. In the fourth were roses,
jessamine, tamarinds, narcissi, violets, lilies, anemonies, &c. &c.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

"The garden was divided by canals of water, and the kiosk was surrounded
with ponds and reservoirs. There were groves in which were seen
antelopes, ostriches, asses, and wild cows. Issuing from the ponds, one
met ducks, geese, partridges, quails, hares, foxes, and other animals.
Around the kiosk the chief Ismaïl planted walks of tall trees,
terminating in the different parts of the garden. He built there a great
house, divided into two apartments, the upper and the lower. From the
latter covered walks led out into the garden, which was all enclosed
with walls, so that no one could see into it, for these walks and
buildings were all void of inhabitants. He made a gallery of coolness,
which ran from this apartment to the cellar, which was behind. This
apartment served as a place of assembly for the men. Having placed
himself on a sofa there opposite the door, the chief made his men sit
down, and gave them to eat and to drink during the whole length of the
day until evening. At nightfall he looked around him, and, selecting
those whose firmness pleased him, said to them, 'Ho! such-a-one, come
and seat thyself near me.' It is thus that Ismail made those whom he had
chosen sit near him on the sofa and drink. He then spoke to them of the
great and excellent qualities of the imam Ali, of his bravery, his
nobleness, and his generosity, until they fell asleep, overcome by the
power of the *benjeh* <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35.md) which he had
given them, and which never failed to produce its effects in less than a
quarter of an hour, so that they fell down as if they were inanimate. As
soon as the man had fallen the chief Ismail arose, and, taking him up,
brought him into a dormitory, and then, shutting the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

door, carried him on his shoulders into the gallery at coolness, which
was in the garden, and thence into the kiosk, where he committed him to
the care of the male and female slaves, directing them to comply with
all the desires of the candidate, on whom they flung vinegar till he
awoke. When he was come to himself the youths and maidens said to him,
'We are only waiting for thy death, for this place is destined for thee.
This is one of the pavilions of paradise, and we are the hoories and the
children of paradise. If thou wert dead thou wouldest be for ever with
us, but thou art only dreaming, and wilt soon awake.' Meanwhile the
chief Ismaïl had returned to the company as soon as he had witnessed the
awakening of the candidate, who now perceived nothing but youths and
maidens of the greatest beauty, and adorned in the most magnificent
manner.

"He looked round the place, inhaled the fragrance of musk and
frankincense, and drew near to the garden, where he saw the beasts and
the birds, the running water, and the trees. He gazed on the beauty of
the kiosk, and the vases of gold and silver, while the youths and
maidens kept him in converse. In this way he remained confounded, not
knowing whether he was awake or only dreaming. When two hours of the
night had gone by, the chief Ismaïl returned to the dormitory, closed to
the door, and thence proceeded to the garden, where his slaves came
around him and rose before him. When the candidate perceived him he said
unto him, 'O chief Ismaïl, do I dream, or am I awake?' The chief Ismaïl
then made answer to him, 'O such-a-one, beware of relating this vision
to any one who is a stranger to this place! Know that the Lord Ali has
shown thee the place which is destined for thee in paradise. Know that
at this moment the Lord Ali and I have been sitting together in the
regions of the empyrean.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So do not hesitate
a moment in the service of the imam who has given thee to know his
felicity.' Then the chief Ismaïl ordered supper to be served. It was
brought in vessels of gold and of silver, and consisted of boiled meats
and roast meats, with other dishes. While the candidate ate he was
sprinkled with rose-water; when he called for drink there were brought
to him vessels of gold and silver filled with delicious liquors, in
which also had been mingled some benjeh. When he had fallen asleep,
Ismaïl carried him through the gallery back to the dormitory, and,
leaving him there, returned to his company. After a little time he went,
back, threw vinegar on his face, and then, bringing him out, ordered one
of the Mamlooks to shake him. On awaking, and finding himself in the
same place among the guests, he said, 'There is no god but God, and
Mohammed is the Prophet of God!' The chief Ismaïl then drew near and
caressed him, and he remained, as it were, immersed in intoxication,
wholly devoted to the service of the chief, who then said unto him, 'O
such-a-one, know that what thou hast seen was not a dream, but one of
the miracles of the imam Ali. Know that he has written thy name among
those of his friends. If thou keep the secret thou art certain of thy
felicity, but if thou speak of it thou wilt incur the resentment of the
imam. If thou die thou art a martyr; but beware of relating this to any
person whatever. Thou hast entered by one of the gates to the friendship
of the imam, and art become one of his family; but if thou betray the
secret, thou wilt become one of his enemies, and be driven from his
house.' Thus this man became one of the servants of the chief Ismaïl,
who in this manner surrounded himself with trusty men, until his
reputation was established. This is what is related of the chief Ismaïl
and his Devoted."

To these romantic tales of the paradise of the Old

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Man of the
Mountain, we must add a third of a still more juggling character,
furnished by the learned and venerable Sheikh Abd-ur-Rahman (*Servant of
the Compassionate*, *i.e.*, *of God*) Ben Ebubekr Al-Jeriri of Damascus,
in the twenty-fourth chapter of his work entitled "A Choice Book for
discovering the Secrets of the Art of Imposture <span
id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36.md)."

After giving some account of Sinan, the chief of the Syrian Assassins,
whom we shall presently have occasion to mention, the sheikh proceeds to
narrate the artifice which he employed to deceive his followers:--

"There was near the sofa on which he sat a hole in the ground
sufficiently deep for a man to sit down in it. This he covered with a
thin piece of wood, leaving only so much of it open as would contain the
neck of a man. He placed on this cover of wood a disk of bronze with a
hole in the middle of it, and put in it two doors. Then taking one of
his disciples, to whom he had given a considerable sum of money to
obtain his consent, he placed the perforated disk round his neck, and
kept it down by weights, so that nothing appeared but the neck of the
man; and he put warm blood upon it, so that it looked as if he had just
cut off his head. He then called in his companions, and showed them the
plate, on which they beheld the head of their comrade. 'Tell thy
comrades,' said the master to the head, 'what thou hast seen, and what
has been said unto thee.' The man then answered as he had been
previously instructed. 'Which wouldest thou prefer,' said the master,
'to return to the world and thy friends, or to dwell in paradise?' 'What
need have I,' replied the head, 'to return to the world after having
seen my pavilion in paradise, and the hoories, and al; that God has
prepared for me? Comrades, salute

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

my family, and take care not to disobey this prophet, who is the lord of
the prophets in the state of time, as God has said unto me. Farewell.'
These words strengthened the faith of the others; but when they were
gone the master took the man up out of the hole, and cut off his head in
right earnest. It was by such means as this that he made himself obeyed
by his people."

The preceding accounts, whatever may be thought of their truth, serve to
testify a general belief throughout the East of some extraordinary means
being employed by the mountain chief to acquire the power which he was
known to possess over the minds of his Fedavee. And, in fact, there is
no great improbability in the supposition of some artifice of that
nature having been occasionally employed by him; for, when we recollect
that an Asiatic imagination is coarse, especially among the lower
orders, and that in the East men rarely see any females but those of
their own family, the chief might find no great difficulty in persuading
a youth, whom he had transported in a state of stupor into an apartment
filled with young girls, of his having been in the actual paradise
promised to the faithful.

But, laying aside supposition, we may observe that the very power over
the minds of their followers ascribed to Hassan Sabah and his successors
has been actually exercised in our own days by the chief of the
Wahabees. Sir John Malcolm <span id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_37.md) informs
us, from a Persian manuscript, that a few years ago one of that sect,
who had stabbed an Arab chief near Bussora, when taken, not only refused
to do anything towards saving his life, but, on the contrary, seemed
anxiously to court death. He was observed to grasp something firmly in
his hand, which he appeared to prize beyond life itself. On its being
taken from him and examined,

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

it proved to be an order from the Wahabee chief for an emerald palace
and a number of beautiful female slaves in the blissful paradise of the
Prophet. This story, however, it must be confessed, appears to be little
consistent with the principles of the sect of the Wahabees, and we may
suspect that it has originated in some misapprehension.

The following instance of the implicit obedience of the Fedavee to the
orders of Hassan Sabah is given 'by a respectable oriental
historian <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38.md). An ambassador from the
Sultan Malek Shah having come to Alamoot to demand the submission and
obedience of the sheikh, Hassan received him in a hall in which he had
assembled several of his followers. Making a sign to one youth, he said,
"Kill thyself!" Instantly the young man's dagger was plunged into his
own bosom, and he lay a corpse upon the ground. To another he said,
"Fling thyself down from the wall." In an instant his shattered limbs
were lying in the castle ditch. Then turning to the terrified envoy, "I
have seventy thousand followers who obey me after this fashion. This be
my answer to thy master."

Very nearly the same tale is told of the Assassins of Syria by a western
writer <span id="fr_39"></span>[†](#fn_39.md). As Henry Count of Champagne
was journeying, in the year 1194, from Palestine to Armenia <span
id="fr_40"></span>[‡](#fn_40.md), his road lay through the confines of the
territory of the Ismaïlites. The chief sent some persons to salute him,
and to beg that, on his return, he would stop at, and partake of the
hospitality of his castle. The count accepted the invitation. As he
returned the Dai-al-Kebir advanced to meet him, showed him every mark of
honour, and led him to view his castles and fortresses. Having

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

passed through several, they came at length to one the towers of which
rose to an exceeding height. On each tower stood two sentinels clad in
white. "These," said the chief, pointing to them, "obey me far better
than the subjects of you Christians obey their lords;" and at a given
signal two of them flung themselves down, and were dashed to pieces. "If
you wish," said he to the astonished count, "all my white ones shall do
the same." The benevolent count shrank from the proposal, and candidly
avowed that no Christian prince could presume to look for such obedience
from his subjects. When he was departing, with many valuable presents,
the chief said to him significantly, "By means of these trusty servants
I get rid of the enemies of our society."

In oriental, and also in occidental history, the same anecdote is often
told of different persons, a circumstance which might induce us to doubt
of its truth altogether, or at least of its truth in any particular
case. The present anecdote, for instance, with a slight variation in the
details, is told of Aboo Taher, a celebrated leader of the Carmathites.
This chief, after his expedition to Mecca, in which he had slain 30,000
of the inhabitants, filled the hallowed well Zemzem with the bodies of
dead men, and carried off the sacred black stone in triumph, had the
hardihood to approach Bagdad, the residence of the khalif, with only 500
horsemen. The pontiff of Islam, enraged at the insult, ordered his
general Aboo Saj to take 30,000 men, and make him a prisoner. The
latter, having collected his forces, sent a man off to Aboo Taher to
tell him on his part that out of regard for him, who had been his old
friend, he advised him, as he had so few troops with him, either to
yield himself at once to the khalif or to see about making his escape.
Aboo Taher asked of the envoy how many men Aboo Saj had with him. The

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

envoy replied, "Thirty thousand." "He still wants three like mine," said
Aboo Taher; and calling to him three of his men, he ordered one of them
to stab himself, another to throw himself into the Tigris, a third to
fling himself down from a precipice. His commands were at once obeyed.
Then turning to the envoy, "He who has such troops fears not the number
of his enemies. I give thyself quarter; but know that I shall soon let
thee see thy general Aboo Saj chained among my dogs." In fact, that very
night he attacked and routed the troops of the khalif, and Aboo Saj,
happening to fall into his hands, soon appeared chained among the
mastiffs of the Carmathite chief <span id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_41.md).

The preceding details on the paradise of the Sheikh-al-Jebal, and his
power over the minds of his followers, will at least help to illustrate
the manners and modes of thinking of the orientals. We now resume the
thread of our narrative, and proceed to narrate the deeds of the
Assassins, as we shall henceforth designate them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[67:\*](sma07.htm#fr_29.md) Ahmar, fem. Hamra, is
*red* in Arabic; hence the celebrated Moorish palace at Granada was
called Alhambra (*Al Hamra*), *i.e.* the Red.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[67:†](sma07.htm#fr_30.md) Hence the Spanish Cid.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[67:‡](sma07.htm#fr_31.md) Hammer, book ii.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[71:\*](sma07.htm#fr_32.md) Wilken, Geschichte der
Kreuzzüge, vol. ii

<span id="fn_33"></span>[72:\*](sma07.htm#fr_33.md) Marsden's Translation.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[74:\*](sma07.htm#fr_34.md) Fundgruben des Orients,
vol. i 11.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[76:\*](sma07.htm#fr_35.md) The Arabic name of the
hyoscyamus, or henbane. Hammer conjectures that the word *benge*, or,
with the Coptic article in the plural, *ni-benje*, is the same with the
nepenthe of the ancients.--Fundgruben des Orients, iii. 202.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[79:\*](sma07.htm#fr_36.md) Fundgruben des Orients,
vol. iv.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[80:\*](sma07.htm#fr_37.md) History of Persia, vol.
i.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[81:\*](sma07.htm#fr_38.md) Elmacin, Historia
Saracenica, l. iii. p. 286.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[81:†](sma07.htm#fr_39.md) Marinus Sanutus, l. iii.
p. x. c. 8.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[81:‡](sma07.htm#fr_40.md) This was the Armenia in
Cilicia.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[83:\*](sma07.htm#fr_41.md) D’Herbelot, *titre*
Carmath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](sma08.md)
