[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma03)  [Next](sma05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### CHAPTER II.

<span class="small">Origin of the Khalifat--The first Khalifs--Extent of
the Arabian Empire--Schism among the Mohammedans--Soonees and
Sheähs--Sects of the latter--The Keissanee--The Zeidites--The
Ghoollat--The Imamee--Sects of the Imamee--Their political
Character--The Carmathites--Origin of the Fatimite Khalifs--Secret
Society at Cairo--Doctrines taught in it--Its Decline.</span>

THE civil and ecclesiastical dignities were united in the person of
Mohammed. As Emir (*prince*) he administered justice and led his
followers to battle; as Imam (*director*) he on every Friday (the
Mohammedan sabbath) taught the principles and duties of religion from
his pulpit. Though his wives were numerous, the Prophet had no male
issue surviving at the time when he felt the approaches of death; but
his daughter Fatima was married to his cousin Ali, his early and
faithful disciple, and it was naturally to be expected that the expiring
voice of the Prophet would nominate him as his Khalif (*successor*) over
the followers of his faith. But Ayesha, the daughter of Aboo Bekr,
Mohammed's youthful and best beloved wife, was vehemently hostile to the
son of Aboo Talib, and she may have exerted all the influence of a
revengeful woman over the mind of the dying Prophet. Or perhaps
Mohammed, like Alexander, perplexed with the extent of dominion to which
he had attained, and aware that only a vigour of character similar to
his own would avail to retain and enlarge it, and, it may be, thinking
himself answerable

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

to God for the choice he should make, deemed it the safest course to
leave the matter to the free decision of his surviving followers. His
appointing Aboo Bekr, a few days before his death, to officiate in his
pulpit, might seem to indicate an intention of conferring the khalifat
on him; and he is said to have at one time declared that the strength of
character displayed by his distinguished follower, Omar, evinced his
possession of the virtues of a prophet and a khalif. Tradition records
no equally strong declaration respecting the mild and virtuous Ali.

At all events the Prophet expired without having named a successor, and
the choice devolving on his companions dissension was ready to break
out, when Omar, abandoning his own claims, gave his voice for Aboo Bekr.
All opposition was thus silenced, and the father of Ayesha reigned for
two years over the faithful. Ali at first refused obedience, but he
finally acknowledged the successor of the Prophet. When dying, Aboo Bekr
bequeathed the sceptre to Omar, as the worthiest, and when, twelve years
afterwards, Omar perished by the dagger of an assassin, six electors
conferred the vacant dignity on Othman, who had been the secretary of
the Prophet. Age having enfeebled the powers of Othman, the reins of
authority were slackened, and a spirit of discord pervaded all Arabia,
illustrative of the Prophet's declaration of vigour being essential to a
khalif. A numerous body of rebels besieged the aged Othman in Medina,
and he was slain, holding the Koran in his lap, by a band of murderers,
headed by the brother of Ayesha, who, the firebrand of Islam, it is
probable had been secretly active in exciting the rebellion.

The popular choice now fell upon Ali, but the [implacable](errata.htm#0)
Ayesha stimulated to revolt against his authority

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

two powerful Arab chiefs, named Telha and Zobeir, who raised their
standards in the province of Arabian Irak. Ayesha, mounted on a camel,
appeared in the thickest of the battle, in which the rebel chiefs were
defeated and slain. The generous Ali sent her to dwell at the tomb of
the Prophet, where she passed in tranquillity the remainder of her days.
The khalif himself was less fortunate. Moawiya, the Governor of Syria,
son of Aboo Sofian, the most violent of the opponents of the Prophet,
assumed the office of the avenger of Othman, whose death he charged on
Ali and his party, and, declaring himself to be the rightful khalif,
roused Syria to arms against the Prophet's son-in-law. In the war
success was on the side of Ali, till the superstition of his troops
obliged him to agree to a treaty; and shortly afterwards he was murdered
by a fanatic in the mosk of Coofa. His son Hassan was induced by Moawiya
to resign his claims and retire to the city of Medina; but his more
high-spirited brother, Hussein, took arms against the khalif Yezid, the
son of Moawiya; and the narrative of his death is one of the most
pathetic and best related incidents of Oriental history <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9). The sisters and children of Hussein were
spared by the clemency of the victorious Yezid, and from them descend a
numerous race, glorying in the blood of Ali and the Prophet.

The Arabian empire was now of immense extent. Egypt, Syria, and Persia
had been conquered in the reign of Omar. Under the first khalifs of the
dynasty of the Ommiades (so called from Ommiyah, the great-grandfather
of Moawiya), the conquest of Africa and Spain was achieved, and the
later princes of this family ruled over the most extensive empire of the
world.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

The great schism of the Mohammedan church (we must be permitted to
employ this term, the only one our language affords) commences with the
accession of the house of Ommiyah. The Mohammedans have, as is generally
known, been from that time to the present day divided into two great
sects, the Soonees and the Sheähs, the orthodox and the dissenters, as
we might venture to call them, whose opposite doctrines, like those of
the Catholics and the Protestants of the Christian church, are each the
established faith of great and independent nations. The Ottoman and the
Usbeg Turks hold the Soonee faith; the Persians are violent Sheähs; and
national and religious animosity concur in making them the determined
and inveterate foes of each other.

The Soonees hold that the first four khalifs were all legitimate
successors of the Prophet; but as their order was determined by their
degree of sanctity, they assign the lowest rank to Ali. The Sheähs, on
the contrary, maintain that the dignity of the Prophet rightfully
descended to the son of his uncle and the husband of his daughter. They
therefore regard Aboo Bekr, Omar, and Othman, as usurpers, and curse and
revile their memory, more especially that of the rigid Omar, whose
murderer they venerate as a saint. It must be steadily kept in mind, in
every discussion respecting the Mohammedan religion, that Mohammed and
his successors succeeded in establishing what the lofty and capacious
mind of Gregory VII. attempted in vain--the union of the civil and
ecclesiastical powers in the same person. Unlike the schisms of the
eastern and western, of the Catholic and Protestant churches, which
originated in difference of opinion on points of discipline or matters
of doctrine, that of the Mohammedans arose solely from ambition and the
struggle for temporal power. The sceptre of the greatest empire of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the world was to be the reward of the party who could gain the greatest
number of believers in his right to grasp the staff and ascend the
pulpit of the Prophet of God. Afterwards, when the learning of the
Greeks and the Persians became familiar to the Arabs, theological and
metaphysical niceties and distinctions were introduced, and the two
great stems of religion threw out numerous sectarian branches. The
Soonees are divided into four main sects, all of which are, however,
regarded as orthodox, for they agree in the main points, though they
differ in subordinate ones. The division of the Sheähs is also into four
sects, the point of agreement being the assertion of the right of Ali
and his descendants to the imamat, or supreme ecclesiastical dignity;
the point of difference being the nature of the proof on which his
rights are founded, and the order of succession among his descendants.
These four sects and their opinions are as follows:--

I. The first and most innocuous of the sects which maintained the rights
of the family of Ali were the Keissanee, so named from Keissan, one of
his freedmen. These, who were subdivided into several branches, held
that Ali's rights descended, not to Hassan or Hussein, but to their
brother, Mohammed-ben-Hanfee. One of these branch-sects maintained that
the imamat remained <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) in the person
of this Mohammed, who had never died, but had since appeared, from time
to time, on earth, under various names. Another branch, named the
Hashemites, held that the imamat descended from Mohammed-ben-Hanfee to
his son Aboo-Hashem, who transmitted it to Mohammed, of the family of
Abbas, from whom it descended to Saffah, the founder of the Abbasside
dynasty of khalifa <span id="fr_11"></span>[†](#fn_11). It is quite
evident

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

that the object of this sect was to give a colour to the claims of the
family of Abbas, who stigmatized the family of Ommiyah as usurpers, and
insisted that the khalifat belonged of right to themselves. Aboo-Moslem,
the great general who first gave dominion to the family of Abbas, was a
real or pretended maintainer of the tenets of this sect, the only
branch, by the way, of the Sheähs which supported the house of Abbas.

II\. A second branch of the Sheähs was named Zeidites. These held that
the imamat descended through Hassan and Hussein to Zein-al-Abedeen, the
son of this last, and thence passed to Zeid (whence their name), the son
of Zein; whereas most other Sheähs regarded Mohammed Bakir, the brother
of Zeid, as the lawful imam. The Zeidites differed from the other Sheähs
in acknowledging the three first khalifs to have been legitimate
successors of the Prophet. Edris, who wrested a part of Africa from the
Abbasside khalifs, and founded the kingdom of Fez, was a real or
pretended descendant of Zeid.

III\. The Ghoollat (*Ultras*), so named from the extravagance of their
doctrines, which, passing all bounds of common sense, were held in equal
abomination by the other Sheähs and by the Soonees. This sect is said to
have existed as early as the time of Ali himself, who is related to have
burnt some of them on account of their impious and extravagant

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

opinions. They held, as we are told, that there was but one imam, and
they ascribed the qualities of divinity to Ali. Some maintained that
there were two natures (the divine and the human) in him, others that
the last alone was his. Some again said that this perfect nature of Ali
passed by transmigration through his descendants, and would continue so
to do till the end of all things; others that the transmission stopped
with Mohammed Bakir, the son of Zein-al-Ahedeen, who still abode on
earth, but unseen, like Khizer, the Guardian of the Well of Life,
according to the beautiful eastern legend <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12). Others, still more bold, denied the
transmission, and asserted that the divine Ali sat enthroned in the
clouds, where the thunder was the voice and the lightning the scourge
wherewith he terrified and chastised the wicked. This sect presents the
first (though a very early) instance of the introduction into Islam of
that mysticism which appears to have had its original

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

birth-place in the dreamy groves of India. As a political party the
Ghoollat never seem to have been formidable.

IV\. Such, however, was not the case with the Imamee, the most dangerous
enemies of the house of Abbas. Agreeing with the Ghoollat in the
doctrine of an *invisible* imam, they maintained that there had been a
series of visible imams antecedent to him, who had vanished. One branch
of this sect (thence called the Seveners--*Sebiïn*) closed the series
with Ismaïl, the grandson of Mohammed Bakir, the *seventh* imam,
reckoning Ali himself the first. These were also called Ismaïlites, from
Ismaïl. The other branch, called Imamites, continued the series from
Ismaïl, through his brother Moosa Casim, down to Askeree, the twelfth
imam. These were hence called the Twelvers (*Esnaashree*). They believed
that the imam Askeree had vanished in a cavern at Hilla, on the banks of
the Euphrates, where he would remain invisible till the end of the
world, when he would again appear under the name of the Guide (*Mehdee*)
to lead mankind into the truth. The Imamee, wherever they might stop in
the series of the visible imams, saw that, for their political purposes,
it was necessary to acknowledge a kind of *locum tenentes* imams; but,
while the Zeidites, who agreed with them in this point, required in
these princes the royal virtues of valour, generosity, justice,
knowledge, the Imamee declared themselves satisfied if they possessed
the saintly ones of the practice of prayer, fasting, and alms-giving.
Hence artful and ambitious men could set up any puppet who was said to
be descended from the last of the visible imams, and aspire to govern
the Mohammedan world in his name.

The Twelvers were very near obtaining possession of the khalifat in the
time of the first Abbassides;

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

for the celebrated Haroon Er-Rasheed's son, Al-Mamoon, the eighth khalif
of that house, moved either by the strength or preponderance which the
Sheäh party had arrived at, or, as the eastern historians tell us,
yielding to the suggestions of his vizir, who was devoted to that sect,
named Ali Riza, the eighth imam, to be his successor on the throne. He
even laid aside the black habiliments peculiar to his family, and wore
green, the colour of Ali and the Prophet. But the family of Abbas, which
now numbered 30,000 persons, refused their assent to this renunciation
of the rights of their line. They rose in arms, and proclaimed as khalif
Al-Mamoon's uncle Ibrahim. The obnoxious vizir perished, and the
opportune death of Ali Riza (by poison, as was said) relieved the son of
Haroon Er-Rasheed from embarrassment. Ali Riza was interred at Meshed,
in the province of Khorasan; and his tomb is, to the present day, a
place of pilgrimage for devout Persians <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13).

The Ismaïlites were more successful in their attempts at obtaining
temporal power; and, as we shall presently see, a considerable portion
of their dominions was wrested from the house of Abbas.

Religion has, in all ages, and in all parts of the world, been made the
mask of ambition, for which its powerful influence over the minds of the
ignorant so well qualifies it. But the political influence of religion
among the calmer and more reasoning nations of Europe is slight compared
with its power over the more ardent and susceptible natives of Asia.
Owing to the effects of this principle the despotism of the East has
never been of that still, undisturbed nature which we might suppose to
be its character. To say nothing of the bloody wars and massacres which
have taken place under the pretext of religion

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

in the countries from Japan to the Indus, the Mohammedan portion of the
East has been, almost without ceasing, the theatre of sanguinary dramas,
where ambition, under the disguise of religion, sought for empire; and
our own days have seen, in the case of the Wahabees, a bold though
unsuccessful attempt of fanaticism to achieve a revolution in a part of
the Ottoman empire. It was this union of religion with policy which
placed the Suffavee family on the throne of Persia in the fifteenth
century; and it was this also which, at a much earlier period,
established the dominion of the Fatimite khalifs of Egypt. The progress
of this last event is thus traced by oriental historians <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14):--

The encouragement given to literature and science by the enlightened
Al-Mamoon had diffused a degree of boldness of speculation and inquiry
hitherto unknown in the empire of the Arabs. The subtile philosophy of
the Greeks was now brought into contact with the sublime but corrupted
theology of the Persians, and the mysticism of India secretly mingled
itself with the mass of knowledge. We are not, perhaps, to give credit
to the assertion of the Arab historian that it was the secret and
settled plan of the Persians to undermine and corrupt the religion, and
thus sap the empire, of those who had overcome them in the field; but it
is not a little remarkable that, as the transformation of the Mosaic
religion into Judaism may be traced to Persia, and as the same country
sent forth the monstrous opinions which corrupted the simplicity of the
Gospel, so it is in Persia that we find the origin of most of the sects
which have sprung up in Islam. Without agreeing with those who would
derive all knowledge from India, it may be held not improbable that the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

intricate metaphysics and mysticism of that country have been the source
of much of the corruption of the various religions which have prevailed
in Cis-Indian Asia. It is at least remarkable that the north-east of
Persia, the part nearest to India, has been the place where many of the
impostors who pretended to intercourse with the Deity made their
appearance. It was here that Mani (*Manes*), the head of the Manichæans,
displayed his arts, and it was in Khorasan (*Sun-land*) that Hakem, who
gave himself out for an incarnation of the Deity, raised the standard of
revolt against the house of Abbas. But, be this as it may, on surveying
the early centuries of Islam, we may ob- serve that all the rebellions
which agitated the empire of the khalifs arose from a union of the
claims of the family of Ali with the philosophical doctrines current in
Persia.

We are told that, in the ninth century of the Christian era, Abdallah, a
man of Persian lineage, residing at Ahwaz, in the south of Persia,
conceived the design of overturning the empire of the khalifs by
secretly introducing into Islam a system of atheism and impiety. Not to
shock deep-rooted prejudices in favour of the established religion and
government, he resolved to communicate his doctrines gradually, and he
fixed on the mystic number seven as that of the degrees through which
his disciples should pass to the grand revelation of the vanity of all
religions and the indifference of all actions. The political cloak of
his system was the assertion of the claims of the descendants of
Mohammed, the son of Ismaïl, to the imamat, and his missionaries
(*dais*) engaged with activity in the task of making proselytes
throughout the empire of the khalifs. Abdallah afterwards removed to
Syria, where he died. His son and

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

grandsons followed up his plans, and in their time a convert was made
who speedily brought the system into active operation <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15).

The name of this person was Carmath, a native of the district of Koofa,
and from him the sect was called Carmathites. He made great alterations
in the original system of Abdallah; and as the sect was now grown
numerous and powerful, he resolved to venture on putting the claims of
the descendants of Ismaïl to the test of the sword. He maintained that
the indefeasible right to earthly dominion lay with what he styled the
imam Maässoom (*spotless*), a sort of ideal of a perfect prince, like
the wise man of the Stoics; consequently all the reigning princes were
usurpers, by reason of their vices and imperfections; and the warriors
of the perfect prince were to precipitate them all, without distinction,
from their thrones. Carmath also taught his disciples to understand the
precepts and observances of Islam in a figurative sense. Prayer
signified obedience to the imam Maässoom, alms-giving was paying the
tithe due to him (that is, augmenting the funds of the society), fasting
was keeping the political secrets relating to the imam and his service.
It was not the tenseel, or outward word of the Koran, which was to be
attended to; the taweel, or exposition, was alone worthy of note. Like
those of Mokanna, and other opponents of the house of Abbas, the
followers of Carmath distinguished themselves by wearing white raiment
to mark their hostility to the reigning khalifs, whose garments and
standards retained the black hue which they had displayed against the
white banners of the house of Ommiyah. A bloody war was renewed at
various periods during

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

an entire century between the followers of Carmath and the troops of the
khalifs, with varying success. In the course of this war the holy city
of Mecca was taken by the sectaries (as it has been of late years by the
Wahabees), after the fall of 30,000 Moslems in its defence. The
celebrated black stone was taken and conveyed in triumph to Hajar, where
it remained for two-and-twenty years, till it was redeemed for 50,000
ducats by the emir of Irak, and replaced in its original seat. Finally,
like so many of their predecessors, the Carmathites were vanquished by
the yet vigorous power of the empire, and their name, though not their
principles, was extinguished.

During this period of contest between the house of Abbas and the
Carmathites, a dai (*missionary*) of the latter, named Abdallah,
contrived to liberate from the prison into which he had been thrown by
the khalif Motadhad a real or pretended descendant of Fatima, named
Obeid-Allah <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16), whom he conveyed to
Africa, and, proclaiming him to be the promised Mehdi (*guide*),
succeeded in establishing for him a dominion on the north coast of that
country. The gratitude of Obeid-Allah was shown by his putting to death
him to whom he was indebted fir his power; but talent and valour can
exist without the presence of virtue, and Obeid-Allah and his two next
descendants extended their sway to the shores of the Atlantic.
Moez-ladin-Allah, his great-grandson, having achieved the conquest of
Egypt and Syria, wisely abandoned his former more distant dominions
along the coast of the Mediterranean, his eye being fixed on the more
valuable Asiatic empire of he Abbassides. This dynasty of Fatimite
khalifs,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

as they were called, reigned during two centuries at Cairo, on the Nile,
the foes and rivals of those who sat in Bagdad, on the banks of the
Tigris. Like every other eastern dynasty, they gradually sank into
impotence and imbecility, and their throne was finally occupied by the
renowned Koord Saladin.

Obeid-Allah derived his pedigree from Ismaïl, the seventh imam. His
house, therefore, looked to the support of the whole sect of the
Seveners, or Ismaïlites, in their projects for extending their sway over
the Mohammedan world; and it was evidently their interest to increase
the numbers and power of that sect as much as possible. We are
accordingly justified in giving credit to the assurances of the eastern
historians, that there was a secret institution at Cairo, at the head of
which was the Fatimite khalif, and of which the object was the
dissemination of the doctrines of the sect of the Ismaïlites, though we
may be allowed to hesitate as to the correctness of some of the details.

This society, we are told, comprised both men and women, who met in
separate assemblies, for the common supposition of the insignificance of
the latter sex in the east is erroneous. It was presided over by the
chief missionary (*Dai-al-Doat* <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)),
who was always a person of importance in the state, and not unfrequently
supreme judge (*Kadhi-al-kodhat* <span id="fr_18"></span>[†](#fn_18)).
Their assemblies, called Societies of Wisdom (*Mejalis-al-hicmet*), were
held twice a-week, on Mondays and Wednesdays. All the members appeared
clad in white. The president, having first waited on the khalif, and
read to him the intended lecture, or, if that could not be done, having
gotten his signature on the back of it, proceeded to the assembly and
delivered a written discourse. At the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

conclusion of it those present kissed his hand and reverently touched
with their forehead the handwriting of the khalif. In this state the
society continued till the reign of that extraordinary madman the khalif
Hakem-bi-emr-illah (*Judge by the command of God*), who determined to
place it on a splendid footing. He erected for it a stately edifice,
styled the House of Wisdom (*Dar-al-hicmet*), abundantly furnished with
books and mathematical instruments. Its doors were open to all, and
paper, pens, and ink were profusely supplied for the use of those who
chose to frequent it. Professors of law, mathematics, logic, and
medicine were appointed to give instructions; and at the learned
disputations which were frequently held in presence of the khalif, these
professors appeared in their state caftans (*Khalaä*), which, it is
said, exactly resembled the robes worn at the English universities. The
income assigned to this establishment, by the munificence of the khalif,
was 257,000 ducats annually, arising from the tenths paid to the crown.

The course of instruction in this university pro. seeded, according to
Macrisi, by the following nine degrees:--1. The object of the first,
which was long and tedious, was to infuse doubts and difficulties into
the mind of the aspirant, and to lead him to repose a blind confidence
in the knowledge and wisdom of his teacher. To this end he was perplexed
with captious questions; the absurdities of the literal sense of the
Koran, and its repugnance to reason, were studiously pointed out, and
dark hints were given that beneath this shell lay a kernel sweet to the
taste and nutritive to the soul. But all further information was most
rigorously withheld till he had consented to bind himself by a most
solemn oath to absolute faith and blind obedience to his instructor. 2.
When he had taken the oath he was admitted to

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

the second degree, which inculcated the acknowledgment of the imams
appointed by God as the sources of all knowledge. 3. The third degree
informed him what was the number of these blessed and holy imams; and
this was the mystic seven; for, as God had made seven heavens, seven
earths, seas, planets, metals, tones, and colours, so seven was the
number of these noblest of God's creatures. 4. In the fourth degree the
pupil learned that God had sent seven lawgivers into the world, each of
whom was commissioned to alter and improve the system of his
predecessor; that each of these had seven helpers, who appeared in the
interval between him and his successor; these helpers, as they did not
appear as public teachers, were called the mute (*samit*), in
contradistinction to the *speaking* lawgivers. The seven lawgivers were
Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Mohammed, and Ismaïl, the son of
Jaaffer; the seven principal helpers, called Seats (*soos*), were Seth,
Shem, Ishmael (the son of Abraham), Aaron, Simon, Ali, and Mohammed, the
son of Ismaïl. It is justly observed <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) that, as this last personage was not more
than a century dead, the teacher had it in his power to fix on whom he
would as the mute prophet of the present time, and inculcate the belief
in, and obedience to, him of all who had not got beyond this degree. 5.
The fifth degree taught that each of the seven mute prophets had twelve
apostles for the dissemination of his faith. The suitableness of this
number was also proved by analogy. There are twelve signs of the zodiac,
twelve months, twelve tribes of Israel, twelve joints in the four
fingers of each hand, and so forth. 6. The pupil being led thus far, and
having shown no symptoms of restiveness, the precepts of the Koran were
once more brought under consideration, and he was told that all the
positive portions of

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

religion must be subordinate to philosophy. He was consequently
instructed in the systems of Plato and Aristotle during a long space of
time; and (7), when esteemed fully qualified, he was admitted to the
seventh degree, when instruction was communicated in that mystic
Pantheism which is held and taught by the sect of the Soofees. 8. The
positive precepts of religion were again considered, the veil was torn
from the eyes of the aspirant, all that had preceded was now declared to
have been merely scaffolding to raise the edifice of knowledge, and was
to be flung down. Prophets and teachers, heaven and hell, all were
nothing; future bliss and misery were idle dreams; all actions were
permitted. 9. The ninth degree had only to inculcate that nought was to
be believed, everything might be done <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20).

In perusing the accounts of secret societies, their rules, regulations,
degrees, and the quantity or nature of the knowledge communicated in
them, a difficulty must always present itself. Secrecy being of the very
essence of everything connected with them, what means had writers, who
were generally hostile to them, of learning their internal constitution
and the exact nature of their maxims and tenets? In the present case our
authority for this account of a society which chiefly flourished in the
tenth and eleventh centuries is Macrisi, a writer of the fifteenth
century. His authorities were doubtless of more ancient date, but we
know not who they were or whence they derived their information. Perhaps
our

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

safest course in this, as in similar cases, would be to admit the
general truth of the statement, but to suffer our minds to remain in a
certain degree of suspense as to the accuracy of the details. We can
thus at once assent to the fact of the existence of the college at
Cairo, and of the mystic tenets of Soofeeism being taught in it, as also
to that of the rights of the Fatimites to the khalifat being inculcated
on the minds of the pupils, and missionaries being thence sent over the
east, without yielding implicit credence to the tale of the nine degrees
through which the aspirant had to pass, or admitting that the course of
instruction terminated in a doctrine subversive of all religion and of
all morality.

As we have seen, the Dai-al-doat, or chief missionary, resided at Cairo,
to direct the operations of the society, while the subordinate dais
pervaded all parts of the dominions of the house of Abbas, making
converts to the claims of Ali. The dais were attended by companions
(*Refeek*), who were persons who had been instructed up to a certain
point in the secret doctrines, but who were neither to presume to teach
nor to seek to make converts, that honour being reserved to the dais. By
the activity of the dais the society spread so widely that in the year
1058 the emir Bessassiri, who belonged to it, made himself master of
Bagdad, and kept possession of it during an entire year, and had money
struck, and prayer made, in the name of the Egyptian khalif. The emir,
however, fell by the sword of Toghrul the Turk, whose aid the feeble
Abbasside implored, and these two distinguishing acts of Mohammedan
sovereignty were again performed by the house of Abbas. Soon afterwards
the society at Cairo seems to have declined along with the power of the
Fatimite khalifs. In 1123 the powerful vizir Afdhal, on occasion of some
disturbance caused by them, shut up the Dar-al-hicmet,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

or, as it would appear, destroyed it. His successor Mamoon permitted the
society to hold their meetings in a building erected in another
situation, and it lingered on till the fall of the khalifat of Egypt.
The policy of Afdhal is perhaps best to be explained by a reference to
the state of the East at that time. The khalif of Bagdad was become a
mere pageant devoid of all real power; the former dominions of the house
of Abbas were in the hands of the Seljookian Turks; the Franks were
masters of a great part of Syria, and threatened Egypt, where the
khalifs were also fallen into incapacity, and the real power had passed
to the vizir. As this last could aspire to nothing beyond preserving
Egypt, a society instituted for the purpose of gaining partisans to the
claims of the Fatimites must have been rather an impediment to him than
otherwise. He must therefore have been inclined to suppress it,
especially as the society of the Assassins, a branch of it, had now been
instituted, which, heedless of the claims of the Fatimites, sought
dominion for itself alone. To the history of that remarkable association
we now proceed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[26:\*](sma04.htm#fr_9) See Ockley's History of
the Saracens.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[28:\*](sma04.htm#fr_10) Hence they were named
the Standing (*Wakfiyah*).

<span id="fn_11"></span>[28:†](sma04.htm#fr_11) Abbas, the ancestor of
this family, was one of the uncles <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> of
the Prophet. They obtained possession of the khalifat A.D. 750, and
retained it through an hereditary succession of princes for 500 years.
Al-Mansoor, the second khalif of this dynasty, transferred the royal
residence from Damascus, where the Ommiades had dwelt, to Bagdad, which
he founded on the banks of the Tigris. This city, also named the City of
Peace, the Vale of Peace, the House of Peace, has acquired, beyond what
any other town can claim, a degree of romantic celebrity by means of the
inimitable Thousand and One Nights. Such is the ennobling power of
genius!

<span id="fn_12"></span>[30:\*](sma04.htm#fr_12) Khizer, by some
supposed, but perhaps erroneously, to be the prophet Elias, is regarded
by the Mohammedans in the light of a beneficent genius. He is the giver
of youth to the animal and the vegetable world. He is clad in garments
of the most brilliant green, and he stands as keeper of the Well of Life
in the Land of Darkness. According to the romances of the East,
Iskander, that is, Alexander the Great, resolved to march into the West,
to the Land of Darkness, that he might drink of the water of
immortality. During seven entire days he and his followers journeyed
through dark and dismal deserts. At length they faintly discerned in the
distance the green light which shone from the raiment of Khizer. As they
advanced it became more and more resplendent, like the brightest and
purest emeralds. As the monarch approached, Khizer dipped a cup in the
verdant Water of Life, and reached it to him; but the impatience of
Iskander was so great that he spilt the contents of the cup, and the law
of fate did not permit the guardian of the fount to fill it for him
again. The moral of this tale is evident. Its historic foundation is the
journey of the Macedonian to the temple of Ammon.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[32:\*](sma04.htm#fr_13) See Frazer's Khorasān.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[33:\*](sma04.htm#fr_14) Lari and Macrisi,
quoted by Hammer.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[35:\*](sma04.htm#fr_15) Macrisi is Hammer's
authority for the preceding account of Abdallah. It is to be observed
that this Abdallah is unnoticed by Herbelot.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[36:\*](sma04.htm#fr_16) The genuineness of the
descent of Obeid-Allah has been a great subject of dispute among the
eastern historians and jurists. Those in the interests of the house of
Abbas strained [every](errata.htm#1) nerve to make him out an impostor.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[37:\*](sma04.htm#fr_17) That is, *Missionary of
Missionaries*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[37:†](sma04.htm#fr_18) *Cadhi of Cadhis*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[39:\*](sma04.htm#fr_19) Hammer, p. 54.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[40:\*](sma04.htm#fr_20) Mr. De Sacy (*Journal
des Savans*, an 1818) is of opinion that the Arabic words *Taleel* and
*Ibahat* will not hear the strong sense which Hammer gives them. The
former, he says, only signifies that Deism which regards the Deity as
merely a speculative being, and annihilates the moral relations between
him and the creature; the latter only denotes emancipation from the
positive precepts of laws, such as fasting prayer, &c., but not from
moral obligations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sma05)
