[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma12)  [Next](sma14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

### CHAPTER X.

Death of Jellal-ed-deen--Character of Ala-ed-deen, his successor--The
Sheikh Jemal-ed-deen--The Astronomer Na-sir- ed-deen--The Vizir
Sheref-al-Moolk--Death of Ala-ed-deen--Succession of Rukn-ed-deen, the
last Sheikh-al-Jebal.

THE reign of Jellal-ed-deen, which, unfortunately for the society,
lasted but twelve years, was unstained by blood; and we see no reason to
doubt the judgment of the oriental historians, who consider his faith in
Islam as being sincere and pure. It was probably his virtue that caused
his death, for his life, it was suspected, was terminated by poison
administered by his own kindred. His son Ala-ed-deen <span
id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_63) (*Eminence of Religion*.md), who succeeded
him, was but nine years old; but as, according to the maxims of the
Ismaïlites, the visible representative of the imam was, to a certain
extent, exempted from the ordinary imperfections of humanity, and his
commands were to be regarded as those of him whose authority he bore,
the young Ala-ed-deen was obeyed as implicitly as any of his
predecessors. At his mandate the blood was shed of all among his
relatives who were suspected of having participated in the murder of his
father.

Ala-ed-deen proved to be a weak, inefficient ruler. His delight was in
the breeding and tending of sheep, and he spent his days in the cotes
among the herdsmen, while the affairs of the society were allowed to run
into disorder. All the restraints imposed by his father were removed,
and every one was left to do

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

what was right in his own eyes. The weakness of this prince's intellect
is ascribed to his having, in the fifth year of his reign, had himself
most copiously bled without the knowledge of his physician, the
consequence of which was an extreme degree of debility and a deep
melancholy, which never afterwards left him. From that time no one could
venture to offer him advice respecting either his health or the state of
the affairs of the society, without being rewarded for it by the rack or
by instant death. Everything was therefore kept concealed from him, and
he had neither friend nor adviser.

Yet Ala-ed-deen was not without some estimable qualities. He had a
respect and esteem for learning and learned men. For the sheikh
Jemal-ed-deen Ghili, who dwelt at Casveen, he testified on all occasions
the utmost reverence, and sent him annually 500 dinars to defray the
expenses of his household. When the people of Casveen reproached the
learned sheikh with living on the bounty of the Impious, he made answer,
"The imams pronounce it lawful to execute the Ismaïlites, and to
confiscate their goods; how much more lawful is it for a man to make use
of their property and their money when they give them voluntarily!"
Ala-ed-deen, who probably heard of the reproaches directed against his
friend, sent to assure the people of Casveen that it was solely on
account of the sheikh that he spared them, or else he would put the
earth of Casveen into bags, hang the bags about the necks of the
inhabitants, and bring them to Alamoot. The following instance of his
respect for the sheikh is also related. A messenger coming with a letter
to him from the sheikh was so imprudent as to deliver it to him when he
was drunk. Ala-ed-deen ordered him to have a hundred blows of the
bastinade, at the same time crying out to him, "O foolish and
thoughtless man, to give me

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

a letter from the sheikh at the time when I was drunk! Thou shouldest
have waited till I was come out of the bath, and was come to my senses."

The celebrated astronomer Nasir-ed-deen (*Victory of Religion*) had also
gained the consideration of Ala-ed-deen, who was anxious to enjoy the
pleasure of his society. But the philosopher, who resided at Bokhara,
testified little inclination to accept of the favour intended him.
Ala-ed-deen therefore sent orders to the Dai-al-Kebir of Kuhistan to
convey the uncourteous sage to Alamoot. As Nasir-ed-deen was one day
recreating himself in the gardens about Bokhara, he found himself
suddenly surrounded by some men, who, showing him a horse, directed him
to mount, telling him he had nothing to fear if he conducted himself
quietly. It was in vain that he argued and remonstrated; he was far on
the road to Kuhistan, which was 600 miles distant, before his friends
knew he was gone. The governor made every apology for what he had been
obliged to do. The philosopher was sent on to Alamoot to be the
companion of Ala-ed-deen, and it was while he was there that he wrote
his great work called the Morals of Nasir (*Akhlaak-Nasiree*). <span
id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_64.md)

It was during the administration of Ala-ed-deen that the following
event, so strongly illustrative of the modes of procedure of the
Assassins, took place. The sultan Jellal-ed-deen, the last ruler of
Khaurism, so well known for his heroic resistance to Chingis

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Khan, had
appointed the emir Arkhan governor of Nishaboor, which bordered closely
on the Ismaïlite territory of Kuhistan. Arkhan being obliged to attend
the sultan, the deputy whom he left in his stead made several
destructive incursions into Kuhistan, and laid waste the Ismaïlite
districts of Teem and Kaïn. The Ismaïlites sent to demand satisfaction,
but the only reply made to their complaints and menaces by the
deputy-governor was one of those symbolical proceedings so common in the
east. He came to receive the Ismaïlite envoy with his girdle stuck full
of daggers, which he flung on the ground before him, to signify either
his disregard for the daggers of the society, or to intimate that he
could play at that game as well as they. The Ismaïlites were not,
however, persons to be provoked with impunity, and shortly afterwards
three Fedavees were despatched to Kunja, where Arkhan was residing at
the court of the sultan. They watched till the emir came without the
walls of the town, and then fell upon and murdered him. They then
hastened to the house of Sheref-al-Moolk (*Nobleness of the Realm*), the
vizir, and penetrated into his divan. Fortunately he was at that time
engaged with the sultan, and they missed him; but they wounded severely
one of his servants, and then, sallying forth, paraded the streets,
proclaiming aloud that they were Assassins. They did not however escape
the penalty of their temerity, for the people assembled and stoned them
to death.

An envoy of the Ismaïlites, named Bedr-ed-deen (*Full Moon of Religion*)
Ahmed, was meantime on his way to the court of the sultan. He stopped
short on hearing what had occurred, and sent to the vizir to know
whether he should go on or return. Sheref-al-Moolk, who feared to
irritate the Assassins, directed him to continue his journey, and, when
he was

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

arrived, showed him every mark of honour. The object of Bedr-ed-deen's
mission was to obtain satisfaction for the ravages committed on the
Ismaïlite territory and the cession of the fortress of Damaghan. The
vizir promised the former demand without a moment's hesitation, and he
made as little difficulty with regard to the second. An instrument was
drawn out assigning to the Ismaïlites the fortress which they craved, on
condition of their remitting annually to the royal treasury the sum of
30,000 pieces of gold.

When this affair was arranged the sultan set out for Azerbeijan, and the
Ismaïlite ambassador remained the guest of the vizir. One day, after a
splendid banquet, when the wine, which they had been drinking in
violation of the law, had mounted into their heads, the ambassador told
the vizir, by way of confidence, that there were several Ismaïlites
among the pages, grooms, guards, and other persons who were immediately
about the sultan. The vizir, dismayed, and at the same time curious to
know who these dangerous attendants were, besought the ambassador to
point them out to him, giving him his napkin as a pledge that nothing
evil should happen to them. Instantly, at a sign from the envoy, five of
the persons who were attendants of the chamber stepped forth, avowing
themselves to be concealed Assassins. "On such a day, and at such an
hour," said one of them, an Indian, to the vizir, "I might have slain
thee without being seen or punished; and, if I did not do so, it was
only because I had no orders from my superiors." The vizir, timid by
nature, and rendered still more so by the effects of the wine, stripped
himself to his shirt, and, sitting down before the five Assassins,
conjured them by their lives to spare him, protesting that he was as
devotedly the slave of the sheikh Ala-ed-deen as of the sultan
Jellal-ed-deen.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

As soon as the sultan heard of the meanness and cowardice of his vizir,
he sent a messenger to him with the keenest reproaches, and an order to
burn alive the five Ismaïlites without an instant's delay. The vizir,
though loth, was obliged to comply, and, in violation of his promise,
the five chamberlains were cast on the flaming pyre, where they died
exulting at being found worthy to suffer in the service of the great
Sheikh-al-Jebal. The master of the pages was also put to death for
having admitted Ismaïlites among them. The sultan then set out for Irak,
leaving the vizir in Azerbeijan. While he was there an envoy arrived
from Alamoot, who, on being admitted to an audience, thus spake, "Thou
hast given five Ismaïlites to the flames; to redeem thy head, pay 10,000
pieces of gold for each of these unfortunate men." The vizir heaped
honours on the envoy, and directed his secretary to draw out a deed in
the usual forms, by which he bound himself to pay the Ismaïlites the
'annual sum of 10,000 pieces of gold, besides paying for them the 30,000
which went to the treasury of the sultan. Sheref-al-Moolk was then
assured that he had nothing to apprehend.

The preceding very characteristic anecdote rests on good authority, for
it is related by Aboo-’l-Fetah Nissavee, the vizir's secretary, in his
life of sultan Jellal-ed-deen.

The astronomer Nasir-ed-deen was not the only involuntary captive of
Alamoot. Ala-ed-deen sent once to Farsistan to the atabeg
Mozaffer-ed-deen, to request that he would send him an able physician.
Requests from Alamoot were not lightly to be disregarded, and the atabeg
despatched the imam Beha-ed-deen, one of the most renowned physicians of
the time, to the mountains of Jebal. The skill of the imam proved of
great benefit to the prince, but when the physician applied for leave to
return to his family

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

he found that he was destined to pass the remainder of his days in
Alamoot, unless he should outlive his patient.

The imam's release, however, was more speedy than he expected.
Ala-ed-deen, who had several children, had nominated the eldest of them,
Rukn-ed-deen (*Support of Religion*), while he was yet a child, to be
his successor. As Rukn-ed-deen grew up the people began to hold him in
equal respect with his father, and to consider his commands as equally
binding on them. Ala-ed-deen took offence, and declared that he would
give the succession to another of his children; but, as this directly
contravened one of the Ismaïlite maxims, namely, that the first
nomination was always the true one, it was little heeded. Rukn-ed-deen,
in apprehension for his life, which his father threatened, retired to a
strong castle to wait there the time when he should be called to the
succession. Meantime the tyranny and caprice of Ala-ed-deen had given
many of the principal persons about him cause to be apprehensive for
their lives, and they resolved to anticipate him. There was a man at
Alamoot named Hassan, a native of Mazenderan, who, though no Ismaïlite,
was of a vile and profligate character. He was the object of the doating
attachment of Ala-ed-deen, and consequently had free and constant access
to him. Him they fixed upon as their agent, and they found no difficulty
in gaining him, Ala-ed-deen, whose fondness for breeding and tending
sheep had never diminished, had built for himself a wooden house close
by his sheepcotes, whither he was wont to retire, and where he indulged
himself in all the excesses in which he delighted. Hassan of Mazenderan
seized the moment when Ala-ed-deen was lying drunk in this house, and
shot him through the neck with an arrow. Rukn-ed-deen, who is said to
have been engaged in

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the conspiracy, assuming the part of the avenger of blood, the murderer
and all his family were put to death, and their bodies committed to the
flames; but this act of seeming justice did not free Rukn-ed-deen from
suspicion, and the bitter reproaches of his mother were poured forth on
him as a parricide.

The termination of the power of the Ismaïlites was now at hand.
Rukn-ed-deen had hardly ascended the throne of his murdered father when
he learned that an enemy was approaching against whom all attempts at
resistance would be vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[148:\*](sma13.htm#fr_63.md) This is the name
which, in the form of Aladdin, is so familiar to us from the story of
the Wonderful Lamp.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[150:\*](sma13.htm#fr_64.md) Malcolm's History of
Persia, vol. i. In the clever work called "Traits and Stories of the
Irish Peasantry," which is the best picture ever given of the language,
manners, and modes of thinking of that class, there is an amusing
account (and an undoubtedly true one) of the "Abduction of Mat
Kavanagh," one of that curious order of men called in that country
hedge-schoolmasters, which, as indicative of a passion for knowledge,
may be placed in comparison with this anecdote of Ala-ed-deen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](sma14.md)
