[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma10)  [Next](sma12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

<span class="small">Sinan the Dai-al-Kebir of Syria--Offers to become a
Christian--His Ambassador murdered by the Templars--Cardinal de Vitry's
Account of the Assassins--Murder of the Marquis of Montferrat--Defence
of King Richard.</span>

THE person who had the chief direction of the affairs of the society in
Syria in the time of Saladin was one of the most remarkable characters
which appear in the history of the Assassins. His name was
Rasheed-ed-deen (*Orthodox in Religion*) Sinan, the son of Suleiman of
Basra. Like so many others of the impostors who have appeared from time
to time in the east, he had the audacity to give himself out for an
incarnation of the Divinity. No one ever saw him eat, drink, sleep, or
even spit. His clothing was of coarse hair-cloth. From the rising to the
setting of the sun he stood upon a lofty rock, preaching to the people,
who received his words as those of a superior being. Unfortunately for
his credit, his auditors at length discovered that he had a halt in his
gait, caused by a wound which he received from a stone in the great
earthquake of 1157. This did not accord with the popular idea of the
perfection which should belong to the corporeal vehicle of Divinity. The
credit of Sinan vanished at once, and those who had just been adoring
the god now threatened to take the life of the impostor. Sinan lost not
his self-possession; he calmly entreated them to be patient, descended
from his rock, caused food to be brought, invited them to eat, and by
the persuasive powers of his eloquence induced them to recognise

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

him as their sole chief, and all unanimously swore obedience and
fidelity to him.

The neglect of chronology by the oriental historians, or their European
translators and followers, is frequently such that we are left in great
uncertainty as to the exact time of particular events, and are thus
unable to trace them to their real causes and occasions. The mention of
the earthquake of 1157 would however seem to make it probable that it
was about that time that Sinan put forward his claims to divinity; and
as, at that very period, Hassan, the son of Keäh Mohammed, was giving
himself out for the promised imam, we may suppose that it was his
example which stimulated Sinan to his bold attempt at obtaining
independent dominion over the Syrian branch of the Ismaïlites.

Sinan was, like Hassan, a man of considerable learning. His works are
held in high estimation by the remains of the sect of the Ismaïlites
still lingering among the mountains of Syria. These works, we are told,
consist of a chaotic mixture of mutilated passages of the Gospel and the
Koran, of contradictory articles of belief, of hymns, prayers, sermons,
and regulations, which are unintelligible even to those who receive and
venerate them.

The sacred books of the Christians formed, as we see, a part of the
studies of the Sheikh of Massyat, and, as it would appear, he thought he
might derive some advantage from his acquaintance with them. The
religio-military society of the Knights of the Temple, whose history we
shall soon have to record, had possessions in the neighbourhood of those
of the Assassins, and their superior power had enabled them, at what
time is uncertain, to render the latter tributary. The tribute was the
annual sum of 2,000 ducats, and Sinan, to whom probably all religions
were alike, and who had unbounded power over the

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

minds of his people, conceived the idea of releasing himself from it by
professing the same religion with his neighbours. He accordingly sent,
in the year 1172, one of his most prudent and eloquent ministers on a
secret embassy to Amalric King of Jerusalem, offering, in the name of
himself and his people, to embrace the Christian religion, and receive
the rite of baptism, provided the king would engage to make the Templars
renounce the tribute of 2,000 ducats, and agree to live with them
henceforward as good neighbours and friends and brethren. Overjoyed at
the prospect of making converts of such importance, the king readily
assented to the desires of the Ismaïlite chief, and he at the same time
assured the Templars that their house should not be a loser, as he would
pay them 2,000 ducats annually out of his treasury. The brethren of the
Temple made no objection to the arrangement; and after the Ismaïlite
ambassador had been detained and treated honourably for some days by the
king, he set out on his return, accompanied by a guide and escort sent
by the king to conduct him as far as the borders of the Ismaïlite
territory. They passed in safety through the country of Tripolis, and
were now in the vicinity of the first castles of the Ismaïlites, when
suddenly some Templars rushed forth from an ambush, and murdered the
ambassador. The Templars were commanded by a knight named Walter du
Mesnil, a one-eyed, daring, wicked man, but who, on this occasion, it
would appear, acted by the orders of his superiors, who probably did not
consider the royal promise good security for the 2,000 ducats; for, when
Amalric, filled with indignation at the base and perfidious action,
assembled his barons at Sidon to deliberate on what should be done, and
by their advice sent two of their number to Ado de St. Amand, the Master
of the Temple, to demand satisfaction for the iniquitous

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

deed, the master contented himself by saying that he had imposed a
penance on brother Du. Mesnil, and had moreover directed him to proceed
to Rome without delay, to know what farther the apostolic father would
order him to do, and that, on this account he must, in the name of the
pope, prohibit any violence against the aforesaid brother. The king,
however, was not regardless of justice and of his own dignity. Shortly
afterwards, when the master and several of the Templars were at Sidon,
he assembled his council again, and, with their consent, sent and
dragged Du Mesnil from the house of the Templars, and threw him into
prison, where he would probably have expiated his crime but for the
speedy death of the king. All hopes of the conversion of the Ismaïlites
were now at an end.

It is on this occasion that the Archbishop of Tyre gives an account of
what he had been able to learn respecting the Assassins. As what we have
previously related of them has been exclusively drawn from eastern
sources, it will not be useless to insert in this place the accounts of
them given by the Cardinal de Vitry, who has followed and enlarged the
sketch of the archbishop <span id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49.md).

"In the province of Phœnicia, near the borders of the Antaradensian town
which is now called Tortosa, dwells a certain people, shut in on all
sides by rocks and mountains, who have ten castles, very strong and
impregnable, by reason of the narrow ways and inaccessible rocks, with
their suburbs and the valleys, which are most fruitful in all species of
fruits and corn, and most delightful for their amenity. The number of
these men, who are called Assassins, is said to exceed 40,000 <span
id="fr_50"></span>[†](#fn_50.md). They set a captain over

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

themselves, not by hereditary succession, but by the prerogative of
merit, whom they call the Old Man (*Veterem* seu *Senem*), not so much
on account of his advanced age as for his pre-eminence in prudence and
dignity. The first and principal *abbot* of this unhappy *religion* of
theirs, and the place where they had their origin and whence they came
to Syria, is in the very remote parts of the east, near the city of
Bagdad and the parts of the province of Persia. These people, who do not
divide the hoof, nor make a difference between what is sacred and what
is profane, believe that all obedience indifferently shown by them
towards their superior is meritorious for eternal life. Hence they are
bound to their master, whom they call the Old Man, with such a bond of
subjection and obedience that there is nothing so difficult or so
dangerous that they would fear to undertake, or which they would not
perform with a cheerful mind and ardent will, at the command of their
lord. The Old Man, their lord, causes boys of this people to be brought
up in secret and delightful places, and having had them diligently
trained and instructed in the different kinds of languages, sends them
to various provinces with daggers, and orders them to slay the great men
of the Christians, as well as of the Saracens, either because he is at
enmity with them for some cause or other, or at the request of his
friends, or even for the lucre of a large sum of money which has been
given him, promising them, for the execution of this command, that they
shall have far greater delights, and without end, in paradise, after
death, than even those amidst which they had been reared. If they chance
to die in this act of obedience they are regarded as martyrs by their
companions, and being placed by that people among their saints, are held
in the greatest reverence. Their parents are enriched with many gifts by
the master, who is called the Old Man, and

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

if they were slaves they are let go free ever after. Whence these
wretched and misguided youths, who are sent from the convent
(*conventu*) of the aforesaid brethren to different parts of the world,
undertake their deadly legation with such joy and delight, and perform
it with such diligence and solicitude, transforming themselves in
various ways, and assuming the manners and dress of other nations,
sometimes concealing themselves under the appearance of merchants, at
other times under that of priests and monks, and in an infinity of other
modes, that there is hardly any person in the whole world so cautious as
to be able to guard against their machinations. They disdain to plot
against an inferior person. The great men to whom they are hostile
either redeem themselves by a large sum of money, or, going armed and
attended by a body of guards, pass their life in suspicion and in dread
of death. They kept the law of Mahomet and his institutions diligently
and straitly beyond all other Saracens till the times of a certain
master of theirs, who, being endowed with natural genius, and exercised
in the study of different writings, began with all diligence to read and
examine the law of the Christians and the Gospels of Christ, admiring
the virtue of the miracles, and the sanctity of the doctrine. From a
comparison with these he began to abominate the frivolous and irrational
doctrine of Mahomet, and at length, when he knew the truth, he studied
to recall his subjects by degrees from the rites of the cursed law.
Wherefore he exhorted and commanded them that they should drink wine in
moderation and eat the flesh of swine. At length, after many discourses
and serious admonitions of their teacher, they all with one consent
agreed to renounce the perfidy of Mahomet, and, by receiving the grace
of baptism, to become Christians."

We may, from this account, perceive that the Crusaders

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

had a tolerably clear idea of the nature and constitution of the society
of the Assassins. The Cardinal de Vitry plainly describes them as
forming a religion, that is, an order under an abbot; and perhaps the
resemblance which Hammer traces between them and the Templars, which we
shall notice when we come to speak of this last society, is not quite so
fanciful as it might at first sight appear. It is curious, too, to
observe that the Christians also believed that the Sheikh-al-Jebal had
some mode of inspiring the Fedavee with a contempt of life and an
aspiration after the joys of paradise.

The dagger had not been unsheathed against the Christian princes since,
forty-two years before (1149), Raymond, the young Count of Tripolis, was
murdered as he knelt at his devotions, and the altar was sprinkled with
his blood. A more illustrious victim was now to bleed; and, as the
question of who twas the real author of his death forms a curious
historical problem, we shall here discuss it at some length.

Conrad Marquis of Montferrat, a name celebrated in the history of the
third crusade, had just been named King of Jerusalem by Richard
Lion-heart King of England. In the latter end of the month of April 1192
the marquis, being at Tyre, went to dine with the Bishop of Beauvais.
One writer says that, the marchioness having stayed too long in the
bath, and the marquis being averse to dining alone, he mounted his horse
and rode to dine with the Bishop; but, finding that that prelate had
already finished his meal, he was returning home to his palace. As he
passed through a narrow street, and was come near the toll-house, two
Assassins, having watched their opportunity, approached him. The one
presented a petition, and, while he was engaged reading it, both struck
him with their daggers, crying,

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Thou shalt be
neither marquis nor king." One of them was cut down instantly, the other
sought refuge in a neighbouring church, and, according to an Arabian
historian, when the wounded marquis was brought into the same church, he
rushed on him anew, and completed his crime. Others relate that the
marquis was carried home to his palace, where he lived long enough to
receive the holy sacrament and to give his last instructions to his
wife. The two accounts, we may perceive, are by no means repugnant.

These Assassins, who were both youths, had been for some time--six
months it is said--in Tyre, watching for an opportunity to perform the
commission which had been given them. They had feigned a conversion from
Islam, or, as some say, had assumed the habit of monks, in order to win
the confidence of the marquis, and thus procure more ready access to
him. One of them, we are told, had even entered his service, and the
other that of Balian of Ibelin.

The question now comes, at whose instigation was the murder committed?
Here we find several both oriental and occidental witnesses disposed to
lay the guilt on Richard, King of England, those writers who were his
own subjects indignantly repelling the accusation, and some indifferent
witnesses testifying in his favour. Previous to examining these
witnesses we must state that king Richard was at enmity with Philip
Augustus, King of France; that though he had given the crown of
Jerusalem to the Marquis of Montferrat, there was little kind feeling
between them, and they had been enemies; and, finally, that the history
of the English monarch exhibits no traits of such a generous chivalrous
disposition as should put him beyond suspicion of being concerned in an
assassination.

Of the writers who charge king Richard with the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

murder it is to be observed that the only ones that are contemporary are
the Arabian historians. The following passage is quoted from the History
of Jerusalem and Hebron, by Hammer, who regards it as quite decisive of
the guilt of the English king--"The marquis went, on the 13th of the
month Rebi-al-Ewal, to visit the Bishop of Tyre. As he was going out he
was attacked by two Assassins, who slew him with their daggers. When
taken and stretched on the rack, they confessed that they had been
employed by the King of England. They died under the torture."
Boha-ed-deen, the friend and biographer of Saladin, writes to the same
effect. It is therefore evident that, at the time, it was reported that
the marquis had been murdered by persons employed by the King of
England; and Vinisauf and the other English writers assure us that the
French party and the friends of the murdered marquis endeavoured to
throw the odium of the deed on king Richard. As that mode of getting rid
of an enemy was far too familiar in the east, it was natural enough that
the Arabian writers should adopt the report without much inquiry. This
consideration alone ought very much to invalidate their testimony. Some
German chroniclers also, following the reports which were industriously
spread to the disadvantage of the English king at the time he was a
prisoner in Austria, did not hesitate to accuse him of the murder of the
marquis; but, as has been justly observed, these, as well as the
preceding, were either partial or at a distance <span
id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51.md).

In opposition to these assertions, we have the unanimous testimony of
all the English writers, such as Vinisauf (the companion and historian
of king Richard's crusade), Hoveden, Brompton William of Newbridge.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Syrian bishop,
Aboo-’l-Faraj, mentions the report of the Assassin who was put to the
rack having laid the guilt on king Richard, but adds that the truth came
afterwards to light. Hugo Plagon, a judicious and impartial writer, so
far from imputing the death of the marquis to king Richard, assigns the
cause which moved the Assassin prince to order the death of the marquis,
namely, the same which we shall presently see stated in the letter
ascribed to the Old Man of the Mountain. Rigord, who wrote the history
of Philip Augustus, does not by any means impute the murder of the
marquis to king Richard, though he says that while Philip was at
Pontoise letters were brought to him from beyond sea, warning him to be
on his guard, as Assassins (*Arsacidæ*) had been sent, at the suggestion
and command of the King of England, to kill him, "for at that time they
had slain the king's kinsman, the marquis." Philip, in real, but more
probably feigned alarm, immediately surrounded his person with a guard
of serjeants-at-mace. The Arabic historian, Ebn-el-Athir, the friend of
Saladin, says that the sultan had agreed with the Old Man of the
Mountain, for a sum of 10,000 pieces of gold, to deliver him of both
king Richard and the marquis, but that Sinan, not thinking it to be for
his interest to relieve the sultan of the English king, had taken the
money and only put the marquis out of the way. This narrative is wholly
improbable, for treachery was surely no part of the character of
Saladin; but it serves to prove the impartiality which is so justly
ascribed to the Arabic writers in general. The testimony of Abulfeda is
as follows: "And in it (the year of the Hejra 588, or A.D. 1192,) was
slain the Marquis, Lord of Soor (or Tyre); may God, whose name be
exalted, curse him! A Batinee, or Assassin (in one copy Batinees),

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

who had entered Soor in the disguise of a monk, slew him <span
id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_52.md)."

We thus see that the evidence in favour of the King of England greatly
preponderates, not a single writer who was on the spot laying the murder
to his charge; on the contrary, those who had the best means of being
informed treated the imputation with contempt, as a base calumny devised
by the French party. But there is a still more illustrious witness in
his behalf, if the testimony ascribed to him be genuine--the Old Man of
the Mountain himself. Brompton gives two letters purporting to have been
written by this personage, the one to the Duke of Austria, the other to
the princes and people of Europe in general. The latter is also given by
William of Newbridge, with some variation. Both have been admitted by
Rymer into his Fœdera. Gibbon, who seems to have known only the last,
pronounces it to be an "absurd and palpable forgery." Hammer, whose
arguments we shall presently consider, undertakes to demonstrate that
these epistles are forgeries. Raumer, more prudently, only says that
this last is not genuine in its present form.

The following are translations of these documents:--

"The Old Man of the Mountain to Limpold, Duke of Austria, greeting.
Since several kings and princes beyond sea accuse Richard, King of
England, and lord, of the death of the marquis, I swear by the God who
reigneth for ever, and by the law which we hold, that he had no guilt in
his death; for the cause of the death of the marquis was as follows.

"One of our brethren was coming in a ship from Satelia (*Salteleya*) to
our parts, and a tempest chancing to drive him to Tyre the marquis had
him taken and slain, and seized a large sum of money

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

which he had with him. But we sent our messengers to the marquis,
requiring him to restore to us the money of our brother, and to satisfy
us respecting the death of our brother, which he laid upon Reginald, the
Lord of Sidon, and we exerted ourselves through our friends till we knew
of a truth that it was he himself who had had him put to death, and had
seized his money.

"And again we sent to him another of our messengers, named Eurisus, whom
he was minded to fling into the sea; but our friends made him depart
with speed out of Tyre, and he came to us quickly and told us these
things. From that very hour we were desirous to slay the marquis; then
also we sent two brethren to Tyre, who slew him openly, and as it were
before all the people of Tyre.

"This, then, was the cause of the death of the marquis; and we say to
you in truth that the lord Richard, King of England, had no guilt in
this death of the marquis, and these who on account of this have done
evil to the lord King of England have done it unjustly and without
cause.

"Know for certain that we kill no man in this world for any hire or
money, unless he has first done us evil.

"And know that we have executed these letters in our house at our castle
of Messiat, in the middle of September. In the year from Alexander M. D.
& V."

 

"The Old Man of the Mountain to the princes of Europe and all the
Christian people, greeting.

"We would not that the innocence of any one should suffer by reason of
what we have done, since we never do evil to any innocent and guiltless
person; but those who have transgressed against us we do not, with God
to aid, long suffer to rejoice in the injuries done to our simplicity.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

"We therefore signify to the whole of you, testifying by him through
whom we hope to be saved, that that Marquis of Montferrat was slain by
no machination of the King of England, but he justly perished, by our
will and command, by our satellites, for that act in which he
transgressed against us, and which, when admonished, he had neglected to
amend. For it is our custom first to admonish those who have acted
injuriously in anything to us or our friends to give us satisfaction,
which if they despise, we take care to take vengeance with severity by
our ministers, who obey us with such devotion that they do not doubt but
that they shall be gloriously rewarded by God if they die in executing
our command.

"We have also heard that it is bruited about of that king that he has
induced us, as being less upright and consistent (*minus integros et
constantes*), to send some of our people to plot against the King of
France, which, beyond doubt, is a false fiction, and of the vainest
suspicion, when neither he, God is witness, has hitherto attempted
anything against us, nor would we, in respect to our honour, permit any
undeserved evil to be planned against any man. Farewell."

 

We will not undertake to maintain the genuineness of these two epistles,
but we may be permitted to point out the futility of some of the
objections made to them. Hammer pronounces the first of them to be an
undoubted forgery because it commences with swearing by the law, and
ends by being dated from the era of the Seleucides. Both, he says, were
equally strange to the Ismaïlites, who precisely at this time had begun
to trample the law under foot, and had abandoned the Hejra, the only era
known in Mohammedan countries, for a new one commencing with the reign
of Hassan II. He further

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

sees, in the circumstance of a letter from the Old Man of the Mountain
(*Sheikh-al-Jebal*) being dated from Massyat, a proof of the ignorance
of the Crusaders respecting the true head and seat of the Ismaïlite
power. These objections are regarded by Wilken as conclusive. They will,
however, lose much of their force if we bear in mind that the letters
are manifestly translations, and that the chief of Massyat at that time
was Sinan, who some years before had offered to become a Christian, and
who does not seem at all to have adopted the innovations of Hassan the
Illuminator. Sinan might easily have been induced by the friends of the
King of England, one of the most steady of whom was Henry of
Champagne <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_53.md), who succeeded Conrad of
Montferrat in the kingdom, to write those letters in his justification,
and it is very probable that the translations were made in Syria, where
the Arabic language was of course better understood than in Europe, and
sent either alone or with the originals. The translator might have
rendered the title which Sinan gave himself by *Senex de Monte*, which
would be better understood in the west, and he may also have given the
corresponding year of the era of the Seleucides (the one in use among
the Syrian Christians) for the year of the Hejra used by the Ismaïlite
chief, or indeed Sinan may have employed that era himself. In this case
there would remain little to object to the genuineness of the letter to
the Duke of Austria. Hammer regards the expression *our simplicity*
(*simplicitas nostra*) as being conclusive against the genuineness of
the second letter. We must confess that we can see no force in the
objection. Sinan might wish to represent himself as a very plain,
simple, innocent sort of person. It might further be doubted

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

if a European forger would venture to represent the prince of the
Assassins--the formidable Old M a n of the Mountain--in such a
respectable light as he appears in these two epistles <span
id="fr_54"></span>[\*](#fn_54.md).

But there is another account of the death of the Marquis of Montferrat,
which is probably much better known to the generality of readers than
any of the preceding ones. The far-famed author of "Waverley" has, in
his romantic tale of the "Talisman," made Conrad to be wounded and
vanquished in the lists by the son of the King of Scotland, the champion
of king Richard, and afterwards slain by the dagger, not of the
Assassins, but of his confederate in villany the Master of the Temple,
to prevent his making confession of their common guilt!

Yielding to none in rational admiration of the genius of Sir W. Scott,
we cannot avoid expressing a wish that he had ceased to write when he
had exhausted that rich field of national feelings and manners with
which he was alone familiar, and from which he drew the exquisite
delineations of "Waverley" and its Scottish brethren. All his later
works, no doubt, exhibit occasional scenes far beyond the power of any
of his imitators; but when his muse quits her native soil, she takes
leave of nature, truth, and simplicity. Even the genius of a Scott is
inadequate to painting manners he never witnessed, scenery he never
beheld.

The tale of the "Talisman" is a flagrant instance. Topography,
chronology, historic truth, oriental manners, and individual character,
are all treated with a most magnanimous neglect, indeed, even, we might
say, with contempt; for, careless, from "security to please," as the
author is known to have been, his vagaries must sometimes have proceeded
from mere

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

wilfulness and caprice. It would, we apprehend, perplex our oriental
travellers and geographers to point out the site of the fountain named
the Diamond of the Desert, not far from the Dead Sea, and yet lying
half-way between the camp of the Saracens and that of the Crusaders,
which last, we are told, lay between Acre and Ascalon, that is, on the
sea-coast, or to show the interminable sandy desert which stretches
between the Dead Sea and the Mediterranean. As to historic truth, we may
boldly say that there is hardly a single circumstance of the romance in
strict accordance with history; and as to the truth of individual
character, what are we to say to the grave, serious, religious Saladin,
but the very year before his death, being in the flower of his age,
rambling alone through the desert, like an errant knight, singing hymns
to the Devil, and coming disguised as a physician to the Christian camp,
to cure the malady of the English monarch, whom he never, in reality,
did or would see <span id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55.md)? We might
enumerate many additional instances of the violation of every kind of
unity and propriety in this single tale <span
id="fr_56"></span>[†](#fn_56.md).

Let not any deem it superfluous thus to point out the errors of an
illustrious writer. The impressions made by his splendid pages on the
youthful mind

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

are permanent and ineffaceable, and, if not corrected, may lead to
errors of a graver kind. The "Talisman" moreover affects a delusive show
of truth and accuracy; for, in a note in one part of it, the author
(ironically, no doubt) affects to correct the historians on a point of
history. The natural inference, then, is that he has himself made
profound researches, and adhered to truth; and we accordingly find
another novelist, in what he terms a history of chivalry, declaring the
"Talisman" to be a faithful picture of the manners of the age. Sir W.
Scott, however, has himself informed us, in the preface to "Ivanhoe," of
his secret for describing the manners of the times of Richard Coeur de
Lion. With the chronicles of the time he joined that of Froissart, so
rich in splendid pictures of chivalric life. Few readers of these
romances perhaps are aware that this was the same in kind, though not in
degree, as if, in his tales of the days of Elizabeth and James I., he
had had recourse to the manner-painting pages of Henry Fielding; for the
distance in point of time between the reign of Richard I. and that of
Richard II., in which last Froissart wrote, is as great as that between
the reigns of Elizabeth and George Il.; and, in both, manners underwent
a proportional change. But we are in the habit of regarding the middle
ages as one single period of unvarying manners and institutions, and we
are too apt to fancy that the descriptions of Froissart and his
successors are equally applicable to all parts of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[117:\*](sma11.htm#fr_49.md) Gesta Dei per Francos,
vol. i. pp. 994, 1062.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[117:†](sma11.htm#fr_50.md) William of Tyre makes
their number 60,000. He declares his inability to give the origin of the
name Assassins.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[122:\*](sma11.htm#fr_51.md) Raumer, Geschichte der
Hohenstauffen, ii., p. 490. Wilken, Geschichte der Kreuzzüge, iv., 489.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[124:\*](sma11.htm#fr_52.md) Annales Muslemici,
tom. iv., pp. 122, 123. Hafniae, 1792.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[127:\*](sma11.htm#fr_53.md) An instance of Henry's
intimacy with the Assassins has been given in [p.
81](sma07.htm#page_81.md).

<span id="fn_54"></span>[128:\*](sma11.htm#fr_54.md) Sir J. Mackintosh
(History of England, i. 187) seems to regard the letters as genuine.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[129:\*](sma11.htm#fr_55.md) May it not be said
that real historic characters should not be misrepresented? Sir W. Scott
was at full liberty to make his Varneys and his Bois Gilberts as
accomplished villains as he pleased; he might do as he pleased with his
own; but what warrant had he from history for painting Conrad of
Montferrat and the then Master of the Templars under such odious colours
as he does?

<span id="fn_56"></span>[129:†](sma11.htm#fr_56.md) The author invariably
writes Montserrat for Montferrat. The former is in Spain, and never was
a marquisate. As it were to show that it was no error of the press, it
is said, "The shield of the marquis bore, in reference to his title, a
serrated and rocky mountain." We also find naphtha and bitumen
confounded, the former being described as the solid, the latter as the
liquid substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](sma12.md)
