[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma17)  [Next](sma19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

### CHAPTER IV. 1

<span class="small">Heroism of the Templars and Hospitallers--Battle of
Hittin--Crusade of Richard of England and Philip of France--Corruption
of the Order--Pope Innocent III. writes a Letter of Censure--Frederic
II.--Great Slaughter of the Templars--Henry III. of England and the
Templars--Power of 4 the Templars in Moravia--Slaughter of them by the
Hospitallers--Fall of Acre.</span>

THE fall of the Christian power in the East was now fast approaching,
and it was not a little hastened by the enmity of the rival orders. The
truth of the old sentence, that the Deity deprives of sense those whom
he will destroy, was manifested on this as on so many other similar
occasions; and while the great and able Saladin was consolidating his
power and preparing for the accomplishment of the object which, as a
true Moslem, lay nearest his heart, the recovery of the Holy City,
discord, enmity, and animosity, prevailed among those who should have
been actuated by one soul and by one spirit.

Yet the two orders of religious chivalry had not derogated from their
original valour, and the last days of Jerusalem were illumined by some
noble feats of prowess. On the 1st of May, 1187, when Malek-el-Afdal,
the son of Saladin, was returning from an expedition into the Holy Land,
which he had undertaken with the consent of the Count of Tripolis,
regent of the kingdom, the Masters of the Temple and of the Hospital,
having collected about 140 knights and 500 footmen, met the
[Moslems](errata.htm#14.md), who were

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 7,000 in number,
at the celebrated brook Kishon. They immediately charged them with the
utmost impetuosity; the Turks. according to custom, turned and fled; the
Christian knights pursued, leaving their infantry unprotected. Suddenly
a large body of the Turks emerged from a valley, and fell on and
slaughtered the footmen. Their cries brought back the knights to their
aid, but, impeded by the narrowness of the ground, they could neither
lay their lances in rest nor run their horses against the enemy, and all
fell beneath the weapons of the Turks, with the exception of the Master
of the Temple and three of his knights, who were saved by the fleetness
of their horses. The Master of the Hospital was among the slain. In this
unfortunate fight, James De Mailly, the marshal of the Templars, and a
Hospitaller, named Henry, especially distinguished themselves. After all
their brave companions had been slain around them, they still maintained
the conflict; the Turks, filled with admiration of their valour,
repeatedly offered them quarter, but in vain; and they fell at last,
overwhelmed with darts flung from a distance, no one venturing to
approach them. The historian, Vinisauf, tells us that De Mailly was
mounted on a white horse, which, joined with his relucent arms and white
mantle, made him appear to the infidels to be St. George, and they
exulted greatly in having slain the tutelar saint of the Christians. He
adds, what is not an unlikely circumstance, that the Turks covered his
body with dust, which they afterwards powdered on their heads, thinking
thereby to acquire some portion of his valour.

At the fatal battle of Hittin, where 30,000 Christians lost their lives,
where the king and all his princes became captives, and where the Latin
power in the East was broken for ever, the Master of the Temple, Gerard
of Ridefort, and several of his

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

knights and those of the Hospital, were among the captives. Saladin, who
bore a particular hatred to the spiritual knights, would spare them on
no condition but that of their renouncing their faith. To a man they
gallantly refused; and, with the exception of the Master, the heads of
all were struck off. Many who belonged not to the orders, smit with
desire for the glory of martyrdom, cast the mantles of Templars around
them, and went cheerfully to death as such. One Templar, named Nicolaus,
evinced such joy and impatience for this glorious fate, that, according
to the ideas of those times, heaven was believed to testify its
approbation by a visible sign, and during three nights a celestial light
illumined the unburied corpse of the Christian martyr.

It was indeed rare for a Templar to renounce his faith: prejudice, or
honour, we may style it, or a better principle, always kept him steady
in it, whatever the irregularities of his life might be. We recollect
but one instance of a brother of the Temple abjuring his faith, and he
was unhappily an English knight, named Robert of St. Albans. From some
unassigned cause, he flung away the dress of his order, broke his vows,
went over to Saladin, and became a Musselman. The sultan gave him one of
his female relatives in marriage, and the recreant knight appeared
before [Jerusalem](errata.htm#15.md) at the head of an army of the
infidels. He had promised to Saladin to reduce the Holy City; but her
hour was not yet come; and after wasting all the country from Mont-
royal to Jericho with fire and sword, he was forced to retreat before
the chivalry of Jerusalem, who came forth with the holy cross, and gave
him a signal defeat. This event occurred in the year 1184; and the
apostacy of this Templar caused extreme dismay among the Christians, and
excited great ill-will against the order in general.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

It had hitherto been the maxim of the order, not to redeem any of their
members out of captivity with any higher ransom than a girdle, or a
knife, or some other insignificant matter, acting in this on the same
principle with the old Romans, who never redeemed prisoners. The Master,
Ado de St. Amando, had died in captivity; but to redeem Gerard de
Ridefort, no less a ransom was given than the city of Ascalon.--Gerard
died of a wound received in battle the following year.

During the memorable crusade of Philip of France and Richard of England
to the Holy Land, which their rivalry and animosity rendered utterly
ineffectual, we find the Hospitaliers on the side of the king of
England, and of course the Templars the warm partizans of the king of
France. Yet, when Richard was on his return to Europe, he sent for the
Master of the Temple, and said to him, that he knew by many he was not
loved, and that he ran great risk of his life on his way to his kingdom;
he therefore besought him that he would permit him to assume the dress
of the order, and send two of the brethren with him. The Master readily
granted the request of so potent a monarch, and the king went on board
in the habit of a Templar. It was probably on account of the known
enmity of the order to him, that King Richard adopted this expedient,
thinking that one would ever suspect him of being with the Templars. His
brother John, we may here observe, was, on the contrary, a great
favourer of the order, to whom he gave Lundy Island, at the mouth of the
Bristol Channel. Throughout his reign, this odious prince attached
himself to the Templars as the faithful servants of his lord the pope,
reckoning on their aid against his gallant barons, who would not leave
the liberties of the nation at the feet of a faithless tyrant. It was
now very much the custom for monarchs to

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

deposit their treasures in the Temple houses; and in the year 1213 we
find King John demanding 20,000 marks which he had committed to the
Templars to keep. We meet with no instance of breach of trust on the
part of the knights.

The Templars shared in the common dishonesty of the church with respect
to false miracles, and they felt no scruple at augmenting their wealth
by deceptions calculated to impose on the ignorance and zeal of the
laity. In the year 1204 it was given out that an image of the Virgin, in
a convent not far from Damascus, had become clothed with flesh, and that
there issued from its breasts a kind of juice or liquor of wondrous
efficacy in removing the sins of pious pilgrims. As the place was
distant, and the road beset with danger, the knights of the Temple took
upon themselves the task of fetching the mirific fluid to the part of
the coast still held by the Latins, and accommodating pilgrims with it,
and the coffers of the order were largely replenished by this pious
traffic.

Though, like all other proprietors in the Holy Land, the order of the
Temple had been losers in consequence of the conquest of it by Saladin,
their possessions in the West were so extensive that they hardly felt
the loss. At this very time we find the number of their possessions of
various kinds in Europe stated at 7050, principally situated in France
and in England. Their arrogance and luxury naturally kept pace with
their wealth; and, though writers of the twelfth century, and even the
Troubadours--the satirists of the age--always speak of the knights of
the Temple with honour, there was a secret dislike of them gaining
ground, especially with the clergy, in consequence of the great
privileges granted to them by the bull *Omne Datum Optimum*, and the
insolent manner in which these privileges were exercised.

Accordingly we find, in the year 1208, the great

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Innocent III. the
most ambitious of popes, and one who was a steady friend to the order,
under the necessity of passing the first public censure of them, and
endeavouring to set, by authority, a limit to their excesses. In his
epistle to the Master on this occasion, the holy father says that they
abused the privilege of having mass celebrated in places which were
under interdict, by causing their churches to be thrown open, and mass
to be said every day, with loud ringing of bells, bearing the cross of
Christ on their breast, but not caring to follow his doctrines, who
forbids to give offence to any of the little ones who believe on him. He
goes on to state that, following the doctrines of demons, they affixed
the cross of their order on the breast of (i.e. *affiliated*) every kind
of scoundrel, asserting that whoever, by paying two or three pence a
year, became one of their fraternity, could not, even though
interdicted, be deprived of Christian burial; and that hence, known
adulterers, usurers, and others who were lying under sentence of
interdict, were honourably interred in their cemeteries; "and thus they
themselves, being captive to the devil, cease not to make captive the
souls of the faithful, seeking to make alive those whom they know to be
dead." The pontiff laments, that instead of, like religious men, using
the world for the sake of God, they employed their religious character
as a means of indulging in the pleasures of the world. Though, on
account of these and such abuses, they deserved to be deprived of the
privileges which had been conferred on them, the holy father will not
proceed to extremity, relying on the exertions of the Master to effect a
reformation.

In this epistle we have all the charges, which, as will hereafter
appear, could be at any time brought with justice against the order,
whose corruption proceeded

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

in the ordinary course of human nature, and no otherwise,--privileges
and exemptions producing insolence and assumption, and wealth generating
luxury and relaxation of morals. It was the lavish generosity of popes,
princes, and nobles, that caused the ruin of the Templars.

The Templars bore a distinguished part in the expedition to Egypt and
siege of Damietta, in 1219, as the chief commander on that occasion was
the papal legate, whose conduct, under show of obedience, they chiefly
directed. But when, in 1228, the Emperor Frederic II., then under the
sentence of the church, undertook the crusade which he had vowed, he
found nothing but opposition and treachery from these staunch adherents
of the pope. Considering the spirit of the age, their opposition is,
perhaps, not so much to be blamed; but no principle will excuse the act
of their writing to inform the Egyptian sultan of the plans of the
emperor. The generous Moslem, instead of taking advantage of this
treachery, sent the letter to Frederic, to the confusion of its authors.
Frederic checked his indignation at the time, but on his return to
Europe he took his satisfaction on those who were most guilty, and he
seized the property of the order in Sicily and his Italian dominions.
Though he was excommunicated again for so doing, Frederic persisted in
his enmity both to them and the Hospitallers; and though, perhaps, the
least given to superstition and illiberality of any man of his age, he
did not disdain to make friendly intercourse with the Moslems a serious
charge against them. "The haughty religion of the Templars," writes he,
"reared on the pleasures of the native barons of the land, waxes wanton.
. . . . We know, on good authority, that sultans and their trains are
received with pompous alacrity within the gates of the Temple, and that
the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Templars suffer
them to celebrate secular plays, and to perform their superstitious
rites with invocation of Mahommet."

The hostility between the Templars and the Hospitallers still continued,
though the Christian power was now nearly restricted to the walls of
Acre. The Templars were in alliance with the prince of Damascus: the
Hospitaliers were the friends of the sultan of Egypt. The Templars
extended their enmity against the emperor to the Teutonic knights, whom
they deprived of their possessions in Syria. The appearance of a new
enemy, however, brought concord for a time among them. The Turks of
Khaurizm, on the east of the Caspian, were now in flight before the
hordes of the Mongols, and 20,000 of their horsemen burst into the Holy
Land. They took and plundered Jerusalem, which was unfortified and open,
and then united themselves with the troops of Egypt. The Christians
applied to the prince of Damascus for aid, who forthwith sent the
required troops, and their combined forces went in quest of the foes. In
the battle the Templars and the militia occupied the centre; the
Hospitaliers were posted on the left wing, the light horse on the right.
The battle lasted two days, and ended in the total defeat of the
Christians, a result which is ascribed, though probably with injustice,
to the treachery of the Damascenes. The Master of the Temple and the
whole chapter, with the knights, in all 300, were slain; only four
knights and fourteen esquires escaped.

The improvident and needy Henry III. of England, in general such a
dutiful son of the holy father, who, for a share of the spoil, usually
aided him in the pious work of robbing his subjects, summoned courage in
1252 to speak of seizing some of the property of the church and the
military orders. "You prelates and religious," said he, "especially you

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Templars and
Hospitaliers, have so many liberties and charters, that your enormous
possessions make you rave with pride and haughtiness. What was
imprudently given, must be therefore prudently revoked; and what was
inconsiderately bestowed must be considerately recalled. . . . I will
break this and other charters which my predecessors and myself have
rashly granted." But the prior of the Templars immediately replied,
"What sayest thou, O king? Far be it that thy mouth should utter so
disagreeable and silly a word. So long as thou dost exercise justice
thou wilt reign; but if thou infringe it, thou wilt cease to be a king!"
These bold words appear to have checked the feeble king, who next year
besought the two orders to become his security for a large sum of money
which he owed. They refused his request, and Henry thenceforth did them
all the injury in his power.

There occurred an event in Moravia in 1252, which may serve to show the
power of the order in Europe. A nobleman, named Vratislaf, who had been
obliged to fly from that country, became a Templar in France. He made
over all his property, among which was the castle of Eichhorn in
Moravia, to the order. But his elder brother, Burian, took possession of
his property, as having fallen to himself as head of the family. King
Winzel, on being applied to, decided in favour of the order. Burian,
however, still kept possession. The next year the Templars collected
some thousands of men, and marched, under the command of their Great
Prior, to take the castle. Burian, assembling 6000 men, 900 of whom he
placed in the castle, advanced to give them battle. The engagement was
bloody; 1700 men, among them the Great Prior of the Templars, lay slain,
when night terminated the conflict. A truce was made for three days, at
the end of which Burian and his men

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

were driven into the castle, which they defended bravely, till king
Attocar sent to threaten them with his wrath if they did not give it up.
Burian surrendered it, and Vratislaf, returning to Moravia, became Prior
of Eichhorn, in which thirty Templars took up their abode.

Though the Templars were so extremely numerous in Europe, they were
little disposed to go out to the East to encounter toil and danger, in
the performance of their duties. They preferred living in ease and
luxury on their rich possessions in the West; and the .members of the
chapter alone, with a few knights, and other persons attached to the
order, abode in Syria. It would even seem that the heads of the society
were meditating a final retreat from the East, where they probably saw
that nothing of permanent advantage was to be achieved. The
Hospitaliers, on the other hand, whatever may have been the cause,
appear to have been more zealous in their calling, and to have had a
greater number of their members in Syria; and it is, probably, to this
cause, that we are to assign the total defeat which they were enabled to
give their rivals in 1259: for the animosity between the orders had come
to such a height, that, in this year, they came to open war. A bloody
battle was fought, in which the Templars were defeated, when, such was
the bitterness of their enmity, that the victors made no prisoners, but
cut to pieces every Templar who fell into their hands, and scarce a
Templar remained to carry the intelligence to Europe.

From this period till the capture of Acre and final destruction of the
Latin power in the East in 1291, after a continuance of nearly two
centuries, the annals of the Templars are bare of events. The rivalry
between them and the other orders still continued; and in the opinion of
some historians, it was their jealousy that hastened the fall of that
last remnant of

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

the Christian dominion in the East. Not more than ten knights of the
Temple escaped in the storm of the town, and these, with the remnants of
the other orders, and the garrison, sought a retreat in Cyprus.

We have now traced the history of the order from its institution to
within a few years of the period of its suppression. Of this most
important event we shall delay the consideration for some time, and
shall occupy the intervening space with an account of the internal
organisation of the society, its officers, its wealth, and various
possessions. This will, we trust, prove no slight contribution to our
knowledge of one of the most curious portions of the history of the
world--that of the middle ages--and gratify the reader by the display of
manners and institutions which have long since passed away <span
id="fr_77"></span>[\*](#fn_77.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[220:\*](sma18.htm#fr_77.md) The organisation and
the rules of the Hospitaliers were similar to those of the Templars; but
as that order existed down to modern times, the rules, &c., given by
Vertot, contain a great number of modern additions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](sma19.md)
