[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma26)  [Next](sma28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

### CHAPTER II.

<span class="small">The Tribunal-Lord--The Count--The Schöppen--The
Messengers--The Public Court--The Secret Tribunal--Extent of its
Jurisdiction--Places of holding the Courts--Time of holding
them--Proceedings in them--Process where the criminal was caught in the
fact--Inquisitorial Process.</span>

HAVING traced the origin of the Fehm-gerichte and their various
appellations, as far as the existing documents and other evidences
admit, we are now to describe the constitution and procedure of these
celebrated tribunals, and to ascertain who were the persons that
composed them; whence their authority was derived; and over what classes
of persons their jurisdiction extended.

Even in the periods of greatest anarchy in Germany, the emperor was
regarded as the fountain of all judicial power and authority, more
particularly where it extended to the right of inflicting capital
punishment. The Fehm-gerichte, therefore, regarded the emperor as their
head, from whom they derived all the power which they possessed, and
acknowledged his right to control and modify their constitution and
decisions. These rights of the emperors we shall, in the sequel,
describe at length.

Between the emperor and the Westphalian tribunal-lords (Stuhlherren), as
they were styled, that is, lay and ecclesiastical territorial lords,
there was no intermediate authority until the fourteenth century, when
the Archbishop of Cologne was made the imperial

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

lieutenant in Westphalia. Each tribunal-lord had his peculiar district,
within which he had the power of erecting tribunals, and beyond which
his authority did not extend. He either presided in person in his court,
or he appointed a count (*Freigraf*) to supply his place. The rights of
a stuhlherr <span id="fr_118"></span>[\*](#fn_118) had some resemblance
to those of the owner of an advowson in this country. He had merely the
power of nominating either himself or another person as count; the right
to inflict capital punishment was to be conferred by the emperor or his
deputy. To this end, when a tribunal-lord presented a count for
investiture, he was obliged to certify on oath that the person so
presented was truly and honestly, both by father and mother, born on
Westphalian soil; that he stood in no ill repute; that he knew of no
open crime he had committed; and that he believed him to be perfectly
well qualified to preside over the county.

The count, on being appointed, was to swear that he would judge truly
and justly, according to the law and the regulations of the emperor
Charles and the *closed tribunal;* that he would be obedient to the
emperor or king, and his lieutenant; and that he would repair, at least
once in each year, to the general chapter which was to be held on the
Westphalian land, and give an account of his conduct, &c.

The income of the free-count arose from fees and a share in fines; he
had also a fixed allowance in money or in kind from the stuhlherr. Each
free-schöppe who was admitted made him a present, *to repair*, as the
laws express it, *his country hat*. If the person admitted was a knight,
this fee was a mark of gold; if not, a mark of silver. Every one of the
initiated who cleared himself by oath from

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

any charge paid the count a cross-penny. He had a share of all the fines
imposed in his court, and a fee on citations, &c.

There was in general but one count to each tribunal; but instances occur
of there being as many as seven or eight. The count presided in the
court, and the citations of the accused proceeded from him.

Next to the count were the assessors or (*Schöppen*) <span
id="fr_119"></span>[\*](#fn_119). These formed the main body and
strength of the society. They were nominated by the count with the
approbation of the tribunal-lord. Two persons, who were already in the
society, were obliged to vouch on oath for the fitness of the candidate
to be admitted. It was necessary that he should be a German by birth;
horn in wedlock of free parents; of the Christian religion; neither
excommunicate nor outlawed; not involved in any Fehm-gericht process; a
member of no spiritual order, &c.

These schöppen were divided into two classes, the knightly, and the
simple, respectable assessors; for, as the maxim that every man should
be judged by his peers prevailed universally during the middle ages, it
was necessary to conform to it also in the Fehm-tribunals.

Previous to their admission to a knowledge of the secrets of the
society, the schöppen were named Ignorant; when they had been initiated
they were called Knowing (*Wissende*) or Fehmenotes. It was only these
last who were admitted to the secret-tribunal.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The initiation of
a schöppe was attended with a good deal of ceremony. He appeared
bareheaded before the assembled tribunal, and was there questioned
respecting his qualifications. Then, kneeling down, with the thumb and
forefinger of his right hand on a naked sword and a halter, he
pronounced the following oath after the count:--

"I promise, on the holy marriage, that I will, from henceforth, aid,
keep, and conceal the holy Fehms, from wife and child, from father and
mother, from sister and brother, from fire and wind, from all that the
sun shines on and the rain covers, from all that is between sky and
ground, especially from the man who knows the law, and will bring before
this free tribunal, under which I sit, all that belongs to the secret
jurisdiction of the emperor, whether I know it to be true myself, or
have heard it from trustworthy people, whatever requires correction or
punishment, whatever is Fehm-free (*i.e.* a crime committed in the
county), that it may be judged, or, with the consent of the accuser, be
put off in grace; and will not cease so to do, for love or for fear, for
gold or for silver, or for precious stones; and will strengthen this
tribunal and jurisdiction with all my five senses and power; and that I
do not take on me this office- for any other cause than for the sake of
right and justice; moreover, that I will ever further and honour this
free tribunal more than any other free tribunals; and what I thus
promise will I stedfastly and firmly keep, so help me God and his Holy
Gospel."

He was further obliged to swear that he would ever, to the best of his
ability, enlarge the holy empire; and that he would undertake nothing
with unrighteous hand against the land and people of the stuhlherr.

The count then inquired of the officers of the

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

court (the *Frohnboten*) if the candidate had gone through all the
formalities requisite to reception, and when that officer had answered
in the affirmative, the count revealed to the aspirant the secrets of
the tribunal, and communicated to him the secret sign by which the
initiated knew one another. What this sign was is utterly unknown: some
say that when they met at table they used to turn the point of their
knife to themselves, and the haft away from them. Others take the
letters S S G G, which were found in an old MS. at Herford, to have been
the sign, and interpret them *Stock Stein, Gras Grein*. These are,
however, the most arbitrary conjectures, without a shadow of proof. The
count then was bound to enter the name of the new member in his
register, and henceforth he was one of the powerful body of the
initiated.

Princes and nobles were anxious to have their chancellors and ministers,
corporate towns to have their magistrates, among the initiated. Many
princes sought to be themselves members of this formidable association,
and we are assured that in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (which
are the only ones of which we have any particular accounts) the number
of the initiated exceeded 100,000.

The duty of the initiated was to go through the country to serve
citations and to trace out and denounce evil-doers; or, if they caught
them in the fact, to execute instant justice upon them. They were also
the count's assessors when the tribunal sat. For that purpose seven at
least were required to be present, all belonging to the county in which
the court was held; those belonging to other counties might attend, but
they could not act as assessors; they only formed a part of the
bystanders of the court. Of these there were frequently some hundreds
present.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

All the initiated of every degree might go on foot and on horseback
through the country, for daring was the man who would presume to injure
them, as certain death was his inevitable lot. A dreadful punishment
also awaited any one of them who should forget his vow and reveal the
secrets of the society; he was to be seized, a cloth bound over his
eyes, his hands tied behind his back, a halter put about his neck; he
was to be thrown upon his belly, his tongue pulled out behind by the
nape of his neck, and he was then to be hung seven feet higher than any
other felon. It is doubtful, however, if there ever was a necessity for
inflicting this punishment, for Æneas Sylvius, who wrote at the time
when the society had degenerated, assures us that no member had ever
been induced, by any motives whatever, to betray its secrets; and he
describes the initiated as grave men and lovers of right and justice.
Similar language is employed concerning them by other writers of the
time.

Besides the count and the assessors, there were required, for the due
holding a Fehm-court, the officers named *Frohnboten* <span
id="fr_120"></span>[\*](#fn_120), or serjeants, or messengers, and a
clerk to enter the decisions in what was called the blood-book (*Liber
sanguinis*). These were, of course, initiated, or they could not be
present. It was required that the messengers should be freemen belonging
to the county, and have all the qualifications of the simple schöppen.
Their duty was to attend on the court when sitting, and to take care
that the ignorant, against whom there was any charge, were duly
cited <span id="fr_121"></span>[†](#fn_121).

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

The count was to hold two kinds of courts, the one public, named the
Open or Public Court (*Offenbare Ding*), to which every freeman had
access; the other private, called the Secret Tribunal (*Heimliche
Acht*), at which no one who was not initiated could venture to appear.

The former court was held at stated periods, and at least three times in
each year. It was announced fourteen days previously by the messengers
(*Frohnboten*), and every householder in the county, whether initiated
or not, free or servile, was bound under a penalty of four heavy
shillings, to appear at it and declare on oath what crimes he knew to
have been committed in the county.

When the count held the Secret Court, the clergy, who had received the
tonsure and ordination, women and children, Jews and Heathens <span
id="fr_122"></span>[\*](#fn_122), and, as it would appear, the higher
nobility, were exempted from its jurisdiction. The clergy were exempted,
probably, from prudential motives, as it was not deemed safe to irritate
the members of so powerful a body, by encroaching on their privileges;
they might, however, voluntarily subject themselves to the Fehm-gerichte
if they were desirous of partaking of the advantages of initiation.
Women and children were exempt on account of their sex and age, and the
period of infancy was extended, in the citations, to fourteen, eighteen,
and sometimes twenty years of age. Jews, Heathens, and such like, were
exempted on account of their unworthiness. The higher nobility were
exempted (if such was really the case) in compliance with the maxim of
German law that

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

each person should be judged by his peers, as it was scarcely possible
that in any county there could be found a count and seven assessors of
equal rank with accused persons of that class.

In their original constitution the Fehm-gerichte, agreeably to the
derivation of the name from *Fem*, condemnation, were purely criminal
courts, and had no jurisdiction in civil matters. They took cognizance
of all offences against the Christian faith, the holy gospel, the holy
ten commandments, the public peace, and private honour--a category,
however, which might easily be made to include almost every
transgression and crime that could be committed. We accordingly find in
the laws of the Fehm-gerichte, sacrilege, robbery, rape, murder,
apostacy, treason, perjury, coining, &c., &c., enumerated; and the
courts, by an astute interpretation of the law, eventually managed to
make matters which. had not even the most remote appearance of
criminality *Fehmbar*, or within their jurisdiction.

But all exceptions were disregarded in cases of contumacy, or of a
person being taken in the actual commission of an offence. When a
person, after being duly cited, even in a civil case, did not appear to
answer the charge against him, he was outlawed, and his offence became
*fehmbar;* every judge was then authorized to seize the accused, whether
he belonged to his county or not; the whole force of the initiated was
now directed against him, and escape was hardly possible. Here it was
that the superior power of the Fehm-gerichte exhibited itself. Other
courts could outlaw as well as they, but no other had the same means of
putting its sentences into execution. The only remedy which remained for
the accused was to offer to appear and defend his cause, or to sue to
the emperor for protection. In cases where a person was caught
*flagranti delicto*, the Westphalian

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

tribunals were competent to proceed to instant punishment.

Those who derive their knowledge of the Fehm-gerichte from plays and
romances are apt to imagine that they were always held in subterranean
chambers, or in the deepest recesses of impenetrable forests, while
night., by pouring her deepest gloom over them, added to their awfulness
and solemnity. Here, as elsewhere, we must, however reluctantly, lend
our aid to dispel the illusions of fiction. They were not held either in
woods or in vaults, and rarely even under a roof. There is only one
recorded instance of a Fehm-gericht being held under ground, viz., at
Heinberg, under the house of John Menkin. At Paderborn indeed it was
held in the town-house; there was also one held in the castle of
Wulften. But the situation most frequently selected for holding a court
was some place under the blue canopy of heaven, for the free German
still retained the predilection of his ancestors for open space and
expansion. Thus at Nordkirchen and Südkirchen (*north and south church*)
the court was held in the churchyard; at Dortmund, in the market-place
close by the town-house. But the favourite place for holding these
courts was the neighbourhood of trees, as in the olden time: and we read
of the tribunal at Arensberg in the orchard; of another under the
hawthorn; of a third under the pear-tree; of a fourth under the linden,
and so on. We also find the courts denominated simply from the trees by
which they were held, such as the tribunal at the elder, that at the
broad oak, &c.

The idea of their being held at night is also utterly devoid of proof,
no mention of any such practice being found in any of the remaining
documents. It is much more analogous to Germanic usage to infer that, as
the Public Court, and the German courts in general,

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

were held in the morning, soon after the break of day, such was also the
rule with the Secret Court.

When an affair was brought before a Fehm-court, the first point to be
determined was whether it was a matter of Fehm-jurisdiction. Should such
prove to be the case, the accused was summoned to appear and answer the
charge before the Public Court. All sorts of persons, Jews and Heathens
included, might be summoned before this court, at which the uninitiated
schöppen also gave attendance, and which was as public as any court in
Germany. If the accused did not appear, or appeared and could not clear
himself, the affair was transferred to the Secret Court. Civil matters
also, which on account of a denial of satisfaction were brought before
the Fehm-court, were, in like manner, in cases of extreme contumacy,
transferred thither.

The Fehm-tribunals had three different modes of procedure, namely, that
in case of the criminal being taken in the fact, the inquisitorial, and
the purely accusatorial.

Two things were requisite in the first case; the criminal must be taken
in the fact, and there must be three schöppen, at least, present to
punish him. With respect to the first particular, the legal language of
Saxony gave great extent to the term taken in the fact. It applied not
merely to him who was seized in the instant of his committing the crime,
but to him who was caught as he was running away. In cases of murder,
those who were found with weapons in their hands were considered as
taken in the fact; as also, in case of theft, was a person who had the
key of any place in which stolen articles were found, unless he could
prove that they came there without his consent or knowledge. The
Fehm-law enumerated three tokens or proofs of guilt in these cases; the
Habende Hand (*Having Hand*), or having the proof

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

in his hand; the Blickende Schein (*looking appearance*), such as the
wound in the body of one who was slain; and the Gichtige Mund
(*faltering mouth*), or confession of the criminal. Still, under all
these circumstances, it was necessary that he should be taken
immediately; for if he succeeded in making his escape, and was caught
again, as he was not this time taken in the fact, he must be proceeded
against before the tribunal with all the requisite formalities.

The second condition was, that there should be at least three initiated
persons together, to entitle them to seize, try, and execute a person
taken in the fact. These then were at the same time judges, accusers,
witnesses, and executioners. We shall in the sequel describe their mode
of procedure. It is a matter of uncertainty whether the rule of trial by
peers was observed on these occasions: what is called the Arensberg
Reformation of the Fehm-law positively asserts, that, in case of a
person being taken *flagranti delicto*, birth formed no exemption, and
the noble was to be tried like the commoner. The cases, however, in
which three of the initiated happened to come on a criminal in the
commission of the fact must have been of extremely rare occurrence.

When a crime had been committed, and the criminal had not been taken in
the fact, there remained two ways of proceeding against him, namely, the
*inquisitorial* and the *accusatorial* processes. It depended on
circumstances which of these should be adopted. In the case, however, of
his being initiated, it was imperative that he should be proceeded
against accusatorially.

Supposing the former course to have been chosen,--which was usually done
when the criminal had been taken in the fact, but had contrived to
escape, or when he was a man whom common fame charged openly and
distinctly with a crime,--he was not cited

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

to appear before the court or vouchsafed a hearing. He was usually
denounced by one of the initiated; the court then examined into the
evidence of his guilt, and if it was found sufficient he was outlawed,
or, as it was called, *forfehmed* <span
id="fr_123"></span>[\*](#fn_123), and his name was inscribed in the
blood-book. A sentence was immediately drawn out, in which all princes,
lords, nobles, towns, every person, in short, especially the initiated,
were called upon to lend their aid to justice. This sentence, of course,
could originally have extended only to Westphalia; but the Fehm-courts
gradually enlarged their claims; their pretensions were favoured by the
emperors, who regarded them as a support to their authority; and it was
soon required that their sentence should be obeyed all over the empire,
as emanating from the imperial power.

Unhappy now was he who was *forfehmed;* the whole body of the initiated,
that is 100,000 persons, were in pursuit of him. If those who met him
were sufficient in number, they seized him at once; if they felt
themselves too weak, they called on their brethren to aid, and every one
of the society was bound, when thus called on by three or four of the
initiated, who averred to him on oath that the man was *forfehmed*, to
help to take him. As soon as they had seized the criminal they proceeded
without a moment's delay to execution; they hung him on a tree by the
road-side and not on a gallows, intimating thereby that they were
entitled to exercise their office in the king's name anywhere they
pleased, and without any regard to territorial jurisdiction. The halter
which they employed was, agreeably to the usage of the middle ages, a
*withy*; and they are said to have had so much practice, and to have
arrived at such expertness

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

in this business, that the word *Fehmen* at last began to signify simply
*to hang*, as *execution* has come to do in English. It is more
probable, however, that this, or something very near it, was the
original signification of the word from which the tribunals took their
name. Should the malefactor resist, his captors were authorised to knock
him down and kill him. In this case they bound the dead body to a tree,
and stuck their knives beside it, to intimate that he had not been slain
by robbers, but had been executed in the name of the emperor.

Were the person who was *forfehmed* uninitiated, he had no means
whatever of knowing his danger till the halter was actually about his
neck; for the severe penalty which awaited any one who divulged the
secrets of the Fehm-courts was such as utterly to preclude the chance of
a friendly hint or warning to be on his guard. Should he, however, by
any casualty, such, for instance, as making his escape from those who
attempted to seize him, become aware of how he stood, he might, if he
thought he could clear himself, seek the protection and aid of the
Stuhlherr, or of the emperor.

If any one knowingly associated with or entertained a person who was
*forfehmed*, he became involved in his danger. It was necessary,
however, to prove that he had done so knowingly--a point which was to be
determined by the emperor, or by the judge of the district in which the
accused resided. This rule originally had extended only to Westphalia,
but the Fehm-judges afterwards assumed a right of punishing in any part
of the empire the person who entertained one who was *forfehmed*.

Nothing can appear more harsh and unjust than this mode of procedure to
those who would apply the ideas and maxims of the present to former
times. But violent evils require violent remedies; and the disorganized
state of Europe in general, and of Germany

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

in particular, during the middle ages, was such as almost to exceed our
conception. Might it not then be argued that we ought to regard as a
benefit, rather than as an evil, any institution which set some bounds
to injustice and violence, by infusing into the bosom of the evil-doer a
salutary fear of the consequences? When a man committed a crime he knew
that there was a tribunal to judge it from which his power, however
great it might be, would not avail to protect him; he knew not who were
the initiated, or at what moment he might fall into their hands; his
very brother might be the person who had denounced him; his intimate
associates might be those who would seize and execute him. So strongly
was the necessity of such a power felt in general, that several cities,
such as Nuremberg, Cologne, Strasburg, and others, applied for and
obtained permission from the emperors, to proceed to pass sentence of
death on evil-doers even unheard, when the evidence of common fame
against them was satisfactory to the majority of the town -council.
Several counts also obtained similar privileges, so that there were, as
we may see, Fehm courts in other places besides Westphalia, but they
were far inferior to those in power, not having a numerous body of
schöppen at their devotion.

It is finally to be observed that it was only when the crimes were of
great magnitude, and the voice of fame loud and constant, that the
inquisitorial process could be properly adopted. In cases of a minor
nature the accused had a right to be heard in his own behalf. Here then
the inquisitorial process had its limit: if report was not sufficiently
strong and overpowering, and the matter was still dubious, the offender
was to be proceeded against accusatorially. If he was one of the
initiated, such was his undoubted right and privilege in all cases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[347:\*](sma27.htm#fr_118) *Stuhlherr* is
*tribunal-lord*, or, literally, *lord of the seat* (of judgment);
*stuhl* (*Anglice*, stool) being a seat, or chair.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[348:\*](sma27.htm#fr_119) This word, which
cannot be adequately translated, is the low-Latin *Scabini*, the French
*Echevins*. We shall take the liberty of using it throughout. The
schöppen were called frei-(*free*) schöppen, as the count was called
*frei-graf*, the court *frei-stuhl*, on account of the jurisdiction of
the tribunals being confined to freemen.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[351:\*](sma27.htm#fr_120) *Frohnbote* is
interpreted a *Holy Messenger*, or a *Servant of God*.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[351:†](sma27.htm#fr_121) When a person was
admitted into the society he paid, besides the fee to the count already
mentioned, to each schöppe <span id="page_352">p. 352</span> who was
assisting there, and to each frohnbote, four livres Tournois.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[352:\*](sma27.htm#fr_122) The natives of
Prussia were still heathens at that time.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[357:\*](sma27.htm#fr_123) In German
*Verfehmt*. We have ventured to coin the word in the text. The English
*for* answers to the German *ver*; *vergessen* is *forget*; *verforen*
is *forlorn*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sma28)
