[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma24)  [Next](sma26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

<span class="small">Examinations in
England--Germany--Spain--Italy--Naples and
Provence--Sicily--Cyprus--Meeting of the Council of Vienne--Suppression
of the order--Fate of its Members--Death of Molay.</span>

THE time fixed for the meeting of the council at Vienne was now at hand,
in which the fate of the order was to be decided. Before we proceed to
narrate its acts we will briefly state the result of the examinations of
the Templars in other countries.

The pope sent, as his judges, to England, Dieudonné, abbot of Lagny, and
Sicard de Vaux, canon of Narbonne; and the examinations commenced at
York, London, Lincoln, and other places, on the 25th November, 1309. The
inquiry continued till the council held in London in 1311; the number of
Templars examined was two hundred and twenty-eight; that of the
witnesses against the order was seventy-two, almost all Carmelites,
Minorites, Dominicans, and Augustinians, the natural foes of the order.
The Templars were treated with great mildness; and in England, Ireland,
and Scotland, they were unanimous and constant in their assertion of the
innocence of the order. The evidence against the order was almost all
hearsay: its nature will be shown by the following specimens.

John de Goderai, a Minorite, had *heard* that Robert de Raxat, a
Templar, had once gone about a meadow crying "Wo, wo is me! that ever I
was born. I have been forced to deny God, and give myself up to the
devil."

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

A Templar had said to William de Berney, in the presence of several
respectable people, at the funeral of the parish-priest of Duxworth,
near Cambridge, that a man has no more a soul, after death, than a dog.

John De Eure, a secular knight, said that he once invited the prior
William de Fenne to dine with him. After dinner the prior took from his
bosom a book, and gave it to the knight's lady to read. She found on a
paper which was fastened into the book the following words, "Christ was
not the Son of God, nor born of a virgin, but conceived by Mary, the
wife of Joseph, in the same way as all other men. Christ was not a true
but a false prophet, and was crucified for his own crimes and not for
the redemption of mankind, &c." The lady showed this paper to her
husband, who spoke to the prior, who only laughed at it; but, being
brought before a court of justice, he confessed the truth, excusing
himself on the grounds of his being illiterate and ignorant of what the
book contained.

Robert of Oteringham, a Minorite, said, "One evening my prior did not
appear at table, as relics were come from Palestine which he wished to
show the brethren. About midnight I heard a confused noise in the
chapel; I got up, and, looking through the keyhole, saw that it was
lighted. In the morning I asked a brother who was the saint in whose
honour they had celebrated the festival during the night? He turned pale
with terror, thinking I had seen something, and said "Ask me not; and if
you value your life say nothing of it before the superiors."

Another witness said that the son of a Templar had peeped through the
slits of the door into the chapter-room, and seen a new member put to
death for hesitating to deny Christ. Long afterwards,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

being asked by his father to become a Templar, he refused, telling what
he had seen: his father instantly slew him.

John of Gertia, a Minorite, was told by a woman named Agnes Lovecote,
who said she had it from Exvalethus, prior in London, that when in one
of the chapters a brother had refused to spit on the cross, they
suspended him in a well and covered it up. This witness also deposed to
some other enormities which he said he had heard of from the same woman,
herself speaking from hearsay.

In June, 1310, the pope wrote to King Edward, blaming his lenity and
calling on him to employ the torture in order to elicit the truth. The
council of London, after a long discussion, ordered it to be employed,
but so as not to mutilate the limbs or cause an incurable wound or
violent effusion of blood. The knights persisted in asserting their
innocence.

In Germany the different prelates examined the Templars in their
respective dioceses. Nothing was elicited. At Mentz the order was
pronounced innocent. The Wildgraf Frederic, preceptor on the Rhine,
offered to undergo the ordeal of glowing iron. He had known the Master
intimately in the East, and believed him to be as good a Christian as
any man.

The Templars in the Spanish peninsula were examined, and witnesses heard
for and against them in Castile, Leon, Aragon, and Portugal, and nothing
was proved against them. The council of Tarragona in Aragon, after
applying the torture, pronounced the order free from the stain of
heresy. At the council of Medina del Campo in Leon, one witness said
that he had heard that, when some Minorites visited the preceptor at
Villalpando, they found him reading a little book, which he instantly
locked up in three boxes, saying, "This book might fall

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

into hands where it may be very dangerous to the order."

The influence of the pope may be supposed to have been stronger in Italy
than in the countries above mentioned, and accordingly we find that
declarations similar to those made in France were given there. Yet it
was at Florence that the adoration of the idols, the cat, &c., was most
fully acknowledged. In the patrimony of St. Peter some confessions to
the same effect were made; but at Bologna, Cesena, and Ancona, nothing
transpired. Nine Templars maintained the innocence of the order before
the council of Ravenna. It was debated whether the torture should be
employed. Two Dominican inquisitors were for it, the remainder of the
council declared against it. It was decreed that the innocent should be
absolved, the guilty punished according to law. *Those who had revoked
the confessions made under torture, or through fear of it*, were to be
regarded as innocent--a very different rule from that acted on by King
Philip.

Charles II. of Anjou, the relation of King Philip, and the enemy of the
Templars, who were on the side of Frederick, king of Sicily, had the
Templars seized and examined in Provence and Naples. Those examined in
Provence were all serving-brethren, and some of them testified to the
impiety and idolatry of the order. Two Templars were examined at
Brindisi, in the kingdom of Naples, in June, 1310; one had denied the
cross in Cyprus, he said, six years after he had entered the order; the
other had trampled on the cross at the time of his reception. He, as
well as others, had bowed down and worshipped a grey cat in the
chapters.

In Sicily six Templars, the only ones who were arrested, deposed against
the order. One of them said he had been received in the unlawful way in

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Catalonia, where,
as we have just seen, the innocence of the order was fully recognized.
His evidence was full of absurdity. He said the cat had not appeared for
a long time in the chapters but that the ancient statutes of Damietta
said that it used to appear and be worshipped.

In Cyprus 110 witnesses were examined; 75 belonged to the order and
maintained its innocence; the testimony of the remainder was also in
favour of it.

We thus find that, in every place beyond the sphere of the influence of
the king of France and his creature the pope, the innocence of the order
was maintained and acknowledged.; and undoubtedly the same would have
been the case in France if the proceedings against it had been regulated
by justice and the love of truth.

The time appointed for the meeting of the general council was now
arrived. On the 1st October, 1311, the pope came to Vienne, which is a
short distance from the city of Lyons, and found there 114 bishops,
besides several other prelates, already assembled. On the 13th, the
anniversary of the arrest of the Templars four years before, the council
commenced its sittings in the cathedral. The pope, in his opening
speech, stated the grounds of its having been convoked, namely, the
process against the Templars, the support of the Holy Land, the
reformation of the Church. The bishops of Soissons, Mende, Leon, and
Aquila, who had been appointed to draw up a report of the result of the
different examinations respecting the order, read it before the
assembled fathers, who then once more invited any Templars who wished to
defend the order to appear.

Though the order was now broken up and persecuted, and numbers of its
ablest members deal or languishing in dungeons with their superiors, yet

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

nine knights had the courage to come forward in defence of their order,
and present themselves before the council as the representatives of from
1500 to 2000 Templars, who were still dwelling or rather lurking in
Lyons and its vicinity. The pope was not present when they appeared, but
his letter of the 11th November shows how he acted when he heard that
defenders of the order had presented themselves. Clement had these brave
knights arrested and thrown into prison, and, in real or affected terror
at the number of Templars at large, he took additional precautions for
the security of his person, and counselled the king to do the same.

To the honour of the assembled fathers, they refused to sanction this
flagrant act of injustice. The prelates of Spain, Germany, Denmark,
England, Ireland, and Scotland, without exception; the Italians, all but
one; the French, with the exception of the archbishops of Rheims, Sens,
and Rouen, declared, but in vain, for admitting the Templars and hearing
their defence. Instead of complying with this demand of justice and
humanity, Clement suddenly put an end to the session. The winter passed
away in arguments and negociations.

Philip, whose practice it was always to look after his affairs himself,
deeming his presence necessary at Vienne, set out for that place, where
he arrived early in February, accompanied by his three sons, his
brother, and several nobles and men-at-arms. The effect of his presence
was soon perceptible; the pope assembled the cardinals and several other
prelates in a secret consistory, and abolished the order, by his sole
authority, on the 22nd March, 1313.

The second session of the council was opened on the 3rd April, with
great solemnity; the king of France, his sons, and his brother, gave
their presence at it, and the royal guards appeared for honour,

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

for protection, or for intimidation. The pope read his bull of
abolition. All present listened in silence. No one ventured to raise his
voice in the cause of justice. The wealthy and powerful order of the
knights of the Temple was suppressed. On the 2d May the bull was
published, and the order as such ceased to exist.

The order being suppressed, persecution became needless, and it
consequently ceased in a great measure. The king and the pope converted
to their own use the moveable property of the order in France. Its other
possessions were, sorely against the will of the king, assigned to the
order of the Hospitaliers, who were, however, obliged to pay such large
fines to the king and pope as completely impoverished them. This
extended to all countries, except the Spanish peninsula and Majorca. The
property of the Templars in Aragon was given to the order of Our Lady of
Montesa, which was founded in 1317. Its destination was to combat the
Moors; its habit was similar to that of the Templars; and it might,
therefore, be almost called the same order. Diniz, the able and
enlightened king of Portugal, did not suppress the order, whose
innocence his prelates had recognised. To yield a show of obedience to
the papal will, he made it change its name, and the great-prior of the
Templars in Portugal became the master of the Order of Christ, which has
continued to the present times.

With respect to the remaining Templars, who were in prison, it was
ordered in council that those who should be found guiltless should be
set at liberty, and maintained out of the property of the order; that
the guilty, if they confessed and lamented their offences, should be
treated with mildness; if they did not, dealt with according to the
ecclesiastical law, and kept in custody in the former temple-houses

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

and in the convents. Those who had escaped were, if they did not appear
within a year before the council or their diocesan, to be
excommunicated.

Most of the knights were immediately set at liberty; but the property of
the order was all gone, and no means of support remained for them: they
were, therefore, reduced to the greatest distress, and many of them
obliged to submit to the most menial employment in order to gain a
livelihood. A great number were received into the order of St. John, on
the same footing as they had stood on in their own order--a strong proof
that the guilt of the order of the Templars was not, by any means,
regarded as proved. Gradually, as the members died off, or merged into
other orders, the name of the Templars fell into oblivion, or was only
recollected with pity for their unmerited fate.

While the noble order over which he had presided was thus suppressed,
its members scattered, its property bestowed on others, the Master,
James de Molay, with his three companions, the great-prior of Normandy,
Hugh de Peyraud, visiter of France, and Guy, brother to the Dauphin of
Auvergne, still languished in prison. Molay had there but one attendant,
his cook; the allowance made to him was barely sufficient to procure him
common necessaries, and life had now lost all its value in his eyes. The
pope at length determined to inform the captives of the fate destined
for them.

A papal commission, composed of the bishop of Alba and two other
cardinals, proceeded to Paris, not to hear the prisoners, but, taking
their guilt for proved, to pronounce their sentence. To give all
publicity to this act, probably in accordance with the desire of the
king, a stage was erected in front of the church of Notre Dame, on which
the three commissioners, with the archbishop of Sens and several other
prelates,

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

took their places, on the 18th March, 1314. An immense concourse of
people stood around. The four noble prisoners were conducted from their
dungeons, and led up on the stage. The cardinal of Alba read out their
former confessions, and pronounced the sentence of perpetual
imprisonment. He was then proceeding to expose the guilt of the order,
when the Master interrupted him, and thus spoke, taking all the
spectators to witness:--

"It is just that, in so terrible a day, and in the last moments of my
life, I should discover all the iniquity of falsehood, and make the
truth to triumph. I declare, then, in the face of heaven and earth, and
acknowledge, though to my eternal shame, that I have committed the
greatest of crimes; but it has been the acknowledging of those which
have been so foully charged on the order. I attest, and truth obliges me
to attest, that it is innocent. I made the contrary declaration only to
suspend the excessive pains of torture, and to mollify those who made me
endure them. I know the punishments which have been inflicted on all the
knights who had the courage to revoke a similar confession; but the
dreadful spectacle which is presented to me is not able to make me
confirm one lie by another. The life offered me on such infamous terms.
I abandon without regret."

Molay was followed by Guy in his assertion of the innocence of the
order; the other two remained silent. The commissioners were confounded,
and stopped. The intelligence was conveyed to the king, who, instantly
calling his council together, without any spiritual person being
present, condemned the two knights to the flames.

A pile was erected on that point of the islet in the Seine where
afterwards was erected the statue of Henry IV., and the following day
Molay and his

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

companion were brought forth and placed upon it. They still persisted in
their assertion of the innocence of the order. The flames were first
applied to their feet, then to their more vital parts. The fetid smell
of their burning flesh infected the surrounding air, and added to their
torments; yet still they persevered in their declarations. At length
death terminated their misery. The spectators shed tears at the view of
their constancy, and during the night their ashes were gathered up to be
preserved as relics.

<span id="img_32600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Portrait of last
Grand Master.](tn/32600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32600.jpg)  
Portrait of last Grand Master.  
</span>

It is mentioned as a tradition, by some historians, that Molay, ere he
expired, summoned Clement to appear within forty days before the Supreme
Judge,

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

and Philip to the same tribunal within the space of a year. The pontiff
actually *did* die of a cholic on the night of the 19th of the following
month, and, the church in which his body was laid taking fire, the
corpse was half consumed. The king, before the year had elapsed, died of
a fall from his horse. Most probably it was these events which gave rise
to the tradition, which testifies the general belief of the innocence of
the Templars. It was also remarked that all the active persecutors of
the order perished by premature or violent deaths.

It remains to discuss the two following points:--Did the
religio-military order of the Knights Templars hold a secret doctrine
subversive of religion and morality? Has the order been continued down
to our own days?

We have seen what the evidence against the Templars was, and it is very
plain that such evidence would not be admitted in any modern court of
justice. It was either hearsay, or given by persons utterly unworthy of
credit, or wrung from the accused by agony and torture. The articles
themselves are absurd and contradictory. Are we to believe that the same
men had adopted the pure deism of the Mahommedans, and were guilty of a
species of idolatry <span id="fr_102"></span>[\*](#fn_102) almost too
gross for the lowest superstition? But when did this corruption commence
among the Templars? Were those whom St. Bernard praised as models of
Christian zeal and piety, and whom the whole Christian world admired and
revered, engaged in a secret conspiracy against religion and government?
Yes, boldly replies Hammer, the two humble and pious knights who founded
the order were the pupils and secret allies of

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

the Mahommedan Ismaelites. This was going too far for Wilike, and he
thinks that the guilt of introducing the secret doctrine lies on the
chaplains; for he could discern that the doctrines of gnosticism, which
the Templars are supposed to have held, were beyond the comprehension of
illiterate knights, who, though they could fight and pray, were but ill
qualified to enter into the mazes of mystic metaphysics. According,
therefore, to one party, the whole order was corrupt from top to bottom;
according to another, the secrets were confined to a few, and, contrary
to all analogy, the heads of the order were frequently in ignorance of
them. Neither offer any thing like evidence in support of their
assumption.

The real guilt of the Templars was their wealth and their pride <span
id="fr_103"></span>[\*](#fn_103): the last alienated the people from
them, the former excited the cupidity of the king of France. Far be it
from us to maintain that the morals of the Templars were purer than
those of the other religious orders. With such ample means as they
possessed of indulging all their appetites and passions, it would be
contrary to all experience to suppose that they always restrained them,
and we will even concede that some of their members were obnoxious to
charges of deism, impiety, breaches of their religious vows, and gross
licentiousness. We only deny that such were the rules of the order. Had
they not been so devoted as they were to the Holy See they would perhaps
have come down to us

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

as unsullied as the knights of St. John <span
id="fr_104"></span>[\*](#fn_104); but they sided with Pope Boniface
against Philip the Fair, and a subservient pontiff sacrificed to his own
avarice and personal ambition the most devoted adherents of the court of
Rome <span id="fr_105"></span>[†](#fn_105).

We make little doubt that any one who coolly and candidly considers the
preceding account of the manner in which the order was suppressed will
readily concede that the guilt of its members was anything but proved.
It behoves their modern impugners to furnish some stronger proofs than
any they have as yet brought forward. The chief adversary of the
Templars at the present day is a writer whose veracity and love of
justice are beyond suspicion, and who has earned for himself enduring
fame by his labours in the field of oriental literature, but in whose
mind, as his most partial friends must allow, learning and imagination
are apt to overbalance judgment and philosophy <span
id="fr_106"></span>[‡](#fn_106). He has been replied to by Raynouard,
Münter, and other able advocates of the knights.

We now come to the question of the continuance of the order to the
present day. That it has in some sort been transmitted to our times is a
matter of no

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

doubt; for, as we have just seen, the king of Portugal formed the Order
of Christ out of the Templars in his dominions. But our readers are no
doubt aware that the freemasons assert a connexion with the Templars,
and that there is a society calling themselves Templars, whose chief
seat is at Paris, and whose branches extend into England and other
countries. The account which they give of themselves is as follows:--

James de Molay, in the year 1314, in anticipation of his speedy
martyrdom,, appointed Johannes Marcus Lormenius to be his successor in
his dignity. This appointment was made by a regular well-authenticated
charter, bearing the signatures of the various chiefs of the order, and
it is still preserved at Paris, together with the statutes, archives,
banners, &c., of the soldiery of the Temple. There has been an unbroken
succession of grand-masters down to the present times, among whom are to
be found some of the most illustrious names in France. Bertrand du
Guesclin was grand-master for a number of years; the dignity was
sustained by several of the Montmorencies; and during the last century
the heads of the society were princes of the different branches of the
house of Bourbon. Bernard Raymond Fabré Palaprat is its head at present,
at least was so a few years ago <span id="fr_107"></span>[\*](#fn_107).

This is no doubt a very plausible circumstantial account; but, on
applying the Ithuriel spear of criticism to it, various ugly shapes
resembling falsehood start up. Thus Molay, we are told, appointed his
successor in 1314. He was put to death on the

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 18th March of that
year, and the order had been abolished nearly a year before. Why then
did he delay so long, and why was he become so apprehensive of martyrdom
at that time, especially when, as is well known, there was then no
intention of putting him to death? Again, where were the chiefs of the
society at that time? How many of them were living? and how could they
manage to assemble in the dungeon of Molay and execute a formal
instrument! Moreover, was it not repugnant to the rules and customs of
the Templars for a Master to appoint his successor? These are a few of
the objections which we think may be justly made; and, on the whole, we
feel strongly disposed to reject the whole story.

As to the freemasons, we incline to think that it was the accidental
circumstance of the name of the Templars which has led them to claim a
descent from that order; and it is possible that, if the same fate had
fallen on the knights of St. John, the claim had never been set up. We
are very far from denying that at the time of the suppression of the
order of the Temple there was a secret doctrine in existence, and that
the overthrow of the papal power, with its idolatry, superstition, and
impiety, was the object aimed at by those who held it, and that
freemasonry may possibly be that doctrine under another name <span
id="fr_108"></span>[\*](#fn_108). But we are perfectly convinced that no
proof of any weight has been given of the Templars' participation in
that doctrine, and that all probability is on the other side. We regard
them, in fine, whatever their sins may have been, as martyrs--martyrs to
the cupidity, blood-thirstiness, and ambition of the king of France.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[327:\*](sma25.htm#fr_102) Almost every charge
brought against the Templars had been previously made against the
Albigenses, with how much truth every one is aware.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[328:\*](sma25.htm#fr_103) Our readers will
call to mind the well-known anecdote of King Richard I. When admonished
by the zealous Fulk, of Neuilly, to get rid of his three favourite
daughters, pride, avarice, and voluptuousness,--"You counsel well," said
the king, "and I hereby dispose of the first to the Templars, of the
second to the Benedictines, and of the third to my prelates.'

<span id="fn_104"></span>[329:\*](sma25.htm#fr_104) Similar charges are
said to have been brought against the Hospitallers in the year 1238, but
without effect. There was no Philip the Fair at that time in France.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[329:†](sma25.htm#fr_105) Clement, in a bull
dated but four days after that of the suppression, acknowledged that the
whole of the evidence against the order amounted only to suspicion!

<span id="fn_106"></span>[329:‡](sma25.htm#fr_106) We mean the
illustrious Jos. von Hammer, whose essay on the subject is to be found
in the sixth volume of the Mines de l’Orient, where it will be seen that
he regards Sir W. Scott, in his Ivanhoe, as a competent witness against
the Templars, on account of his *correct* and *faithful* pictures of the
manners and opinions of the middle ages. We apprehend that people are
beginning now to entertain somewhat different ideas on the subject of
our great romancer's fidelity, of which the present pages present some
instances.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[330:\*](sma25.htm#fr_107) See Manuel des
Templiers. As this book is only sold to members of the society, we have
been unable to obtain a copy of it. Our account has been derived from
Mills's History of Chivalry. That this writer should have believed it
implicitly is, we apprehend, no proof of its truth.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[331:\*](sma25.htm#fr_108) This has, we think,
been fully prayed by Sr. Rossetti. It must not be concealed that this
writer strongly asserts that the Templars were a branch of this society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](sma26)
