[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma25)  [Next](sma27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

###### THE

## SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA <span id="fr_109"></span>[\*](#fn_109),

### CHAPTER I.

<span class="small">Introduction--The Original Westphalia--Conquest of
the Saxons by Charlemagne--His Regulations--Dukes of Saxony--State of
Germany--Henry the Lion--His Outlawry--Consequences of it--Origin of
German Towns--Origin of the Fehm-gerichte, or Secret Tribunals--Theories
of their Origin--Origin of their Name--Synonymous Terms.</span>

WE are now arrived at an association remarkable in itself, but which has
been, by the magic arts of romancers, especially of the great archimage
of the north, enveloped in darkness, mystery, and awe, far beyond the
degree in which such a poetical investiture can be bestowed upon it by
the calm inquirer after truth. The gloom of midnight will rise to the
mind of many a reader at the name of the Secret

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tribunals of
Westphalia: a dimly lighted cavern beneath the walls of some castle, or
peradventure Swiss *hostelrie*, wherein sit black-robed judges in solemn
silence, will be present to his imagination, and he is prepared with
breathless anxiety to peruse the details of deeds without a name <span
id="fr_110"></span>[\*](#fn_110).

We fear that we cannot promise the full gratification of these
high-wrought expectations. Extraordinary as the Secret Tribunals really
were, we can only view them as an instance of that compensating
principle which may be discerned in the moral as well as in the natural
empire of the Deity; for, during the most turbulent and lawless period
of the history of Germany, almost the sole check on crime, in a large
portion of that country, was the salutary terror of these Fehm-Gerichte,
or Secret Tribunals. And those readers who have taken their notions of
them only from works of fiction will learn with surprise that no courts
of justice at the time exceeded, or perhaps we might say equalled, them
in the equity of their proceedings.

Unfortunately their history is involved in much obscurity, and we
cannot, as in the case of the two preceding societies, clearly trace
this association from its first formation to the time when it became
evanescent and faded from the view. While it flourished, the dread and
the fear of it weighed too heavily on the minds of men to allow them to
venture to pry into its mysteries. Certain and instantaneous death was
the portion of the stranger who was seen at any place where a tribunal
was sitting, or who dared so

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

much as to look into the books which contained the laws and ordinances
of the society. Death was also the portion of any member of the society
who revealed its secrets; and so strongly did this terror, or a
principle of honour, operate, that, as Æneas Sylvius (afterwards Pope
Pius II.), the secretary of the Emperor Frederick III., assures us,
though the number of the members usually exceeded 100,000, no motive had
ever induced a single one to be faithless to his trust. Still, however,
sufficient materials are to be found for satisfying all reasonable
curiosity on the subject.

To ascertain the exact and legal sphere of the operation of this
formidable jurisdiction, and to point out its most probable origin, are
necessary preliminaries to an account of its constitution and its
proceedings. We shall therefore commence with the consideration of these
points.

Westphalia, then, was the birth-place of this institution, and over
Westphalia alone did it exercise authority. But the Westphalia of the
middle ages did not exactly correspond with that of the later times. In
a general sense it comprehended the country between the Rhine and the
Weser; its southern boundary was the mountains of Hesse; its northern,
the district of Friesland, which at that time extended from Holland to
Sleswig. In the records and law-books of the middle ages, this land
bears the mystic appellation of the *red earth*, a name derived, as one
writer thinks, from the *gules*, or red, which was the colour of the
field in the ducal shield of Saxony; another regards it as synonymous
with the *bloody earth;* and a third hints that it may owe its origin to
the *red* colour of the soil in some districts of Westphalia.

This land formed a large portion of the country of the Saxons, who,
after a gallant resistance of thirty

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

years, were forced to submit to the sway of Charlemagne, and to embrace
the religion of their conqueror. The Saxons had hitherto lived in a
state of rude independence, and their dukes and princes possessed little
or no civil power, being merely the presidents in their assemblies and
their leaders in war. Charlemagne thought it advisable to abolish this
dignity altogether, and he extended to the country of the Saxons the
French system of counts and counties. Each count was merely a royal
officer who exercised in the district over which he was placed the civil
and military authority. The *missi dominici* or regii were despatched
from the court to hold their visitations in Saxony, as well as in the
other dominions of Charles, and at these persons of all classes might
appear and prefer their complaints to the representative of the king, if
they thought themselves aggrieved by the count or any of the inferior
officers.

In the reign of Louis the German, the excellent institutions of
Charlemagne had begun to fall into desuetude; anarchy and violence had
greatly increased. The incursions of the Northmen had become most,
formidable, and the Vends <span id="fr_111"></span>[\*](#fn_111) also
gave great disturbance to Germany. The Saxon land being the part most
immediately exposed to invasion, the emperor resolved to revive the
ancient dignity of dukes, and to place the district under one head, who
might direct the energies of the whole people against the invaders. The
duke was a royal lieutenant, like the counts, only differing from them
in the extent of the district over which he exercised authority. The
first duke of Saxony was Count Ludolf, the founder of Gandersheim; on
his death the dignity was conferred on his son Bruno, who, being

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

slain in the bloody battle of Ebsdorf fought against the Northmen, was
succeeded by his younger brother Otto, the father of Henry the Fowler.

On the failure of the German branch of the Carlovingians, the different
nations which composed the Germanic body appointed Conrad the Franconian
to be their supreme head; for a new enemy, the Magyars, or Hungarians,
now harassed the empire, and energy was demanded from its chief. Of this
Conrad himself was so convinced, that, when dying, after a short reign,
he recommended to the choice of the electors, not his own brother, but
Henry the Fowler, Duke of Saxony, who had, in his conflicts with the
Vends and the Northmen, given the strongest proofs of his talents and
valour. Henry was chosen, and the measures adopted by him during his
reign, and the defeat of the Hungarians, justified the act of his
elevation.

On the death of Henry, his son Otto, afterwards justly styled the Great,
was unanimously chosen to succeed him in the imperial dignity. Otto
conferred the Duchy of Saxony on Herman Billung. From their constant
warfare with the Vends and the Northmen, the Saxons were now esteemed
the most valiant nation in Germany, and they were naturally the most
favoured by the emperors of the house of Saxony. This line ending with
Henry II. in 1024, the sceptre passed to that of Franconia, under which
and the succeeding line of Suabia, owing to the contests with the popes
about investitures and to various other causes, the imperial power
greatly declined in Germany; anarchy and feuds prevailed to an alarming
extent; the castles of the nobles became dens of robbers; and law and
justice were nowhere to be found.

The most remarkable event of this disastrous period, and one closely
connected with our subject,

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

is the outlawry of Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony and Bavaria. Magnus,
the last of the Billungs of Saxony, died, leaving only two daughters, of
whom the eldest was married to Henry the Black, Duke of Bavaria, who
consequently had, according to the maxims of that age, a right to the
Duchy of Saxony; but the Emperor Henry V. refused to admit his claim,
and conferred it on Lothaire of Supplinburg. As, however, Henry the
Black's son, Henry the Proud, was married to the only daughter of
Lothaire, and this prince succeeded Henry V. in the empire, Henry found
no difficulty in obtaining the Duchy of Saxony from his father-in-law,
who also endeavoured to have him chosen his successor in the imperial
dignity. But the other princes were jealous of him, and on the death of
Lothaire they hastily elected Conrad of Suabia, who, under the pretext
that no duke should possess two duchies, called on Henry to resign
either Saxony or Bavaria. On his refusal, Conrad, in conjunction with
the princes of the empire, pronounced them both forfeited, and conferred
Bavaria on the Margraf of Austria, and Saxony on Albert the Bear, the
son of the second daughter of Duke Magnus of Saxony.

Saxony was, however, afterwards restored by Conrad to Henry the Lion,
son of Henry the Proud, and Conrad's successor, Frederick Barbarossa,
gave him again Bavaria. Henry had himself carried his arms from the Elbe
to the Baltic, and conquered a considerable territory from the Vends,
which he regarded as his own peculiar principality. He was now master of
the greater part of Germany, and it was quite evident that he must
either obtain the imperial dignity or fall. His pride and his severity
made him many enemies; but as he had no child but a daughter, who was
married to a cousin of the emperor, his power was regarded without much

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

apprehension. It was, however, the ambition of Henry to be the father of
a race of heroes, and, after the fashion of those times, he divorced his
wife and espoused Matilda, daughter of Henry II. of England, by whom he
had four sons. Owing to this and other circumstances all friendly
feeling ceased between Henry and the emperor, whom, however, he
accompanied on the expedition to Italy, which terminated in the battle
of Legnano. But he suddenly drew off his forces and quitted the imperial
army on the way, and Frederick, imputing the ill success which he met
with in a great measure to the conduct of the Duke of Saxony, was, on
his return to Germany, in a mood to lend a ready ear to any charges
against him. These did not fail soon to pour in: the Saxon clergy, over
whom he had arrogated a right of investiture, appeared as his principal
accusers. Their charges, which were partly true, partly false, were
listened to by Frederick and the princes of the empire, and the downfall
of Henry was resolved upon. He was thrice summoned, but in vain, to
appear and answer the charges made against him. He was summoned a fourth
time, but to as little purpose; the sentence of outlawry was then
formally pronounced at Würtzburg. He denied the legality of the
sentence, and attempted to oppose its execution; several counts stood by
him in his resistance; but he was forced to submit and sue for grace at
Erfurt. The emperor pardoned him and permitted him to retain his
allodial property on condition of his leaving Germany for three years.
He was deprived of all his imperial fiefs, which were immediately
bestowed upon others.

In the division of the spoil of Henry the Lion Saxony was cut up into
pieces; a large portion of it went to the Archbishop of Cologne; and
Bernhard of Anhalt, son of Albert the Bear, obtained a considerable

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

part of the remainder; the supremacy over Holstein, Mecklenburg, and
Pomerania, ceased; and Lübeck became a free imperial city. All the
archbishops, bishops, counts, and barons, seized as much as they could,
and became immediate vassals of the empire. Neither Bernhard nor the
Archbishop of Cologne was able completely to establish his power over
the portion assigned him, and lawless violence everywhere prevailed.
"There was no king in Israel, and every one did that which was right in
his own eyes," is the language of the Chronicler <span
id="fr_112"></span>[\*](#fn_112).

We here again meet an instance of the compensatory principle which
prevails in the arrangements of Providence. It was the period of
turbulence and anarchy succeeding the outlawry of Henry the Lion which
gave an impulse to the building or enlarging of towns in the north of
Germany. The free Germans, as described by Tacitus, scorned to be pent
up within walls and ditches; and their descendants in Saxony would seem
to have inherited their sentiments, for there were no towns in that
country till the time of Henry the Fowler. As a security against the
Northmen, the Slaves, and the Magyars, this monarch caused pieces of
land to be enclosed by earthen walls and ditches, within which was
collected a third part of the produce of the surrounding country, and in
which he made every ninth man of the population fix his residence. The
courts of justice were held in these places to give them consequence;
and, their strength augmenting with their population, they became towns
capable of resisting the attacks of the enemy, and of giving shelter and
defence to the people of the open country. Other towns, such as Münster,
Osnabrück (*Osnaburgh*), Paderborn, and Minden, grew up gradually, from
the desire of the

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

people to dwell close to abbeys, churches, and episcopal residences,
whence they might obtain succour in time of temporal or spiritual need,
and derive protection from the reverence shown to the church. A third
class of towns owed their origin to the stormy period of which we now
write; for the people of the open country, the victims of oppression and
tyranny, fled to where they might, in return for their obedience, meet
with some degree of protection, and erected their houses at the foot of
the castle of some powerful nobleman. These towns gradually increased in
power, with the favour of the emperors, who, like other monarchs,
viewing in them allies against the excessive power of the church and the
nobility, gladly bestowed on them extensive privileges; and from these
originated the celebrated Hanseatic League, to which almost every town
of any importance in Westphalia belonged, either mediately or
immediately.

But the growth of cities, and the prosperity and the better system of
social regulation which they presented, were not the only beneficial
effects which resulted from the overthrow of the power of Henry the
Lion. There is every reason to conclude that it was at this period that
the Fehm-gerichte, or Secret Tribunals, were instituted in Westphalia;
at least, the earliest document in which there is any clear and express
mention of them is dated in the year 1267. This is an instrument by
which Engelbert, Count of the Mark, frees one Gervin of Kinkenrode from
the feudal obligations for his inheritance of Broke, which was in the
county of Mark; and it is declared to have been executed at a place
named Berle, the court being presided over by Bernhard of Henedorp, and
the *Fehmenotes* being present. By the Fehmenotes were at all times
understood the initiated in the secrets of the Westphalian tribunals; so
that we have here a clear and decisive proof of the existence of these

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

tribunals at that time. In another document, dated 1280, the Fehmenotes
again appear as witnesses, and after this time the mention of them
becomes frequent.

We thus find that, in little more than half a century after the outlawry
of Henry the Lion, the Fehm-gerichte were in operation in Westphalia;
and there is not the slightest allusion to them before that date, or any
proof, at all convincing, to be produced in favour of their having been
an earlier institution. Are we not, therefore, justified in adopting tie
opinion of those who place their origin in the first half of the
thirteenth century, and ascribe it to the anarchy and confusion
consequent on the removal of the power which had hitherto kept within
bounds the excesses of the nobles and the people? And is it a conjecture
altogether devoid of probability that some courageous and upright men
may have formed a secret determination to apply a violent remedy to the
intolerable evils which afflicted the country, and to have adopted those
expedients for preserving the public peace, out of which gradually grew
the Secret Tribunals? or that some powerful prince of the country,
acting from purely selfish motives, devised the plan of the society, and
appointed his judges to make the first essay of it <span
id="fr_113"></span>[\*](#fn_113)?

Still it must be confessed that the origin of the Fehm-gerichte is
involved in the same degree of obscurity which hangs over that of the
Hanseatic league and so many other institutions of the middle ages; and
little hopes can be entertained of this obscurity ever being totally
dispelled. Conjecture will, therefore, ever have free scope of the
subject; and the opinion which we have just expressed ourselves as
inclined to adopt is only one of nine which have been already advanced
on it. Four of these carry

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

back the origin of the Fehm-gerichte to the time of Charlemagne, making
them to have been either directly instituted by that great prince, or to
have gradually grown out of some of his other institutions for the
better governing of his states. A fifth places their origin in the
latter half of the eleventh century, and regards them as an invention of
the Westphalian clergy for forwarding the views of the popes in their
attempt to arrive at dominion over all temporal. princes. A sixth
ascribes the institution to St. Engelbert, Archbishop of Cologne, to
whom the Emperor Frederic II. committed the administration of affairs in
Germany during his own absence in Sicily, and who was distinguished for
his zeal in the persecution of heretics. He modelled it, the advocates
of this opinion say, on that of the Inquisition, which had lately been
established. The seventh and eighth theories are undeserving of notice.
On the others we shall make a few remarks.

The first writers who mention the Fehm-gerichte are Henry of Hervorden,
a Dominican, who wrote against them in the reign of the Emperor Charles
IV., about the middle of the fourteenth century; and Æneas Sylvius, the
secretary of Frederic III., a century later. These writers are among
those who refer the origin of the Fehm-gerichte to Charlemagne, and such
was evidently the current opinion of the time--an opinion studiously
disseminated by the members of the society, who sought to give it
consequence in the eyes of the emperor and people, by associating it
with the memory of the illustrious monarch of the West. There is,
however, neither external testimony nor internal probability to support
that opinion. Eginhart, the secretary and biographer of Charlemagne, and
all the other contemporary writers, are silent on the subject; the
valuable fragments of the ancient Saxon laws collected in the twelfth
century

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

make not the slightest allusion to these courts; and, in fine, their
spirit and mode of procedure are utterly at variance with the
Carlovingian institutions. As to the hypothesis which makes Archbishop
Engelbert the author of the Fehm-gerichte, it is entirely unsupported by
external evidence, and has nothing in its favour but the coincidence, in
point of time, of Engelbert's administration with the first account
which we have of this jurisdiction, and the similarity which it bore in
the secrecy of its proceedings to that of the Holy Inquisition--a
resemblance easy to be accounted for, without any necessity for having
recourse to the supposition of the one being borrowed from the other. We
can therefore only say with certainty that, in the middle of the
thirteenth century, the Fehm-gerichte were existing and in operation in
the country which we have described as the Westphalia of the middle
ages. To this we may add that this jurisdiction extended over the whole
of that country, and was originally confined to it, all the courts in
other parts of Germany, which bore a resemblance to the Westphalian
Fehm-gerichte, being of a different character and nature <span
id="fr_114"></span>[\*](#fn_114).

It remains, before proceeding to a description et these tribunals, to
give some account of the origin of their name. And here again we find
ourselves involved in as much difficulty and uncertainty as when
inquiring into the origin of the society itself.

Almost every word in the German and cognate languages, which bears the
slightest resemblance to the word Fehm <span
id="fr_115"></span>[†](#fn_115), has been given by some writer or other
as

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

its true etymon. It is unnecessary, in the present sketch of the history
of the Fehm-gerichte, to discuss the merits of each of the claimants: we
shall content ourselves with remarking that, among those which appear to
have most probability in their favour, is the Latin *Fama*, which was
first proposed by Leibnitz. At the time when we have most reason for
supposing these tribunals to have been instituted the Germans were
familiar with the language of the civil and canonical laws; the
Fehm-gerichte departed from the original maxim of German law, which
was--*no accuser*, *no judge*, and, in imitation of those foreign
laws <span id="fr_116"></span>[\*](#fn_116), proceeded on *common fame*,
and without any formal accusation against persons suspected of crime or
of evil courses. Moreover, various tribunals, not in Westphalia, which
proceeded in the same manner, on common report, were also called
Fehm-gerichte, which may therefore be interpreted Fame-tribunals, or
such as did not, according to the old German rule, require a formal
accusation, but proceeded to the investigation of the truth of any
charge which common fame of general report made against any person--a
dangerous mode of proceeding, no doubt, and one liable to the greatest
abuse, but which the lawless state of Germany at that period, and the
consequent impunity which great criminals would else have enjoyed, from
the fear of them, which would have kept back accusers and witnesses,
perhaps abundantly justified. It is proper to observe, however, that
*fem* appears to be an old German word, signifying

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

condemnation; and it is far from being unlikely, after all, that the
Fehm-gerichte may mean merely the tribunals of condemnation--in other
words, courts for the punishment of crime, or what we should call
criminal courts.

The Fehm-gerichte was not the only name which these tribunals bore; they
were also called *Fehm-ding*, the word *ding* <span
id="fr_117"></span>[\*](#fn_117) being, in the middle ages, equivalent
to *gericht*, or tribunal. They were also called the Westphalian
tribunals, as they could only be holden in the *Red Land*, or
Westphalia, and only Westphalians were amenable to their jurisdiction.
They were further styled free-seats (*Frei-stühle*, *stühl* also being
the same as *gericht*), free-tribunals, &c., as only freemen were
subject to them. A Frei-gericht, however, was not a convertible term
with a Westphalian Fehm-gericht; the former was the genus, the latter
the species. They are in the records also named Secret Tribunals,
(*Heimliche Gerichte*), and Silent Tribunals (*Stillgerichte*), from the
secrecy of their proceedings; Forbidden Tribunals (*Verbotene
Gerichte*), the reason of which name is not very clear; Carolinian
Tribunals, as having been, as was believed, instituted by Charles the
Great; also the Free Bann, which last word was equivalent to
*jurisdiction*. A Fehm-gericht was also termed a *Heimliche Acht*, and a
*Heimliche beschlossene Acht* (secret and secret-closed tribunal);
*acht* also being the same as *gericht*, or tribunal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[332:\*](sma26.htm#fr_109) Dr. Berck has, in
his elaborate work on this subject (Geschichte der Westphälischen
Femgerichte, Bremen, 1815), collected, we believe, nearly all the
information that is now attainable. This work has been our principal
guide; for, though we have read some others, we cannot say that we have
derived any important information from them. As the subject is in its
historical form entirely new in English literature, we have, at the
hazard of appearing occasionally dry, traced with some minuteness the
construction and mode of procedure of these celebrated courts.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[333:\*](sma26.htm#fr_110) The romantic
accounts of the Secret Tribunals will be found in Sir W. Scott's
translation of Goëthe's Götz von Berlichingen, and in his House of Aspen
and Anne of Geierstein. From various passages in Sir W. Scott's
biographical and other essays, it is plain that he believed such to be
the true character of the Secret Tribunals.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[335:\*](sma26.htm#fr_111) The Vends (*Wenden*)
were a portion of the Slavonian race who dwelt along the south coast of
the Baltic.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[339:\*](sma26.htm#fr_112) Arnold of Lübeck,
Chronica Slavorum, l. iii. c. l., apud Leibnitz Scriptores Rerum
Brunsvicarum, t. ii. p. 653.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[341:\*](sma26.htm#fr_113) Berck, pp. 259, 260.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[343:\*](sma26.htm#fr_114) See Berck, l. i. c.
5, 6, 7.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[343:†](sma26.htm#fr_115) Spelt also *Fem*,
*Fäm*, *Vem*, *Vehm*. In German *f* and *v* are pronounced alike, as
also are *ä* and *e*. The words from which *Fahm* has been derived are
*Fahne*, a standard; *Femen*, to skin; *Fehde*, feud; *Vemi* (*i.e.* væ
mihi), wo is me; *Ve* or *Vaem*, which Dreyer says signifies, in the
northern languages, <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> holy; *Vitte* (old
German), prudence; *Vette*, punishment; the *Fimmiha* of the Salic law;
Swedish *Fem*, Islandic *Fimm*, five, such being erroneously supposed to
be the number of judges in a Fehm, or court. Finally, Mözer deduces it
from *Fahm*, which he says is employed in Austria and some other
countries for *Rahm*, cream.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[344:\*](sma26.htm#fr_116) Common fame was a
sufficient ground of arraignment in England, also, in the Anglo-Saxon
period.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[345:\*](sma26.htm#fr_117) In the northern
languages, *Ting*; hence the *Storc Ting* (in our journals usually
written *Storthing*), i.e. *Great Ting*, or Parliament of Norway.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sma27)
