[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [China](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fs01)  [Next](fs03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CHAPTER I

### INTRODUCTORY

What is Feng-shui? This is a question which has been asked over and over
again for the last thirty years. Ever since foreigners were allowed to
settle down on the confines of this strange empire of China, this same
question has been cropping up continually here and there. When
purchasing a site, when building a house, when pulling down a wall, or
raising a flagstaff,--residents in the Treaty Ports have encountered
innumerable difficulties, and all on account of Feng-shui. When it was
proposed to erect a few telegraph poles, when the construction of a
railway was urged upon the Chinese Government, when a mere tramway was
suggested to utilize the coal-mines of the interior, Chinese officials
would invariably make a polite bow and declare the thing impossible on
account of Feng-shui. When, thirty years ago, the leading merchants of
the Colony of Hongkong endeavoured to place the business part of the
town in the so-called Happy Valley, and to make that part of the island
the centre of the whole town, they ignominiously failed on account of
Feng-shui. When the Hongkong Government cut a road, now known as the
Gap, to the Happy Valley, the Chinese community was thrown into a state
of abject terror and fright, on account of the disturbance which this
amputation of the dragon's limbs would cause to the Feng-shui of
Hongkong; and when many of the engineers, employed at the cutting, died
of Hongkong fever, and the foreign houses already built in the Happy
Valley had to be deserted on account of malaria, the Chinese
triumphantly declared,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

it was an act of retributory justice on the part of Feng-shui. When
Senhor Amaral, the Governor of Macao, who combined with a great passion
for constructing roads an unlimited contempt for Feng-shui, interfered
with the situation and aspects of Chinese tombs, he was waylaid by
Chinese, his head cut off, and the Chinese called this dastardly deed
the revenge of Feng-shui.

Surely there must be something in Feng-shui, if it drives the lowest
classes of Chinese to commit a foul murder, and is eagerly availed of by
ministers of state, as a satisfactory excuse for their own unwillingness
to further the progress of trade and civilisation.

What is Feng-shui? Sinologues looked through the Chinese Classics for an
answer to this question, searched through their Dictionaries, and found
none. Merchants asked their compradores and house-boys, What is
Feng-shui? but the replies they got were rather obscure and confused,
and at best they were told, that Feng-shui means "wind and water," and
is so called, "because it's a thing like wind, which you cannot
comprehend, and like water, which you cannot grasp."

But, strange to say, Chinese constantly assert, that foreigners know all
about Feng-shui. When mortality was frightful among the Hongkong troops
quartered in Murray Barracks, and the Colonial Surgeon proposed the
planting of bamboos at the back of the buildings, the Chinese justly
remarked, that this measure was in strict accordance with Feng-shui; and
when it was found, that disease was actually checked thereby, they
looked upon it as a proof of the virtues of Feng-shui. When foreign
residents of Hongkong began to build villas in Pok-foo-lum (which
Feng-shui declares to be the best site of the island), when the
Government began to build a reservoir there, when tanks were built on
the north side of Hongkong, and the hill-side studded with trees, when
the cutting of earth was forbidden in places where there

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

is much decomposed rock, the Chinese in all of these cases supposed
foreigners to know more about Feng-shui than they would tell, and the
Surveyor General was put down as a profound adept in Feng-shui. Why,
they say, there is Government House, occupying the very best spot on the
northern side of the island, screened at the back by high trees and
gently-shelving terraces, skirted right and left by roads with graceful
curves, and the whole situation combining everything that Feng-shui
would prescribe,--how is it possible that foreigners pretend to know
nothing of Feng-shui?

Well, if Feng-shui were no more than what our common sense and natural
instincts teach us, Chinese Feng-shui would be no such puzzle to us. But
the fact is, the Chinese have made Feng-shui a black art, and those that
are proficient in this art and derive their livelihood from it, find it
to their advantage to make the same mystery of it, with which European
alchemists and astrologers used to surround their vagaries. Every
resident of China, however, acquires by a few years' practical
intercourse with the Chinese a tolerably clear idea of what Feng-shui
is, and most of my readers no doubt know, that practically speaking it
is simply a system of superstition, supposed to teach people where and
when to build a tomb or to erect a house so as to insure for those
concerned everlasting prosperity and happiness.

Since my arrival in China I have had a great many practical collisions
with Feng-shui, and having for many years collected notes on the subject
and studied its literature in all its branches, I now propose to lay the
result of my studies before the public. Feng-shui is however, as I take
it, but another name for natural science; and I must ask therefore the
indulgence of my readers, for my introducing a general outline of
Chinese physical science in order to make the system of Feng-shui
intelligible.

Natural science has never been cultivated in China in

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

that technical, dry and matter-of-fact fashion, which seems to us
inseparable from true science. Chinese naturalists did not take much
pains in studying nature and ferreting out her hidden secrets by minute
and practical tests and experiments. They invented no instruments to aid
them in the observation of the heavenly bodies, they never took to
hunting beetles and stuffing birds, they shrank from the idea of
dissecting animal bodies, nor did they chemically analyse inorganic
substances, but with very little actual knowledge of nature they evolved
a whole system of natural science from their own inner consciousness and
expounded it according to the dogmatic formulæ of ancient tradition.
Deplorable, however, as this absence of practical and experimental
investigation is, which opened the door to all sorts of conjectural
theories, it preserved in Chinese natural science a spirit of sacred
reverence for the divine powers of nature.

Though modern Confucianism has long ago discarded the belief in one
supreme personal God, of which their classical writings still preserve a
dead record, and though they substituted, for the personal God whom
their forefathers worshipped, an abstract entity, devoid of personality,
devoid of all attributes whatsoever, yet they look upon nature not as a
dead inanimate fabric, but as a living breathing organism. They see a
golden chain of spiritual life running through every form of existence
and binding together, as in one living body, everything that subsists in
heaven above or on earth below. What has so often been admired in the
natural philosophy of the Greeks,--that they made nature live; that they
saw in every stone, in every tree, a living spirit; that they peopled
the sea with naiads, the forest with satyrs,--this poetical, emotional
and reverential way of looking at natural objects, is equally so a
characteristic of natural science in China.

The whole system of Feng-shui is based on this emotional conception of
nature. We may smile at the unscientific, rudimentary character of
Chinese physiology; we

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

may point out, that every branch of science in China is but a
rudimentary groping after truths with which every school-boy in Europe
is familiar; we may conclude, that China as a whole resembles but an
over-grown child, on whose intellect has fallen a sudden blight and who
grew up since to manhood, to old age, with no more knowledge than that
of a precocious baby; and yet I say, looking at this same China, the
oldest among ancient peoples, the greatest among great empires, or at
least the most populous among all the countries of the world, hoary with
old age, heavy, dull, childishly ignorant as regards matters of
intellect,--yet I say, would God, that our own men of science had
preserved in their observatories, laboratories and lecture-rooms that
same child-like reverence for the living powers of nature, that sacred
awe and trembling fear of the mysteries of the unseen, that firm belief
in the reality of the invisible world and its constant
intercommunication with the seen and the temporal, which characterise
these Chinese gropings after natural science.

The system of Feng-shui is of comparatively modern origin. Its diagrams
and leading ideas are indeed borrowed from one of the ancient classics,
but its method and practical application are almost wholly based on the
teachings of Choo-he and others, who lived under the Sung dynasty (A.D.
1126-1278), and whose commentaries to the classics are read in every
school. Choo-he's mode of thinking has in fact been adopted by modern
Confucianism, and forms the philosophical basis of the whole system of
Feng-shui.

According to Choo-he there was in the beginning one abstract principle
or monad, called the "absolute nothing," which evolved out of itself the
"great absolute." This abstract principle or monad, the great absolute,
is the primordial cause of all existence. When it first moved, its
breath or vital energy congealing, produced the great male principle.
When it had moved to the uttermost it rested, and in resting produced
the female principle.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After it had rested to the utmost extent, it
again moved, and thus went on in alternate motion and rest without
cessation. When this supreme cause thus divided itself into male and
female, that which was above constituted heaven, and that which was
beneath formed the earth. Thus it was that heaven and earth were made.
But the supreme cause having produced by evolution the male and female
principles, and through them heaven and earth, ceased not its constant
permutations, in the course of which men and animals, vegetables and
minerals, rose into being. The same vital energy, moreover, continued to
act ever since, and continued to act through those two originating
causes, the male and female powers of nature, which ever since mutually
and alternately push and agitate one another, without a moment's
intermission.

Now, the energy animating the two principles is called in Chinese Hi, or
the breath of nature. When this breath first went forth and produced the
male and female principles and finally the whole universe, it did not do
so arbitrarily or at random, but followed fixed, inscrutable and
immutable laws. These laws or order of nature, called Li, were therefore
abstractly considered prior to the issuing of the vital breath, and must
therefore be considered separately. Again, considering this Li, or the
general order of the universe, the ancient sages observed that all the
laws of nature and all the workings of its vital breath are in strict
accordance with certain mathematical principles, which may be traced and
illustrated by diagrams, exhibiting the numerical proportion of the
universe called So, or numbers. But the breath of nature or the Hi, the
order of nature called Li, and the mathematical proportions of nature,
called So, these three principles are not directly cognizable to the
senses, they are hidden from view, and only become manifest through
forms and outlines of physical nature. In other words, the phenomena of
nature, her outward forms of appearance, constitute a fourth branch of
the system of natural

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

science called Ying, or forms of nature. Now these four divisions, Li,
or the general order of nature, So, her numerical proportions, Hi, her
vital breath or subtle energies, and Ying, her forms of appearance,
constitute what is popularly called the system of Feng-shui.

No Chinese work on Feng-shui, however--or at least none that I have seen
or heard of--follows out this division methodically, though they all
mention these four principles and give them here and there due
prominence. On the other hand, this division of four branches of the
Feng-shui system is not my own. A distinguished Cantonese scholar, a
member of the Imperial College, mentions, in a preface which he wrote to
a popular geomantic: work, that the whole system of Feng-shui might
advantageously be divided into the above-mentioned four parts. From this
preface I have taken the hint, and propose now to set before my readers
the system of Feng-shui, following out this fourfold plan, and working
it out so that it should give them an insight into the whole system of
Chinese natural science generally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Laws of Nature](fs03)
