[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ael08)  [Next](ael10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Egyptian Legends*, by M. A. Murray, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### VI

### THE SCORPIONS OF ISIS

<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> Isis, the great Goddess, the
Mistress of Magic, the Speaker of Spells.

I came out of my house which my brother Set had given to me, for Thoth
called to me to come, Thoth the twice great, mighty of truth in earth
and in heaven. He called, and I came forth when Ra descended in glory to
the western horizon of heaven, and it was evening.

And with me came the seven scorpions, and their names were Tefen and
Befen, Mestet and Mestetef, Petet, Thetet, and Matet. Behind me were
Tefen and Befen; on either side were Mestet and Mestetef; in front were
Petet, Thetet, and Matet, clearing the way that none should oppose or
hinder me. I called aloud to the scorpions, and my words rang through
the air and entered into their ears, "Beware of the Black One, call not
the Red One, look neither at children nor at any small helpless
creature."

Then I wandered through the Land of Egypt, Tefen and Befen behind me,
Mestet and Mestetef

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

on either side of me, Petet, Thetet, and Matet before me; and we came to
Per-sui, where the crocodile is God, and to the Town of the Two Sandals,
which is the city of the Twin Goddesses. Here it is that the swamps and
marshes of the North Country begin, where there are fields of
papyrus-reeds, and where the marshmen dwell; from here to the Great
Green Waters is the North Land.

Then we came near houses where the marsh-people dwelt, and the name of
one of the women was "Glory," though some called her "Strength " also.
She stood at her door, and from afar she saw me coming, wayworn and
weary, and I would fain have sat me down in her house to rest. But when
I would have spoken to her, she shut the door in my face, for she feared
the seven scorpions that were with me.

I went farther, and one of the marshwomen opened her door to me, and in
her house I rested. But Mestet and Mestetef, Petet, Thetet, and Matet,
and Befen also, they came together and laid their poison upon the sting
of Tefen; thus the sting of Tefen had sevenfold power. Then returned
Tefen to the house of the woman Glory, she who had closed her door
against me; the door was still shut, but between it and the threshold
was a narrow space. Through this narrow space crept Tefen and entered
the house, and stung with a sting of sevenfold power the son of the
woman

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Glory. So fierce
and burning was the poison that the child died and fire broke out in the
house.

Then the woman Glory cried and lamented, but no man hearkened to her,
and Heaven itself sent water upon her house. A great marvel was this
water from Heaven, for the time of the inundation was not yet.

Thus she mourned and lamented, and her heart was full of sorrow when she
remembered how she had shut her door in my face when, weary and wayworn,
I would have rested in her house. And the sound of her grief came to my
ears, and my heart swelled with sorrow for her sorrow, and I turned back
and went with her to where her dead child lay.

And I, Isis, the Mistress of magic, whose voice can awake the dead, I
called aloud the Words of Power, the Words that even the dead can hear.
And I laid my arms upon the child that I might bring back Life to the
lifeless. Cold and still he lay, for the sevenfold poison of Tefen was
in him. Then did I speak magical spells to the poison of the scorpions,
saying, "O poison of Tefen, come out of him and fall upon the ground!
Poison of Befen, advance not, penetrate no farther, come out of him, and
fall upon the ground! For I am Isis, the great Enchantress, the Speaker
of spells. Fall down, O poison of Mestet! Hasten not, poison of
Mestetef! Rise not, poison of Petet and Thetet! Approach not, poison of
Matet!

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For I am Isis, the
great Enchantress, the Speaker of spells. The child shall live, the
poison shall die! As Horus is strong and well for me, his mother, so
shall this child be strong and well for his mother!"

Then the child recovered, and the fire was quenched, and the rain from
heaven ceased. And the woman Glory brought all her wealth, her bracelets
and her neck-ornaments, her gold-work and silver-work, to the house of
the marshwoman, and laid them at my feet in token of repentance that she
had shut the door upon me when, weary and wayworn, I had come to her
house.

And to this day men make dough of wheat-flour kneaded with salt and lay
it upon the wound made by the sting of a scorpion, and over it they
recite the Words of Power which I recited over the child of the woman
Glory when the sevenfold poison was in him. For I am Isis, the great
Enchantress, the Mistress of magic, the Speaker of spells.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII: The Black Pig](ael10)
