[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ael10)  [Next](ael12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Egyptian Legends*, by M. A. Murray, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### VIII

### THE BATTLES OF HORUS

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> was in the three hundred and
sixty-third year of the reign of the God Ra-Horakhti upon earth that the
great war happened between Horus and Set.

The Majesty of the God Ra, whom men call Ra-Horakhti also, was in Nubia
with his army, a great and innumerable multitude of soldiers, footmen
and horsemen, archers and chariots. He came in his Boat upon the river;
the prow of the Boat was of palm-wood, its stern was of acacia-wood, and
he landed at Thest-Hor, to the east of the Inner Waters. And to him came
Horus of Edfu, he whose name is Harpooner and Hero, seeking for that
Wicked One, Set, the murderer of Osiris. Long had he sought, but Set had
ever eluded him.

The Majesty of Ra had gathered his forces, for Set had rebelled against
him, and Horus was glad at the thought of battle, for he loved an hour
of fighting more than a day of rejoicing. He entered into the presence
of Thoth, the twice great, god

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of magic, and Thoth gave him the power to change himself into a great
winged disk, a disk that glowed like a ball of fire, with great wings on
either side like the colours of the sky at sunset when the blue shades
from dark to light, and is shot with gold and flame. Men try to copy
these hues when they carve the winged disk above the temple-doors, or
make it into a breast-ornament of gold inlaid with turquoise and
carnelian and lazuli.

Thus Horus, as a great winged disk, sat on the prow of the Boat of Ra,
and his splendour flashed across the waters and fell upon his foes as
they lay in ambush. Upon his glorious wings he rose into the air, and
against his crafty enemies he made a curse, a curse terrible and
fear-striking, saying, "Your eyes shall be blinded, and ye shall not
see; and your ears shall be deaf, and ye shall not hear."

And at once, when each man looked at his neighbour, he saw a stranger;
and when he heard his own familiar mother-tongue it sounded like a
foreign language, and they cried out that they were betrayed, and that
the enemy had come among them. They turned their weapons each against
the other, and in the quickness of a moment many had ceased to live, and
the rest had fled, while over them flew the gleaming Disk watching for
Set. But Set was in the marshes of the North Country and these were but
his advance-guard.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Then Horus flew back to Ra, and Ra embraced him and gave him a draught
of wine mixed with water. And to this day men pour a libation of wine
and water to Horus at this place in remembrance. When Horus had drunk
the wine, he spoke to the Majesty of Ra and said, "Come and see thine
enemies, how they lie overthrown in their blood." Ra came, and with him
came Astarte, Mistress of Horses, driving her furious steeds; and they
saw the corpse-strewn field where the army of Set had slain one another.

Now this is the first encounter in the South, but the last great battle
was not yet.

Then the associates of Set came together and took counsel, and took upon
themselves the likeness of crocodiles and hippopotamuses, for these
great beasts can live under water and no human weapon can pierce their
hides. They came up the river, the water swirling behind them, and
rushed upon the Boat of Ra to overturn it. But Horus had gathered
together his band of armourers and weapon-smiths, and they had prepared
arrows and spears of metal, smelted and welded, hammered and shaped,
with magical words and spells chanted over them. When the fierce beasts
came up the river in waves of foam, the Followers of Horus drew their
bowstrings and let fly their arrows, they cast their javelins, and
charged with their spears. And the metal pierced the hides and reached
the hearts, and of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

these wicked animals six hundred and fifty were slain, and the rest
fled.

Now this is the second encounter in the South, but the last great battle
was not yet.

The associates of Set fled, some up the river and some down the river;
their hearts were weak and their feet failed for fear of Horus, the
Harpooner, the Hero. And those whose faces were towards the South Land
fled fastest, for Horus was at their back in the Boat of Ra; and with
him came his Followers, their weapons in their hands.

At the south-east of Denderah, the city of Hathor, Horus saw the enemy,
and he rushed upon them with his Followers, while Ra and Thoth watched
the conflict as they waited in the Boat.

Then said the Majesty of Ra to Thoth, "See, how he wounds his enemies!
See, how Horus of Edfu carries destruction among them!" And afterwards
men built a shrine in this place in remembrance of the fight, and the
Gods in the shrine were Ra and Min and Horus of Edfu.

Now this is the third encounter in the South, but the last great battle
was not yet.

Then quickly they turned the Boat, and swiftly was it carried
downstream, following the fugitives, whose faces were towards the North
Land. For a night and a day they followed after, and at the north-east
of Denderah Horus saw them. And he made haste, he and his Followers, and
fell

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

upon them, and slew them. Great and terrible was the slaughter as he
drove them before him.

Thus was destroyed Set's army in the South in four great encounters, but
the last great battle was not yet.

Now the allies of Set turned their faces towards the lake and towards
the marshes of the sea. Horus came behind them in the Boat of Ra, and
his form was the form of a great winged disk; and with him came his
Followers, their weapons in their hands. Then Horus commanded silence,
and silence was upon their mouths.

Four days and four nights were they upon the water seeking the enemy.
But none did they find, for their foes had turned their shapes into the
shapes of crocodiles and hippopotamuses, and lay hidden in the water. On
the morning of the fifth day Horus saw them; at once he gave battle, and
the air was filled with the noise of the combat, while Ra and Thoth
watched the conflict as they waited in the Boat.

Then the Majesty of Ra cried aloud when he saw Horus like a devouring
flame upon the battlefield, "See, how he casts his weapon against them,
he kills them, he destroys them with his sword, he cuts them in pieces,
he utterly defeats them! See and behold Horus of Edfu!" At the end of
the fight Horus came back in triumph and he brought one hundred and
forty-two prisoners to the Boat of Ra.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Now this is the first encounter in the North, but the last great battle
was not yet.

For the enemies, who were upon the Northern Waters, turned their faces
towards the canal to reach the sea, and they came to the Western Waters
of Mert, where the Ally of Set had his dwelling. Behind them followed
Horus, equipped with all his glittering weapons, and he went in the Boat
of Ra, and Ra was in the Boat with eight of his train. They were upon
the Northern Canal, and backwards and forwards they went, turning and
re-turning, but nothing did they see or hear. Then they went northward
for a night and a day and they came to the House of Rerhu.

There Ra spoke to Horus and said, "Behold, thy enemies are gathered
together at the Western Waters of Mert, where dwell the Allies of Set."
And Horus of Edfu prayed the Majesty of Ra to come in his Boat against
the Allies of Set.

Again they travelled to the northwards, where the never-setting Stars
wheel round a certain point in the sky, and on the banks of the Western
Waters of Mert were the Allies of Set, ready for battle. Then Horus of
Edfu delayed not a moment, but rushed upon the foe, and with him came
his Followers, their weapons in their hands. Death and destruction they
dealt to right and to left till the enemy fled before them. When the
conflict was over, they counted the prisoners; three hundred and
eighty-one were taken, and these

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Horus slew before
the Boat of Ra, and their weapons he gave to his Followers.

Now this is the second encounter in the North, but the last great battle
was not yet.

And now, at last, Set himself came forth from his hiding-place. Fierce
and savage he is, cunning and cruel; in his nature like a beast of prey,
without ruth or pity; and men make his image with the head of a wild
beast, for human feeling is to him unknown. From his hiding-place he
came forth and he roared terribly. The earth and the heavens trembled at
the sound of his roaring and at the words which he uttered, for he
boasted that he would himself fight against Horus and destroy him as he
had destroyed Osiris.

The wind bore the words of his boasting to Ra, and Ra said to Thoth the
twice great, Lord of Magic and Wisdom, "Cause that these high words of
the Terrible One be cast down."

Then Horus of Edfu sprang forward and rushed at his enemy, and a great
fight raged. Horus cast his weapon and killed many, and his Followers
fought also and prevailed. Out of the dust and the noise of the combat
came Horus, dragging a prisoner; and the captive's arms were bound
behind him, and the staff of Horus was tied across his mouth so that he
could make no sound, and the weapon of Horus was at his throat.

Horus dragged him before the Majesty of Ra. And Ra spoke and said to
Horus, "Do with him

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

as thou wilt." Then Horus fell upon his enemy, and struck the weapon
into his head and into his back, and cut off his head, and dragged the
body about by the feet, and at last he cut the body into pieces. Thus
did he treat the body of his adversary as Set had treated the body of
Osiris. This took place on the seventh day of the first month of the
season when the earth appears after the inundation. And the lake is
called the Lake of Fighting to this day.

Now this is the third encounter in the North. but the last great battle
was not yet.

For it was the Ally of Set whom Horus had slain, and Set himself was
still alive, and he raged against Horus as a panther of the South. And
he stood up and roared in the face of heaven, and his voice was the
voice of thunder, and as he roared he changed himself into a great
snake, and entered into the earth. None saw him go and none saw him
change, but he was fighting against the Gods, and by their power and
knowledge are they aware of what comes to pass, though no man tells
them. And Ra said to Horus, "Set has transformed himself into a hissing
snake and has entered the earth. We must cause that he never comes
forth; never, never no more!"

The associates of Set took courage, knowing that their leader was alive,
and they assembled again, and their boats filled the canal. The Boat of
Ra went against them, and above the Boat

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

shone the glory of the great winged Disk. When Horus saw the enemy
gathered together in one place, he drove at them and routed them and
slew them without number.

Now this is the fourth encounter in the North, but the last great battle
was not yet.

Then Horus of Edfu remained in the Boat of Ra upon the canal for six
days and six nights, watching for the enemy, but he saw none, for they
lay as corpses in the water.

And to this day men make ceremonies in remembrance of the Battles of
Horus on the first day of the first month of the inundation, on the
seventh day of the first month of the appearing of the earth after the
inundation, and on the twenty-first and twenty-fourth days of the second
month of the earth's appearing. These days are kept holy at Ast-abt,
which is at the south side of Anrudef, where is one of the graves of
Osiris. And Isis made magical spells round Anrudef that no enemy might
come near it; and the priestess of Anrudef is called "The Lady of
Spells" to this day in remembrance; and the waters are called "The
Waters of Seeking," for there it was that Horus sought for his foe.

And Horus sent out his Followers, and they hunted down the enemy, and
brought in prisoners; one hundred and six from the East and one hundred
and six from the West. These they slew before Ra in the sanctuaries.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

Then Ra gave to Horus and his fighters two cities which are called the
Mesen-cities to this day, for the Followers of Horus are Mesenti, the
Metalworkers. In the shrines of the Mesen-cities Horus is the God, and
his secret ceremonies are held on four days in the year. Great and holy
are these days in the Mesen-cities, for they are in remembrance of the
Battles of Horus which he fought against Set, the murderer of Osiris.

Now these enemies, they gathered again in the East, and they travelled
towards Tharu. Then was launched the Boat of Ra to follow after them,
and Horus of Edfu transformed himself into the likeness of a lion with
the face of a man; his arms were like flint, and on his head was the
Atef-crown, which is the white diadem of the South Land with feathers
and horns, and on either side a crowned serpent. And he hastened after
his enemies, and defeated them, and brought of prisoners one hundred and
forty-two.

Then said Ra to Horus of Edfu, "Let us journey northwards to the Great
Green Waters, and smite the foe there as we have smitten him in Egypt."

Northwards they went, and the enemy fled before them, and they reached
the Great Green Waters, where the waves broke on the shore with the
noise of thunder. Then Thoth arose and he stood in the midst of the
Boat, and he chanted strange words over the boats and barges of Horus
and his Followers, and the sea fell calm as the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

sound of the words floated across its waves. And there was silence on
the Great Green Waters, for the wind was lulled, and naught was in sight
save the boats of Ra and of Horus.

Then said the Majesty of Ra, "Let us sail round the whole extent of the
land, let us sail to the South Land." And they knew that Ra was aware of
the enemy. They made haste and sailed to the South Land by night, to the
country of Ta-kens, and they came to the town of Shaïs, but until they
reached Shaïs they saw naught of any enemy. Now Shaïs is on the border
of Nubia, and in Nubia were the guards of the enemy.

Then Horus of Edfu changed himself into a great winged Disk with
gleaming pinions outspread, and on either side of him came the goddesses
Nekhbet and Uazet, and their form was the form of great hooded snakes
with crowns upon their heads; on the head of Nekhbet was the white crown
of the South Land, on the head of Uazet was the red crown of the North
Land.

And the Gods in the Boat of Ra cried aloud and said, "See, O Thou who
art twice great, he has placed himself between the two goddesses. Behold
how he overthrows his adversaries and destroys them."

Now this is the encounter in Nubia, but the last great battle was not
yet.

Then came Ra in his Boat and he moored at Thest-Hor, and he gave
commandment that in

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

every temple throughout the Two Lands men should carve the Winged Disk,
and on the right and left of the Disk should be Nekhbet and Uazet as
great hooded snakes with crowns upon their heads. And the temple at the
point of Thest-Hor is called "The House of Horus in the South" to this
day in remembrance, and a great offering is made there to Ra and Horus.
And Ra gave to Horus the province of the House of Fighting, and Ast-Abt,
and the Mesen-cities of the East and the West, and Edfu of the North,
and Tharu, and Gauti, and the Sea of Sailing, and Upper Shasu, and
Edfu-of-the-House-of-Ra. And from the lake south of
Edfu-of-the-House-of-Ra they bring water to the two Houses of the King
on the day of the Sed-festival. And Isis carried Ar-stone of sand to
Thest-Hor—Ar-stone of the Star was it; and in every place in the South
Land to which Horus went, there is Ar-stone found to this day.

Now some say that the last great battle is still to come, and that in
the end Horus will kill Set, and that Osiris and all the Gods will reign
on earth when their enemy is utterly destroyed. But others say that the
battle is already ended and that Horus slew the great and wicked Foe who
had wrought misery and calamity to all.

And this is what they say: After months and years Horus the Child grew
to manhood. Then came Set with his allies, and he challenged Horus in
the presence of Ra, And Horus came forth,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

his Followers with him in their boats, with their armour, and their
glittering weapons with handles of worked wood, and their cords, and
their spears.

And Isis made golden ornaments for the prow of the boat of Horus, and
she laid them in their places with magic words and spells, saying, "Gold
is at the prow of thy boat, O Lord of Mesen, Horus, Chieftain of the
boat, the great boat of Horus, the boat of rejoicing. May the valour of
Ra, the strength of Shu, power and fear be around thee. Thou art
victorious, O son of Osiris, son of Isis, for thou fightest for the
throne of thy father."

Then Set took upon himself the form of a red hippopotamus, great and
mighty, and he came from the South Land with his Allies, travelling to
the North Land to meet Horus of Edfu. And at Elephantine, Set stood up
and spoke a great curse against Horus of Edfu and against Isis, and
said, "Let there come a great wind, even a furious north-wind and a
raging tempest"; and the sound of his voice was like thunder in the East
of the sky. His words were cried from the southern heaven and rolled
back to the northern heaven, a word and a cry from Set, the enemy of
Osiris and the Gods.

At once a storm broke over the boats of Horus and his Followers, the
wind roared, and the water was lashed into great waves, and the boats
were tossed like straws. But Horus held on his way;

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and through the darkness of the storm and the foam of the waves gleamed
the golden prow like the rays of the sun.

And Horus took upon himself the form of a young man; his height was
eight cubits; in his hand he held a harpoon, the blade was four cubits,
the shaft twenty cubits, and a chain of sixty cubits was welded to it.
Over his head he brandished the weapon as though it were a reed, and he
launched it at the great red hippopotamus which stood in the deep
waters, ready to destroy Horus and his Followers when the storm should
wreck their boats.

And at the first cast the weapon struck deep into the head of the great
red hippopotamus and entered the brain. Thus died Set, that great and
wicked One, the enemy of Osiris and the Gods.

And to this day the priests of Horus of Edfu, and the King's daughters,
and the women of Busiris and the women of Pé chant a hymn and strike the
drum for Horus in triumph.

And this is their song: "Rejoice, O women of Busiris! Rejoice, O women
of Pé! Horus has overthrown his enemies!

"Exult, dwellers in Edfu! Horus, the great God, Lord of heaven, has
smitten the enemy of his father!

"Eat ye the flesh of the vanquished, drink ye his blood, burn ye his
bones in the flame of the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

fire. Let him be cut in pieces, and let his bones be given to the cats,
the fragments of him to the reptiles.

"O Horus, the Striker, the great One of Valour, the Slayer, the Chief,
of the Gods, the Harpooner, the Hero, the only begotten, Captor of
captives, Horus of Edfu, Horus the Avenger!

"He has destroyed the wicked One, he has made a whirlpool with the blood
of his enemy, his shaft has made a prey. Behold ye, see ye Horus at the
prow of his boat. Like Ra, he shines on the horizon. He is decked in
green linen, in binding linen, in fine linen and byssus. The double
diadem is upon thy head, the two serpents upon thy brow, O Horus the
Avenger!

"Thy harpoon is of metal, the shaft is of the sycomore of the desert,
the net is woven by Hathor of the Roses. Thou hast aimed to the right,
thou hast cast to the left. We give praise to thee to the height of
heaven, for thou hast chained the wickedness of thine enemy. We give
praise to thee, we worship thy majesty, O Horus of Edfu, Horus the
Avenger!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX: The Beer of Heliopolis](ael12)
