[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Procopius](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shp02)  [Next](shp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076617039X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Secret History of Procopius*, tr. by Richard Atwater, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### FOREWORD BY THE HISTORIAN

IN what I have written on the Roman wars up to the present point, the
story was arranged in chronological order and as completely as the times
then permitted. What I shall write now follows a different plan,
supplementing the previous formal chronicle with a disclosure of what
really happened throughout the Roman Empire. You see, it was not
possible, during the life of certain persons, to write the truth of what
they did, as a historian should. If I had, their hordes of spies would
have found out about it, and they would have put me to a most horrible
death. I could not even trust my nearest relatives. That is why I was
compelled to hide the real explanation of many matters glossed over in
my previous books.

These secrets it is now my duty to tell

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and reveal the remaining hidden matters and motives. Yet when I approach
this different task, I find it hard indeed to have to stammer and
retract what I have written before about the lives of Justinian and
Theodora. Worse yet, it occurs to me that what I am now about to tell
will seem neither probable nor plausible to future generations,
especially as time flows on and my story becomes ancient history. I fear
they may think me a writer of fiction, and even put me among the poets.

However, I have this much to cheer me, that my account will not be
unendorsed by other testimony: so I shall not shrink from the duty of
completing this work. For the men of today, who know best the truth of
these matters, will be trustworthy witnesses to posterity of the
accuracy of my evidence.

Still another thing for a long time deferred my passion to relieve
myself of this untold tale. For I wondered if it might be prejudicial

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

to future generations, and the wickedness of these deeds had not best
remain unknown to later times: lest future tyrants, hearing, might
emulate them. It is deplorably natural that most monarchs mimic the sins
of their predecessors and are most readily disposed to turn to the evils
of the past.

But, finally, I was again constrained to proceed with this history, for
the reason that future tyrants may see also that those who thus err
cannot avoid retribution in the end, since the persons of whom I write
suffered that judgment. Furthermore, the disclosure of these actions and
tempers will be published for all time, and in consequence others will
perhaps feel less urge to transgress.

For who now would know of the unchastened life of Semiramis or the
madness of Sardanapalus or Nero, if the record had not thus been written
by men of their own times? Besides, even those who suffer

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

similarly from later tyrants will not find this narrative quite
unprofitable. For the miserable find comfort in the philosophy that not
on them alone has evil fallen.

Accordingly, I begin the tale. First I shall reveal the folly of
Belisarius, and then the depravity of Justinian and Theodora.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. How The Great General Belisarius Was Hoodwinked By His Wife,
Whose Lover Became A Monk](shp04)
