[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Procopius](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shp27)  [Next](shp29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076617039X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Secret History of Procopius*, tr. by Richard Atwater, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

### XXV. HOW HE ROBBED HIS OWN OFFICIALS, MERCHANTS, SAILORS, WORKMEN, AND EVERYBODY ELSE

I will next describe another way in which he robbed his subjects. Those
who serve the Emperor and the magistrates in Constantinople, either as
guards or as secretaries or what not, are inscribed last in the list of
officials. As time goes on, their rank advances as their superiors die
or retire and they replace them, until they reach the topmost dignity.
Those who attained this highest rank, according to the long-established
rule, were paid more than one hundred gold centenaries a year, so as to
have a competence for their old age, and that they might be able to
discharge their many debts: which resulted in the affairs of state being
competently and

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

smoothly managed. But this Emperor deprived them of nearly all this
money, to the great harm of these officials and everybody else. For
poverty, attacking them first, soon spread to the others who formerly
shared their solvency. And if one could calculate the sums of money thus
lost during thirty-two years, he would know of how great a total they
were thus deprived. This is how the tyrant used his military aides.

What he did to merchants and sailors, artisans and shop-keepers, and
through them to everybody else, I will now relate. There are two straits
on either side of Constantinople: one in the Hellespont between Sestos
and Abydus, the other at the mouth of the Euxine Sea, where the Church
of the Holy Mother is situated. Now in the Hellespontine strait there
had been no customhouse, though an officer was stationed by the Emperor
at Abydus, to see that no ship carrying a cargo of arms should pass to
Constantinople without orders from the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Emperor, and that
no one should set sail from Constantinople without papers signed by the
proper officials; for no ship was allowed to leave Constantinople
without permission of the bureau of the Master of Offices. The toll
exacted from the ship owners, however, had been inconsequential. The
officer stationed at the other strait received a regular salary from the
Emperor, and his duty was exactly the same, to see that nothing was
transported to the barbarians dwelling beyond the Euxine that was not
permitted to be sent from Roman to hostile territory; but he was not
allowed to collect any duties from navigators at this point.

But as soon as Justinian became Emperor, he stationed a customhouse at
either strait, under two salaried officials, to whom he gave full power
to collect as much money as they found possible. Eager to show their
zeal, they made the mariners pay such tributes on everything as pirates
might have

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

exacted. And this was done at both straits.

At Constantinople, he concocted the following scheme. He appointed one
of his intimates, a Syrian named Addeus, in charge of the port, with
orders to collect duty from the ships anchoring there. And he,
accordingly, never allowed any of the vessels putting in to
Constantinople to leave until their owners either paid clearance fees or
submitted to taking a cargo for Libya or Italy. Some of the shipowners,
however, refused to submit to this compulsion, preferring to burn their
boats rather than sail at such a price; and considered themselves lucky
to escape with this sacrifice. Those who had to continue sailing in
order to live, on the other hand, charged merchants three times the
former rate for carrying their wares: so that the merchants had to
recoup these losses by selling their stuff to individual purchasers at a
correspondingly high price, with the result that the Romans nearly died
of starvation.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

This was the state of affairs throughout the Empire.

I must not omit, I suppose, mention of what the rulers did to the petty
coinage. Formerly the money changers had customarily given two hundred
and ten obols, or "folles," for one gold stater; but Justinian and
Theodora, as a scheme for their private profit, ordered that only one
hundred and eighty obols should be given for a stater. In this way they
clipped off one sixth of each gold coin possessed by the people.

By licensing monopolies of nearly all kinds of wares, these rulers daily
oppressed the purchasers; the sale of clothes was the only thing they
left untouched, and even in this case they contrived the following
scheme. Cloaks of silk had long been made in Berytus and Tyre, in
Phoenicia. Merchants who dwelt in these, and all the artisans and
workers connected with the trade, had settled there in early times, and
from these cities this trade had spread throughout the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

earth. But during the reign of Justinian, those in this business at
Constantinople and in the other cities, raised the price of these
garments: claiming that the price for such stuffs had been raised by the
Persians, and that the import duties to Roman territory were also
higher.

The Emperor, pretending to be incensed at this, proclaimed by edict that
such clothing could not be sold for more than eight gold coins a pound;
and the punishment for disobeying this law was the confiscation of the
transgressor's property. This seemed to everybody impossible and futile.
For it was not practicable for the merchants, who imported silk at a
higher price, to sell it to their customers for less. Consequently they
decided to stop dealing in it at all, and privately got rid of their
present stock as best they could, selling it to such notables as took
pleasure in throwing away their money for such finery, or thought they
had to wear it.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

The Empress, hearing what was going on through her whispering spies,
without stopping to verify the rumor, immediately confiscated these
persons' wares, fining them a centenary in addition. Now the imperial
treasurer is supposed to be in charge of all matters connected with this
trade. So when Peter Barsyames was given that office, they soon left it
to him to do their unholy deeds. He ruled that all should obey the
letter of the law, while he ordered the silk makers to work for himself.
And this was no secret, for he sold colored silk in the Forum at six
gold pieces an ounce, while for the imperial dye, which is known as
holovere, he charged more than twenty-four.

In this way he got much money for the Emperor and more, quietly, for
himself; and the custom he started continues to this day, the treasurer
being admittedly the sole silk merchant and controller of this trade.

The former dealers in silk in Constantinople and

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

every other city, by sea and by land, were naturally heavily damaged.
Almost the whole populace in the cities mentioned were suddenly made
beggars. Artisans and mechanics were forced to struggle against famine,
and many consequently left the country and fled to Persia. Only the
imperial treasurer could transact this business, giving a share of the
profits aforesaid to the Emperor, and himself taking most of them,
fattening on the public calamity. And so much for that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. How He Spoiled the Beauty of the Cities and Plundered the
Poor](shp29)
