[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](som05)  [Next](som07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V

After all, the "Mormon" people regard the advent of the Buchanan army as
one of the greatest material blessings ever brought to them.

The troops, once in Utah, had to be provisioned; and everything the
settlers could spare was eagerly bought at an unusual price. The gold
changed hands. Then, in their hasty departure, the soldiers disposed of
everything outside of actual necessities in the way of accouterment and
camp equipage. The army found the people in poverty, and left them in
comparative wealth.

And what was the cause of this hurried departure of the military? For
many months, ominous rumblings had been heard,--indications of the
gathering storm which was soon to break in the awful fury of civil
strife. It could not be doubted that war was imminent; already the
conflict had begun, and a picked part of the army was away in the
western wilds, doing nothing for any phase of the public good. But a
word further concerning the expedition in general. The sending of troops
to Utah was part of a foul scheme to weaken the government in its
impending struggle with the secessionists. The movement has been called
not inaptly "Buchanan's blunder," but the best and wisest men may make
blunders, and whatever may be said of President Buchanan's
short-sightedness in taking this step, even his enemies do not question
his integrity in the matter. He was unjustly charged with favoring
secession; but the charge was soon disproved.

However, it was known that certain of his cabinet were in league with
the seceding states; and prominent among them was John Floyd, secretary
of war. The successful efforts of this officer to disarm the North,
while accumulating the munitions of war in the South; to scatter the
forces by locating them in widely separated and remote stations; and in
other ways to dispose of the regular army in the manner best calculated
to favor the anticipated rebellion, are matters of history. It is also
told how, at the commencement of the rebellion, he allied himself with
the confederate forces, accepting the rank of brigadier-general. It was
through Floyd's advice that Buchanan ordered the military expedition to
Utah, ostensibly to install certain federal officials and to repress an
alleged infantile rebellion which in fact had never come into existence,
but in reality to further the interests of the secessionists. When the
history of that great struggle with its antecedent and its consequent
circumstances is written with a pen that shall indite naught but truth,
when prejudice and partisanship are lived down, it may appear that
Jefferson Davis rather than James Buchanan was the prime cause of the
great mistake.

And General Johnston who commanded the army in the west; he who was so
vehement in his denunciation of the rebel "Mormons," and who rejoiced in
being selected to chastise them into submission; who, because of his
vindictiveness incurred the ill-favor of the governor, whose *posse
comitatus* the army was; what became of him, at one time so popular that
he was spoken of as a likely successor to Winfield Scott in the office
of general-in-chief of the United States army? He left Utah in the early
stages of the rebellion, turned his arms against the flag he had sworn
to defend, doffed the blue, donned the grey, and fell a rebel on the
field of Shiloh.

Changes many and great followed in bewildering succession in Utah. The
people were besought to take sides with the South in the awful scenes of
cruel strife; it was openly stated in the east that Utah had allied
herself with the cause of secession; and by others that the design was
to make Salt Lake City the capital of an independent government. And
surely such conjectures were pardonable on the part of all whose
ignorance and prejudice still nursed the delusion of "Mormon"
disloyalty. Moreover, had the people been inclined to rebellion what
greater opportunity could they have wished? Already a North and a South
were talked of--why not set up also a West? A supreme opportunity had
come and how was it used? It was at this very time that the Overland
Telegraph line, which had been approaching from the Atlantic and the
Pacific, was completed, and the first tremor felt in that nerve of steel
carried these words from Brigham Young:

Utah has not seceded, but is firm for the constitution and laws of our
country.

The "Mormon" people saw in their terrible experiences and in the
outrages to which they had been subjected, only the mal-administration
of laws and the subversion of justice through human incapacity and
hatred. Never even for a moment did they question the supreme authority
and the inspired origin of the constitution of their land. They knew no
North, no South, no East, no West; they stood positively by the
constitution, and would have nothing to do in the bloody strife between
brothers, unless indeed they were summoned by the authority to which
they had already once loyally responded, to furnish men and arms for
their country's need.

Following the advent of the telegraph came the railway; and the land of
"Mormondom" was no longer isolated. Her resources were developed, her
wealth became a topic of the world's wonder; the tide of immigration
swelled her population, contributing much of the best from all the
civilized nations of the earth. Every reader of recent and current
history has learned of her rapid growth; of her repeated appeals for the
recognition to which she had so long been entitled in the sisterhood of
states; of the prompt refusals with which her pleas were persistently
met, though other territories with smaller and more illiterate
populations, more restricted resources, and in every way weaker claims,
were allowed to assume the habiliments of maturity, while Utah, lusty,
large and strong, was kept in swaddling clothes. But the cries of the
vigorous infant were at length heeded, and in answer to the seventh
appeal of the kind, Utah's star was added to the nation's galaxy.

But let us turn more particularly to the history of the Church itself.
For a second time and thrice thereafter, the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints has been deprived of its president, and on each
occasion were reiterated the prophecies of disruption uttered at the
time of Joseph Smith's assassination. Calm observers declared that as
the shepherd had gone, the flock would soon be dispersed; while others,
comparable only to wolves, thinking the fold unguarded, sought to harry
and scatter the sheep. But "Mormonism" died not; every added pang of
grief served but to unite the people.

When Brigham Young passed from earth, he was mourned of the people as
deeply as was Moses of Israel. And had he not proved himself a Moses,
aye and a Joshua, too? He had led the people into the land of holy
promise, and had divided unto them their inheritances. He was a man with
clear title as one of the small brotherhood we call great. As carpenter,
farmer, pioneer, capitalist, financier, preacher, apostle, prophet--in
everything he was a leader among men. Even those who opposed him in
politics and in religion respected him for his talents, his magnanimity,
his liberality, and his manliness; and years after his demise, men who
had refused him honor while alive brought their mites and their gold to
erect a monument of stone and bronze to the memory of this man who needs
it not. With his death closed another epoch in the history of his
people, and a successor arose, one who was capable of leading and
judging under the changed conditions.

-----------

But perhaps I am suspected of having forgotten or of having
intentionally omitted reference to what popular belief once considered
the chief feature of "Mormonism," the cornerstone of the structure, the
secret of its influence over its members, and of its attractiveness to
its proselytes, viz., the peculiarity of the "Mormon" institution of
marriage. The Latter-day Saints were long regarded as a polygamous
people. That plural marriage has been practised by a limited proportion
of the people, under sanction of Church ordinance, has never since the
introduction of the system been denied. But that plural marriage is a
vital tenet of the Church is not true. What the Latter-day Saints call
celestial marriage is characteristic of the Church, and is in very
general practise; but of celestial marriage, plurality of wives was an
incident, never an essential. Yet the two have often been confused in
the popular mind.

We believe in a literal resurrection and an actual hereafter, in which
future state shall be recognized every sanctified and authorized
relationship existing here on earth--of parent and child, brother and
sister, husband and wife. We believe, further that contracts as of
marriage, to be valid beyond the veil of mortality must be sanctioned by
a power greater than that of earth. With the seal of the holy Priesthood
upon their wedded state, these people believe implicitly in the
perpetuity of that relationship on the far side of the grave. They marry
not with the saddening limitation "Until death do you part," but "For
time and for all eternity." <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) This
constitutes celestial marriage. The thought that plural marriage has
ever been the head and front of "Mormon" offending, that to it is
traceable as the true cause the hatred of other sects and the
unpopularity of the Church, is not tenable to the earnest thinker. Sad
as have been the experiences of the people in consequence of this
practise, deep and anguish-laden as have been the sighs and groans, hot
and bitter as have been the tears so caused, the heaviest persecution,
the cruelest treatment of their history began before plural marriage was
known in the Church.

There is no sect nor people that sets a higher value on virtue and
chastity than do the Latter-day Saints, nor a people that visits surer
retribution upon the heads of offenders against the laws of sexual
purity. To them marriage is not, can never be, a civil compact alone;
its significance reaches beyond the grave; its obligations are eternal;
and the Latter-day Saints are notable for the sanctity with which they
invest the marital state. It has been my privilege to tread the soil of
many lands, to observe the customs and study the habits of more nations
than one; and I have yet to find the place and meet the people, where
and with whom the purity of man and woman is held more precious than
among the maligned "Mormons" in the mountain valleys of the west. There
I find this measure of just equality of the sexes-- *that the sins of
man shall not be visited upon the head of woman*.

At the inception of plural marriage among the Latter-day Saints, there
was no law, national or state, against its practise. This statement
assumes, as granted, a distinction between bigamy and the "Mormon"
institution of plural marriage. In 1862, a law was enacted with the
purpose of suppressing plural marriage, and, as had been predicted in
the national Senate prior to its passage, it lay for many years a dead
letter. Federal judges and United States attorneys in Utah, who were not
"Mormons" nor lovers of "Mormonism," refused to entertain complaints or
prosecute cases under the law, because of its manifest injustice and
inadequacy. But other laws followed, most of which, as the Latter-day
Saints believe, were aimed directly at their religious conception of the
marriage contract, and not at social impropriety nor sexual offense.

At last the Edmunds-Tucker act took effect, making not the marriage
alone but the subsequent acknowledging of the contract an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. Under the spell of
unrighteous zeal, the federal judiciary of Utah announced and practised
that most infamous doctrine of segregation of offenses with accumulating
penalties.

I who write have listened to judges instructing grand juries in such
terms as these: that although the law of Congress designated as an
offense the acknowledging of more living wives than one by any man, and
prescribed a penalty therefor, as Congress had not specified the length
of time during which this unlawful acknowledging must continue to
constitute the offense, grand juries might indict separately for every
day of the period during which the forbidden relationship existed. This
meant that for an alleged misdemeanor--for which Congress prescribed a
maximum penalty of six months' imprisonment and a fine of three hundred
dollars--a man might be imprisoned for life, aye, for many terms of a
man's natural life did the court's power to enforce its sentences extend
so far, and might be fined millions of dollars. Before this travesty on
the administration of law could be brought before the court of last
resort, and there meet with the reversal and rebuke it deserved, men
were imprisoned under sentences of many years' duration.

The people contested these measures one by one in the courts; presenting
in case after case the different phases of the subject, and urging the
unconstitutionality of the measure. Then the Church was disincorporated,
and its property both real and personal confiscated and escheated to the
government of the United States; and although the personal property was
soon restored, real estate of great value long lay in the hands of the
court's receiver, and the "Mormon" Church had to pay the national
government high rental on its own property. But the people have
suspended the practise of plural marriage; and the testimony of the
governors, judges, and district attorneys of the territory, and later
that of the officers of the state, have declared the sincerity of the
renunciation.

As the people had adopted the practise under what was believed to be
divine approval, they suspended it when they were justified in so doing.
In whatever light this practise has been regarded in the past, it is
today a dead issue, forbidden by ecclesiastical rule as it is prohibited
by legal statute. And the world is learning, to its manifest surprise,
that plural marriage and "Mormonism" are not synonymous terms.

-----------

And so the story of "Mormonism" runs on; its finale has not yet been
written; the current press presents continuously new stages of its
progress, new developments of its plan. Today the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints is stronger than ever before; and the people are
confident that it is at its weakest stage for all time to come. It lives
and thrives because within it are the elements of thrift and the forces
of life. It embraces a boundless liberality of belief and practise; true
toleration is one of its essential features; it makes love for mankind
second only to love for Deity. Its creed provides for the protection of
all men in their rights of worship according to the dictates of
conscience. It contemplates a millennium of peace, when every man shall
love his neighbor and respect his neighbor's opinion as he regards
himself and his own--a day when the voice of the people shall be in
unison with the voice of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[:3](som06.htm#fr_2) For treatment of Celestial
Marraige and other Temple ordinances, see "The House of the Lord," by
the present author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1912.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](som07)
