[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the
will of God--and our brother Timothy: To the Church of God in Corinth,
with all God's people throughout Greece.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May grace and peace be granted to you from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Heartfelt thanks be to the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ--the Father who is full of compassion and the
God who gives all comfort.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He comforts us in our every affliction so
that we may be able to comfort those who are in any kind of affliction
by means of the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For just as we have more than our share of
suffering for the Christ, so also through the Christ we have more than
our share of comfort.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But if, on the one hand, we are enduring
affliction, it is for your comfort and salvation; and if, on the other
hand, we are receiving comfort, it is for your comfort which is produced
within you through your patient fortitude under the same sufferings as
those which we also are enduring.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And our hope for you is stedfast; for we
know that as you are partners with us in the sufferings, so you are also
partners in the comfort.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For as for our troubles which came upon us
in the province of Asia, we would have you know, brethren, that we were
exceedingly weighed down, and felt overwhelmed, so that we renounced all
hope even of life.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Nay, we had, as we still have, the sentence
of death within our own selves, in order that our confidence may repose,
not on ourselves, but on God who raised the dead to life.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> He it is who rescued us from so imminent
a death, and will do so again; and we have a firm hope in Him that He
will also rescue us in all the future,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> while you on your part lend us your aid
in entreaty for us, so that from many lips thanksgivings may rise on our
behalf for the boon granted to us at the intercession of many.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For the reason for our boasting is
this--the testimony of our own conscience that it was in holiness and
with pure motives before God, and in reliance not on worldly wisdom but
on the gracious help of God, that we have conducted ourselves in the
world, and above all in our relations with you.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For we are writing to you nothing
different from what we have written before, or from what indeed you
already recognize as truth and will, I trust, recognize as such to the
very end;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> just as some few of you have recognized
us as your reason for boasting, even as you will be ours, on the day of
Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> It was because I entertained this
confidence that I intended to visit you before going elsewhere--so that
you might receive a twofold proof of God's favour--

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and to pass by way of Corinth into
Macedonia. Then my plan was to return from Macedonia to you, and be
helped forward by you to Judaea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Did I display any vacillation or caprice
in this? Or the purposes which I form--do I form them on worldly
principles, now crying "Yes, yes," and now "No, no"?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> As certainly as God is faithful, our
language to you is not now "Yes" and now "No."

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For Jesus Christ the Son of God--He who
was proclaimed among you by us, that is by Silas and Timothy and
myself--did not show Himself a waverer between "Yes" and "No." But it
was and always is "Yes" with Him.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For all the promises of God, whatever
their number, have their confirmation in Him; and for this reason
through Him also our "Amen" acknowledges their truth and promotes the
glory of God through our faith.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> But He who is making us as well as you
stedfast through union with the Anointed One, and has anointed us, is
God,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and He has also set His seal upon us, and
has put His Spirit into our hearts as a pledge and foretaste of future
blessing.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But as for me, as my soul shall answer
for it, I appeal to God as my witness, that it was to spare you pain
that I gave up my visit to Corinth.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Not that we want to lord it over you in
respect of your faith--we do, however, desire to help your joy--for in
the matter of your faith you are standing firm.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But, so far as I am concerned, I have
resolved not to have a painful visit the next time I come to see you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if I of all men give you pain, who then
is there to gladden my heart, but the very persons to whom I give pain?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I write this to you in order that when
I come I may not receive pain from those who ought to give me joy,
confident as I am as to all of you that my joy is the joy of you all.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For with many tears I write to you, and in
deep suffering and depression of spirit, not in order to grieve you, but
in the hope of showing you how brimful my heart is with love for you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now if any one has caused sorrow, it has
been caused not so much to me, as in some degree--for I have no wish to
exaggerate--to all of you.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> In the case of such a person the punishment
which was inflicted by the majority of you is enough.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So that you may now take the opposite
course, and forgive him rather and comfort him, for fear he should
perhaps be driven to despair by his excess of grief.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I beg you therefore fully to reinstate him
in your love.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For in writing to you I have also this
object in view--to discover by experience whether you are prepared to be
obedient in every respect.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When you forgive a man an offence I also
forgive it; for in fact what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven
anything, has always been for your sakes in the presence of Christ,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> for fear Satan should gain an advantage
over us. For we are not ignorant of his devices.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now when I came into the Troad to spread
there the Good News about the Christ, even though in the Lord's
providence a door stood open before me,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> yet, obtaining no relief for my spirit
because I did not find our brother Titus, I bade them farewell and went
on into Macedonia.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But to God be the thanks who in Christ
ever heads our triumphal procession, and by our hands waves in every
place that sweet incense, the knowledge of Him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For we are a fragrance of Christ grateful
to God in those whom He is saving and in those who are perishing;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> to the last-named an odor of death
predictive of death, and to the others an odor of life predictive of
life. And for such service as this who is competent?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> We are; for, unlike most teachers, we are
not fraudulent hucksters of God's Message; but with transparent motives,
as commissioned by God, in God's presence and in communion with Christ,
so we speak.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do you say that this is self-recommendation
once more? Or do we need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you
or from you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Our letter of recommendation is
yourselves--a letter written on our hearts and everywhere known and
read.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For all can see that you are a letter of
Christ entrusted to our care, and written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the ever-living God--and not on tablets of stone, but on human
hearts as tablets.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Such is the confidence which we have
through Christ in the presence of God;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> not that of ourselves we are competent to
decide anything by our own reasonings, but our competency comes from
God.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> It is He also who has made us competent to
serve Him in connexion with a new Covenant, which is not a written code
but a Spirit; for the written code inflicts death, but the Spirit gives
Life.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> If, however, the service that proclaims
death--its code being engraved in writing upon stones--came with glory,
so that the children of Israel could not look steadily on the face of
Moses because of the brightness of his face--a vanishing brightness;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> will not the service of the Spirit be far
more glorious?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For if the service which pronounces doom
had glory, far more glorious still is the service which tells of
righteousness.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For, in fact, that which was once
resplendent in glory has no glory at all in this respect, that it pales
before the glory which surpasses it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For if that which was to be abolished
came with glory, much more is that which is permanent arrayed in glory.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Therefore, cherishing a hope like this,
we speak without reserve, and we do not imitate Moses,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> who used to throw a veil over his face to
hide from the gaze of the children of Israel the passing away of what
was but transitory.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Nay, their minds were made dull; for to
this very day during the reading of the book of the ancient Covenant,
the same veil remains unlifted, because it is only in Christ that it is
to be abolished.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Yes, to this day, whenever Moses is read,
a veil lies upon their hearts.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But whenever the heart of the nation
shall have returned to the Lord, the veil will be withdrawn.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now by "the Lord" is meant the Spirit;
and where the Spirit of the Lord is, freedom is enjoyed.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And all of us, with unveiled faces,
reflecting like bright mirrors the glory of the Lord, are being
transformed into the same likeness, from one degree of radiant holiness
to another, even as derived from the Lord the Spirit.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, being engaged in this service
and being mindful of the mercy which has been shown us, we are not
cowards.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Nay, we have renounced the secrecy which
marks a feeling of shame. We practice no cunning tricks, nor do we
adulterate God's Message. But by a full clear statement of the truth we
strive to commend ourselves in the presence of God to every human
conscience.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> If, however, the meaning of our Good News
has been veiled, the veil has been on the hearts of those who are on the
way to perdition,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> in whom the god of this present age has
blinded their unbelieving minds so as to shut out the sunshine of the
Good News of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> (For we do not proclaim ourselves, but we
proclaim Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your bondservants for
the sake of Jesus.)

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For God who said, "Out of darkness let
light shine," is He who has shone in our hearts to give us the light of
the knowledge of God's glory, which is radiant on the face of Christ.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But we have this treasure in a fragile vase
of clay, in order that the surpassing greatness of the power may be seen
to belong to God, and not to originate in us.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> We are hard pressed, yet never in absolute
distress; perplexed, yet never utterly baffled;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> pursued, yet never left unsuccoured; struck
to the ground, yet never slain;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> always, wherever we go, carrying with us
in our bodies the putting to death of Jesus, so that in our bodies it
may also be clearly shown that Jesus lives.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For we, alive though we are, are
continually surrendering ourselves to death for the sake of Jesus, so
that in this mortal nature of ours it may also be clearly shown that
Jesus lives.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Thus we are constantly dying, while you
are in full enjoyment of Life.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But possessing the same Spirit of faith
as he who wrote, &lt;"I believed, and therefore I have spoken,"&gt; we
also believe, and therefore we speak.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For we know that He who raised the Lord
Jesus from the dead will raise us also to be with Jesus, and will cause
both us and you to stand in His own presence.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For everything is for your sakes, in
order that grace, being more richly bestowed because of the
thanksgivings of the increased number, may more and more promote the
glory of God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Therefore we are not cowards. Nay, even
though our outward man is wasting away, yet our inward man is being
renewed day by day.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For this our light and transitory burden
of suffering is achieving for us a preponderating, yes, a vastly
preponderating, and eternal weight of glory;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> while we look not at things seen, but
things unseen; for things seen are temporary, but things unseen are
eternal.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we know that if this poor tent, our
earthly house, is taken down, we have in Heaven a building which God has
provided, a house not built by human hands, but eternal.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For in this one we sigh, because we long to
put on over it our dwelling which comes from Heaven--

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> if indeed having really put on a robe we
shall not be found to be unclothed.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Yes, we who are in this tent certainly do
sigh under our burdens, for we do not wish to lay aside that with which
we are now clothed, but to put on more, so that our mortality may be
absorbed in Life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And He who formed us with this very end in
view is God, who has given us His Spirit as a pledge and foretaste of
that bliss.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> We have therefore a cheerful confidence. We
know that while we are at home in the body we are banished from the
Lord;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> for we are living a life of faith, and not
one of sight.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> So we have a cheerful confidence, and we
anticipate with greater delight being banished from the body and going
home to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And for this reason also we make it our
ambition, whether at home or in exile, to please Him perfectly.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For we must all of us appear before
Christ's judgement-seat in our true characters, in order that each may
then receive an award for his actions in this life, in accordance with
what he has done, whether it be good or whether it be worthless.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Therefore, because we realize how greatly
the Lord is to be feared, we are endeavouring to win men over, and God
recognizes what our motives are, and I hope that you, in your hearts,
recognize them too.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> We are not again commending ourselves to
your favour, but are furnishing you with a ground of boasting on our
behalf, so that you may have a reply ready for those with whom
superficial appearances are everything and sincerity of heart counts for
nothing.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For if we have been beside ourselves, it
has been for God's glory; or if we are now in our right senses, it is in
order to be of service to you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the love of Christ overmasters us,
the conclusion at which we have arrived being this--that One having died
for all, His death was their death,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and that He died for all in order that
the living may no longer live to themselves, but to Him who died for
them and rose again.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Therefore for the future we know no one
simply as a man. Even if we have known Christ as a man, yet now we do so
no longer.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> So that if any one is in Christ, he is a
new creature: the old state of things has passed away; a new state of
things has come into existence.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And all this is from God, who has
reconciled us to Himself through Christ, and has appointed us to serve
in the ministry of reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> We are to tell how God was in Christ
reconciling the world to Himself, not charging men's transgressions to
their account, and that He has entrusted to us the Message of this
reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> On Christ's behalf therefore we come as
ambassadors, God, as it were, making entreaty through our lips: we, on
Christ's behalf, beseech men to be reconciled to God.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> He has made Him who knew nothing of sin
to be sin for us, in order that in Him we may become the righteousness
of God.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And you also we, as God's fellow workers,
entreat not to be found to have received His grace to no purpose.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> For He says, &lt;"At a time of welcome I
have listened to you, and on a day of salvation I have succoured
you."&gt; Now is the time of loving welcome! Now is the day of
salvation!

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> We endeavour to give people no cause for
stumbling in anything, lest the work we are doing should fall into
discredit.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> On the contrary, as God's servants, we seek
their full approval--by unwearied endurance, by afflictions, by
distress, by helplessness;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> by floggings, by imprisonments; by facing
riots, by toil, by sleepless watching, by hunger and thirst;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> by purity of life, by knowledge, by
patience, by kindness, by the Holy Spirit, by sincere love;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> by the proclamation of the truth, by the
power of God; by the weapons of righteousness, wielded in both hands;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> through honour and ignominy, through
calumny and praise. We are looked upon as impostors and yet are true
men;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> as obscure persons, and yet are well known;
as on the point of death, and yet, strange to tell, we live; as under
God's discipline, and yet we are not deprived of life;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> as sad, but we are always joyful; as
poor, but we bestow wealth on many; as having nothing, and yet we
securely possess all things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> O Corinthians, our lips are unsealed to
you: our heart is expanded.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> There is no narrowness in our love to
you: the narrowness is in your own feelings.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And in just requital--I speak as to my
children--let your hearts expand also.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Do not come into close association with
unbelievers, like oxen yoked with asses. For what is there in common
between righteousness and lawlessness? Or what partnership has light
with darkness?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Where can harmony between Christ and
Belial be found? Or what participation has a believer with an
unbeliever?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And what compact has the Temple of God
with idols? For \*we\* are the Temple of the ever-living God; as God has
said, &lt;"I will dwell among them, and walk about among them; and will
be their God, and it is they who shall be My people."&gt;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Therefore, &lt;"\`Come out from among
them and separate yourselves,' says the Lord, \`and touch nothing
impure; and I will receive you, and will be a Father to you,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and you shall be My sons and daughters,'
says the Lord the Ruler of all."&gt;

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Having therefore these promises, beloved
friends, let us purify ourselves from all defilement of body and of
spirit, and secure perfect holiness through the fear of God.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Make room for us in your hearts. There is
not one of you whom we have wronged, not one to whom we have done harm,
not one over whom we have gained any selfish advantage.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> I do not say this to imply blame, for, as I
have already said, you have such a place in our hearts that we would die
with you or live with you.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> I have great confidence in you: very loudly
do I boast of you. I am filled with comfort: my heart overflows with joy
amid all our affliction.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For even after our arrival in Macedonia we
could get no relief such as human nature craves. We were greatly
harassed; there were conflicts without and fears within.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But He who comforts the depressed--even
God-- comforted us by the coming of Titus, and not by his coming only,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> but also by the fact that he had felt
comforted on your account, and by the report which he brought of your
eager affection, of your grief, and of your jealousy on my behalf, so
that I rejoiced more than ever.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For if I gave you pain by that letter, I do
not regret it, though I did regret it then. I see that that letter, even
though for a time it gave you pain, had a salutary effect.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Now I rejoice, not in your grief, but
because the grief led to repentance; for you sorrowed with a godly
sorrow, which prevented you from receiving injury from us in any
respect.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For godly sorrow produces repentance
leading to salvation, a repentance not to be regretted; but the sorrow
of the world finally produces death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For mark the effects of this very
thing--your having sorrowed with a godly sorrow--what earnestness it has
called forth in you, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what
indignation, what alarm, what longing affection, what jealousy, what
meting out of justice! You have completely wiped away reproach from
yourselves in the matter.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Therefore, though I wrote to you, it was
not to punish the offender, nor to secure justice for him who had
suffered the wrong, but it was chiefly in order that your earnest
feeling on our behalf might become manifest to yourselves in the sight
of God.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For this reason we feel comforted;
and--in addition to this our comfort--we have been filled with all the
deeper joy at Titus's joy, because his spirit has been set at rest by
you all.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For however I may have boasted to him
about you, I have no reason to feel ashamed; but as we have in all
respects spoken the truth to you, so also our boasting to Titus about
you has turned out to be the truth.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And his strong and tender affection is
all the more drawn out towards you when he recalls to mind the obedience
which all of you manifested by the timidity and nervous anxiety with
which you welcomed him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I rejoice that I have absolute confidence
in you.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> But we desire to let you know, brethren, of
the grace of God which has been bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> how, while passing through great trouble,
their boundless joy even amid their deep poverty has overflowed to
increase their generous liberality.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For I can testify that to the utmost of
their power, and even beyond their power, they have of their own free
will given help.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> With earnest entreaty they begged from us
the favour of being allowed to share in the service now being rendered
to God's people.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> They not only did this, as we had expected,
but first of all in obedience to God's will they gave their own selves
to the Lord and to us.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> This led us to urge Titus that, as he had
previously been the one who commenced the work, so he should now go and
complete among you this act of beneficence also.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Yes, just as you are already very rich in
faith, readiness of speech, knowledge, unwearied zeal, and in the love
that is in you, implanted by us, see to it that this grace of liberal
giving also flourishes in you.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> I am not saying this by way of command, but
to test by the standard of other men's earnestness the genuineness of
your love also.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For you know the condescending goodness of
our Lord Jesus Christ--how for your sakes He became poor, though He was
rich, in order that you through His poverty might grow rich.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> But in this matter I give you an opinion;
for my doing this helps forward your own intentions, seeing that not
only have you begun operations, but a year ago you already had the
desire to do so.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And now complete the doing also, in order
that, just as there was then the eagerness in desiring, there may now be
the accomplishment in proportion to your means.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For, assuming the earnest willingness,
the gift is acceptable according to whatever a man has, and not
according to what he has not.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I do not urge you to give in order that
others may have relief while you are unduly pressed,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> but that, by equalization of burdens,
your superfluity having in the present emergency supplied their
deficiency, their superfluity may in turn be a supply for your
deficiency later on, so that there may be equalization of burdens.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Even as it is written, &lt;"He who
gathered much had not too much, and he who gathered little had not too
little."&gt;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But thanks be to God that He inspires the
heart of Titus with the same deep interest in you;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> for Titus welcomed our request, and,
being thoroughly in earnest, comes to you of his own free will.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And we send with him the brother whose
praises for his earnestness in proclaiming the Good News are heard
throughout all the Churches.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And more than that, he is the one who was
chosen by the vote of the Churches to travel with us, sharing our
commission in the administration of this generous gift to promote the
Lord's glory and gratify our own strong desire.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For against one thing we are on our
guard--I mean against blame being thrown upon us in respect to these
large and liberal contributions which are under our charge.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For we seek not only God's approval of
our integrity, but man's also.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And we send with them our brother, of
whose zeal we have had frequent proof in many matters, and who is now
more zealous than ever through the strong confidence which he has in
you.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> As for Titus, remember that he is a
partner with me, and is my comrade in my labours for you. And as for our
brethren, remember that they are delegates from the Churches, and are
men in whom Christ is glorified.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Exhibit therefore to the Churches a proof
of your love, and a justification of our boasting to these brethren
about you.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> As to the services which are being rendered
to God's people, it is really unnecessary for me to write to you.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For I know your earnest willingness, on
account of which I habitually boast of you to the Macedonians, pointing
out to them that for a whole year you in Greece have been ready; and the
greater number of them have been spurred on by your ardour.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Still I send the brethren in order that in
this matter our boast about you may not turn out to have been an idle
one; so that, as I have said, you may be ready;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> for fear that, if any Macedonians come with
me and find you unprepared, we--not to say you yourselves--should be put
to the blush in respect to this confidence.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> I have thought it absolutely necessary
therefore to request these brethren to visit you before I myself come,
and to make sure beforehand that the gift of love which you have already
promised may be ready as a gift of love, and may not seem to have been
something which I have extorted from you.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But do not forget that he who sows with a
niggardly hand will also reap a niggardly crop, and that he who sows
bountifully will also reap bountifully.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Let each contribute what he has decided
upon in his own mind, and not do it reluctantly or under compulsion.
&lt;"It is a cheerful giver that God loves."&gt;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God is able to bestow every blessing on
you in abundance, so that richly enjoying all sufficiency at all times,
you may have ample means for all good works.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> As it is written, &lt;"He has scattered
abroad, he has given to the poor, his almsgiving remains for ever."&gt;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And God who continually supplies seed for
the sower and bread for eating, will supply you with seed and multiply
it, and will cause your almsgiving to yield a plentiful harvest.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> May you be abundantly enriched so as to
show all liberality, such as through our instrumentality brings
thanksgiving to God.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For the service rendered in this sacred
gift not only helps to relieve the wants of God's people, but it is also
rich in its results and awakens a chorus of thanksgiving to God.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For, by the practical proof of it which
you exhibit in this service, you cause God to be extolled for your
fidelity to your professed adherence to the Good News of the Christ, and
for the liberality of your contributions for them and for all who are in
need,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> while they themselves also in
supplications on your behalf pour out their longing love towards you
because of God's surpassing grace which is resting upon you.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Thanks be to God for His unspeakably
precious gift!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> But as for me Paul, I entreat you by the
gentleness and self-forgetfulness of Christ--I who when among you have
not an imposing personal presence, but when absent am fearlessly
outspoken in dealing with you.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I beseech you not to compel me when
present to make a bold display of the confidence with which I reckon I
shall show my \`courage' against some who reckon that we are guided by
worldly principles.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For, though we are still living in the
world, it is no worldly warfare that we are waging.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> The weapons with which we fight are not
human weapons, but are mighty for God in overthrowing strong fortresses.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For we overthrow arrogant \`reckonings,'
and every stronghold that towers high in defiance of the knowledge of
God, and we carry off every thought as if into slavery--into subjection
to Christ;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> while we hold ourselves in readiness to
punish every act of disobedience, as soon as ever you as a Church have
fully shown your obedience.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Is it outward appearances you look to? If
any man is confident as regards himself that he specially belongs to
Christ, let him consider again and reflect that just as he belongs to
Christ, so also do we.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> If, however, I were to boast more loudly
of our Apostolic authority, which the Lord has given us that we may
build you up, not pull you down, I should have no reason to feel
ashamed.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Let it not seem as if I wanted to
frighten you by my letters.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For they say "His letters are
authoritative and forcible, but his personal presence is unimpressive,
and as for eloquence, he has none."

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Let such people take this into their
reckoning, that whatever we are in word by our letters when absent, the
same are we also in act when present.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we have not the \`courage' to rank
ourselves among, or compare ourselves with, certain persons
distinguished by their self-commendation. Yet they are not wise,
measuring themselves, as they do, by one another and comparing
themselves with one another.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> We, however, will not exceed due limits
in our boasting, but will keep within the limits of the sphere which God
has assigned to us as a limit, which reaches even to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For there is no undue stretch of
authority on our part, as though it did not extend to you. We pressed on
even to Corinth, and were the first to proclaim to you the Good News of
the Christ.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> We do not exceed our due limits, and
take credit for other men's labours; but we entertain the hope that, as
your faith grows, we shall gain promotion among you--still keeping
within our own sphere--promotion to a larger field of labour,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and shall tell the Good News in the
districts beyond you, not boasting in another man's sphere about work
already done by him.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But &lt;"whoever boasts, let his boast
be in the Lord."&gt;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For it is not the man that commends
himself who is really approved, but he whom the Lord commends.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I wish you could have borne with a little
foolish boasting on my part. Nay, do bear with me.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> I am jealous over you with God's own
jealousy. For I have betrothed you to Christ to present you to Him like
a faithful bride to her one husband.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I am afraid that, as the serpent in
his craftiness deceived Eve, so your minds may be led astray from their
single-heartedness and their fidelity to Christ.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> If indeed some visitor is proclaiming
among you another Jesus whom we did not proclaim, or if you are
receiving a Spirit different from the One you have already received or a
Good News different from that which you have already welcomed, your
toleration is admirable!

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Why, I reckon myself in no respect
inferior to those superlatively great Apostles.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And if in the matter of speech I am no
orator, yet in knowledge I am not deficient. Nay, we have in every way
made that fully evident to you.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Is it a sin that I abased myself in order
for you to be exalted, in that I proclaimed God's Good News to you
without fee or reward?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Other Churches I robbed, receiving pay
from them in order to do you service.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And when I was with you and my resources
failed, there was no one to whom I became a burden--for the brethren
when they came from Macedonia fully supplied my wants--and I kept myself
from being in the least a burden to you, and will do so still.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Christ knows that it is true when I say
that I will not be stopped from boasting of this anywhere in Greece.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And why? Because I do not love you? God
knows that I do.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But I will persist in the same line of
conduct in order to cut the ground from under the feet of those who
desire an opportunity of getting themselves recognized as being on a
level with us in the matters about which they boast.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For men of this stamp are sham
apostles, dishonest workmen, assuming the garb of Apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And no wonder. Satan, their master, can
disguise himself as an angel of light.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> It is therefore no great thing for his
servants also to disguise themselves as servants of righteousness. Their
end will be in accordance with their actions.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> To return to what I was saying. Let no
one suppose that I am foolish. Or if you must, at any rate make
allowance for me as being foolish, in order that I, as well as they, may
boast a little.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> What I am now saying, I do not say by
the Lord's command, but as a fool in his folly might, in this reckless
boasting.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Since many boast for merely human
reasons, I too will boast.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Wise as you yourselves are, you find
pleasure in tolerating fools.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For you tolerate it, if any one
enslaves you, lives at your expense, makes off with your property, gives
himself airs, or strikes you on the face.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> I use the language of
self-disparagement, as though I were admitting our own feebleness. Yet
for whatever reason any one is \`courageous' --I speak in mere folly--I
also am courageous.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they
Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Are they servants of Christ? (I speak
as if I were out of my mind.) Much more am I His servant; serving Him
more thoroughly than they by my labours, and more thoroughly also by my
imprisonments, by excessively cruel floggings, and with risk of life
many a time.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> From the Jews I five times have
received forty lashes all but one.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Three times I have been beaten with
Roman rods, once I have been stoned, three times I have been
shipwrecked, once for full four and twenty hours I was floating on the
open sea.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> I have served Him by frequent
travelling, amid dangers in crossing rivers, dangers from robbers;
dangers from my own countrymen, dangers from the Gentiles; dangers in
the city, dangers in the Desert, dangers by sea, dangers from spies in
our midst;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> with labour and toil, with many a
sleepless night, in hunger and thirst, in frequent fastings, in cold,
and with insufficient clothing.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And besides other things, which I pass
over, there is that which presses on me daily--my anxiety for all the
Churches.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
led astray into sin, and I am not aflame with indignation?

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> If boast I must, it shall be of things
which display my weakness.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ--He who is blessed throughout the Ages--knows that I am speaking
the truth.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> In Damascus the governor under King
Aretas kept guards at the gates of the city in order to apprehend me,

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> but through an opening in the wall I
was let down in a basket, and so escaped his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I am compelled to boast. It is not a
profitable employment, but I will proceed to visions and revelations
granted me by the Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I know a Christian man who fourteen years
ago-- whether in the body I do not know, or out of the body I do not
know; God knows--was caught up (this man of whom I am speaking) even to
the highest Heaven.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And I know that this man-- whether in the
body or apart from the body I do not know;

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> God knows--was caught up into Paradise
and heard unspeakable things which no human being is permitted to
repeat.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Of such a one I will boast; but of myself
I will not boast, except in my weaknesses.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> If however I should choose to boast, I
should not be a fool for so doing, for I should be speaking the truth.
But I forbear, lest any one should be led to estimate me more highly
than what his own eyes attest, or more highly than what he hears from my
lips.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And judging by the stupendous grandeur of
the revelations--therefore lest I should be over-elated there has been
sent to me, like the agony of impalement, Satan's angel dealing blow
after blow, lest I should be over-elated.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> As for this, three times have I besought
the Lord to rid me of him;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> but His reply has been, "My grace
suffices for you, for power matures in weakness." Most gladly therefore
will I boast of my infirmities rather than complain of them--in order
that Christ's power may overshadow me.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In fact I take pleasure in infirmities,
in the bearing of insults, in distress, in persecutions, in grievous
difficulties--for Christ's sake; for when I am weak, then I am strong.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> It is foolish of me to write all this,
but you have compelled me to do so. Why, you ought to have been my
vindicators; for in no respect have I been inferior to these
superlatively great Apostles, even though in myself I am nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The signs that characterize the true
Apostle have been done among you, accompanied by unwearied fortitude,
and by tokens and marvels and displays of power.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> In what respect, therefore, have you
been worse dealt with than other Churches, except that I myself never
hung as a dead weight upon you? Forgive the injustice I thus did you!

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> See, I am now for the third time
prepared to visit you, but I will not be a dead weight to you. I desire
not your money, but yourselves; for children ought not to put by for
their parents, but parents for their children.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And as for me, most gladly will I spend
all I have and be utterly spent for your salvation.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> If I love you so intensely, am I the
less to be loved? Be that as it may: I was not a burden to you. But
being by no means scrupulous, I entrapped you, they say!

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Have I gained any selfish advantage
over you through any one of the messengers I have sent to you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I begged Titus to visit you, and sent
our other brother with him. Did Titus gain any selfish advantage over
you? Were not he and I guided by one and the same Spirit, and did we not
walk in the same steps?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> You are imagining, all this time, that
we are making our defense at your bar. In reality it is as in God's
presence and in communion with Christ that we speak; but, dear friends,
it is all with a view to your progress in goodness.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For I am afraid that perhaps when I
come I may not find you to be what I desire, and that you may find me to
be what you do not desire; that perhaps there may be contention,
jealousy, bitter feeling, party spirit, ill-natured talk, backbiting,
undue eulogy, unrest;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and that upon re-visiting you I may be
humbled by my God in your presence, and may have to mourn over many
whose hearts still cling to their old sins, and who have not repented of
the impurity, fornication, and gross sensuality, of which they have been
guilty.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> This intended visit of mine is my third
visit to you. &lt;"On the evidence of two or three witnesses every
charge shall be sustained."&gt;

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Those who cling to their old sins, and
indeed all of you, I have forewarned and still forewarn (as I did on my
second visit when present, so I do now, though absent) that, when I come
again, I shall not spare you;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> since you want a practical proof of the
fact that Christ speaks by my lips--He who is not feeble towards you,
but powerful among you.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For though it is true that He was
crucified through weakness, yet He now lives through the power of God.
We also are weak, sharing His weakness, but with Him we shall be full of
life to deal with you through the power of God.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Test yourselves to discover whether you
are true believers: put your own selves under examination. Or do you not
know that Jesus Christ is within you, unless you are insincere?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But I trust that you will recognize that
we are not insincere.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And our prayer to God is that you may do
nothing wrong; not in order that our sincerity may be demonstrated, but
that you may do what is right, even though our sincerity may seem to be
doubtful.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For we have no power against the truth,
but only for the furtherance of the truth;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> and it is a joy to us when we are
powerless, but you are strong. This we also pray for--the perfecting of
your characters.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For this reason I write thus while
absent, that when present I may not have to act severely in the exercise
of the authority which the Lord has given me for building up, and not
for pulling down.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Finally, brethren, be joyful, secure
perfection of character, take courage, be of one mind, live in peace.
And then God who gives love and peace will be with you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> All God's people here send greetings to
you.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal.md)
