[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phi)  [Next](th1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Colossians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the
will of God--and Timothy our brother:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To the people of God and the believing
brethren at Colossae who are in Christ. May grace and peace be granted
to you from God our Father.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We give thanks to God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, constantly praying for you as we do,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> because we have heard of your faith in
Christ Jesus and of the love which you cherish towards all God's people,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> on account of the hope treasured up for you
in Heaven. Of this hope you have already heard in the Message of the
truth of the Good News.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For it has reached you, and remains with
you, just as it has also spread through the whole world, yielding fruit
there and increasing, as it has done among you from the day when first
you heard it and came really to know the grace of God,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> as you learned it from Epaphras our
dearly-loved fellow servant. He is to you a faithful minister of Christ
in our stead,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> and moreover he has informed us of your
love, which is inspired by the Spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For this reason we also, from the day we
first received these tidings, have never ceased to pray for you and to
entreat that you may be filled with a clear knowledge of His will
accompanied by thorough wisdom and discernment in spiritual things;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> so that your lives may be worthy of the
Lord and perfectly pleasing to Him, while you exhibit the results of
right action of every sort and grow into a fuller knowledge of God.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Since His power is so glorious, may you
be strengthened with strength of every kind, and be prepared for
cheerfully enduring all things with patience and long-suffering;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and give thanks to the Father who has
made us fit to receive our share of the inheritance of God's people in
Light.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> It is God who has delivered us out of the
dominion of darkness, and has transferred us into the Kingdom of His
dearly-loved Son,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> in whom we have our redemption--the
forgiveness of our sins.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Christ is the visible representation of
the invisible God, the Firstborn and Lord of all creation.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For in Him was created the universe of
things in heaven and on earth, things seen and things unseen, thrones,
dominions, princedoms, powers--all were created, and exist through and
for Him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And HE IS before all things and in and
through Him the universe is a harmonious whole.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Moreover He is the Head of His Body, the
Church. He is the Beginning, the Firstborn from among the dead, in order
that He Himself may in all things occupy the foremost place.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For it was the Father's gracious will
that the whole of the divine perfections should dwell in Him.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And God purposed through Him to reconcile
the universe to Himself, making peace through His blood, which was shed
upon the Cross--to reconcile to Himself through Him, I say, things on
earth and things in Heaven.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And you, estranged as you once were and
even hostile in your minds, amidst your evil deeds,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> He has now, in His human body, reconciled
to God by His death, to bring you, holy and faultless and
irreproachable, into His presence;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> if, indeed, you are still firmly holding
to faith as your foundation, without ever shifting from your hope that
rests on the Good News that you have heard, which has been proclaimed in
the whole creation under Heaven, and in which I Paul have been appointed
to serve.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Now I can find joy amid my sufferings for
you, and I fill up in my own person whatever is lacking in Christ's
afflictions on behalf of His Body, the Church.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> I have been appointed to serve the Church
in the position of responsibility entrusted to me by God for your
benefit, so that I may fully deliver God's Message--

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> the truth which has been kept secret from
all ages and generations, but has now been revealed to His people,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> to whom it was His will to make known how
vast a wealth of glory for the Gentile world is implied in this
truth--the truth that \`Christ is in you, the hope of glory.'

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Him we preach, admonishing every one and
instructing every one, with all possible wisdom, so that we may bring
every one into God's presence, made perfect through Christ.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> To this end, like an earnest wrestler, I
exert all my strength in reliance upon the power of Him who is mightily
at work within me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For I would have you know in how severe a
struggle I am engaged on behalf of you and the brethren in Laodicea and
of all who have not known me personally,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> in order that their hearts may be cheered,
they themselves being welded together in love and enjoying all the
advantages of a reasonable certainty, till at last they attain the full
knowledge of God's truth, which is Christ Himself.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> In Him all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are stored up, hidden from view.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I say this to prevent your being misled by
any one's plausible sophistry.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For although, as you say, I am absent from
you in body, yet in spirit I am present with you and am delighted to
witness your good discipline and the solid front presented by your faith
in Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> As therefore you have received the Christ,
even Jesus our Lord, live and act in vital union with Him;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> having the roots of your being firmly
planted in Him, and continually building yourselves up in Him, and
always being increasingly confirmed in the faith as you were taught it,
and abounding in it with thanksgiving.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Take care lest there be some one who leads
you away as prisoners by means of his philosophy and idle fancies,
following human traditions and the world's crude notions instead of
following Christ.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For it is in Christ that the fulness of
God's nature dwells embodied, and in Him you are made complete,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and He is the Lord of all princes and
rulers.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> In Him also you were circumcised with a
circumcision not performed by hand, when you threw off your sinful
nature in true Christian circumcision;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> having been buried with Him in your
baptism, in which you were also raised with Him through faith produced
within you by God who raised Him from among the dead.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And to you--dead as you once were in your
transgressions and in the uncircumcision of your natural state--He has
nevertheless given Life with Himself, having forgiven us all our
transgressions.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The bond, with its requirements, which
was in force against us and was hostile to us, He cancelled, and cleared
it out of the way, nailing it to His Cross.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And the hostile princes and rulers He
shook off from Himself, and boldly displayed them as His conquests, when
by the Cross He triumphed over them.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Therefore suffer no one to sit in
judgement on you as to eating or drinking or with regard to a festival,
a new moon or a sabbath.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These were a shadow of things that were
soon to come, but the substance belongs to Christ.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Let no one defraud you of your prize,
priding himself on his humility and on his worship of the angels, and
taking his stand on the visions he has seen, and idly puffed up with his
unspiritual thoughts.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Such a one does not keep his hold upon
Christ, the Head, from whom the Body, in all its parts nourished and
strengthened by its points of contact and its connections, grows with a
divine growth.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> If you have died with Christ and have
escaped from the world's rudimentary notions, why, as though your life
still belonged to the world, do you submit to such precepts as

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> "Do not handle this;" "Do not taste
that;" "Do not touch that other thing" --

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> referring to things which are all
intended to be used up and perish--in obedience to mere human
injunctions and teachings?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> These rules have indeed an appearance of
wisdom where self-imposed worship exists, and an affectation of humility
and an ascetic severity. But not one of them is of any value in
combating the indulgence of our lower natures.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> If however you have risen with Christ, seek
the things that are above, where Christ is, enthroned at God's right
hand.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Give your minds to the things that are
above, not to the things that are on the earth.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For you have died, and your life is hidden
with Christ in God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> When Christ appears--He is our true
Life--then you also will appear with Him in glory.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Therefore put to death your earthward
inclinations--fornication, impurity, sensual passion, unholy desire, and
all greed, for that is a form of idolatry.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> It is on account of these very sins that
God's anger is coming,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and you also were once addicted to them,
while you were living under their power.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But now you must rid yourselves of every
kind of sin--angry and passionate outbreaks, ill-will, evil speaking,
foul-mouthed abuse--so that these may never soil your lips.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Do not speak falsehoods to one another, for
you have stripped off the old self with its doings,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and have clothed yourselves with the new
self which is being remoulded into full knowledge so as to become like
Him who created it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> In that new creation there is neither
Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian,
slave nor free man, but Christ is everything and is in all of us.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Clothe yourselves therefore, as God's own
people holy and dearly loved, with tender-heartedness, kindness,
lowliness of mind, meekness, long-suffering;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> bearing with one another and readily
forgiving each other, if any one has a grievance against another. Just
as the Lord has forgiven you, you also must forgive.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And over all these put on love, which is
the perfect bond of union;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and let the peace which Christ gives
settle all questionings in your hearts, to which peace indeed you were
called as belonging to His one Body; and be thankful.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Let the teaching concerning Christ remain
as a rich treasure in your hearts. In all wisdom teach and admonish one
another with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, and sing with grace in
your hearts to God.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And whatever you do, in word or in deed,
do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, and let it be through Him
that you give thanks to God the Father.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Married women, be submissive to your
husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Married men, be affectionate to your
wives, and do not treat them harshly.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Children be obedient to your parents in
everything; for that is right for Christians.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Fathers, do not fret and harass your
children, or you may make them sullen and morose.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Slaves, be obedient in everything to your
earthly masters; not in acts of eye service, as aiming only to please
men, but with simplicity of purpose, because you fear the Lord.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Whatever you are doing, let your hearts
be in your work, as a thing done for the Lord and not for men.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For you know that it is from the Lord you
will receive the inheritance as your reward. Christ is the Master whose
bondservants you are.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> The man who perpetrates a wrong will find
the wrong repaid to him; and with God there are no merely earthly
distinctions.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Masters, deal justly and equitably with
your slaves, knowing that you too have a Master in Heaven.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Be earnest and unwearied in prayer, being
on the alert in it and in your giving of thanks.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And pray at the same time for us also, that
God may open for us a door for preaching, for us to tell the truth
concerning Christ for the sake of which I am even a prisoner.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then I shall proclaim it fully, as it is my
duty to do.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behave wisely in relation to the outside
world, buying up your opportunities.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Let your language be always seasoned with
the salt of grace, so that you may know how to give every man a fitting
answer.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Tychicus, our much-loved brother, a trusty
assistant and fellow servant with us in the Lord's work, will give you
every information about me.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And for this very purpose I send him to you
that you may know how we are faring; and that he may cheer your hearts.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And with him I send our dear and trusty
brother Onesimus, who is one of yourselves. They will inform you of
everything here.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Aristarchus my fellow prisoner sends
greeting to you, and so does Barnabas's cousin Mark. You have received
instructions as to him; if he comes to you, give him a welcome.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Jesus, called Justus, also sends
greeting. These three are Hebrew converts. They alone among such have
worked loyally with me for the Kingdom of God--they are men who have
been a comfort to me.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Epaphras, who is one of yourselves, a
bondservant of Jesus Christ, sends greetings to you, always wrestling on
your behalf in his prayers, that you may stand firm--Christians of ripe
character and of clear conviction as to everything which is God's will.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For I can bear witness to the deep
interest he takes in you and in the brethren at Laodicea and in those at
Hierapolis.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Luke, the dearly-loved physician, salutes
you, and so does Demas.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Christian greetings to the brethren at
Laodicea, especially to Nymphas, and to the Church that meets at their
house.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And when this Letter has been read among
you, let it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and you in
turn must read the one I am sending to Laodicea.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And tell Archippus to discharge carefully
the duties devolving upon him as a servant of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> I Paul add with my own hand this final
greeting. Be mindful of me in my imprisonment. Grace be with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians](th1)
