[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co2)  [Next](eph.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Galatians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle sent not from men nor by
any man, but by Jesus Christ and by God the Father, who raised Jesus
from among the dead--

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and all the brethren who are with me: To
the Churches of Galatia.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> May grace and peace be granted to you from
God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who gave Himself to suffer for our sins in
order to rescue us from the present wicked age in accordance with the
will of our God and Father.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> To Him be the glory to the Ages of the
Ages! Amen.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> I marvel that you are so readily leaving
Him who called you by the grace of Christ, and are adhering to a
different Good News.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For other "Good News" there is none; but
there are some persons who are troubling you, and are seeking to distort
the Good News concerning Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But if even we or an angel from Heaven
should bring you a Good News different from that which we have already
brought you, let him be accursed.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What I have just said I repeat--if any one
is preaching to you a Good News other than that which you originally
received, let him be accursed.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For is it man's favour or God's that I
aspire to? Or am I seeking to please men? If I were still a man-pleaser,
I should not be Christ's bondservant.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I must tell you, brethren, that the
Good News which was proclaimed by me is not such as man approves of.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For, in fact, it was not from man that I
received or learnt it, but by a revelation from Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For you have heard of my early career in
Judaism--how I furiously persecuted the Church of God, and made havoc of
it;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and how in devotion to Judaism I
outstripped many men of my own age among my people, being far more
zealous than they on behalf of the traditions of my forefathers.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But when He who set me apart even from my
birth, and called me by His grace,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> saw fit to reveal His Son within me in
order that I might tell among the Gentiles the Good News concerning Him,
at once I did not confer with any human being,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who
were my seniors in the Apostleship, but I went away into Arabia, and
afterwards came back to Damascus.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then, three years later, I went up to
Jerusalem to inquire for Peter, and I spent a fortnight with him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> I saw none of the other Apostles, except
James, the Lord's brother.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> In making these assertions I am speaking
the truth, as in the sight of God.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Afterwards I visited Syria and Cilicia.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But to the Christian Churches in Judaea I
was personally unknown.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> They only heard it said, "He who was once
our persecutor is now telling the Good News of the faith of which he
formerly made havoc."

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they gave glory to God on my account.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Later still, after an interval of fourteen
years, I again went up to Jerusalem in company with Barnabas, taking
Titus also with me.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I went up in obedience to a revelation of
God's will; and I explained to them the Good News which I proclaim among
the Gentiles. To the leaders of the Church this explanation was made in
private, lest by any means I should be running, or should already have
run, in vain.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> But although my companion Titus was a Greek
they did not insist upon even his being circumcised.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Yet there was danger of this through the
false brethren secretly introduced into the Church, who had stolen in to
spy out the freedom which is ours in Christ Jesus, in order to rob us of
it.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But not for an hour did we give way and
submit to them; in order that the Good News might continue with you in
its integrity.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> From those leaders I gained nothing new.
Whether they were men of importance or not, matters nothing to me--God
recognizes no external distinctions. To me, at any rate, the leaders
imparted nothing new.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Indeed, when they saw that I was entrusted
with the preaching of the Good News to the Gentiles as Peter had been
with that to the Jews--

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> for He who had been at work within Peter
with a view to his Apostleship to the Jews had also been at work within
me with a view to my Apostleship to the Gentiles--

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and when they perceived the mission which
was graciously entrusted to me, they (that is to say, James, Peter, and
John, who were considered to be the pillars of the Church) welcomed
Barnabas and me to their fellowship on the understanding that we were to
go to the Gentiles and they to the Jews.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Only they urged that we should remember
their poor--a thing which was uppermost in my own mind.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Now when Peter visited Antioch, I
remonstrated with him to his face, because he had incurred just censure.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For until certain persons came from James
he had been accustomed to eat with Gentiles; but as soon as these
persons came, he withdrew and separated himself for fear of the
Circumcision party.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And along with him the other Jews also
concealed their real opinions, so that even Barnabas was carried away by
their lack of straightforwardness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> As soon as I saw that they were not
walking uprightly in the spirit of the Good News, I said to Peter,
before them all, "If you, though you are a Jew, live as a Gentile does,
and not as a Jew, how can you make the Gentiles follow Jewish customs?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> You and I, though we are Jews by birth
and not Gentile sinners,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> know that it is not through obedience to
Law that a man can be declared free from guilt, but only through faith
in Jesus Christ. We have therefore believed in Christ Jesus, for the
purpose of being declared free from guilt, through faith in Christ and
not through obedience to Law. For through obedience to Law no human
being shall be declared free from guilt.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But if while we are seeking in Christ
acquittal from guilt we ourselves are convicted of sin, Christ then
encourages us to sin! No, indeed.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Why, if I am now rebuilding that
structure of sin which I had demolished, I am thereby constituting
myself a transgressor;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> for it is by the Law that I have died to
the Law, in order that I may live to God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I have been crucified with Christ, and it
is no longer I that live, but Christ that lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the body I live through faith in the Son of God who
loved me and gave Himself up to death on my behalf.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I do not nullify the grace of God; for if
acquittal from guilt is obtainable through the Law, then Christ has died
in vain."

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> You foolish Galatians! Whose sophistry has
bewitched you--you to whom Jesus Christ has been vividly portrayed as on
the Cross?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Answer me this one question, "Is it on the
ground of your obedience to the Law that you received the Spirit, or is
it because, when you heard, you believed?"

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Are you so foolish? Having begun by the
Spirit, are you now going to reach perfection through what is external?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Have you endured such sufferings to no
purpose--if indeed it has been to no purpose?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He who gives you His Spirit and works
miracles among you--does He do so on the ground of your obedience to the
Law, or is it the result of your having heard and believed:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> even as &lt;Abraham believed God, and his
faith was placed to his account as righteousness?&gt;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Notice therefore that those who possess
faith are true sons of Abraham.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And the Scripture, foreseeing that in
consequence of faith God would declare the nations to be free from
guilt, sent beforehand the Good News to Abraham, saying, &lt;"In you all
the nations shall be blessed."&gt;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So we see that it is those who possess
faith that are blessed with believing Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> All who are depending upon their own
obedience to the Law are under a curse, for it is written, &lt;"Cursed
is every one who does not remain faithful to all the precepts of the
Law, and practise them."&gt;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> It is evident, too, that no one can find
acceptance with God simply by obeying the Law, because &lt;"the
righteous shall live by faith,"&gt;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and the Law has nothing to do with faith.
It teaches that &lt;"he who does these things shall live by doing
them."&gt;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Christ has purchased our freedom from the
curse of the Law by becoming accursed for us--because &lt;"Cursed is
every one who is hanged upon a tree."&gt;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Our freedom has been thus purchased in
order that in Christ Jesus the blessing belonging to Abraham may come
upon the nations, so that through faith we may receive the promised
Spirit.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Brethren, even a covenant made by a
man--to borrow an illustration from daily life--when once formally
sanctioned is not liable to be set aside or added to.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> (Now the promises were given to Abraham
and to his seed. God did not say "and to seeds," as if speaking of many,
but "and to your seed," since He spoke of only one--and this is Christ.)

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I mean that the Covenant which God had
already formally made is not abrogated by the Law which was given four
hundred and thirty years later--so as to annul the promise.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For if the inheritance comes through
obedience to Law, it no longer comes because of a promise. But, as a
matter of fact, God has granted it to Abraham in fulfilment of a
promise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Why then was the Law given? It was
imposed later on for the sake of defining sin, until the seed should
come to whom God had made the promise; and its details were laid down by
a mediator with the help of angels.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> But there cannot be a mediator where only
one individual is concerned.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> God, however, is only one. Is the Law
then opposed to the promises of God? No, indeed; for if a Law had been
given which could have conferred Life, righteousness would certainly
have come by the Law.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> But Scripture has shown that all mankind
are the prisoners of sin, in order that the promised blessing, which
depends on faith in Jesus Christ, may be given to those who believe.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Before this faith came, we Jews were
perpetual prisoners under the Law, living under restraints and
limitations in preparation for the faith which was soon to be revealed.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> So that the Law has acted the part of a
tutor-slave to lead us to Christ, in order that through faith we may be
declared to be free from guilt.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But now that this faith has come, we are
no longer under a tutor-slave.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> You are all sons of God through faith in
Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> for all of you who have been baptized
into Christ, have clothed yourselves with Christ.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> In Him the distinctions between Jew and
Gentile, slave and free man, male and female, disappear; you are all one
in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And if you belong to Christ, then you are
indeed true descendants of Abraham, and are heirs in fulfilment of the
promise.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now I say that so long as an heir is a
child, he in no respect differs from a slave, although he is the owner
of everything,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but he is under the control of guardians
and trustees until the time his father has appointed.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> So we also, when spiritually we were
children, were subject to the world's rudimentary notions, and were
enslaved.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But, when the time was fully come, God sent
forth His Son, born of a woman, born subject to Law,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> in order to purchase the freedom of all who
were subject to Law, so that we might receive recognition as sons.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And because you are sons, God has sent out
the Spirit of His Son to enter your hearts and cry "Abba! our Father!"

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Therefore you are no longer a slave, but a
son; and if a son, then an heir also through God's own act.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> But at one time, you Gentiles, having no
knowledge of God, were slaves to gods which in reality do not exist.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now, however, having come to know God--or
rather to be known by Him--how is it you are again turning back to weak
and worthless rudimentary notions to which you are once more willing to
be enslaved?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> You scrupulously observe days and months,
special seasons, and years.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I am alarmed about you, and am afraid
that I have perhaps bestowed labour upon you to no purpose.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Brethren, become as I am, I beseech you;
for I have also become like you. In no respect did you behave badly to
me.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And you know that in those early days it
was on account of bodily infirmity that I proclaimed the Good News to
you,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> and yet the bodily infirmity which was
such a trial to you, you did not regard with contempt or loathing, but
you received me as if I had been an angel of God or Christ Jesus
Himself!

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> I ask you, then, what has become of your
self-congratulations? For I bear you witness that had it been possible
you would have torn out your own eyes and have given them to me.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Can it be that I have become your enemy
through speaking the truth to you?

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> These men pay court to you, but not with
honourable motives. They want to exclude you, so that you may pay court
to them.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> It is always an honourable thing to be
courted in an honourable cause; always, and not only when I am with you,
my children--

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> you for whom I am again, as it were,
undergoing the pains of childbirth, until Christ is fully formed within
you.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Would that I were with you and could
change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Tell me--you who want to continue to be
subject to Law--will you not listen to the Law?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For it is written that Abraham had two
sons, one by the slave-girl and one by the free woman.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> But we see that the child of the
slave-girl was born in the common course of nature; but the child of the
free woman in fulfilment of the promise.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> All this is allegorical; for the women
represent two Covenants. One has its origin on Mount Sinai, and bears
children destined for slavery.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> This is Hagar; for the name Hagar stands
for Mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds to the present Jerusalem,
which is in bondage together with her children.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> But the Jerusalem which is above is free,
and \*she\* is \*our\* mother.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For it is written, &lt;"Rejoice, thou
barren woman that bearest not, break forth into a joyful cry, thou that
dost not travail with child. For the desolate woman has many
children--more indeed than she who has the husband."&gt;

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> But you, brethren, like Isaac, are
children born in fulfilment of a promise.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Yet just as, at that time, the child born
in the common course of nature persecuted the one whose birth was due to
the power of the Spirit, so it is now.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> But what says the Scripture? &lt;"Send
away the slave-girl and her son, for never shall the slave-girl's son
share the inheritance with the son of the free woman."&gt;

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Therefore, brethren, since we are not the
children of a slave-girl, but of the free woman--

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Christ having made us gloriously
free--stand fast and do not again be hampered with the yoke of slavery.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Remember that it is I Paul who tell you
that if you receive circumcision Christ will avail you nothing.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I once more protest to every man who
receives circumcision that he is under obligation to obey the whole Law
of Moses.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Christ has become nothing to any of you who
are seeking acceptance with God through the Law: you have fallen away
from grace.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> \*We\* have not, for through the Spirit we
wait with longing hope for an acceptance with God which is to come
through faith.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
nor uncircumcision is of any importance; but only faith working through
love.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> You were running the race nobly! Who has
interfered and caused you to swerve from the truth?

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> No such teaching ever proceeded from Him
who is calling you.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> A little yeast corrupts the whole of the
dough.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For my part I have strong confidence in
you in the Lord that you will adopt my view of the matter. But the
man--be he who he may--who is troubling you, will have to bear the full
weight of the judgement to be pronounced on him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> As for me, brethren, if I am still a
preacher of circumcision, how is it that I am still suffering
persecution? In that case the Cross has ceased to be a stumbling-block!

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Would to God that those who are
unsettling your faith would even mutilate themselves.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> You however, brethren, were called to
freedom. Only do not turn your freedom into an excuse for giving way to
your lower natures; but become bondservants to one another in a spirit
of love.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the entire Law has been obeyed when
you have kept the single precept, which says, &lt;"You are to love your
fellow man equally with yourself."&gt;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But if you are perpetually snarling and
snapping at one another, beware lest you are destroyed by one another.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> This then is what I mean. Let your lives
be guided by the Spirit, and then you will certainly not indulge the
cravings of your lower natures.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For the cravings of the lower nature are
opposed to those of the Spirit, and the cravings of the Spirit are
opposed to those of the lower nature; because these are antagonistic to
each other, so that you cannot do everything to which you are inclined.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But if the Spirit is leading you, you are
not subject to Law.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Now you know full well the doings of our
lower natures. Fornication, impurity, indecency, idol-worship, sorcery;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> enmity, strife, jealousy, outbursts of
passion, intrigues, dissensions, factions, envyings;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> hard drinking, riotous feasting, and the
like. And as to these I forewarn you, as I have already forewarned you,
that those who are guilty of such things will have no share in the
Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The Spirit, on the other hand, brings a
harvest of love, joy, peace; patience towards others, kindness,
benevolence;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> good faith, meekness, self-restraint.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Against such things as these there is no
law. Now those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified their lower
nature with its passions and appetites.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> If we are living by the Spirit's power,
let our conduct also be governed by the Spirit's power.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Let us not become vain-glorious,
challenging one another, envying one another.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Brethren, if anybody be detected in any
misconduct, you who are spiritual should restore such a one in a spirit
of meekness. And let each of you keep watch over himself, lest he also
fall into temptation.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Always carry one another's burdens, and so
obey the whole of Christ's Law.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For if there is any one who thinks himself
to be somebody when he is nobody, he is deluding himself.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But let every man scrutinize his own
conduct, and then he will find out, not with reference to another but
with reference to himself, what he has to boast of.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For every man will have to carry his own
load.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But let those who receive instruction in
Christian truth share with their instructors all temporal blessings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Do not deceive yourselves. God is not to be
scoffed at. For whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> He who sows in the field of his lower
nature, will from that nature reap destruction; but he who sows to serve
the Spirit will from the Spirit reap the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Let us not abate our courage in doing what
is right; for in due time we shall reap a reward, if we do not faint.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So then, as we have opportunity, let us
labour for the good of all, and especially of those who belong to the
household of the faith.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> See in what large letters I am writing to
you with my own hand.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> All who desire to display their zeal for
external observances try to compel you to receive circumcision, but
their real object is simply to escape being persecuted for the Cross of
Christ.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For these very men do not really keep the
Law of Moses, but they would have you receive circumcision in order that
they may glory in \*your\* bodies.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> But as for me, God forbid that I should
glory in anything except the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, upon which
the world is crucified to me, and I am crucified to the world.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision is of any importance; but only a renewed nature.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And all who shall regulate their lives by
this principle--may peace and mercy be given to them--and to the true
Israel of God.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> From this time onward let no one trouble
me; for, as for me, I bear, branded on my body, the scars of Jesus as my
Master.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with your spirits, brethren. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians](eph.md)
