[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](heb)  [Next](pe1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: James

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> James, a bondservant of God and of the Lord
Jesus Christ: to the twelve tribes who are scattered over the world. All
good wishes.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Reckon it nothing but joy, my brethren,
whenever you find yourselves hedged in by various trials.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Be assured that the testing of your faith
leads to power of endurance.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Only let endurance have perfect results so
that you may become perfect and complete, deficient in nothing.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And if any one of you is deficient in
wisdom, let him ask God for it, who gives with open hand to all men, and
without upbraiding; and it will be given him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But let him ask in faith and have no
doubts; for he who has doubts is like the surge of the sea, driven by
the wind and tossed into spray.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> A person of that sort must not expect to
receive anything from the Lord--

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> such a one is a man of two minds, undecided
in every step he takes.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Let a brother in humble life rejoice when
raised to a higher position;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but a rich man should rejoice in being
brought low, for like flowers among the herbage rich men will pass away.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> The sun rises with his scorching heat and
dries up the herbage, so that its flowers drop off and the beauty of its
appearance perishes, and in the same way rich men with all their
prosperity will fade away.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Blessed is he who patiently endures
trials; for when he has stood the test, he will gain the victor's
crown--even the crown of Life--which the Lord has promised to those who
love Him.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Let no one say when passing through
trial, "My temptation is from God;" for God is incapable of being
tempted to do evil, and He Himself tempts no one.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But when a man is tempted, it is his own
passions that carry him away and serve as a bait.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Then the passion conceives, and becomes
the parent of sin; and sin, when fully matured, gives birth to death.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Do not be deceived, my dearly-loved
brethren.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Every gift which is good, and every
perfect boon, is from above, and comes down from the Father, who is the
source of all Light. In Him there is no variation nor the slightest
suggestion of change.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> In accordance with His will He made us
His children through the Message of the truth, so that we might, in a
sense, be the Firstfruits of the things which He has created.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> You know this, my dearly-loved brethren.
But let every one be quick to hear, slow to speak, and slow to be angry.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For a man's anger does not lead to action
which God regards as righteous.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Ridding yourselves, therefore, of all
that is vile and of the evil influences which prevail around you,
welcome in a humble spirit the Message implanted within you, which is
able to save your souls.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But prove yourselves obedient to the
Message, and do not be mere hearers of it, imposing a delusion upon
yourselves.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> For if any one listens but does not obey,
he is like a man who carefully looks at his own face in a mirror.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Although he has looked carefully at
himself, he goes away, and has immediately forgotten the sort of man he
is.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But he who looks closely into the perfect
Law--the Law of freedom--and continues looking, he, being not a hearer
who forgets, but an obedient doer, will as the result of his obedience
be blessed.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> If a man thinks that he is scrupulously
religious, although he is not curbing his tongue but is deceiving
himself, his religious service is worthless.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> The religious service which is pure and
stainless in the sight of our God and Father is to visit fatherless
children and widowed women in their time of trouble, and to keep one's
own self unspotted from the world.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My brethren, you must not make distinctions
between one man and another while you are striving to maintain faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our glory.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For suppose a man comes into one of your
meetings wearing gold rings and fine clothes, and there also comes in a
poor man wearing shabby clothes,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and you pay court to the one who wears the
fine clothes, and say, "Sit here; this is a good place;" while to the
poor man you say, "Stand there, or sit on the floor at my feet;"

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> is it not plain that in your hearts you
have little faith, seeing that you have become judges full of wrong
thoughts?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Listen, my dearly-loved brethren. Has not
God chosen those whom the world regards as poor to be rich in faith and
heirs of the Kingdom which He has promised to those that love Him?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But \*you\* have put dishonour upon the
poor man. Yet is it not the rich who grind you down? Are not they the
very people who drag you into the Law courts? --

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and the very people who speak evil of the
noble Name by which you are called?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> If, however, you are keeping the Law as
supreme, in obedience to the Commandment which says &lt;"You are to love
your fellow man just as you love yourself,"&gt; you are acting rightly.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But if you are making distinctions between
one man and another, you are guilty of sin, and are convicted by the Law
as offenders.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> A man who has kept the Law as a whole,
but has failed to keep some one command, has become guilty of violating
all.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For He who said, &lt;"Do not commit
adultery,"&gt; also said, &lt;"Do not commit murder,"&gt; and if you are
a murderer, although not an adulterer, you have become an offender
against the Law.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Speak and act as those should who are
expecting to be judged by the Law of freedom.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For he who shows no mercy will have
judgement given against him without mercy; but mercy triumphs over
judgement.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> What good is it, my brethren, if a man
professes to have faith, and yet his actions do not correspond? Can such
faith save him?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Suppose a Christian brother or sister is
poorly clad or lacks daily food,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and one of you says to them, "I wish you
well; keep yourselves warm and well fed," and yet you do not give them
what they need; what is the use of that?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So also faith, if it is unaccompanied by
obedience, has no life in it--so long as it stands alone.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Nay, some one will say, "You have faith,
I have actions: prove to me your faith apart from corresponding actions
and I will prove mine to you by my actions.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> You believe that God is one, and you are
quite right: evil spirits also believe this, and shudder."

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But, idle boaster, are you willing to be
taught how it is that faith apart from obedience is worthless? Take the
case of Abraham our forefather.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Was it, or was it not, because of his
actions that he was declared to be righteous as the result of his having
offered up his son Isaac upon the altar?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> You notice that his faith was
co-operating with his actions, and that by his actions his faith was
perfected;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and the Scripture was fulfilled which
says, &lt;"And Abraham believed God, and his faith was placed to his
credit as righteousness,"&gt; and he received the name of \`God's
friend.'

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> You all see that it is because of actions
that a man is pronounced righteous, and not simply because of faith.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> In the same way also was not the
notorious sinner Rahab declared to be righteous because of her actions
when she welcomed the spies and hurriedly helped them to escape another
way?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For just as a human body without a spirit
is lifeless, so also faith is lifeless if it is unaccompanied by
obedience.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do not be eager, my brethren, for many
among you to become teachers; for you know that we teachers shall
undergo severer judgement.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For we often stumble and fall, all of us.
If there is any one who never stumbles in speech, that man has reached
maturity of character and is able to curb his whole nature.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Remember that we put the horses' bit into
their mouths to make them obey us, and so we turn their whole bodies
round.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> So too with ships, great as they are, and
often driven along by strong gales, yet they can be steered with a very
small rudder in whichever direction the caprice of the man at the helm
chooses.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> In the same way the tongue is an
insignificant part of the body, but it is immensely boastful. Remember
how a mere spark may set a vast forest in flames.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the tongue is a fire. That world of
iniquity, the tongue, is placed within us spotting and soiling our whole
nature, and setting the whole round of our lives on fire, being itself
set on fire by Gehenna.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For brute nature under all its
forms--beasts and birds, reptiles and fishes--can be subjected and kept
in subjection by human nature.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But the tongue no man or woman is able to
tame. It is an ever-busy mischief, and is full of deadly poison.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> With it we bless the Lord and Father, and
with it we curse men, who are made in God's likeness.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Out of the same mouth there proceed
blessing and cursing. My brethren, this ought not to be.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> In a fountain, are fresh water and bitter
sent forth from the same opening?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Can a fig-tree, my brethren, yield
olives, or a vine yield figs? No; and neither can salt water yield
sweet.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Which of you is a wise and
well-instructed man? Let him prove it by a right life with conduct
guided by a wisely teachable spirit.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But if in your hearts you have bitter
feelings of envy and rivalry, do not speak boastfully and falsely, in
defiance of the truth.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> That is not the wisdom which comes down
from above: it belongs to earth, to the unspiritual nature, and to evil
spirits.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For where envy and rivalry are, there
also are unrest and every vile deed.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The wisdom from above is first of all
pure, then peaceful, courteous, not self-willed, full of compassion and
kind actions, free from favouritism and from all insincerity.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And peace, for those who strive for
peace, is the seed of which the harvest is righteousness.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What causes wars and contentions among you?
Is it not the cravings which are ever at war within you for various
pleasures?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> You covet things and yet cannot get them;
you commit murder; you have passionate desires and yet cannot gain your
end; you begin to fight and make war. You have not, because you do not
pray;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> or you pray and yet do not receive, because
you pray wrongly, your object being to waste what you get on some
pleasure or another.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> You unfaithful women, do you not know that
friendship with the world means enmity to God? Therefore whoever is bent
on being friendly with the world makes himself an enemy to God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Or do you suppose that it is to no purpose
that the Scripture says, "The Spirit which He has caused to dwell in our
hearts yearns jealously over us"?

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> But He gives more abundant grace, as is
implied in His saying, &lt;"God sets Himself against the haughty, but to
the lowly He gives grace."&gt;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Submit therefore to God: resist the Devil,
and he will flee from you.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Draw near to God, and He will draw near to
you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and make your hearts pure, you who
are half-hearted towards God.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Afflict yourselves and mourn and weep
aloud; let your laughter be turned into grief, and your gladness into
shame.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Humble yourselves in the presence of the
Lord, and He will exalt you.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Do not speak evil of one another,
brethren. The man who speaks evil of a brother-man or judges his
brother-man speaks evil of the Law and judges the Law. But if you judge
the Law, you are no longer one who obeys the Law, but one who judges it.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> The only real Lawgiver and Judge is He
who is able to save or to destroy. Who are you to sit in judgement on
your fellow man?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Come, you who say, "To-day or to-morrow
we will go to this or that city, and spend a year there and carry on a
successful business,"

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> when, all the while, you do not even know
what will happen to-morrow. For what is the nature of your life? Why, it
is but a mist, which appears for a short time and then is seen no more.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Instead of that you ought to say, "If it
is the Lord's will, we shall live and do this or that."

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> But, as the case stands, it is in mere
self-confidence that you boast: all such boasting is evil.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> If, however, a man knows what it is right
to do and yet does not do it, he commits a sin.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Come, you rich men, weep aloud and howl for
your sorrows which will soon be upon you.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Your treasures have rotted, and your piles
of clothing are moth-eaten;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> your gold and your silver have become
covered with rust, and the rust on them will give evidence against you,
and will eat your flesh like fire. You have hoarded up wealth in these
last days.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> I tell you that the pay of the labourers
who have gathered in your crops--pay which you are keeping back--is
calling out against you; and the outcries of those who have been your
reapers have entered into the ears of the Lord of the armies of Heaven.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Here on earth you have lived self-indulgent
and profligate lives. You have stupefied yourselves with gross feeding;
but a day of slaughter has come.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> You have condemned--you have murdered-- the
righteous man: he offers no resistance.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Be patient therefore, brethren, until the
Coming of the Lord. Notice how eagerly a farmer waits for a valuable
crop! He is patient over it till it has received the early and the later
rain.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> So you also must be patient: keeping up
your courage; for the Coming of the Lord is now close at hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Do not cry out in condemnation of one
another, brethren, lest you come under judgement. I tell you that the
Judge is standing at the door.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> In illustration, brethren, of persecution
patiently endured take the Prophets who have spoken as messengers from
the Lord.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Remember that we call those blessed who
endured what they did. You have also heard of Job's patient endurance,
and have seen the issue of the Lord's dealings with him--how full of
tenderness and pity the Lord is.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But above all things, my brethren, do not
swear, either by Heaven or by the earth, or with any other oath. Let
your \`yes' be simply \`yes,' and your \`no' be simply \`no;' that you
may not come under condemnation.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Is one of you suffering? Let him pray. Is
any one in good spirits? Let him sing a psalm.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Is any one ill? Let him send for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, after anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the prayer of faith will restore the
sick man, and the Lord will raise him up to health; and if he has
committed sins, they shall be forgiven.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Therefore confess your sins to one
another, and pray for one another, so that you may be cured. The
heartfelt supplication of a righteous man exerts a mighty influence.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Elijah was a man with a nature similar to
ours, and he earnestly prayed that there might be no rain: and no rain
fell on the land for three years and six months.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Again he prayed, and the sky gave rain
and the land yielded its crops.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> My brethren, if one of you strays from
the truth and some one brings him back,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> let him know that he who brings a sinner
back from his evil ways will save the man's soul from death and throw a
veil over a multitude of sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter](pe1.md)
