[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jo3)  [Next](rev.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Jude

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Jude, a bondservant of Jesus Christ and a
brother of James: To those who are in God the Father, enfolded in His
love, and kept for Jesus Christ, and called.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May mercy, peace and love be abundantly
granted to you.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Dear friends, since I am eager to begin a
letter to you on the subject of our common salvation, I find myself
constrained to write and cheer you on to the vigorous defense of the
faith delivered once for all to God's people.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> For certain persons have crept in
unnoticed--men spoken of in ancient writings as pre-destined to this
condemnation--ungodly men, who pervert the grace of our God into an
excuse for immorality, and disown Jesus Christ, our only Sovereign and
Lord.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I desire to remind you--although the whole
matter is already familiar to you--that the Lord saved a people out of
the land of Egypt, but afterwards destroyed those who had no faith.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And angels--those who did not keep the
position originally assigned to them, but deserted their own proper
abode--He reserves in everlasting bonds, in darkness, in preparation for
the judgement of the great day.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> So also Sodom and Gomorrah--and the
neighboring towns in the same manner--having been guilty of gross
fornication and having gone astray in pursuit of unnatural vice, are now
before us as a specimen of the fire of the Ages in the punishment which
they are undergoing.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Yet in just the same way these dreamers
also pollute the body, while they set authority at naught and speak evil
of dignities.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But Michael the Archangel, when contending
with the Devil and arguing with him about the body of Moses, did not
dare to pronounce judgement on him in abusive terms, but simply said,
"The Lord rebuke you."

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yet these men are abusive in matters of
which they know nothing, and in things which, like the brutes, they
understand instinctively--in all these they corrupt themselves.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Alas for them; for they have followed in
the steps of Cain; for the sake of gain they have rushed on headlong in
the evil ways of Balaam; and have perished in rebellion like that of
Korah!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> These men--sunken rocks! --are those who
share the pleasure of your love-feasts, unrestrained by fear while
caring only for themselves; clouds without water, driven away by the
winds; trees that cast their fruit, barren, doubly dead, uprooted;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> wild waves of the sea, foaming out their
own shame; wandering stars, for whom is reserved dense darkness of
age-long duration.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> It was also about these that Enoch, who
belonged to the seventh generation from Adam, prophesied, saying, "The
Lord has come, attended by myriads of His people, to execute judgement
upon all,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and to convict all the ungodly of all the
ungodly deeds which in their ungodliness they have committed, and of all
the hard words which they, ungodly sinners as they are, have spoken
against Him."

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These men are murmurers, ever bemoaning
their lot. Their lives are guided by their evil passions, and their
mouths are full of big, boastful words, while they treat individual men
with admiring reverence for the sake of the advantage they can gain.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But as for you, my dearly-loved friends,
remember the words that before now were spoken by the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ--

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> how they declared to you, "In the last
times there shall be scoffers, obeying only their own ungodly passions."

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> These are those who cause divisions. They
are men of the world, wholly unspiritual.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But you, my dearly-loved friends,
building yourselves up on the basis of your most holy faith and praying
in the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> must keep yourselves safe in the love of
God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ which will result in
the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Some, when they argue with you, you must
endeavor to convince;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> others you must try to save, as brands
plucked from the flames; and on others look with pity mingled with fear,
while you hate every trace of their sin.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> But to Him who is able to keep you safe
from stumbling, and cause you to stand in the presence of His glory free
from blemish and full of exultant joy--

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> to the only God our Saviour--through
Jesus Christ our Lord, be ascribed glory, majesty, might, and authority,
as it was before all time, is now, and shall be to all the Ages! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation](rev.md)
