[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](luk)  [Next](act) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> He was in the beginning with God.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> All things came into being through Him, and
apart from Him nothing that exists came into being.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> In Him was Life, and that Life was the
Light of men.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The Light shines in the darkness, and the
darkness has not overpowered it.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> There was a man sent from God, whose name
was John.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He came as a witness, in order that he
might give testimony concerning the Light--so that all might believe
through him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> He was not the Light, but he existed that
he might give testimony concerning the Light.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The true Light was that which illumines
every man by its coming into the world.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> He was in the world, and the world came
into existence through Him, and the world did not recognize Him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> He came to the things that were His own,
and His own people gave Him no welcome.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But all who have received Him, to
them--that is, to those who trust in His name--He has given the
privilege of becoming children of God;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who were begotten as such not by human
descent, nor through an impulse of their own nature, nor through the
will of a human father, but from God.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the Word came in the flesh, and lived
for a time in our midst, so that we saw His glory--the glory as of the
Father's only Son, sent from His presence. He was full of grace and
truth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> John gave testimony concerning Him and
cried aloud, saying, "This is He of whom I said, \`He who is coming
after me has been put before me,' for He was before me."

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For He it is from whose fulness we have
all received, and grace upon grace.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For the Law was given through Moses;
grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> No human eye has ever seen God: the only
Son, who is in the Father's bosom--He has made Him known.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> This also is John's testimony, when the
Jews sent to him a deputation of Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to
ask him who he was.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> He avowed--he did not conceal the truth,
but avowed, "I am not the Christ."

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> "What then?" they inquired; "are you
Elijah?" "I am not," he said. "Are you the Prophet?" "No," he answered.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> So they pressed the question. "Who are
you?" they said--"that we may take an answer to those who sent us. What
account do you give of yourself?"

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> "I am &lt;the voice,"&gt; he replied,
&lt;"of one crying aloud, \`Make straight the Lord's way in the
Desert,'&gt; fulfilling the words of the Prophet Isaiah."

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> They were Pharisees who had been sent.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Again they questioned him. "Why then do
you baptize," they said, "if you are neither the Christ nor Elijah nor
the Prophet?"

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> "I baptize in water only," John answered,
"but in your midst stands One whom you do not know--

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> He who is to come after me, and whose
sandal-strap I am not worthy to unfasten."

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> This conversation took place at Bethany
beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> The next day John saw Jesus coming
towards him and exclaimed, "Look, that is the Lamb of God who is to take
away the sin of the world!

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> This is He about whom I said, \`After me
is to come One who has been put before me, because He was before me.'

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> I did not yet know Him; but that He may
be openly shown to Israel is the reason why I have come baptizing in
water."

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> John also gave testimony by stating: "I
have seen the Spirit coming down like a dove out of Heaven; and it
remained upon Him.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> I did not yet know Him, but He who sent
me to baptize in water said to me, "\`The One on whom you see the Spirit
coming down, and remaining, He it is who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.'

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> "This I have seen, and I have become a
witness that He is the Son of God."

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Again the next day John was standing with
two of his disciples,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> when he saw Jesus passing by, and said,
"Look! that is the Lamb of God!"

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> The two disciples heard his exclamation,
and they followed Jesus.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Then Jesus turned round, and seeing them
following He asked them, "What is your wish?" "Rabbi," they
replied--\`Rabbi' means \`Teacher' --"where are you staying?"

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> "Come and you shall see," He said. So
they went and saw where He was staying, and they remained and spent that
day with Him. It was then about ten o'clock in the morning.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of
the two who heard John's exclamation and followed Jesus.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> He first found his own brother Simon, and
said to him, "We have found the Messiah!" --that is to say, the Anointed
One.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at
him and said, "You are Simon, son of John: you shall be called Cephas"
--that is to say, Peter (or \`Rock').

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> The next day, having decided to leave
Bethany and go into Galilee, Jesus found Philip, and invited him to
follow Him.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> (Now Philip came from Bethsaida, the same
town as Andrew and Peter.)

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Then Philip found Nathanael, and said to
him, "We have found him about whom Moses in the Law wrote, as well as
the Prophets--Jesus, the son of Joseph, a man of Nazareth."

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> "Can anything good come out of Nazareth?"
replied Nathanael. "Come and see," said Philip.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Jesus saw Nathanael approaching, and said
of him, "Look! here is a true Israelite, in whom there is no
deceitfulness!"

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> "How do you know me?" Nathanael asked.
"Before Philip called you," said Jesus, "when you were under the
fig-tree I saw you."

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> "Rabbi," cried Nathanael, "you are the
Son of God, you are Israel's King!"

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> "Because I said to you, \`I saw you under
the fig-tree,'" replied Jesus, "do you believe? You shall see greater
things than that."

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> "I tell you all in most solemn truth," He
added, "that you shall see Heaven opened wide, and God's angels going
up, and coming down to the Son of Man."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Two days later there was a wedding at Cana
in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and Jesus also was invited and His
disciples.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Now the wine ran short; whereupon the
mother of Jesus said to Him, "They have no wine."

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> "Leave the matter in my hands," He replied;
"the time for me to act has not yet come."

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> His mother said to the attendants,
"Whatever he tells you to do, do it."

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now there were six stone jars standing
there (in accordance with the Jewish regulations for purification), each
large enough to hold twenty gallons or more.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Jesus said to the attendants, "Fill the
jars with water." And they filled them to the brim.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Then He said, "Now, take some out, and
carry it to the President of the feast."

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> So they carried some to him. And no sooner
had the President tasted the water now turned into wine, than--not
knowing where it came from, though the attendants who had drawn the
water knew--he called to the bridegroom

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and said to him, "It is usual to put on
the good wine first, and when people have drunk freely, then that which
is inferior. But you have kept the good wine till now."

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> This, the first of His miracles, Jesus
performed at Cana in Galilee, and thus displayed His glorious power; and
His disciples believed in Him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Afterwards He went down to Capernaum--He,
and His mother, and His brothers, and His disciples; and they made a
short stay there.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But the Jewish Passover was approaching,
and for this Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And He found in the Temple the dealers in
cattle and sheep and in pigeons, and the money-changers sitting there.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So He plaited a whip of rushes, and drove
all--both sheep and bullocks--out of the Temple. The small coin of the
brokers He upset on the ground and overturned their tables.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And to the pigeon-dealers He said, "Take
these things away. Do not turn my Father's house into a market."

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> This recalled to His disciples the words
of Scripture, &lt;"My zeal for Thy House will consume me."&gt;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> So the Jews asked Him, "What proof of
your authority do you exhibit to us, seeing that you do these things?"

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> "Demolish this Sanctuary," said Jesus,
"and in three days I will rebuild it."

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> "It has taken forty-six years," replied
the Jews, "to build this Sanctuary, and will you rebuild it in three
days?"

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> But He was speaking of the Sanctuary of
His body.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> When however He had risen from among the
dead, His disciples recollected that He had said this; and they believed
the Scripture and the teaching which Jesus had given them.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Now when He was in Jerusalem, at the
Festival of the Passover, many became believers in Him through watching
the miracles He performed.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But for His part, Jesus did not trust
Himself to them, because He knew them all,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> and did not need any one's testimony
concerning a man, for He of Himself knew what was in the man.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now there was one of the Pharisees whose
name was Nicodemus--a ruler among the Jews.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> He came to Jesus by night and said, "Rabbi,
we know that you are a teacher from God; for no one can do these
miracles which you are doing, unless God is with him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you," answered
Jesus, "that unless a man is born anew he cannot see the Kingdom of
God."

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> "How is it possible," Nicodemus asked, "for
a man to be born when he is old? Can he a second time enter his mother's
womb and be born?"

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you," replied
Jesus, "that unless a man is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot
enter the Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Whatever has been born of the flesh is
flesh, and whatever has been born of the Spirit is spirit.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Do not be astonished at my telling you,
\`You must all be born anew.'

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The wind blows where it chooses, and you
hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it is
going. So is it with every one who has been born of the Spirit."

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> "How is all this possible?" asked
Nicodemus.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> "Are you," replied Jesus, "\`the Teacher
of Israel,' and yet do you not understand these things?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that we
speak what we know, and give testimony of that of which we were
eye-witnesses, and yet you all reject our testimony.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> If I have told you earthly things and
none of you believe me, how will you believe me if I tell you of things
in Heaven?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> There is no one who has gone up to
Heaven, but there is One who has come down from Heaven, namely the Son
of Man whose home is in Heaven.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And just as Moses lifted high the serpent
in the Desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> in order that every one who trusts in Him
may have the Life of the Ages."

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For so greatly did God love the world
that He gave His only Son, that every one who trusts in Him may not
perish but may have the Life of Ages.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For God did not send His Son into the
world to judge the world, but that the world might be saved through Him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> He who trusts in Him does not come up for
judgement. He who does not trust has already received sentence, because
he has not his trust resting on the name of God's only Son.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And this is the test by which men are
judged--the Light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness
more than they loved the Light, because their deeds were wicked.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For every wrongdoer hates the light, and
does not come to the light, for fear his actions should be exposed and
condemned.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But he who does what is honest and right
comes to the light, in order that his actions may be plainly shown to
have been done in God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> After this Jesus and His disciples went
into Judaea; and there He made a stay in company with them and baptized.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And John too was baptizing at Aenon, near
Salim, because there were many pools of water there; and people came and
received baptism.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> (For John was not yet in prison.)

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> As the result, a discussion having arisen
on the part of John's disciples with a Jew about purification,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> they came to John and reported to him,
"Rabbi, he who was with you on the other side of the Jordan and to whom
you bore testimony is now baptizing, and great numbers of people are
resorting to him."

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> "A man cannot obtain anything," replied
John, "unless it has been granted to him from Heaven.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> You yourselves can bear witness to my
having said, \`I am not the Christ,' but \`I am His appointed
forerunner.'

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> He who has the bride is the bridegroom;
and the bridegroom's friend who stands by his side and listens to him,
rejoices heartily on account of the bridegroom's happiness. Therefore
this joy of mine is now complete.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> He must grow greater, but I must grow
less.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> He who comes from above is above all. He
whose origin is from the earth is not only himself from the earth, his
teaching also is from the earth. He who comes from Heaven is above all.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> What He has seen and heard, to that He
bears witness; but His testimony no one receives.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Any man who has received His testimony
has solemnly declared that God is true.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> For He whom God has sent speaks God's
words; for God does not give the Spirit with limitations."

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The Father loves the Son and has
entrusted everything to His hands.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> He who believes in the Son has the Life
of the Ages; he who disobeys the Son will not enter into Life, but God's
anger remains upon him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now as soon as the Master was aware that
the Pharisees had heard it said, "Jesus is gaining and baptizing more
disciples than John"--

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> though Jesus Himself did not baptize them,
but His disciples did--

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> He left Judaea and returned to Galilee.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> His road lay through Samaria,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and so He came to Sychar, a town in Samaria
near the piece of land that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Jacob's Well was there: and accordingly
Jesus, tired out with His journey, sat down by the well to rest. It was
about six o'clock in the evening.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Presently there came a woman of Samaria to
draw water. Jesus asked her to give Him some water;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> for His disciples were gone to the town to
buy provisions.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> "How is it," replied the woman, "that a Jew
like you asks me, who am a woman and a Samaritan, for water?" (For Jews
have no dealings with Samaritans.)

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> "If you had known God's free gift,"
replied Jesus, "and who it is that said to you, \`Give me some water,'
you would have asked Him, and He would have given you living water."

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> "Sir," she said, "you have nothing to
draw with, and the well is deep; so where can you get the living water
from?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Are you greater than our forefather
Jacob, who gave us the well, and himself drank from it, as did also his
sons and his cattle?"

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> "Every one," replied Jesus, "who drinks
any of this water will be thirsty again;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> but whoever drinks any of the water that
I shall give him will never, never thirst. But the water that I shall
give him will become a fountain within him of water springing up for the
Life of the Ages."

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> "Sir," said the woman, "give me that
water, that I may never be thirsty, nor continually come all the way
here to draw from the well."

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> "Go and call your husband," said Jesus;
"and come back."

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> "I have no husband," she replied. "You
rightly say that you have no husband," said Jesus;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> "for you have had five husbands, and the
man you have at present is not your husband. You have spoken the truth
in saying that."

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> "Sir," replied the woman, "I see that you
are a Prophet.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Our forefathers worshipped on this
mountain, but you Jews say that the place where people must worship is
in Jerusalem."

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> "Believe me," said Jesus, "the time is
coming when you will worship the Father neither on this mountain nor in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> You worship One of whom you know nothing.
We worship One whom we know; for salvation comes from the Jews.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> But a time is coming--nay, has already
come--when the true worshippers will worship the Father with true
spiritual worship; for indeed the Father desires such worshippers.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> God is Spirit; and those who worship Him
must bring Him true spiritual worship."

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> "I know," replied the woman, "that
Messiah is coming--\`the Christ,' as He is called. When He has come, He
will tell us everything."

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> "I am He," said Jesus--"I who am now
talking to you."

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Just then His disciples came, and were
surprised to find Him talking with a woman. Yet not one of them asked
Him, "What is your wish?" or "Why are you talking with her?"

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> The woman however, leaving her pitcher,
went away to the town, and called the people.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> "Come," she said, "and see a man who has
told me everything I have ever done. Can this be the Christ, do you
think?"

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> They left the town and set out to go to
Him.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Meanwhile the disciples were urging
Jesus. "Rabbi," they said, "eat something."

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> "I have food to eat," He replied, "of
which you do not know."

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> So the disciples began questioning one
another. "Can it be," they said, "that some one has brought Him
something to eat?"

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> "My food," said Jesus, "is to be obedient
to Him who sent me, and fully to accomplish His work.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Do you not say, \`It wants four months
yet to the harvest'? But look round, I tell you, and observe these
plains-- they are already ripe for the sickle.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> The reaper gets pay and gathers in a crop
in preparation for the Life of the Ages, that so the sower and the
reapers may rejoice together.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> For it is in this that you see the real
meaning of the saying, \`The sower is one person, and the reaper is
another.'

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> I sent you to reap a harvest which is not
the result of your own labours. Others have laboured, and you are
getting benefit from their labours."

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Of the Samaritan population of that town
a good many believed in Him because of the woman's statement when she
declared, "He has told me all that I have ever done."

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> When however the Samaritans came to Him,
they asked Him on all sides to stay with them; and He stayed there two
days.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then a far larger number of people
believed because of His own words,

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> and they said to the woman, "We no longer
believe in Him simply because of your statements; for we have now heard
for ourselves, and we know that this man really is the Saviour of the
world."

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> After the two days He departed, and went
into Galilee;

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> though Jesus Himself declared that a
Prophet has no honour in his own country.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> When however He reached Galilee, the
Galilaeans welcomed Him eagerly, having been eye-witnesses of all that
He had done in Jerusalem at the Festival; for they also had been to the
Festival.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> So He came once more to Cana in Galilee,
where He had made the water into wine. Now there was a certain officer
of the King's court whose son was ill at Capernaum.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> Having heard that Jesus had come from
Judaea to Galilee, he came to Him and begged Him to go down and cure his
son; for he was at the point of death.

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> "Unless you and others see miracles and
marvels," said Jesus, "nothing will induce you to believe."

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> "Sir," pleaded the officer, "come down
before my child dies."

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> "You may return home," replied Jesus;
"your son has recovered." He believed the words of Jesus, and started
back home;

<span id="an_4:51">4:51</span> and he was already on his way down when
his servants met him and told him that his son was alive and well.

<span id="an_4:52">4:52</span> So he inquired of them at what hour he
had shown improvement. "Yesterday, about seven o'clock," they replied,
"the fever left him."

<span id="an_4:53">4:53</span> Then the father recollected that that was
the time at which Jesus had said to him, "Your son has recovered," and
he and his whole household became believers.

<span id="an_4:54">4:54</span> This is the second miracle that Jesus
performed, after coming from Judaea into Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After this there was a Festival of the
Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Now there is in Jerusalem near the Sheep
Gate a pool, called in Hebrew \`Bethesda.' It has five arcades.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> In these there used to lie a great number
of sick persons, and of people who were blind or lame or paralyzed.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> \[\]

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And there was one man there who had been an
invalid for thirty-eight years.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Jesus saw him lying there, and knowing that
he had been a long time in that condition, He asked him, "Do you wish to
have health and strength?"

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> "Sir," replied the sufferer, "I have no one
to put me into the pool when the water is moved; but while I am coming
some one else steps down before me."

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> "Rise," said Jesus, "take up your mat and
walk."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Instantly the man was restored to perfect
health, and he took up his mat and began to walk.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> That day was a Sabbath. So the Jews said
to the man who had been cured, "It is the Sabbath: you must not carry
your mat."

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> "He who cured me," he replied, "said to
me, \`Take up your mat and walk.'"

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> "Who is it," they asked, "that said to
you, \`Take up your mat and walk'?"

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But the man who had been cured did not
know who it was; for Jesus had passed out unnoticed, there being a crowd
in the place.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Afterwards Jesus found him in the Temple
and said to him, "You are now restored to health. Do not sin any more,
or a worse thing may befall you."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The man went and told the Jews that it
was Jesus who had restored him to health;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and on this account the Jews began to
persecute Jesus--because He did these things on the Sabbath.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> His reply to their accusation was, "My
Father works unceasingly, and so do I."

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> On this account then the Jews were all
the more eager to put Him to death--because He not only broke the
Sabbath, but also spoke of God as being in a special sense His Father,
thus putting Himself on a level with God.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you,"
replied Jesus, "that the Son can do nothing of Himself--He can only do
what He sees the Father doing; for whatever He does, that the Son does
in like manner.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For the Father loves the Son and reveals
to Him all that He Himself is doing. And greater deeds than these will
He reveal to Him, in order that you may wonder.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For just as the Father awakens the dead
and gives them life, so the Son also gives life to whom He wills.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The Father indeed does not judge any one,
but He has entrusted all judgement to the Son,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> that all may honour the Son even as they
honour the Father. The man who withholds honour from the Son withholds
honour from the Father who sent Him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you that he
who listens to my teaching and believes Him who sent me, has the Life of
the Ages, and does not come under judgement, but has passed over out of
death into Life.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you that a
time is coming--nay, has already come--when the dead will hear the voice
of the Son of God, and those who hear it will live.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For just as the Father has life in
Himself, so He has also given to the Son to have life in Himself.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And He has conferred on Him authority to
act as Judge, because He is the Son of Man.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Wonder not at this. For a time is coming
when all who are in the graves will hear His voice and will come forth--

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> they who have done what is right to the
resurrection of Life, and they whose actions have been evil to the
resurrection of judgement.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> "I can of my own self do nothing. As I am
bidden, so I judge; and mine is a just judgement, because it is not my
own will that guides me, but the will of Him who sent me.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> "If I give testimony concerning myself,
my testimony cannot be accepted.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> There is Another who gives testimony
concerning me, and I know that the testimony is true which He offers
concerning me.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> "You sent to John, and he both was and
still is a witness to the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But the testimony on my behalf which I
accept is not from man; though I say all this in order that you may be
saved.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> He was the lamp that burned and shone,
and for a time you were willing to be gladdened by his light.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> "But the testimony which I have is
weightier than that of John; for the work the Father has assigned to me
for me to bring it to completion--the very work which I am
doing--affords testimony concerning me that the Father has sent me.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And the Father who sent me, \*He\* has
given testimony concerning me. None of you have ever either heard His
voice or seen what He is like.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> Nor have you His word dwelling within
you, for you refuse to believe Him whom \*He\* has sent.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> "You search the Scriptures, because you
suppose that in them you will find the Life of the Ages; and it is those
Scriptures that yield testimony concerning me;

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> and yet you are unwilling to come to me
that you may have Life.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> "I do not accept glory from man,

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> but I know you well, and I know that in
your hearts you do not really love God.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> I have come as my Father's
representative, and you do not receive me. If some one else comes
representing only himself, him you will receive.

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> How is it possible for you to believe,
while you receive glory from one another and have no desire for the
glory that comes from the only God?

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> "Do not suppose that I will accuse you to
the Father. There is one who accuses you, namely Moses, on whom your
hope rests.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if you believe Moses, you would
believe me; for he wrote about me.

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> But if you disbelieve his writings, how
are you to believe my words?"

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> After this Jesus went away across the Lake
of Galilee (that is, the Lake of Tiberias).

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> A vast multitude followed Him, because they
witnessed the miracles on the sick which He was constantly performing.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then Jesus went up the hill, and sat there
with His disciples.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> The Jewish Festival, the Passover, was at
hand.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And when He looked round and saw an immense
crowd coming towards Him, He said to Philip, "Where shall we buy bread
for all these people to eat?"

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> He said this to put Philip to the test, for
He Himself knew what He was going to do.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> "Seven pounds' worth of bread," replied
Philip, "is not enough for them all to get even a scanty meal."

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> One of His disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother, said to Him,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> "There is a boy here with five barley
loaves and a couple of fish: but what is that among so many?"

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> "Make the people sit down," said Jesus.
The ground was covered with thick grass; so they sat down, the adult men
numbering about 5,000.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then Jesus took the loaves, and after
giving thanks He distributed them to those who were resting on the
ground; and also the fish in like manner--as much as they desired.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> When all were fully satisfied, He said to
His disciples, "Gather up the broken portions that remain over, so that
nothing be lost."

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Accordingly they gathered them up; and
with the fragments of the five barley loaves--the broken portions that
remained over after they had done eating--they filled twelve baskets.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Thereupon the people, having seen the
miracle He had performed, said, "This is indeed the Prophet who was to
come into the world."

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Perceiving, however, that they were about
to come and carry Him off by force to make Him a king, Jesus withdrew
again up the hill alone by Himself.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> When evening came on, His disciples went
down to the Lake.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> There they got on board a boat, and
pushed off to cross the Lake to Capernaum. By this time it had become
dark, and Jesus had not yet joined them.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The Lake also was getting rough, because
a strong wind was blowing.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> When, however, they had rowed three or
four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the water and coming near the
boat.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They were terrified; but He called to
them. "It is I," He said, "do not be afraid."

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then they were willing to take Him on
board; and in a moment the boat reached the shore at the point to which
they were going.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Next morning the crowd who were still
standing about on the other side of the Lake found that there had been
but one small boat there, and they had seen that Jesus did not go on
board with His disciples, but that His disciples went away without Him.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Yet a number of small boats came from
Tiberias to the neighbourhood of the place where they had eaten the
bread after the Lord had given thanks.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> When however the crowd saw that neither
Jesus nor His disciples were there, they themselves also took boats and
came to Capernaum to look for Jesus.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> So when they had crossed the Lake and had
found Him, they asked Him, "Rabbi, when did you come here?"

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you,"
replied Jesus, "that you are searching for me not because you have seen
miracles, but because you ate the loaves and had a hearty meal.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Bestow your pains not on the food which
perishes, but on the food that remains unto the Life of the Ages--that
food which will be the Son of Man's gift to you; for on Him the Father,
God, has set His seal."

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> "What are we to do," they asked, "in
order to carry out the things that God requires?"

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> "This," replied Jesus, "is above all the
thing that God requires--that you should be believers in Him whom He has
sent."

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> "What miracle then," they asked, "do you
perform for us to see and become believers in you? What do you \*do\*?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Our forefathers ate the manna in the
Desert, as it is written, &lt;\`He gave them bread out of Heaven to
eat'."&gt;

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you,"
replied Jesus, "that Moses did not give you the bread out of Heaven, but
my Father is giving you the bread--the true bread--out of Heaven.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> For God's bread is that which comes down
out of Heaven and gives Life to the world."

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> "Sir," they said, "always give us that
bread."

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> "I am the bread of Life," replied Jesus;
"he who comes to me shall never hunger, and he who believes in me shall
never, never thirst.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> But it is as I have said to you: you have
seen me and yet you do not believe.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> Every one whom the Father gives me will
come to me, and him who comes to me I will never on any account drive
away.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> For I have left Heaven and have come down
to earth not to seek my own pleasure, but to do the will of Him who sent
me.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And this is the will of Him who sent me,
that of all that He has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise
it to life on the last day.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> For this is my Father's will, that every
one who fixes his gaze on the Son of God and believes in Him should have
the Life of the Ages, and I will raise him to life on the last day."

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> Now the Jews began to find fault about
Him because of His claiming to be the bread which came down out of
Heaven.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> They kept asking, "Is not this man
Joseph's son? Is he not Jesus, whose father and mother we know? What
does he mean by now saying, \`I have come down out of Heaven'?"

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> "Do not thus find fault among
yourselves," replied Jesus;

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> "no one can come to me unless the Father
who sent me draws him; then I will raise him to life on the last day.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> It stands written in the Prophets,
&lt;\`And they shall all of them be taught by God'.&gt; Every one who
listens to the Father and learns from Him comes to me.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> No one has ever seen the Father--except
Him who is from God. He has seen the Father.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you that he
who believes has the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> I am the bread of Life.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> Your forefathers ate the manna in the
Desert, and they died.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> Here is the bread that comes down out of
Heaven that a man may eat it and not die.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> I am the living bread come down out of
Heaven. If a man eats this bread, he shall live for ever. Moreover the
bread which I will give is my flesh given for the life of the world."

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> This led to an angry debate among the
Jews. "How can this man," they argued, "give us his flesh to eat?"

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you," said
Jesus, "that unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His
blood, you have no Life in you.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has the Life of the Ages, and I will raise him up on the last day.

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> For my flesh is true food, and my blood
is true drink.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood
remains in union with me, and I remain in union with him.

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> As the ever-living Father has sent me,
and I live because of the Father, so also he who eats me will live
because of me.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> This is the bread which came down out of
Heaven; it is unlike that which your forefathers ate--for they ate and
yet died. He who eats this bread shall live for ever."

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> Jesus said all this in the synagogue
while teaching at Capernaum.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> Many therefore of His disciples, when
they heard it, said, "This is hard to accept. Who can listen to such
teaching?"

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> But, knowing in Himself that His
disciples were dissatisfied about it, Jesus asked them,

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> "Does this seem incredible to you? What
then if you were to see the Son of Man ascending again where He was
before?

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> It is the spirit which gives Life. The
flesh confers no benefit whatever. The words I have spoken to you are
spirit and are Life.

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> But there are some of you who do not
believe." For Jesus knew from the beginning who those were that did not
believe, and who it was that would betray Him.

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> So He added, "That is why I told you that
no one can come to me unless it be granted him by the Father."

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> Thereupon many of His disciples left Him
and went away, and no longer associated with Him.

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> Jesus therefore appealed to the Twelve.
"Will you go also?" He asked.

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> "Master," replied Simon Peter, "to whom
shall we go? Your teachings tell us of the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> And we have come to believe and know that
\*you\* are indeed the Holy One of God."

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> "Did not I choose you--the Twelve?" said
Jesus, "and even of you one is a devil."

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> He alluded to Judas, the son of Simon the
Iscariot. For he it was who, though one of the Twelve, was afterwards to
betray Him.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> After this Jesus moved from place to place
in Galilee. He would not go about in Judaea, because the Jews were
seeking an opportunity to kill Him.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> But the Jewish Festival of the
Tent-Pitching was approaching.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So His brothers said to Him, "Leave these
parts and go into Judaea, that not only we but your disciples also may
witness the miracles which you perform.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For no one acts in secret, desiring all the
while to be himself known publicly. Since you are doing these things,
show yourself openly to the world."

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For even His brothers were not believers in
Him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> "My time," replied Jesus, "has not yet
come, but for you any time is suitable.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> It is impossible for the world to hate you;
but me it does hate, because I give testimony concerning it that its
conduct is evil.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> As for you, go up to the Festival. I do not
now go up to this Festival, because my time is not yet fully come."

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Such was His answer, and He remained in
Galilee.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> When however His brothers had gone up to
the Festival, then He also went up, not openly, but as it were
privately.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Meanwhile the Jews at the Festival were
looking for Him and were inquiring, "Where is he?"

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Among the mass of the people there was
much muttered debate about Him. Some said, "He is a good man." Others
said, "Not so: he is imposing on the people."

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Yet for fear of the Jews no one spoke out
boldly about Him.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> But when the Festival was already half
over, Jesus went up to the Temple and commenced teaching.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The Jews were astonished. "How does this
man know anything of books," they said, "although he has never been at
any of the schools?"

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Jesus answered their question by saying,
"My teaching does not belong to me, but comes from Him who sent me.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If any one is willing to do His will, he
shall know about the teaching, whether it is from God or originates with
me.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The man whose teaching originates with
himself aims at his own glory. He who aims at the glory of Him who sent
him teaches the truth, and there is no deception in him.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Did not Moses give you the Law? And yet
not a man of you obeys the Law. Why do you want to kill me?"

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> "You are possessed by a demon," replied
the crowd; "no one wants to kill you."

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> "One deed I have done," replied Jesus,
"and you are all full of wonder.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Consider therefore. Moses gave you the
rite of circumcision (not that it began with Moses, but with your
earlier forefathers), and even on a Sabbath day you circumcise a child.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> If a child is circumcised even on a
Sabbath day, are you bitter against me because I have restored a man to
perfect health on a Sabbath day?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Do not form superficial judgements, but
form the judgements that are just."

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Some however of the people of Jerusalem
said, "Is not this the man they are wanting to kill?

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> But here he is, speaking openly and
boldly, and they say nothing to him! Can the Rulers really have
ascertained that this man is the Christ?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And yet we know this man, and we know
where he is from; but as for the Christ, when He comes, no one can tell
where He is from."

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Jesus therefore, while teaching in the
Temple, cried aloud, and said, "Yes, you know me, and you know where I
am from. And yet I have not come of my own accord; but there is One who
has sent me, an Authority indeed, of whom you have no knowledge.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> I know Him, because I came from Him, and
He sent me."

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> On hearing this they wanted to arrest
Him; yet not a hand was laid on Him, because His time had not yet come.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> But from among the crowd a large number
believed in Him. "When the Christ comes," they said, "will He perform
more miracles than this teacher has performed?"

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The Pharisees heard the people thus
expressing their various doubts about Him, and the High Priests and the
Pharisees sent some officers to apprehend Him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> So Jesus said, "Still for a short time I
am with you, and then I go my way to Him who sent me.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> You will look for me and will not find
me, and where I am you cannot come."

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> The Jews therefore said to one another,
"Where is he about to betake himself, so that we shall not find him?
Will he betake himself to the Dispersion among the Gentiles, and teach
the Gentiles?

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> What do those words of his mean, \`You
will look for me, but will not find me, and where I am you cannot
come'?"

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> On the last day of the Festival--the
great day--Jesus stood up and cried aloud. "Whoever is thirsty," He
said, "let him come to me and drink.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> He who believes in me, from within
him--as the Scripture has said--rivers of living water shall flow."

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> He referred to the Spirit which those who
believed in Him were to receive; for the Spirit was not bestowed as yet,
because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> After listening to these discourses, some
of the crowd began to say, "This is beyond doubt the Prophet."

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> Others said, "He is the Christ." But
others again, "Not so, for is the Christ to come from Galilee?

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Has not the Scripture declared that the
Christ is to come of the family of David and from Bethlehem, David's
village?"

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> So there was a violent dissension among
the people on His account.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Some of them wanted at once to arrest
Him, but no one laid hands upon Him.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Meanwhile the officers returned to the
High Priests and Pharisees, who asked them, "Why have you not brought
him?"

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> "No mere man has ever spoken as this man
speaks," said the officers.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> "Are \*you\* deluded too?" replied the
Pharisees;

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> "has any one of the Rulers or of the
Pharisees believed in him?

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> But this rabble who understand nothing
about the Law are accursed!"

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Nicodemus interposed--he who had formerly
gone to Jesus, being himself one of them.

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> "Does our Law," he asked, "judge a man
without first hearing what he has to say and ascertaining what his
conduct is?"

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> "Do you also come from Galilee?" they
asked in reply. "Search and see for yourself that no Prophet is of
Galilaean origin."

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> \[So they went away to their several
homes;

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> At break of day however He returned to the
Temple, and there the people came to Him in crowds. He seated Himself;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and was teaching them when the Scribes and
the Pharisees brought to Him a woman who had been found committing
adultery. They made her stand in the centre of the court, and they put
the case to Him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> "Rabbi," they said, "this woman has been
found in the very act of committing adultery.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Now, in the Law, Moses has ordered us to
stone such women to death. But what do you say?"

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> They asked this in order to put Him to the
test, so that they might have some charge to bring against Him. But
Jesus leant forward and began to write with His finger on the ground.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> When however they persisted with their
question, He raised His head and said to them, "Let the sinless man
among you be the first to throw a stone at her."

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then He leant forward again, and again
began to write on the ground.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They listened to Him, and then, beginning
with the eldest, took their departure, one by one, till all were gone.
And Jesus was left behind alone--and the woman in the centre of the
court.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Then, raising His head, Jesus said to
her, "Where are they? Has no one condemned you?"

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> "No one, Sir," she replied. "And \*I\* do
not condemn you either," said Jesus; "go, and from this time do not sin
any more."\]

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Once more Jesus addressed them. "I am the
Light of the world," He said; "the man who follows me shall certainly
not walk in the dark, but shall have the light of Life."

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> "You are giving testimony about
yourself," said the Pharisees; "your testimony is not true."

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> "Even if I am giving testimony about
myself," replied Jesus, "my testimony is true; for I know where I came
from and where I am going, but you know neither of these two things.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> You judge according to appearances: I am
judging no one.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And even if I do judge, my judgement is
just; for I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> In your own Law, too, it is written that
&lt;the testimony of two men is true.&gt;

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> I am one giving testimony about myself,
and the Father who sent me gives testimony about me."

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> "Where is your Father?" they asked. "You
know my Father as little as you know me." He replied; "if you knew me,
you would know my Father also."

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> These sayings He uttered in the Treasury,
while teaching in the Temple; yet no one arrested Him, because His time
had not yet come.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Again He said to them, "I am going away.
Then you will try to find me, but you will die in your sins. Where I am
going, it is impossible for you to come."

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The Jews began to ask one another, "Is he
going to kill himself, do you think, that he says, \`Where I am going,
it is impossible for you to come'?"

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> "You," He continued, "are from below, I
am from above: you are of this present world, I am not of this present
world.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> That is why I told you that you will die
in your sins; for, unless you believe that I am He, that is what will
happen."

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> "You--who are you?" they asked. "How is
it that I am speaking to you at all?" replied Jesus.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> "Many things I have to speak and to judge
concerning you. But He who sent me is true, and the things which I have
heard from Him are those which I have come into the world to speak."

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> They did not perceive that He was
speaking to them of the Father.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> So Jesus added, "When you have lifted up
the Son of Man, then you will know that I am He. Of myself I do nothing;
but as the Father has taught me, so I speak.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And He who sent me is with me. He has not
left me alone: for I do always what is pleasing to Him."

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> As He thus spoke, many became believers
in Him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Jesus therefore said to those of the Jews
who had now believed in Him, "As for you, if you hold fast to my
teaching, then you are truly my disciples;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> and you shall know the Truth, and the
Truth will make you free."

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> "We are descendants of Abraham," they
answered, "and have never at any time been in slavery to any one. What
do those words of yours mean, \`You shall become free'?"

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you,"
replied Jesus, "that every one who commits sin is the slave of sin.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Now a slave does not remain permanently
in his master's house, but a son does.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> If then the Son shall make you free, you
will be free indeed.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> You are descendants of Abraham, I know;
but you want to kill me, because my teaching gains no ground within you.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> The words I speak are those I have learnt
in the presence of the Father. Therefore you also should do what you
have heard from your father."

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> "Our father is Abraham," they said. "If
you were Abraham's children," replied Jesus, "it is Abraham's deeds that
you would be doing.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But, in fact, you are longing to kill me,
a man who has spoken to you the truth which I have heard from God.
Abraham did not do that.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> You are doing the deeds of your father."
"We," they replied, "are not illegitimate children. We have one Father,
namely God."

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> "If God were your Father," said Jesus,
"you would love me; for it is from God that I came and I am now here. I
have not come of myself, but \*He\* sent me.

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> How is it you do not understand me when I
speak? It is because you cannot bear to listen to my words.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> The father whose sons you are is the
Devil; and you desire to do what gives him pleasure. \*He\* was a
murderer from the beginning, and does not stand firm in the truth--for
there is no truth in him. Whenever he utters his lie, he utters it out
of his own store; for he is a liar, and the father of lies.

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> But because I speak the truth, you do not
believe me.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> Which of \*you\* convicts me of sin? If I
speak the truth, why do you not believe me?

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> He who is a child of God listens to God's
words. You do not listen to them: and why? It is because you are not
God's children."

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> "Are we not right," answered the Jews,
"in saying that you are a Samaritan and are possessed by a demon?"

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> "I am not possessed by a demon," replied
Jesus. "On the contrary I honour my Father, and you dishonour me.

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> I, however, am not aiming at glory for
myself: there is One who aims at glory for me--and who judges.

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that if
any one shall have obeyed my teaching he shall in no case ever see
death."

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> "Now," exclaimed the Jews, "we know that
you are possessed by a demon. Abraham died, and so did the Prophets, and
yet \*you\* say, \`If any one shall have obeyed my teaching, he shall in
no case ever taste death.'

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> Are you really greater than our
forefather Abraham? For he died. And the prophets died. Who do you make
yourself out to be?"

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> "Were I to glorify myself," answered
Jesus, "I should have no real glory. There is One who glorifies
me--namely my Father, who you say is your God.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> You do not know Him, but I know Him
perfectly; and were I to deny my knowledge of Him, I should resemble
you, and be a liar. On the contrary I do know Him, and I obey His
commands.

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Abraham your forefather exulted in the
hope of seeing my day: and he saw it, and was glad."

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> "You are not yet fifty years old," cried
the Jews, "and have you seen Abraham?"

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> "In most solemn truth," answered Jesus,
"I tell you that before Abraham came into existence, I am."

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> Thereupon they took up stones with which
to stone Him, but He hid Himself and went away out of the Temple.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> As He passed by, He saw a man who had been
blind from his birth.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> So His disciples asked Him, "Rabbi, who
sinned--this man or his parents--that he was born blind?"

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> "Neither he nor his parents sinned,"
answered Jesus, "but he was born blind in order that God's mercy might
be openly shown in him.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> We must do the works of Him who sent me
while there is daylight. Night is coming on, when no one can work.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> When I am in the world, I am the Light of
the world."

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> After thus speaking, He spat on the ground,
and then, kneading the dust and spittle into clay, He smeared the clay
over the man's eyes and said to him,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> "Go and wash in the pool of Siloam" --the
name means \`Sent.' So he went and washed his eyes, and returned able to
see.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> His neighbours, therefore, and the other
people to whom he had been a familiar object because he was a beggar,
began asking, "Is not this the man who used to sit and beg?"

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> "Yes it is," replied some of them. "No it
is not," said others, "but he is like him." His own statement was, "I am
the man."

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> "How then were your eyes opened?" they
asked.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> "He whose name is Jesus," he answered,
"made clay and smeared my eyes with it, and then told me to go to Siloam
and wash. So I went and washed and obtained sight."

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> "Where is he?" they inquired, but the man
did not know.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> They brought him to the Pharisees--the
man who had been blind.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Now the day on which Jesus made the clay
and opened the man's eyes was the Sabbath.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So the Pharisees renewed their
questioning as to how he had obtained his sight. "He put clay on my
eyes," he replied, "and I washed, and now I can see."

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> This led some of the Pharisees to say,
"That man has not come from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath." "How
is it possible for a bad man to do such miracles?" argued others.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And there was a division among them. So
again they asked the once blind man, "What is your account of him? --for
he opened your eyes." "He is a Prophet," he replied.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> The Jews, however, did not believe the
statement concerning him--that he had been blind and had obtained his
sight--until they called his parents and asked them,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> "Is this your son, who you say was born
blind? How is it then that he can now see?"

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> "We know," replied the parents, "that
this is our son and that he was born blind;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> but how it is that he can now see or who
has opened his eyes we do not know. Ask him himself; he is of full age;
he himself will give his own account of it."

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Such was their answer, because they were
afraid of the Jews; for the Jews had already settled among themselves
that if any one should acknowledge Jesus as the Christ, he should be
excluded from the synagogue.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> That was why his parents said, "He is of
full age: ask him himself."

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> A second time therefore they called the
man who had been blind, and said, "Give God the praise: we know that
that man is a sinner."

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> "Whether he is a sinner or not, I do not
know," he replied; "one thing I know--that I was once blind and that now
I can see."

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> "What did he do to you?" they asked; "how
did he open your eyes?"

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> "I have told you already," he replied,
"and you did not listen to me. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you
also mean to be disciples of his?"

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Then they railed at him, and said, "You
are that man's disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> We know that God spoke to Moses; but as
for this fellow we do not know where he comes from."

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> "Why, this is marvellous!" the man
replied; "you do not know where he comes from, and yet he has opened my
eyes!

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> We know that God does not listen to bad
people, but that if any one is a God-fearing man and obeys Him, to him
He listens.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> From the beginning of the world such a
thing was never heard of as that any one should open the eyes of a man
blind from his birth.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> Had that man not come from God, he could
have done nothing."

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> "You," they replied, "were wholly
begotten and born in sin, and do \*you\* teach \*us\*?" And they put him
out of the synagogue.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Jesus heard that they had done this. So
having found him, He asked him, "Do you believe in the Son of God?"

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> "Who is He, Sir?" replied the man. "Tell
me, so that I may believe in Him."

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> "You have seen Him," said Jesus; "and not
only so: He is now speaking to you."

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> "I believe, Sir," he said. And he threw
himself at His feet.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> "I came into this world," said Jesus, "to
judge men, that those who do not see may see, and that those who do see
may become blind."

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> These words were heard by those of the
Pharisees who were present, and they asked Him, "Are \*we\* also blind?"

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> "If you were blind," answered Jesus, "you
would have no sin; but as a matter of fact you boast that you see. So
your sin remains!"

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you that the
man who does not enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs over some
other way, is a thief and a robber.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> But he who enters by the door is the
shepherd of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> To him the porter opens the door, and the
sheep hear his voice; and he calls his own sheep by their names and
leads them out.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> When he has brought out his own
sheep--all of them--he walks at the head of them; and the sheep follow
him, because they know his voice.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> But a stranger they will by no means
follow, but will run away from him, because they do not know the voice
of strangers."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Jesus spoke to them in this figurative
language, but they did not understand what He meant.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Again therefore Jesus said to them, "In
most solemn truth I tell you that I am the Door of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> All who have come before me are thieves
and robbers; but the sheep would not listen to them.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> I am the Door. If any one enters by me,
he will find safety, and will go in and out and find pasture.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> The thief comes only to steal and kill
and destroy: I have come that they may have Life, and may have it in
abundance.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> "I am the Good Shepherd. A good
shepherd lays down his very life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The hired servant--one who is not a
shepherd and does not own the sheep--no sooner sees the wolf coming than
he leaves the sheep and runs away; and the wolf worries and scatters
them.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For he is only a hired servant and
cares nothing for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> "I am the Good Shepherd. And I know my
sheep and my sheep know me,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> just as the Father knows me and I know
the Father; and I am laying down my life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> I have also other sheep--which do not
belong to this fold. Those also I must bring, and they will listen to my
voice; and they shall become one flock under one Shepherd.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For this reason my Father loves me,
because I am laying down my life in order to receive it back again.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> No one is taking it away from me, but I
myself am laying it down. I am authorized to lay it down, and I am
authorized to receive it back again. This is the command I received from
my Father."

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Again there arose a division among the
Jews because of these words.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Many of them said, "He is possessed by
a demon and is mad. Why do you listen to him?"

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Others argued, "That is not the
language of a demoniac: and can a demon open blind men's eyes?"

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The Dedication Festival came on in
Jerusalem. It was winter,

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> and Jesus was walking in the Temple in
Solomon's Portico,

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> when the Jews gathered round Him and
kept asking Him, "How long do you mean to keep us in suspense? If you
are the Christ, tell us so plainly."

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> "I have told you," answered Jesus, "and
you do not believe. The deeds that I do in my Father's name--they give
testimony about me.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But you do not believe, because you are
not my sheep.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> My sheep listen to my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> I give them the Life of the Ages, and
they shall never, never perish, nor shall any one wrest them from my
hand.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> What my Father has given me is more
precious than all besides; and no one is able to wrest anything from my
Father's hand.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> I and the Father are one."

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Again the Jews brought stones with
which to stone Him.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Jesus remonstrated with them. "Many
good deeds," He said, "have I shown you as coming from the Father; for
which of them are you going to stone me?"

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> "For no good deed," the Jews replied,
"are we going to stone you, but for blasphemy, and because you, who are
only a man, are making yourself out to be God."

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> "Does it not stand written in your
Law," replied Jesus, &lt;"\`I said, you are gods'?&gt;

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> If those to whom God's word was
addressed are called gods (and the Scripture cannot be annulled),

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> how is it that you say to one whom the
Father consecrated and sent into the world, \`You are blaspheming,'
because I said, \`I am God's Son'?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> If the deeds I do are not my Father's
deeds, do not believe me.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But if they are, then even if you do
not believe me, at least believe the deeds, that you may know and see
clearly that the Father is in me, and that I am in the Father."

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> This made them once more try to arrest
Him, but He withdrew out of their power.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Then He went away again to the other
side of the Jordan, to the place where John had been baptizing at first;
and there He stayed.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Large numbers of people also came to
Him. Their report was, "John did not work any miracle, but all that John
said about this Teacher was true."

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And many became believers in Him there.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now a certain man, named Lazarus, of
Bethany, was lying ill-- Bethany being the village of Mary and her
sister Martha.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> (It was the Mary who poured the perfume
over the Lord and wiped His feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus
was ill.)

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> So the sisters sent to Him to say,
"Master, he whom you hold dear is ill."

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Jesus received the message and said,
"This illness is not to end in death, but is to promote the glory of
God, in order that the Son of God may be glorified by it."

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister,
and Lazarus.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> When, however, He heard that Lazarus was
ill, He still remained two days in that same place.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then, after that, He said to the
disciples, "Let us return to Judaea."

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> "Rabbi," exclaimed the disciples, "the
Jews have just been trying to stone you, and do you think of going back
there again?"

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> "Are there not twelve hours in the day?"
replied Jesus. "If any one walks in the daytime, he does not
stumble--because he sees the light of this world.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> But if a man walks by night, he does
stumble, because the light is not in him."

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> He said this, and afterwards He added,
"Our friend Lazarus is sleeping, but I will go and wake him."

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> "Master," said the disciples, "if he is
asleep he will recover."

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but
they thought He referred to the rest taken in ordinary sleep.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> So then He told them plainly,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> "Lazarus is dead; and for your sakes I
am glad I was not there, in order that you may believe. But let us go to
him."

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> "Let us go also," Thomas, the Twin,
said to his fellow disciples, "that we may die with him."

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> On His arrival Jesus found that Lazarus
had already been three days in the tomb.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Bethany was near Jerusalem, the
distance being a little less than two miles;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and a considerable number of the Jews
were with Martha and Mary, having come to express sympathy with them on
the death of their brother.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Martha, however, as soon as she heard
the tidings, "Jesus is coming," went to meet Him; but Mary remained
sitting in the house.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> So Martha came and spoke to Jesus.
"Master, if you had been here," she said, "my brother would not have
died.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And even now I know that whatever you
ask God for, God will give you."

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> "Your brother shall rise again,"
replied Jesus.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> "I know," said Martha, "that he will
rise again at the resurrection, on the last day."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> "I am the Resurrection and the Life,"
said Jesus; "he who believes in me, even if he has died, he shall live;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and every one who is living and is a
believer in me shall never, never die. Do you believe this?"

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> "Yes, Master," she replied; "I
thoroughly believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to
come into the world."

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> After saying this, she went and called
her sister Mary privately, telling her, "The Rabbi is here and is asking
for you."

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> So she, on hearing that, rose up
quickly to go to Him.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Now Jesus was not yet come into the
village, but was still at the place where Martha had met Him.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> So the Jews who were with Mary in the
house sympathizing with her, when they saw that she had risen hastily
and had gone out, followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb
to weep aloud there.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> Mary then, when she came to Jesus and
saw Him, fell at His feet and exclaimed, "Master, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died."

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Seeing her weeping aloud, and the Jews
in like manner weeping who had come with her, Jesus, curbing the strong
emotion of His spirit,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> though deeply troubled, asked them,
"Where have you laid him?" "Master, come and see," was their reply.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Jesus wept.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> "See how dear he held him," said the
Jews.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> But others of them asked, "Was this man
who opened the blind man's eyes unable to prevent this man from dying?"

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Jesus, however, again restraining His
strong feeling, came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone had been
laid against the mouth of it.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> "Take away the stone," said Jesus.
Martha, the sister of the dead man, exclaimed, "Master, by this time
there is a foul smell; for it is three days since he died."

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> "Did I not promise you," replied Jesus,
"that if you believe, you shall see the glory of God?"

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> So they removed the stone. Then Jesus
lifted up His eyes and said, "Father, I thank Thee that Thou hast heard
me.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> I know that Thou always hearest me; but
for the sake of the crowd standing round I have said this--that they may
believe that Thou didst send me."

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> After speaking thus, He called out in a
loud voice, "Lazarus, come out."

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> The dead man came out, his hands and
feet wrapped in cloths, and his face wrapped round with a towel. "Untie
him," said Jesus, "and let him go free."

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> Thereupon a considerable number of the
Jews--namely those who had come to Mary and had witnessed His
deeds--became believers in Him;

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> though some of them went off to the
Pharisees and told them what He had done.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> Therefore the High Priests and the
Pharisees held a meeting of the Sanhedrin. "What steps are we taking?"
they asked one another; "for this man is performing a great number of
miracles.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> If we leave him alone in this way,
everybody will believe in him, and the Romans will come and blot out
both our city and our nation."

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> But one of them, named Caiaphas, being
High Priest that year, said, "You know nothing about it.

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> You do not reflect that it is to your
interest that one man should die for the people rather than the whole
nation perish."

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> It was not as a mere man that he thus
spoke. But being High Priest that year he was inspired to declare that
Jesus was to die for the nation,

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> and not for the nation only, but in
order to unite into one body all the far-scattered children of God.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> So from that day forward they planned
and schemed in order to put Him to death.

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> Therefore Jesus no longer went about
openly among the Jews, but He left that neighbourhood and went into the
district near the Desert, to a town called Ephraim, and remained there
with the disciples.

<span id="an_11:55">11:55</span> The Jewish Passover was coming near,
and many from that district went up to Jerusalem before the Passover, to
purify themselves.

<span id="an_11:56">11:56</span> They therefore looked out for Jesus,
and asked one another as they stood in the Temple, "What do you think?
--will he come to the Festival at all?"

<span id="an_11:57">11:57</span> Now the High Priests and the Pharisees
had issued orders that if any one knew where He was, he should give
information, so that they might arrest Him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Jesus, however, six days before the
Passover, came to Bethany, where Lazarus was whom He had raised from the
dead.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> So they gave a dinner there in honour of
Jesus, at which Martha waited at table, but Lazarus was one of the
guests who were with Him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Availing herself of the opportunity, Mary
took a pound weight of pure spikenard, very costly, and poured it over
His feet, and wiped His feet with her hair, so that the house was filled
with the fragrance of the perfume.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then said Judas (the Iscariot, one of the
Twelve--the one who afterwards betrayed Jesus),

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> "Why was not that perfume sold for 300
shillings and the money given to the poor?"

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The reason he said this was not that he
cared for the poor, but that he was a thief, and that being in charge of
the money-box, he used to steal what was put into it.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But Jesus interposed. "Do not blame her,"
He said, "allow her to have kept it for the time of my preparation for
burial.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For the poor you always have with you,
but you have not me always."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Now it became widely known among the Jews
that Jesus was there; but they came not only on His account, but also in
order to see Lazarus whom He had brought back to life.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The High Priests, however, consulted
together to put Lazarus also to death,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> for because of him many of the Jews
left them and became believers in Jesus.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The next day a great crowd of those who
had come to the Festival, hearing that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> took branches of the palm trees and
went out to meet Him, shouting as they went, "God save him!
&lt;Blessings on him who comes in the name of the Lord&gt;--even on the
King of Israel!"

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And Jesus, having procured a young ass,
sat upon it, just as the Scripture says,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> &lt;"Fear not, Daughter of Zion! See,
thy King is coming riding on an ass's colt."&gt;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The meaning of this His disciples did
not understand at the time; but after Jesus was glorified they
recollected that this was written about Him, and that they had done this
to Him.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The large number of people, however,
who had been present when He called Lazarus out of the tomb and brought
him back to life, related what they had witnessed.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> This was also why the crowd came to
meet Him, because they had heard of His having performed that miracle.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The result was that the Pharisees said
among themselves, "Observe how idle all your efforts are! The world is
gone after him!"

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now some of those who used to come up
to worship at the Festival were Greeks.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> They came to Philip, of Bethsaida in
Galilee, with the request, "Sir, we wish to see Jesus."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Philip came and told Andrew: Andrew and
Philip told Jesus.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> His answer was, "The time has come for
the Son of Man to be glorified.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that
unless the grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains
what it was--a single grain; but that if it dies, it yields a rich
harvest.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> He who holds his life dear, is
destroying it; and he who makes his life of no account in this world
shall keep it to the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If a man wishes to be my servant, let
him follow me; and where I am, there too shall my servant be. If a man
wishes to be my servant, the Father will honour him.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Now is my soul full of trouble; and
what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But for this purpose I
have come to this hour.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Father, glorify Thy name." Thereupon
there came a voice from the sky, "I have glorified it and will also
glorify it again."

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> The crowd that stood by and heard it,
said that there had been thunder. Others said, "An angel spoke to him."

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> "It is not for my sake," said Jesus,
"that that voice came, but for your sakes.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Now is a judgement of this world: now
will the Prince of this world be driven out.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And I-- if I am lifted up from the
earth--will draw all men to me."

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> He said this to indicate the kind of
death He would die.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> The crowd answered Him, "We have heard
out of the Law that the Christ remains for ever. In what sense do you
say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is that Son of Man?"

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> "Yet a little while," He replied, "the
light is among you. Be faithful to the light that you have, for fear
darkness should overtake you; for a man who walks in the dark does not
know where he is going.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> In the degree that you have light,
believe in the Light, so that you may become sons of Light." Jesus said
this, and went away and hid Himself from them.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> But though He had performed such great
miracles in their presence, they did not believe in Him--

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> in order that the words of Isaiah the
Prophet might be fulfilled, &lt;"Lord, who has believed our preaching?
And the arm of the Lord--to whom has it been unveiled?"&gt;

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> For this reason they were unable to
believe--because Isaiah said again,

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> &lt;"He has blinded their eyes and made
their minds callous, lest they should see with their eyes and perceive
with their minds, and should turn, and I should heal them."&gt;

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> Isaiah uttered these words because he
saw His glory; and he spoke of Him.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> Nevertheless even from among the Rulers
many believed in Him. But because of the Pharisees they did not avow
their belief, for fear they should be shut out from the synagogue.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> For they loved the glory that comes
from men rather than the glory that comes from God.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> But Jesus cried aloud, "He who believes
in me, believes not so much in me, as in Him who sent me;

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> and he who sees me sees Him who sent
me.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> I have come like light into the world,
in order that no one who believes in me may remain in the dark.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And if any one hears my teachings and
regards them not, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the
world, but to save the world.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> He who sets me at naught and does not
receive my teachings is not left without a judge: the Message which I
have spoken will judge him on the last day.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> Because I have not spoken on my own
authority; but the Father who sent me, Himself gave me a command what to
say and in what words to speak.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> And I know that His command is the Life
of the Ages. What therefore I speak, I speak just as the Father has
bidden me."

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now just before the Feast of the Passover
this incident took place. Jesus knew that the time had come for Him to
leave this world and go to the Father; and having loved His own who were
in the world, He loved them to the end.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> While supper was proceeding, the Devil
having by this time suggested to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, the
thought of betraying Him, Jesus,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> although He knew that the Father had put
everything into His hands, and that He had come forth from God and was
now going to God,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> rose from the table, threw off His upper
garments, and took a towel and tied it round Him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Then He poured water into a basin, and
proceeded to wash the feet of the disciples and to wipe them with the
towel which He had put round Him.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> When He came to Simon Peter, Peter
objected. "Master," he said, "are \*you\* going to wash my feet?"

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> "What I am doing," answered Jesus, "for
the present you do not know, but afterwards you shall know."

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> "Never, while the world lasts," said
Peter, "shall you wash my feet." "If I do not wash you," replied Jesus,
"you have no share with me."

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> "Master," said Peter, "wash not only my
feet, but also my hands and my head."

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> "Any one who has lately bathed," said
Jesus, "does not need to wash more than his feet, but is clean all over.
And you my disciples are clean, and yet this is not true of all of you."

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For He knew who was betraying Him, and
that was why He said, "You are not all of you clean."

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> So after He had washed their feet, put
on His garments again, and returned to the table, He said to them, "Do
you understand what I have done to you?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> You call me \`The Rabbi' and \`The
Master,' and rightly so, for such I am.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> If I then, your Master and Rabbi, have
washed your feet, it is also your duty to wash one another's feet.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For I have set you an example in order
that you may do what I have done to you.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that a
servant is not superior to his master, nor is a messenger superior to
him who sent him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> If you know all this, blessed are you
if you act accordingly.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> I am not speaking of all of you. I know
whom I have chosen, but things are as they are in order that the
Scripture may be fulfilled, which says, &lt;\`He who eats my bread has
lifted up his heel against me.'&gt;

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> From this time forward I tell you
things before they happen, in order that when they do happen you may
believe that I am He.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that he
who receives whoever I send receives me, and that he who receives me
receives Him who sent me."

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> After speaking thus Jesus was troubled
in spirit and said with deep earnestness, "In most solemn truth I tell
you that one of you will betray me."

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The disciples began looking at one
another, at a loss to know to which of them He was referring.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> There was at table one of His
disciples--the one Jesus loved-- reclining with his head on Jesus's
bosom.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Making a sign therefore to him, Simon
Peter said, "Tell us to whom he is referring."

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> So he, having his head on Jesus's
bosom, leaned back and asked, "Master, who is it?"

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> "It is the one," answered Jesus, "for
whom I shall dip this piece of bread and to whom I shall give it."
Accordingly He dipped the piece of bread, and took it and gave it to
Judas, the son of the Iscariot Simon.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Then, after Judas had received the
piece of bread, Satan entered into him. "Lose no time about it," said
Jesus to him.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> But why He said this no one else at the
table understood.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Some, however, supposed that because
Judas had the money-box Jesus meant, "Buy what we require for the
Festival," or that he should give something to the poor.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> So Judas took the piece of bread and
immediately went out. And it was night.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> So when he was gone out, Jesus said,
"Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in Him.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> Moreover God will glorify Him in
Himself, and will glorify Him without delay.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Dear children, I am still with you a
little longer. You will seek me, but, as I said to the Jews, \`Where I
am going you cannot come,' so for the present I say to you.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> A new commandment I give you, to love
one another; that as I have loved you, you also may love one another.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> It is by this that every one will know
that you are my disciples--if you love one another."

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> "Master," inquired Simon Peter, "where
are you going?" "Where I am going," replied Jesus, "you cannot be my
follower now, but you shall be later."

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> "Master," asked Peter again, "why
cannot I follow you now? I will lay down my life on your behalf.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> "You say you will lay down your life on
my behalf!" said Jesus; "in most solemn truth I tell you that the cock
will not crow before you have three times disowned me."

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> "Let not your hearts be troubled. Trust
in God: trust in me also.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> In my Father's house there are many
resting-places. Were it otherwise, I would have told you; for I am going
to make ready a place for you.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And if I go and make ready a place for
you, I will return and take you to be with me, that where I am you also
may be.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And where I am going, you all know the
way."

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> "Master," said Thomas, "we do not know
where you are going. In what sense do we know the way?"

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> "I am the Way," replied Jesus, "and the
Truth and the Life. No one comes to the Father except through me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> If you--all of you--knew me, you would
fully know my Father also. From this time forward you know Him and have
seen Him."

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> "Master," said Philip, "cause us to see
the Father: that is all we need."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> "Have I been so long among you," Jesus
answered, "and yet you, Philip, do not know me? He who has seen me has
seen the Father. How can \*you\* ask me, \`Cause us to see the Father'?

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Do you not believe that I am in the
Father and that the Father is in me? The things that I tell you all I do
not speak on my own authority: but the Father dwelling within me carries
on His own work.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Believe me, all of you, that I am in
the Father and that the Father is in me; or at any rate, believe me
because of what I do.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that he
who trusts in me--the things which I do he shall do also; and greater
things than these he shall do, because I am going to the Father.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And whatever any of you ask in my name,
I will do, in order that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If you make any request of me in my
name, I will do it.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> "If you love me, you will obey my
commandments.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And I will ask the Father, and He will
give you another Advocate to be for ever with you--the Spirit of truth.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> That Spirit the world cannot receive,
because it does not see Him or know Him. You know Him, because He
remains by your side and is in you.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I will not leave you bereaved: I am
coming to you.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Yet a little while and the world will
see me no more, but you will see me: because I live, you also shall
live.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> At that time you will know that I am in
my Father, and that you are in me, and that I am in you.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He who has my commandments and obeys
them--he it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my
Father, and I will love him and will clearly reveal myself to him."

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Judas (not the Iscariot) asked,
"Master, how is it that you will reveal yourself clearly to us and not
to the world?"

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> "If any one loves me," replied Jesus,
"he will obey my teaching; and my Father will love him, and we will come
to him and make our home with him.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> He who has no love for me does not obey
my teaching; and yet the teaching to which you are listening is not
mine, but is the teaching of the Father who sent me.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> "All this I have spoken to you while
still with you.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit whom
the Father will send at my request, will teach you everything, and will
bring to your memories all that I have said to you.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> Peace I leave with you: my own peace I
give to you. It is not as the world gives its greetings that I give you
peace. Let not your hearts be troubled or dismayed.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> "You heard me say to you, \`I am going
away, and yet I am coming to you.' If you loved me, you would have
rejoiced because I am going to the Father; for the Father is greater
than I am.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> I have now told you before it comes to
pass, that when it has come to pass you may believe.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> In future I shall not talk much with
you, for the Prince of this world is coming. And yet in me he has
nothing;

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> but it is in order that the world may
know that I love the Father, and that it is in obedience to the command
which the Father gave me that I thus act. Rise, let us be going."

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> "I am the Vine--the True Vine, and my
Father is the vine-dresser.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Every branch in me--if it bears no fruit,
He takes away; and every branch that bears fruit He prunes, that it may
bear more fruit.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Already you are cleansed--through the
teaching which I have given you.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Continue in me, and let me continue in
you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself--that is, if it does
not continue in the vine--so neither can you if you do not continue in
me.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> I am the Vine, you are the branches. He
who continues in me and in whom I continue bears abundant fruit, for
apart from me you can do nothing.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> If any one does not continue in me, he is
like the unfruitful branch which is at once thrown away and then withers
up. Such branches they gather up and throw into the fire and they are
burned.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> "If you continue in me and my sayings
continue in you, ask what you will and it shall be done for you.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> By this is God glorified--by your bearing
abundant fruit and thus being true disciples of mine.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> As the Father has loved me, I have also
loved you: continue in my love.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> If you obey my commands, you will
continue in my love, as I have obeyed my Father's commands and continue
in His love.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> "These things I have spoken to you in
order that I may have joy in you, and that your joy may become perfect.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> This is my commandment to you, to love
one another as I have loved you.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> No one has greater love than this--a
man laying down his life for his friends.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> You are my friends, if you do what I
command you.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> No longer do I call you servants,
because a servant does not know what his master is doing; but I have
called you friends, because all that I have heard from the Father I have
made known to you.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> It is not you who chose me, but it is I
who chose you and appointed you that you might go and be fruitful and
that your fruit might remain; so that whatever petition you present to
the Father in my name He may give you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> "Thus I command you to love one
another.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> If the world hates you, remember that
it has first had me as the fixed object of its hatred.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If you belonged to the world, the world
would love its own property. But because you do not belong to the world,
and I have chosen you out of the world--for that reason the world hates
you.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Bear in mind what I said to you, \`A
servant is not superior to his master.' If they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you: if they have obeyed my teaching, they will obey
yours also.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But they will inflict all this
suffering upon you on account of your bearing my name--because they do
not know Him who sent me.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> "If I had not come and spoken to them,
they would have had no sin; but as the case stands they are without
excuse for their sin.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He who hates me hates my Father also.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> If I had not done among them, as I
have, such miracles as no one else ever did, they would have had no sin;
but they have in fact seen and also hated both me and my Father.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But this has been so, in order that the
saying may be fulfilled which stands written in their Law, &lt;\`They
have hated me without any reason.'&gt;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> "When the Advocate is come whom I will
send to you from the Father's presence--the Spirit of Truth who comes
forth from the Father's presence--He will be a witness concerning me.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And you also are witnesses, because you
have been with me from the first.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> "These things I have spoken to you in
order to clear stumbling-blocks out of your path.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> You will be excluded from the synagogues;
nay more, the time is coming when any one who has murdered one of you
will suppose he is offering service to God.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And they will do these things because
they have failed to recognize the Father and to discover who I am.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> But I have spoken these things to you in
order that when the time for their accomplishment comes you may remember
them, and may recollect that I told you. I did not, however, tell you
all this at first, because I was still with you.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But now I an returning to Him who sent
me; and not one of you asks me where I am going.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But grief has filled your hearts because
I have said all this to you.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> "Yet it is the truth that I am telling
you--it is to your advantage that I go away. For unless I go away, the
Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send Him to you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And He, when He comes, will convict the
world in respect of sin, of righteousness, and of judgement; --

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> of sin, because they do not believe in
me;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> of righteousness, because I am going to
the Father, and you will no longer see me;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> of judgement, because the Prince of
this world is under sentence.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> "I have much more to say to you, but
you are unable at present to bear the burden of it.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> But when He has come--the Spirit of
Truth--He will guide you into all the truth. For He will not speak as
Himself originating what He says, but all that He hears He will speak,
and He will make known the future to you.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He will glorify me, because He will
take of what is mine and will make it known to you.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Everything that the Father has is mine;
that is why I said that the Spirit of Truth takes of what is mine and
will make it known to you.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> "A little while and you see me no more,
and again a little while and you shall see me."

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Some of His disciples therefore said to
one another, "What does this mean which He is telling us, \`A little
while and you do not see me, and again a little while and you shall see
me,' and \`Because I am going to the Father'?"

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> So they asked one another repeatedly,
"What can that \`little while' mean which He speaks of? We do not
understand His words."

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask
Him, and He said, "Is this what you are questioning one another
about--my saying, \`A little while and you do not see me, and again a
little while and you shall see me'?

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> In most solemn truth I tell you that
you will weep aloud and lament, but the world will be glad. You will
mourn, but your grief will be turned into gladness.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> A woman, when she is in labour, has
sorrow, because her time has come. But when she has given birth to the
babe, she no longer remembers the pain, because of her joy at a child
being born into the world.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> So you also now have sorrow; but I
shall see you again, and your hearts will be glad, and your gladness no
one will take away from you.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> You will put no questions to me then.
"In most solemn truth I tell you that whatever you ask the Father for in
my name He will give you.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> As yet you have not asked for anything
in my name: ask, and you shall receive, that your hearts may be filled
with gladness.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> "All this I have spoken to you in
veiled language. The time is coming when I shall no longer speak to you
in veiled language, but will tell you about the Father in plain words.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> At that time you will make your
requests in my name; and I do not promise to ask the Father on your
behalf,

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> for the Father Himself holds you dear,
because you have held me dear and have believed that I came from the
Father's presence.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> I came from the Father and have come
into the world. Again I am leaving the world and am going to the
Father."

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> "Ah, now you are using plain language,"
said His disciples, "and are uttering no figure of speech!

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> Now we know that you have all
knowledge, and do not need to be pressed with questions. Through this we
believe that you came from God."

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> "Do you at last believe?" replied
Jesus.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> "Remember that the time is coming, nay,
has already come, for you all to be dispersed each to his own home and
to leave me alone. And yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> "I have spoken all this to you in order
that in me you may have peace. In the world you have affliction. But
keep up your courage: \*I\* have won the victory over the world."

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> When Jesus had thus spoken, He raised his
eyes towards Heaven and said, "Father, the hour has come. Glorify Thy
Son that the Son may glorify Thee;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> even as Thou hast given Him authority
over all mankind, so that on all whom Thou hast given Him He may bestow
the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And in this consists the Life of the
Ages--in knowing Thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast
sent.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> I have glorified Thee on earth, having
done perfectly the work which by Thine appointment has been mine to do.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And now, Father, do Thou glorify me in
Thine own presence, with the glory that I had in Thy presence before the
world existed.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> "I have revealed Thy perfections to the
men whom Thou gavest me out of the world. Thine they were, and Thou
gavest them to me, and they have obeyed Thy message.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Now they know that whatever Thou hast
given me is from Thee.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> For the truths which Thou didst teach me
I have taught them. And they have received them, and have known for
certain that I came out from Thy presence, and have believed that Thou
didst send me.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> "I am making request for them: for the
world I do not make any request, but for those whom Thou hast given me.
Because they are Thine,

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> and everything that is mine is Thine,
and everything that is Thine is mine; and I am crowned with glory in
them.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> I am now no longer in the world, but
they are in the world and I am coming to Thee. "Holy Father, keep them
true to Thy name--the name which Thou hast given me to bear--that they
may be one, even as we are.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> While I was with them, I kept them true
to Thy name--the name Thou hast given me to bear--and I kept watch over
them, and not one of them is lost but only he who is doomed to
destruction--that the Scripture may be fulfilled.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> "But now I am coming to Thee, and I
speak these words while I am in the world, in order that they may have
my gladness within them filling their hearts.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I have given them Thy Message, and the
world has hated them, because they do not belong to the world, just as I
do not belong to the world.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> I do not ask that Thou wilt remove them
out of the world, but that Thou wilt protect them from the Evil one.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> They do not belong to the world, just
as I do not belong to the world.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Make them holy in the truth: Thy
Message is truth.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Just as Thou didst send me into the
world, I also have sent them;

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and on their behalf I consecrate
myself, in order that they may become perfectly consecrated in truth.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> "Nor is it for them alone that I make
request. It is also for those who trust in me through their teaching;

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> that they may all be one, even as Thou
art in me, O Father, and I am in Thee; that they also may be in us; that
the world may believe that Thou didst send me.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And the glory which Thou hast given me
I have given them, that they may be one, just as we are one:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> I in them and Thou in me; that they may
stand perfected in one; that the world may come to understand that Thou
didst send me and hast loved them with the same love as that with which
Thou hast loved me.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> "Father, those whom Thou hast given
me--I desire that where I am they also may be with me, that they may see
the glory--my glory--my gift from Thee, which Thou hast given me because
Thou didst love me before the creation of the world.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And, righteous Father, though the world
has failed to recognize Thee, I have known Thee, and these have
perceived that Thou didst send me.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And I have made known Thy name to them
and will make it known, that the love with which Thou hast loved me may
be in them, and that I may be in them."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> After offering this prayer Jesus went out
with His disciples to a place on the further side of the Ravine of the
Cedars, where there was a garden which He entered--Himself and His
disciples.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Now Judas also, who at that very time was
betraying Him, knew the place, for Jesus had often resorted there with
His disciples.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> So Judas, followed by the battalion and
by a detachment of the Temple police sent by the High Priests and
Pharisees, came there with torches and lamps and weapons.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Jesus therefore, knowing all that was
about to befall Him, went out to meet them. "Who are you looking for?"
He asked them.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> "For Jesus the Nazarene," was the answer.
"I am he," He replied. (Now Judas who was betraying Him was also
standing with them.)

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> As soon then as He said to them, "I am
he," they went backwards and fell to the ground.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Again therefore He asked them, "Who are
you looking for?" "For Jesus the Nazarene," they said.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> "I have told you," replied Jesus, "that I
am he. If therefore you are looking for me, let these my disciples go
their way."

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He made this request in order that the
words He had spoken might be fulfilled, "As for those whom Thou hast
given me, I have not lost one."

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Simon Peter, however, having a sword,
drew it, and, aiming at the High Priest's servant, cut off his right
ear. The servant's name was Malchus.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Jesus therefore said to Peter, "Put
back your sword. Shall I refuse to drink the cup of sorrow which the
Father has given me to drink?"

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> So the battalion and their tribune and
the Jewish police closed in, and took Jesus and bound Him.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> They then brought Him to Annas first;
for Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas who was High Priest that
year.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> (It was this Caiaphas who had advised
the Jews, saying, "It is to your interest that one man should die for
the People.")

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Meanwhile Simon Peter was following
Jesus, and so also was another disciple. The latter was known to the
High Priest, and went in with Jesus into the court of the High Priest's
palace.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But Peter remained standing outside the
door, till the disciple who was acquainted with the High Priest came out
and induced the portress to let Peter in.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> This led the girl, the portress, to ask
Peter, "Are you also one of this man's disciples?" "No, I am not," he
replied.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Now because it was cold the servants
and the police had lighted a charcoal fire, and were standing and
warming themselves; and Peter too remained with them, standing and
warming himself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> So the High Priest questioned Jesus
about His disciples and His teaching.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> "As for me," replied Jesus, "I have
spoken openly to the world. I have continually taught in some synagogue
or in the Temple where all the Jews are wont to assemble, and I have
said nothing in secret.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Why do you question me? Question those
who heard what it was I said to them: these witnesses here know what I
said."

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Upon His saying this, one of the
officers standing by struck Him with his open hand, asking Him as he did
so, "Is that the way you answer the High Priest?"

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> "If I have spoken wrongly," replied
Jesus, "bear witness to it as wrong; but if rightly, why that blow?"

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> So Annas sent Him bound to Caiaphas the
High Priest.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> But Simon Peter remained standing and
warming himself, and this led to their asking him, "Are you also one of
his disciples?" He denied it, and said, "No, I am not."

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> One of the High Priest's servants, a
relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said, "Did I not see
you in the garden with him?"

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Once more Peter denied it, and
immediately a cock crowed.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> So they brought Jesus from Caiaphas's
house to the Praetorium. It was the early morning, and they would not
enter the Praetorium themselves for fear of defilement, and in order
that they might be able to eat the Passover.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Accordingly Pilate came out to them and
inquired, "What accusation have you to bring against this man?"

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> "If the man were not a criminal," they
replied, "we would not have handed him over to you."

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> "Take him yourselves," said Pilate,
"and judge him by your Law." "We have no power," replied the Jews, "to
put any man to death."

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> They said this that the words might be
fulfilled in which Jesus predicted the kind of death He was to die.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Re-entering the Praetorium, therefore,
Pilate called Jesus and asked Him, "Are \*you\* the King of the Jews?"

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> "Do you say this of yourself, or have
others told it you about me?" replied Jesus.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> "Am I a Jew?" exclaimed Pilate; "it is
your own nation and the High Priests who have handed you over to me.
What have you done?"

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> "My kingdom," replied Jesus, "does not
belong to this world. If my kingdom did belong to this world, my
subjects would have resolutely fought to save me from being delivered up
to the Jews. But, as a matter of fact, my kingdom has not this origin."

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> "So then \*you\* are a king!" rejoined
Pilate. "Yes," said Jesus, "you say truly that I am a king. For this
purpose I was born, and for this purpose I have come into the world--to
give testimony for the truth. Every one who is a friend of the truth
listens to my voice."

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> "What is truth?" said Pilate. But no
sooner had he spoken the words than he went out again to the Jews and
told them, "I find no crime in him.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> But you have a custom that I should
release one prisoner to you at the Passover. So shall I release to you
the King of the Jews?"

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> With a roar of voices they again cried
out, saying, "Not this man, but Barabbas!" Now Barabbas was a robber.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Then Pilate took Jesus and scourged Him.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And the soldiers, twisting twigs of thorn
into a wreath, put it on His head, and threw round Him a crimson cloak.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Then they began to march up to Him,
saying in a mocking voice, "Hail King of the Jews!" And they struck Him
with the palms of their hands.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Once more Pilate came out and said to the
Jews, "See, I am bringing him out to you to let you clearly understand
that I find no crime in him."

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> So Jesus came out, wearing the wreath of
thorns and the crimson cloak. And Pilate said to them, "See, there is
the man."

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> As soon then as the High Priests and the
officers saw Him, they shouted "To the cross! To the cross!" "Take him
yourselves and crucify him," said Pilate; "for I, at any rate, find no
crime in him."

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> "We," replied the Jews, "have a Law, and
in accordance with that Law he ought to die, for having claimed to be
the Son of God."

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> More alarmed than ever, Pilate no sooner
heard these words than he re-entered the Praetorium and began to
question Jesus.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> "What is your origin?" he asked. But
Jesus gave him no answer.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> "Do you refuse to speak even to me?"
asked Pilate; "do you not know that I have it in my power either to
release you or to crucify you?"

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> "You would have had no power whatever
over me," replied Jesus, "had it not been granted you from above. On
that account he who has delivered me up to you is more guilty than you
are."

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Upon receiving this answer, Pilate was
for releasing Him. But the Jews kept shouting, "If you release this man,
you are no friend of Caesar's. Every one who sets himself up as king
declares himself a rebel against Caesar."

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> On hearing this, Pilate brought Jesus
out, and sat down on the judge's seat in a place called the Pavement--or
in Hebrew, Gabbatha.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> It was the day of Preparation for the
Passover, about six o'clock in the morning. Then he said to the Jews,
"There is your king!"

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> This caused a storm of outcries, "Away
with him! Away with him! Crucify him!" "Am I to crucify your king?"
Pilate asked. "We have no king, except Caesar," answered the High
Priests.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Then Pilate gave Him up to them to be
crucified. Accordingly they took Jesus;

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> and He went out carrying His own cross,
to the place called Skull-place--or, in Hebrew, Golgotha--

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> where they nailed Him to a cross, and
two others at the same time, one on each side and Jesus in the middle.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And Pilate wrote a notice and had it
fastened to the top of the cross. It ran thus: JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE
KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Many of the Jews read this notice, for
the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and the notice
was in three languages--Hebrew, Latin, and Greek.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> This led the Jewish High Priests to
remonstrate with Pilate. "You should not write \`The King of the Jews,'"
they said, "but that he claimed to be King of the Jews."

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> "What I have written I have written,"
was Pilate's answer.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> So the soldiers, as soon as they had
crucified Jesus, took His garments, including His tunic, and divided
them into four parts--one part for each soldier. The tunic was without
seam, woven from the top in one piece.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> So they said to one another, "Do not
let us tear it. Let us draw lots for it." This happened that the
Scripture might be fulfilled which says, &lt;"They shared my garments
among them, and drew lots for my clothing."&gt; That was just what the
soldiers did.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Now standing close to the cross of
Jesus were His mother and His mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas,
and Mary of Magdala.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> So Jesus, seeing His mother, and seeing
the disciple whom He loved standing near, said to His mother, "Behold,
your son!"

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then He said to the disciple, "Behold,
your mother!" And from that time the disciple received her into his own
home.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> After this, Jesus, knowing that
everything was now brought to an end, said--that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, "I am thirsty."

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> There was a jar of wine standing there.
With this wine they filled a sponge, put it on the end of a stalk of
hyssop, and lifted it to His mouth.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> As soon as Jesus had taken the wine, He
said, "It is finished." And then, bowing His head, He yielded up His
spirit.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> Meanwhile the Jews, because it was the
day of Preparation for the Passover, and in order that the bodies might
not remain on the crosses during the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was one
of special solemnity), requested Pilate to have the legs of the dying
men broken, and the bodies removed.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Accordingly the soldiers came and broke
the legs of the first man and also of the other who had been crucified
with Jesus.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> Then they came to Jesus Himself: but
when they saw that He was already dead, they refrained from breaking His
legs.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> One of the soldiers, however, made a
thrust at His side with a lance, and immediately blood and water flowed
out.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> This statement is the testimony of an
eye-witness, and it is true. He knows that he is telling the truth--in
order that you also may believe.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> For all this took place that the
Scripture might be fulfilled which declares, &lt;"Not one of His bones
shall be broken."&gt;

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And again another Scripture says,
&lt;"They shall look on Him whom they have pierced."&gt;

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> After this, Joseph of Arimathaea, who
was a disciple of Jesus, but for fear of the Jews a secret disciple,
asked Pilate's permission to carry away the body of Jesus; and Pilate
gave him leave. So he came and removed the body.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> Nicodemus too--he who at first had
visited Jesus by night--came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, in
weight about seventy or eighty pounds.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> Taking down the body they wrapped it in
linen cloths along with the spices, in accordance with the Jewish mode
of preparing for burial.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> There was a garden at the place where
Jesus had been crucified, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one
had yet been buried.

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> Therefore, because it was the day of
Preparation for the Jewish Passover, and the tomb was close at hand,
they put Jesus there.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> On the first day of the week, very early,
while it was still dark, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb and saw that
the stone had been removed from it.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> So she ran, as fast as she could, to find
Simon Peter and the other disciple--the one who was dear to Jesus--and
to tell them, "They have taken the Master out of the tomb, and we do not
know where they have put Him."

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Peter and the other disciple started at
once to go to the tomb, both of them running,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> but the other disciple ran faster than
Peter and reached it before he did.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen
cloths lying there on the ground, but he did not go in.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Simon Peter, however, also came,
following him, and entered the tomb. There on the ground he saw the
cloths;

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> and the towel, which had been placed over
the face of Jesus, not lying with the cloths, but folded up and put by
itself.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Then the other disciple, who had been the
first to come to the tomb, also went in and saw and was convinced.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> For until now they had not understood the
inspired teaching, that He must rise again from among the dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Then they went away and returned home.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Meanwhile Mary remained standing near
the tomb, weeping aloud. She did not enter the tomb, but as she wept she
stooped and looked in,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> and saw two angels clothed in white
raiment, sitting one at the head and one at the feet where the body of
Jesus had been.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> They spoke to her. "Why are you
weeping?" they asked. "Because," she replied, "they have taken away my
Lord, and I do not know where they have put him."

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> While she was speaking, she turned
round and saw Jesus standing there, but did not recognize Him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> "Why are you weeping?" He asked; "who
are you looking for?" She, supposing that He was the gardener, replied,
"Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him and I
will remove him."

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> "Mary!" said Jesus. She turned to Him.
"Rabboni!" she cried in Hebrew: the word means \`Teacher!'

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> "Do not cling to me," said Jesus, "for
I have not yet ascended to the Father. But take this message to my
brethren: \`I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and
your God.'"

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Mary of Magdala came and brought word
to the disciples. "I have seen the Master," she said. And she told them
that He had said these things to her.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> On that same first day of the week,
when it was evening and, for fear of the Jews, the doors of the house
where the disciples were, were locked, Jesus came and stood in their
midst, and said to them, "Peace be to you!"

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Having said this He showed them His
hands and also His side; and the disciples were filled with joy at
seeing the Master.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> A second time, therefore, He said to
them, "Peace be to you! As the Father sent me, I also now send you."

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Having said this He breathed upon them
and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> If you remit the sins of any persons,
they remain remitted to them. If you bind fast the sins of any, they
remain bound."

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Thomas, one of the twelve--surnamed
\`the Twin' --was not among them when Jesus came.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> So the rest of the disciples told him,
"We have seen the Master!" His reply was, "Unless I see in his hands the
wound made by the nails and put my finger into the wound, and put my
hand into his side, I will never believe it."

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A week later the disciples were again
in the house, and Thomas was with them, when Jesus came--though the
doors were locked--and stood in their midst, and said, "Peace be to
you."

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Then He said to Thomas, "Bring your
finger here and feel my hands; bring you hand and put it into my side;
and do not be ready to disbelieve but to believe."

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> "My Lord and my God!" replied Thomas.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> "Because you have seen me," replied
Jesus, "you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet
have believed."

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> There were also a great number of other
signs which Jesus performed in the presence of the disciples, which are
not recorded in this book.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> But these have been recorded in order
that you may believe that He is the Christ, the Son of God, and that,
through believing, you may have Life through His name.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> After this, Jesus again showed Himself to
the disciples. It was at the Lake of Tiberias. The circumstances were as
follows.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Simon Peter was with Thomas, called the
Twin, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zabdi, and two others of
the Master's disciples.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Simon Peter said to them, "I am going
fishing." "We will go too," said they. So they set out and went on board
their boat; but they caught nothing that night.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> When, however, day was now dawning, Jesus
stood on the beach, though the disciples did not know that it was Jesus.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> He called to them. "Children," He said,
"have you any food there?" "No," they answered.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> "Throw the net in on the right hand
side," He said, "and you will find fish." So they threw the net in, and
now they could scarcely drag it along for the quantity of fish.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> This made the disciple whom Jesus loved
say to Peter, "It is the Master." Simon Peter therefore, when he heard
the words, "It is the Master," drew on his fisherman's shirt--for he had
not been wearing it--put on his girdle, and sprang into the water.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> But the rest of the disciples came in the
small boat (for they were not far from land--only about a hundred yards
off), dragging the net full of fish.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> As soon as they landed, they saw a
charcoal fire burning there, with fish broiling on it, and bread close
by.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Jesus told them to fetch some of the
fish which they had just caught.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> So Simon Peter went on board the boat
and drew the net ashore full of large fish, 153 in number; and yet,
although there were so many, the net had not broken.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> "Come this way and have breakfast,"
said Jesus. But not one of the disciples ventured to question Him as to
who He was, for they felt sure that it was the Master.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Jesus came and took the bread and
gave them some, and the fish in the same way.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> This was now the third occasion on
which Jesus showed Himself to the disciples after He had risen from
among the dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> When they had finished breakfast, Jesus
asked Simon Peter, "Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these
others do?" "Yes, Master," was his answer; "you know that you are dear
to me." "Then feed my lambs," replied Jesus.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Again a second time He asked him,
"Simon, son of John, do you love me?" "Yes, Master," he said, "you know
that you are dear to me." "Then be a shepherd to my sheep," He said.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> A third time Jesus put the question:
"Simon, son of John, am I dear to you?" It grieved Peter that Jesus
asked him the third time, "Am I dear to you?" "Master," he replied, "you
know everything, you can see that you are dear to me." "Then feed my
much-loved sheep," said Jesus.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> "In most solemn truth I tell you that
whereas, when you were young, you used to put on your girdle and walk
whichever way you chose, when you have grown old you will stretch out
your arms and some one else will put a girdle round you and carry you
where you have no wish to go."

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> This He said to indicate the kind of
death by which that disciple would bring glory to God; and after
speaking thus He said to him, "Follow me."

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Peter turned round and noticed the
disciple whom Jesus loved following--the one who at the supper had
leaned back on His breast and had asked, "Master, who is it that is
betraying you?"

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> On seeing him, Peter asked Jesus, "And,
Master, what about him?"

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> "If I desire him to remain till I
come," replied Jesus, "what concern is that of yours? You, yourself,
must follow me."

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Hence the report spread among the
brethren that that disciple would never die. Yet Jesus did not say, "He
is not to die," but, "If I desire him to remain till I come, what
concern is that of yours?"

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> That is the disciple who gives his
testimony as to these matters, and has written this history; and we know
that his testimony is true.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But there are also many other things
which Jesus did--so vast a number indeed that if they were all described
in detail, I suppose that the world itself could not contain the books
that would have to be written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts](act)
