[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mar)  [Next](joh.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Luke

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Seeing that many have attempted to draw up
a narrative of the facts which are received with full assurance among us

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> on the authority of those who were from the
beginning eye-witnesses and were devoted to the service of the divine
Message,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> it has seemed right to me also, after
careful investigation of the facts from their commencement, to write for
you, most noble Theophilus, a connected account,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> that you may fully know the truth of the
things which you have been taught by word of mouth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> There was in the time of Herod, the king of
Judaea, a priest of the name of Zechariah, belonging to the class of
Abijah. He had a wife who was a descendant of Aaron, and her name was
Elizabeth.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> They were both of them upright before God,
blamelessly obeying all the Lord's precepts and ordinances.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But they had no child, because Elizabeth
was barren; and both of them were far advanced in life.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now while he was doing priestly duty before
God in the prescribed course of his class,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> it fell to his lot--according to the custom
of the priesthood--to go into the Sanctuary of the Lord and burn the
incense;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and the whole multitude of the people
were outside praying, at the hour of incense.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then there appeared to him an angel of
the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and Zechariah on seeing him was agitated
and terrified.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But the angel said to him, "Do not be
afraid, Zechariah, for your petition has been heard: and your wife
Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to call his name John.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Gladness and exultant joy shall be yours,
and many will rejoice over his birth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For he will be great in the sight of the
Lord; no wine or fermented drink shall he ever drink; but he will be
filled with the Holy Spirit from the very hour of his birth.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Many of the descendants of Israel will he
turn to the Lord their God;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and he will be His forerunner in the
spirit and power of Elijah, to turn fathers' hearts to the children, and
cause the rebellious to walk in the wisdom of the upright, to make a
people perfectly ready for the lord."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> "By what proof," asked Zechariah, "shall
I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is far advanced in years."

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> "I am Gabriel, who stand in the presence
of God," answered the angel, "and I have been sent to talk with you and
tell you this good news.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And now you will be dumb and unable to
speak until the day when this has taken place; because you did not
believe my words--words which will be fulfilled at their appointed
time."

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Meanwhile the people were waiting for
Zechariah, and were surprised that he stayed so long in the Sanctuary.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> When, however, he came out, he was unable
to speak to them; and they knew that he must have seen a vision in the
Sanctuary; but he kept making signs to them and continued dumb.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> When his days of service were at an end,
he went to his home;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and in course of time his wife Elizabeth
conceived, and kept herself secluded five months.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> "Thus has the Lord dealt with me," she
said, "now that He has graciously taken away my reproach among men."

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel
was sent from God to a town in Galilee called Nazareth,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> to a maiden betrothed to a man of the
name of Joseph, a descendant of David. The maiden's name was Mary.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> So Gabriel went into the house and said
to her, "Joy be to you, favoured one! the Lord is with you."

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> She was greatly agitated at his words,
and wondered what such a greeting meant.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> But the angel said, "Do not be
frightened, Mary, for you have found favour with God.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> You will conceive in your womb and bear a
son; and you are to call His name JESUS.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> He will be great and He will be called
\`Son of the Most High.' And the Lord God will give Him the throne of
His forefather David;

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> and He will be King over the House of
Jacob for the Ages, and of His Kingdom there will be no end."

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> "How can this be," Mary replied, "seeing
that I have no husband?"

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> The angel answered, "The Holy Spirit will
come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; and
for this reason your holy offspring will be called \`the Son of God.'

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And see, your relative Elizabeth--she
also has conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month
with her who was called barren.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> For no promise from God will be
impossible of fulfilment."

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> "I am the Lord's maidservant," Mary
replied; "may it be with me in accordance with your words!" And then the
angel left her.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> Not long after this, Mary rose up and
went in haste into the hill country to a town in Judah.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Here she came to the house of Zechariah
and greeted Elizabeth;

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> and as soon as Elizabeth heard Mary's
greeting, the babe leapt within her. And Elizabeth was filled with the
Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> and uttered a loud cry of joy. "Blest
among women are you," she said, "and the offspring of your body is
blest!

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> But why is this honour done me, that the
mother of my Lord should come to me?

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> For, the moment your greeting reached my
ears, the babe within me leapt for joy.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And blessed is she who has believed, for
the word spoken to her from the Lord shall be fulfilled."

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> Then Mary said: "My soul extols the Lord,

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> And my spirit triumphs in God my Saviour;

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Because He has not turned from His
maidservant in her lowly position; For from this time forward all
generations will account me happy,

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Because the mighty One has done great
things for me--Holy is His name!--

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> And His compassion is, generation after
generation, Upon those who fear Him.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> He has manifested His supreme strength.
He has scattered those who were haughty in the thoughts of their hearts.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> He has cast monarchs down from their
thrones, And exalted men of low estate.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> The hungry He has satisfied with choice
gifts, But the rich He has sent empty-handed away.

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> His servant Israel He has helped,
Remembering His compassion--

<span id="an_1:55">1:55</span> In fulfillment of His promises to our
forefathers--For Abraham and his posterity for ever."

<span id="an_1:56">1:56</span> So Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three
months, and then returned home.

<span id="an_1:57">1:57</span> Now when Elizabeth's full time was come,
she gave birth to a son;

<span id="an_1:58">1:58</span> and her neighbours and relatives heard
how the Lord had had great compassion on her; and they rejoiced with
her.

<span id="an_1:59">1:59</span> And on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child, and were going to call him Zechariah, after his
father.

<span id="an_1:60">1:60</span> His mother, however, said, "No, he is to
be called John."

<span id="an_1:61">1:61</span> "There is not one of your family," they
said, "who has that name."

<span id="an_1:62">1:62</span> They asked his father by signs what he
wished him to be called.

<span id="an_1:63">1:63</span> So he asked for a writing-tablet, and
wrote, "His name is John." And they all wondered.

<span id="an_1:64">1:64</span> Instantly his mouth and his tongue were
set free, and he began to speak and bless God.

<span id="an_1:65">1:65</span> And all who lived round about them were
filled with awe, and throughout the hill country of Judaea reports of
all these things were spread abroad.

<span id="an_1:66">1:66</span> All who heard the story treasured it in
their memories. "What then will this child be?" they said. For the
lord's hand was indeed with him.

<span id="an_1:67">1:67</span> And Zechariah his father was filled with
the Holy Spirit, and spoke in a rapture of praise.

<span id="an_1:68">1:68</span> "Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,"
he said, "Because He has not forgotten His people but has effected
redemption for them,

<span id="an_1:69">1:69</span> And has raised up a mighty Deliverer for
us In the house of David His servant--

<span id="an_1:70">1:70</span> As He has spoken from all time by the
lips of His holy Prophets--

<span id="an_1:71">1:71</span> To deliver us from our foes and from the
power of all who hate us.

<span id="an_1:72">1:72</span> He dealt pitifully with our forefathers,
And remembered His holy covenant,

<span id="an_1:73">1:73</span> The oath which He swore to Abraham our
forefather,

<span id="an_1:74">1:74</span> To grant us to be rescued from the power
of our foes And so render worship to Him free from fear,

<span id="an_1:75">1:75</span> In piety and uprightness before Him all
our days.

<span id="an_1:76">1:76</span> And you moreover, O child, shall be
called Prophet of the Most High; For you shall go on in front before the
Lord to prepare the way for Him,

<span id="an_1:77">1:77</span> To give to His People a knowledge of
salvation In the forgiveness of their sins,

<span id="an_1:78">1:78</span> Through the tender compassion of our God,
Through which the daybreak from on high will come to us,

<span id="an_1:79">1:79</span> Dawning on those who now dwell in the
darkness and shadow of death--To direct our feet into the path of
peace."

<span id="an_1:80">1:80</span> And the child grew and became strong in
character, and lived in the Desert till the time came for him to appear
publicly to Israel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Just at this time an edict was issued by
Caesar Augustus for the registration of the whole Empire.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> It was the first registration made during
the governorship of Quirinius in Syria;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and all went to be registered--every one to
the town to which he belonged.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> So Joseph went up from Galilee, from the
town of Nazareth, to Judaea, to David's town of Bethlehem, because he
was of the house and lineage of David,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to have himself registered together with
Mary, who was betrothed to him and was with child.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But while they were there, her full time
came,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and she gave birth to her first-born son,
and wrapped Him round, and laid Him in a manger, because there was no
room for them in the inn.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Now there were shepherds in the same part
of the country, keeping watch over their sheep by night in the open
fields,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> when suddenly an angel of the Lord stood by
them, and the glory of the Lord shone round them; and they were filled
with terror.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But the angel said to them, "Put away all
fear; for I am bringing you good news of great joy--joy for all the
People.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For a Saviour who is the Anointed Lord is
born to you to-day, in the town of David.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And this is the token for you: you will
find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger."

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And immediately there was with the angel
a multitude of the army of Heaven praising God and saying,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> "Glory be to God in the highest Heavens,
And on earth peace among men who please Him!"

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then, as soon as the angels had left them
and returned to Heaven, the shepherds said to one another, "Let us now
go over as far as Bethlehem and see this that has happened, which the
Lord has made known to us."

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So they made haste and came and found
Mary and Joseph, with the babe lying in the manger.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And when they saw the child, they told
what had been said to them about Him;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and all who listened were astonished at
what the shepherds told them.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But Mary treasured up all these things,
often dwelling on them in her mind.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the shepherds returned, glorifying
and praising God for all that they had heard and seen in accordance with
the announcement made to them.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> When eight days had passed and the time
for circumcising Him had come, He was called JESUS, the name given Him
by the angel before His conception in the womb.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And when the days for their purification
appointed by the Law of Moses had passed, they took Him up to Jerusalem
to present Him to the Lord--

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> as it is written in the Law of the Lord:
&lt;"Every first-born male shall be called holy to the Lord."&gt;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And they also offered a sacrifice as
commanded in the Law of the Lord, &lt;"a pair of turtle doves or two
young pigeons."&gt;

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Now there was a man in Jerusalem of the
name of Symeon, an upright and God-fearing man, who was waiting for the
consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> To him it had been revealed by the Holy
Spirit that he should not see death until he had seen the Lord's
Anointed One.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Led by the Spirit he came to the Temple;
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do with regard to Him
according to the custom of the Law,

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> he took Him up in his arms and blessed
God and said,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> "Now, O Sovereign Lord, Thou dost send
Thy servant away in peace, in fulfilment of Thy word,

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Because mine eyes have seen Thy
salvation,

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Which Thou hast made ready in the sight
of all nations--

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> A light to shine upon the Gentiles, And
the glory of Thy people Israel."

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And while the child's father and mother
were wondering at the words of Symeon concerning Him,

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Symeon blessed them and said to Mary the
mother, "This child is appointed for the falling and the uprising of
many in Israel and for a token to be spoken against;

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> and a sword will pierce through your own
soul also; that the reasonings in many hearts may be revealed."

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> There was also Anna, a prophetess, the
daughter of Phanuel, belonging to the tribe of Asher. She was of a very
great age, having had after her maidenhood seven years of married life,

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> and then being a widow of eighty-four
years. She was never absent from the Temple, but worshipped, by day and
by night, with fasting and prayer.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And coming up just at that moment, she
gave thanks to God, and spoke about the child to all who were expecting
the deliverance of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> Then, as soon as they had accomplished
all that the Law required, they returned to Galilee to their own town of
Nazareth.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And the child grew and became strong and
full of wisdom, and the favour of God rested upon Him.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> Now His parents used to go up year by
year to Jerusalem at the Feast of the Passover.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And when He was twelve years old they
went up as was customary at the time of the Feast, and,

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> after staying the full number of days,
when they started back home the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem.
His parents did not discover this,

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> but supposing Him to be in the travelling
company, they proceeded a day's journey. Then they searched up and down
for Him among their relatives and acquaintances;

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> but being unable to find Him they
returned to Jerusalem, making anxious inquiry for Him.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> On the third day they found Him in the
Temple sitting among the Rabbis, both listening to them and asking them
questions,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> while all who heard Him were astonished
at His intelligence and at the answers He gave.

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> When they saw Him, they were smitten with
amazement, and His mother said to Him, "My child, why have you behaved
thus to us? Your father and I have been searching for you in anguish."

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> "Why is it that you have been searching
for me?" He replied; "did you not know that it is my duty to be engaged
upon my Father's business?"

<span id="an_2:50">2:50</span> But they did not understand the
significance of these words.

<span id="an_2:51">2:51</span> Then He went down with them and came to
Nazareth, and was always obedient to them; but His mother carefully
treasured up all these incidents in her memory.

<span id="an_2:52">2:52</span> And as Jesus grew older He gained in both
wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of
Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judaea, Herod Tetrarch
of Galilee, his brother Philip Tetrarch of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and
Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilene,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> during the High-priesthood of Annas and
Caiaphas, a message from God came to John, the son of Zechariah, in the
Desert.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> John went into all the district about the
Jordan proclaiming a baptism of the penitent for the forgiveness of
sins;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> as it is written in the book of the prophet
Isaiah, &lt;"The voice of one crying aloud! \`In the Desert prepare ye a
road for the Lord: make His highway straight.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Every ravine shall be filled up, and every
mountain and hill levelled down, the crooked places shall be turned into
straight roads, and the rugged ways into smooth;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and then shall all mankind see God's
salvation.'"&gt;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Accordingly John used to say to the crowds
who came out to be baptized by him, "O vipers' brood, who has warned you
to flee from the coming wrath?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Live lives which shall prove your change of
heart; and do not begin to say to yourselves, \`We have Abraham as our
forefather,' for I tell you that God can raise up descendants for
Abraham from these stones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And even now the axe is lying at the root
of the trees, so that every tree which fails to yield good fruit will
quickly be hewn down and thrown into the fire."

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The crowds repeatedly asked him, "What
then are we to do?"

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> "Let the man who has two coats," he
answered, "give one to the man who has none; and let the man who has
food share it with others."

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> There came also a party of tax-gatherers
to be baptized, and they asked him, "Rabbi, what are we to do?"

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> "Do not exact more than the legal
amount," he replied.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> The soldiers also once and again inquired
of him, "And we, what are we to do?" His answer was, "Neither intimidate
any one nor lay false charges; and be content with your pay."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And while the people were in suspense and
all were debating in their minds whether John might possibly be the
Anointed One,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> he answered the question by saying to
them all, "As for me, I am baptizing you with water, but One mightier
than I is coming, whose very sandal-strap I am not worthy to unfasten:
He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and with fire.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> His winnowing-shovel is in His hand to
clear out His threshing-floor, and to gather the wheat into His
storehouse; but the chaff He will burn up in fire unquenchable."

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> With many exhortations besides these he
declared the Good News to the people.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But Herod the Tetrarch, being repeatedly
rebuked by him about Herodias his brother's wife, and about all the
wicked deeds that he had done,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> now added this to crown all the rest,
that he threw John into prison.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Now when all the people had been
baptized, and Jesus also had been baptized and was praying, the sky
opened,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and the Holy Spirit came down in bodily
shape, like a dove, upon Him, and a voice came from Heaven, which said,
"Thou art My Son, dearly loved: in Thee is My delight."

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And He--Jesus--when He began His
ministry, was about thirty years old. He was the son (it was supposed)
of Joseph, son of Heli,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> son of Matthat, son of Levi, son of
Melchi, son of Jannai, son of Joseph,

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> son of Mattathias, son of Amos, son of
Nahum, son of Esli, son of Naggai,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> son of Mahath, son of Mattathias, son of
Semein, son of Josech, son of Joda,

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> son of Johanan, son of Resa, son of
Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, son of Neri,

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> son of Melchi, son of Addi, son of Cosam,
son of Elmadam, son of Er,

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> son of Joshua, son of Eliezar, son of
Jorim, son of Maththat, son of Levi,

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> son of Symeon, son of Judah, son of
Joseph, son of Jonam, son of Eliakim, son of

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Melea, son of Menna, son of Mattatha, son
of Nathan, son of David,

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> son of Jesse, son of Obed, son of Boaz,
son of Salmon, son of Nahshon,

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> son of Amminadab, son of Admin, son of
Arni, son of Hezron, son of Perez, son of Judah,

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of
Abraham, son of Terah, son of Nahor,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> son of Serug, son of Reu, son of Peleg,
son of Eber, son of Shelah,

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> son of Cainan, son of Arpachshad, son of
Shem, son of Noah, son of Lamech,

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> son of Methuselah, son of Enoch, son of
Jared, son of Mahalalel, son of Kenan,

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> son of Enosh, son of Seth, son of Adam,
son of God.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit,
returned from the Jordan, and was led about by the Spirit in the Desert
for forty days,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> tempted all the while by the Devil. During
those days He ate nothing, and at the close of them He suffered from
hunger.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Then the Devil said to Him, "If you are
God's Son, tell this stone to become bread."

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> "It is written," replied Jesus, &lt;"\`It
is not on bread alone that a man shall live.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The Devil next led Him up and caused Him to
see at a glance all the kingdoms of the world.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the Devil said to Him, "To you will I
give all this authority and this splendour; for it has been handed over
to me, and on whomsoever I will I bestow it.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> If therefore you do homage to me, it shall
all be yours.'

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Jesus answered him, "It is written,
&lt;\`To the Lord thy God thou shalt do homage, and to Him alone shalt
thou render worship.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Then he brought Him to Jerusalem and caused
Him to stand on the roof of the Temple, and said to Him, "If you are
God's Son, throw yourself down from here; for it is written,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> &lt;\`He will give orders to His angels
concerning thee, to guard thee safely;'&gt;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and &lt;\`On their hands they shall bear
thee up, Lest at any moment thou shouldst strike thy foot against a
stone.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> The reply of Jesus was, "It is said,
&lt;\`Thou shalt not put the Lord they God to the proof.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> So the Devil, having fully tried every
kind of temptation on Him, left Him for a time.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then Jesus returned in the Spirit's power
to Galilee; and His fame spread through all the adjacent districts.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And He proceeded to teach in their
synagogues, winning praise from all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> He came to Nazareth also, where He had
been brought up; and, as was His custom, He went to the synagogue on the
Sabbath, and stood up to read.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And there was handed to Him the book of
the Prophet Isaiah, and, opening the book, He found the place where it
was written,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> &lt;"The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because He has anointed me to proclaim Good News to the poor; He has
sent me to announce release to the prisoners of war and recovery of
sight to the blind: to send away free those whom tyranny has crushed,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> to proclaim the year of acceptance with
the Lord."&gt;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And rolling up the book, He returned it
to the attendant, and sat down--to speak. And the eyes of all in the
synagogue were fixed on Him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Then He proceeded to say to them, "To-day
is this Scripture fulfilled in your hearing."

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And they all spoke well of Him, wondering
at the sweet words of kindness which fell from His lips, while they
asked one another, "Is not this Joseph's son?"

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> "Doubtless," said He, "you will quote to
me the proverb, \`Physician, cure yourself: all that we hear that you
have done at Capernaum, do here also in your native place.'"

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> "I tell you in solemn truth," He added,
"that no Prophet is welcomed among his own people.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> But I tell you in truth that there was
many a widow in Israel in the time of Elijah, when there was no rain for
three years and six months and there came a severe famine over all the
land;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> and yet to not one of them was Elijah
sent: he was only sent to a widow at Zarephath in the Sidonian country.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And there was also many a leper in Israel
in the time of the Prophet Elisha, and yet not one of them was cleansed,
but Naaman the Syrian was."

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Then all in the synagogue, while
listening to these words, were filled with fury.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> They rose, hurried Him outside the town,
and brought Him to the brow of the hill on which their town was built,
to throw Him down the cliff;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> but He passed through the midst of them
and went His way.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> So He came down to Capernaum, a town in
Galilee, where He frequently taught the people on the Sabbath days.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And they were greatly impressed by His
teaching, because He spoke with the language of authority.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> But in the synagogue there was a man
possessed by the spirit of a foul demon. In a loud voice he cried out,

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> "Ha! Jesus the Nazarene, what have you to
do with us? I know who you are--God's Holy One!"

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> But Jesus rebuked the demon. "Silence!"
He exclaimed; "come out of him." Upon this, the demon hurled the man
into the midst of them, and came out of him without doing him any harm.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> All were astonished and awe-struck; and
they asked one another, "What sort of language is this? For with
authority and real power He gives orders to the foul spirits and they
come out."

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And the talk about Him spread into every
part of the neighbouring country.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> Now when He rose and left the synagogue
He went to Simon's house. Simon's mother-in-law was suffering from an
acute attack of fever; and they consulted Him about her.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Then standing over her He rebuked the
fever, and it left her; and she at once rose and waited on them.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> At sunset all who had friends suffering
from any illness brought them to Him, and He laid His hands on them all,
one by one, and cured them.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Demons also came out of many, loudly
calling out, "You are the Son of God." But He rebuked them and forbad
them to speak, because they knew Him to be the Christ.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> Next morning, at daybreak, He left the
town and went away to a solitary place; but the people flocked out to
find Him, and, coming to the place where He was, they endeavoured to
detain Him that He might not leave them.

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> But He said to them, "I have to tell the
Good News of the Kingdom of God to the other towns also, because for
this purpose I was sent."

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And for some time He preached in the
synagogues in Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> On one occasion the crowd was pressing on
Him and listening to God's Message, while He was standing by the Lake of
Gennesaret.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> He, however, saw two fishing-boats drawn up
on the beach (for the men had gone away from them and were washing the
nets),

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> and going on board one of them, which was
Simon's He asked him to push out a little from land. Then He sat down
and taught the crowd of people from the boat.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When He had finished speaking, He said to
Simon, "Push out into deep water, and let down your nets for a haul."

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> "Rabbi," replied Peter, "all night long we
have worked hard and caught nothing; but at your command I will let down
the nets."

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This they did, and enclosed a vast number
of fish; and their nets began to break.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> So they signalled to their partners in the
other boat to come and help them; they came, and they filled both the
boats so that they almost sank.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at
the knees of Jesus, and exclaimed, "Master, leave my boat, for I am a
sinful man."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> (For he was astonished and terrified--he
and all his companions--at the haul of fish which they had taken;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and so were Simon's partners James and
John, the sons of Zabdi.) But Jesus replied to Simon, "Fear not: from
this time you shall be a catcher of men."

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Then, after bringing their boats to land,
they left everything and followed Him.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> On another occasion, when He was in one
of the towns, there was a man there covered with leprosy, who, seeing
Jesus, threw himself at His feet and implored Him, saying, "Sir, if only
you are willing, you are able to make me clean."

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Reaching out His hand and touching him,
Jesus said, "I am willing; be cleansed!" And instantly the leprosy left
him.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> He ordered him to tell no one. "But go,"
He said, "show yourself to the Priest, and make the offering for your
purification which Moses appointed, as evidence for them."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But all the more the report about Him
spread abroad, and great multitudes crowded to hear Him and to be cured
of their diseases;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> but Jesus Himself constantly withdrew
into the Desert and there prayed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> One day He was teaching, and there were
Pharisees and teachers of the Law sitting there who had come from every
village in Galilee and Judaea and from Jerusalem. And the power of the
Lord was present for Him to cure people.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And a party of men came carrying a
palsied man on a bed, and they endeavoured to bring him in and lay him
before Jesus.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But when they could find no way of doing
so because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and let him down
through the tiling--bed and all--into the midst, in front of Jesus.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> He saw their faith and said to him,
"Friend, your sins are forgiven."

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Then the Scribes and Pharisees began to
cavil, asking, "Who is this, uttering blasphemies? Who but God alone can
forgive sins?"

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Well aware of their reasonings, Jesus
answered their questions by asking in turn, "What is this that you are
debating in your hearts?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Which is easier? --to say, \`Your sins
are forgiven,' or to say, \`Rise and walk'?

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> But to prove to you that the Son of Man
has authority on earth to forgive sins" --Turning to the paralytic He
said, "I bid you, Rise, take up your bed, and go home."

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Instantly he stood up in their presence,
took up the mattress on which he had been lying, and went away to his
home, giving glory to God.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Amazement seized them all. "Glory to
God!" was the abiding feeling. Yet fear flashed through their minds and
they said, "We have seen strange things to-day."

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> After this He went out and noticed a
tax-gatherer, Levi by name, sitting at the Toll office; and He said to
him, "Follow me."

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> He rose, left everything, and followed
Him.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Levi also gave a great entertainment at
his house in honour of Jesus, and there was a large party of
tax-gatherers and others at table with them.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> This led the Pharisees and Scribes of
their party to expostulate with His disciples and ask, "Why are you
eating and drinking with these tax-gatherers and notorious sinners?"

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> But Jesus replied to them, "It is not men
in good health who require a physician, but the sick.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> I have not come to call the righteous to
repentance, but sinners."

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Again they said to Him, "John's disciples
fast often and pray, as do also those of the pharisees; but yours eat
and drink."

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> "Can you compel the bridal party to
fast," replied Jesus, "so long as they have the bridegroom among them?

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> But a time for this will come, when the
Bridegroom has been taken away from them: then, at that time, they will
fast."

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> He also spoke in figurative language to
them. "No one," He said, "tears a piece from a new garment to mend an
old one. Otherwise he would not only spoil the new, but the patch from
the new would not match the old.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> Nor does any one pour new wine into old
wine-skins. Otherwise the new wine would burst the skins, the wine
itself would be spilt, and the skins be destroyed.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> But new wine must be put into fresh
wineskins.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> Nor does any one after drinking old wine
wish for new; for he says, \`The old is better.'"

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now on the second-first Sabbath while He
was passing through the wheatfields, His disciples were plucking the
ears and rubbing them with their hands to eat the grain.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And some of the Pharisees asked, "Why are
you doing what the Law forbids on the Sabbath?"

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> "Have you never read so much as this,"
answered Jesus--"what David did when he and his followers were hungry;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> how he entered the house of God and took
and ate the Presented Loaves and gave some to his followers--loaves
which none but the Priests are allowed to eat?"

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> "The Son of Man," He added, "is Lord of the
Sabbath also."

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> On another Sabbath He had gone to the
synagogue and was teaching there; and in the congregation was a man
whose right arm was withered.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The Scribes and the Pharisees were on the
watch to see whether He would cure him on the Sabbath that they might be
able to bring an accusation against Him.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> He knew their thoughts, and said to the man
with the withered arm, "Rise, and stand there in the middle." And he
rose and stood there.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Then Jesus said to them, "I put it to you
all whether we are allowed to do good on the Sabbath, or to do evil; to
save a life, or to destroy it."

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And looking round upon them all He said
to the man, "Stretch out your arm." He did so, and the arm was restored.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But they were filled with madness, and
began to discuss with one another what they should do to Jesus.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> About that time He went out on one
occasion into the hill country to pray; and He remained all night in
prayer to God.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> When it was day, He called His disciples;
and He selected from among them twelve, whom He also named Apostles.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> These were Simon, to whom also He had
given the name of Peter, and Andrew his brother; James and John; Philip
and Bartholomew;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Matthew and Thomas; James the son of
Alphaeus and Simon called the Zealot;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> James's relative Judas, and Judas
Iscariot who proved to be a traitor.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> With these He came down till He reached a
level place, where there was a great crowd of His disciples, and a
multitude of people from every part of Judaea, from Jerusalem, and from
the sea-side district of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him and to be
cured of their diseases;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and those who were tormented by foul
spirits were cured.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> The whole crowd were eager to touch Him,
because power went forth from him and cured every one.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Then fixing His eyes upon His disciples,
Jesus said to them, "Blessed are you poor, because the Kingdom of God is
yours.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> "Blessed are you who hunger now, because
your hunger shall be satisfied. "Blessed are you who now weep aloud,
because you shall laugh.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> "Blessed are you when men shall hate you
and exclude you from their society and insult you, and spurn your very
names as evil things, for the Son of Man's sake.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> "Be glad at such a time, and dance for
joy; for your reward is great in Heaven; for that is just the way their
forefathers behaved to the Prophets!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> "But alas for you rich men, because you
already have your consolation!

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> "Alas for you who now have plenty to eat,
because you will be hungry! "Alas for you who laugh now, because you
will mourn and weep aloud!

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> "Alas for you when men shall all have
spoken well of you; for that is just the way their forefathers behaved
to the false Prophets!

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> "But to you who are listening to me I
say, Love your enemies; seek the welfare of those who hate you;

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> bless those who curse you; pray for those
who revile you.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> To him who gives you a blow on one side
of the face offer the other side also; and to him who is robbing you of
your outer garment refuse not the under one also.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> To every one who asks, give; and from him
who takes away your property, do not demand it back.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And behave to your fellow men just as you
would have them behave to you.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> "If you love those who love you, what
credit is it to you? Why, even bad men love those who love them.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And if you are kind to those who are kind
to you, what credit is it to you? Even bad men act thus.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And if you lend to those from whom you
hope to receive, what credit is it to you? Even bad men lend to their
fellows so as to receive back an equal amount.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> Nevertheless love your enemies, be
beneficent; and lend without hoping for any repayment. Then your
recompense shall be great, and you will be sons of the Most High; for He
is kind to the ungrateful and wicked.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> Be compassionate just as your Father is
compassionate.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> "Judge not, and you shall not be judged;
condemn not, and you shall not be condemned; pardon, and you shall be
pardoned;

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> give, and gifts shall be bestowed on you.
Full measure, pressed, shaken down, and running over, shall they pour
into your laps; for with the same measure that you use they shall
measure to you in return."

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> He also spoke to them in figurative
language. "Can a blind man lead a blind man?" He asked; "would not both
fall into the ditch?

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> There is no disciple who is superior to
his teacher; but every one whose instruction is complete will be like
his teacher.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> "And why look at the splinter in your
brother's eye instead of giving careful attention to the beam in your
own?

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> How can you say to your brother,
\`Brother, let me take that splinter out of your eye,' when all the
while you yourself do not see the beam in your own eye? Vain pretender!
take the beam out of your own eye first, and then you will see clearly
to take the splinter out of your brother's eye.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> "There is no good tree that yields
unsound fruit, nor again any unsound tree that yields good fruit.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> Every tree is known by its own fruit. It
is not from thorns that men gather figs, nor from the bramble that they
can get a bunch of grapes.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> A good man from the good stored up in his
heart brings out what is good; and an evil man from the evil stored up
brings out what is evil; for from the overflow of his heart his mouth
speaks.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> "And why do you all call me \`Master,
Master' and yet not do what I tell you?

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> Every one who comes to me and listens to
my words and puts them in practice, I will show you whom he is like.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> He is like a man building a house, who
digs and goes deep, and lays the foundation on the rock; and when a
flood comes, the torrent bursts upon that house, but is unable to shake
it, because it is securely built.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> But he who has heard and not practised is
like a man who has built a house upon the soft soil without a
foundation, against which the torrent bursts, and immediately it
collapses, and terrible is the wreck and ruin of that house."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> After He had finished teaching all these
things in the hearing of the people, He went into Capernaum.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Here the servant of a certain Captain, a
man dear to his master, was ill and at the point of death;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and the Captain, hearing about Jesus, sent
to Him some of the Jewish Elders, begging Him to come and restore his
servant to health.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And they, when they came to Jesus,
earnestly entreated Him, pleading, "He deserves to have this favour
granted him,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> for he loves our nation, and at his own
expense he built our synagogue for us."

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Then Jesus went with them. But when He was
not far from the house, the Captain sent friends to Him with the
message: "Sir, do not trouble to come. I am not worthy of having you
come under my roof;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and therefore I did not deem myself worthy
to come to you. Only speak the word, and let my young man be cured.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For I too am a man obedient to authority,
and have soldiers under me; and I say to one, \`Go,' and he goes; to
another, \`Come,' and he comes; and to my slave, \`Do this or that,' and
he does it."

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Jesus listened to the Captain's message and
was astonished at him, and He turned and said to the crowd that followed
Him, "I tell you that not even in Israel have I found faith like that."

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the friends who had been sent, on
returning to the house, found the servant in perfect health.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Shortly afterwards He went to a town
called Nain, attended by His disciples and a great crowd of people.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And just as He reached the gate of the
town, they happened to be bringing out for burial a dead man who was his
mother's only son; and she was a widow; and a great number of the
townspeople were with her.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The Lord saw her, was moved with pity for
her, and said to her, "Do not weep."

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then He went close and touched the bier,
and the bearers halted. "Young man," He said, "I command you, wake!"

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The dead man sat up and began to speak;
and He restored him to his mother.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> All were awe-struck, and they gave glory
to God--some saying, "A Prophet, a great Prophet, has risen up among
us." Others said, "God has not forgotten His People."

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And the report of what Jesus had done
spread through the whole of Judaea and in all the surrounding districts.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> John's disciples brought him an account
of all these things;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> so John called two of his disciples and
sent them to the Lord. "Are you the Coming One?" he asked, "or is there
another that we are to expect?"

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The men came to Jesus and said, "John the
Baptist has sent us to you with this question: \`Are you the Coming One,
or is there another that we are to expect?'"

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> He immediately cured many of diseases,
severe pain, and evil spirits, and to many who were blind He gave the
gift of sight.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Then He answered the messengers, "Go and
report to John what you have seen and heard. Blind men receive sight,
the lame walk, lepers are purified, deaf persons hear, the dead are
raised to life, the poor have the Good News proclaimed to them.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And blessed is every one who does not
stumble and fall because of my claims."

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> When John's messengers were gone, He
proceeded to say to the multitude concerning John, "What did you go out
into the Desert to gaze at? A reed waving in the wind?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> But what did you go out to see? A man
wearing luxurious clothes? People who are gorgeously dressed and live in
luxury are found in palaces.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> But what did you go out to see? A
Prophet? Aye, I tell you, and far more than a Prophet.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> John is the man about whom it is written,
&lt;\`See, I am sending My messenger before thy face, and he shall make
ready thy way before thee.'&gt;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> "I tell you that among all of women born
there is not one greater than John. Yet one who is of lower rank in the
Kingdom of God is greater than he.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And all the people, including the
tax-gatherers, when they listened to him upheld the righteousness of
God, by being baptized with John's baptism.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> But the Pharisees and expounders of the
Law have frustrated God's purpose as to their own lives, by refusing to
be baptized.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> "To what then shall I compare the men of
the present generation, and what do they resemble?

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> They are like children sitting in the
public square and calling out to one another, \`We have played the flute
to you, and you have not danced: we have sung dirges, and you have not
shown sorrow.'

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> For John the Baptist has come eating no
bread and drinking no wine, and you say, \`He has a demon!'

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> The Son of Man has come eating and
drinking, and you say, \`Look, there is a man who is overfond of eating
and drinking--he is a friend of tax-gatherers and notorious sinners!'

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> But wisdom is justified by all who are
truly wise."

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> Now one of the Pharisees repeatedly
invited Him to a meal at his house; so He entered the house and reclined
at the table.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And there was a woman in the town who was
a notorious sinner. Having learnt that Jesus was at table in the
Pharisee's house she brought a flask of perfume,

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> and, standing behind close to His feet,
weeping, began to wet His feet with her tears; and with her hair she
wiped the tears away again, while she lovingly kissed His feet and
poured the perfume over them.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Noticing this, the Pharisee, His host,
said to himself, "This man, if he were really a Prophet, would know who
and what sort of person this woman is who is touching him--and would
know that she is an immoral woman."

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> In answer to his thoughts Jesus said to
him, "Simon, I have a word to say to you." "Rabbi, say on," he replied.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> "There were once two men in debt to one
money-lender," said Jesus; "one owed him five hundred shillings and the
other fifty.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> But neither of them could pay anything;
so he freely forgave them both. Tell me, then, which of them will love
him most?"

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> "I suppose," replied Simon, "the one to
whom he forgave most." "You have judged rightly," Jesus rejoined.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Then turning towards the woman He said to
Simon, "Do you see this woman? I came into your house: you gave me no
water for my feet; but she has made my feet wet with her tears, and then
wiped the tears away with her hair.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> No kiss did you give me; but she from the
moment I came in has not left off tenderly kissing my feet.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> No oil did you pour even on my head; but
she has poured perfume upon my feet.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> This is the reason why I tell you that
her sins, her many sins, are forgiven--because she has loved much; but
he who is forgiven little, loves little."

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> And He said to her, "Your sins are
forgiven."

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> Then the other guests began to say to
themselves, "Who can this man be who even forgives sins?"

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> But He said to the woman, "Your faith has
cured you: go, and be at peace."

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Shortly after this He visited town after
town, and village after village, proclaiming His Message and telling the
Good News of the Kingdom of God. The Twelve were with Him,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and certain women whom He had delivered
from evil spirits and various diseases--Mary of Magdala, out of whom
seven demons had come,

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's
steward, and Susanna, and many other women, all of whom contributed to
the support of Jesus and His Apostles.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And when a great crowd was assembling, and
was receiving additions from one town after another, He spoke a parable
to them.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> "The sower," He said, "goes out to sow his
seed; and as he sows, some of the seed falls by the way-side, and is
trodden upon, or the birds of the air come and peck it up.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Another part drops upon the rock, and after
growing up it withers away for want of moisture.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Another part falls among the thorns, and
the thorns grow up with it and stifle it.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> But some of the seed falls into good
ground, and grows up and yields a return of a hundred for one." While
thus speaking, He cried aloud and said, "Listen, every one who has ears
to listen with!"

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> The disciples proceeded to ask Him what
this parable meant.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> "To you," He replied, "it is granted to
know the secrets of the Kingdom of God; but all others are taught by
parables, in order that they may see and yet not see, and may hear and
yet not understand.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> The meaning of the parable is as follows.
The seed is God's Message.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Those by the way-side are those who have
heard, and then the Devil comes and carries away the Message from their
hearts, lest they should believe and be saved.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Those on the rock are the people who on
hearing the Message receive it joyfully; but they have no root: for a
time they believe, but when trial comes they fall away.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> That which fell among the thorns means
those who have heard, but as they go on their way, the Message is
stifled by the anxieties, wealth and gaieties of time, and they yield
nothing in perfection.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> But as for that in the good ground, it
means those who, having listened to the Message with open minds and in a
right spirit, hold it fast, and patiently yield a return.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> "When any one lights a lamp, he does not
cover it with a vessel or hide it under a couch; he puts it on a
lampstand, that people who enter the room may see the light.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> There is nothing hidden, which shall not
be openly seen; nor anything secret, which shall not be known and come
into the light of day.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Be careful, therefore, how you hear; for
whoever has anything, to him more shall be given, and whoever has
nothing, even that which he thinks he has shall be taken away from him."

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Then came to Him His mother and His
brothers, but could not get near Him for the crowd.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> But He was told, "Your mother and
brothers are standing on the edge of the crowd, and want to see you."

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> "My mother and my brothers," He replied,
"are these who hear God's Message and obey it."

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> One day He went on board a boat--both He
and his disciples; and He said to them, "Let us cross over to the other
side of the Lake." So they set sail.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> During the passage He fell asleep, and
there came down a squall of wind on the Lake, so that the boat began to
fill and they were in deadly peril.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> So they came and woke Him, crying,
"Rabbi, Rabbi, we are drowning." Then He roused Himself and rebuked the
wind and the surging of the water, and they ceased and there was a calm.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> "Where is your faith?" He asked them. But
they were filled with terror and amazement, and said to one another,
"Who then is this? for He gives orders both to wind and waves, and they
obey Him."

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Then they put in to shore in the country
of the Gerasenes, which lies opposite to Galilee.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> Here, on landing, He was met by one of
the townsmen who was possessed by demons--for a long time he had not put
on any garment, nor did he live in a house, but in the tombs.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell
down before Him, and said in a loud voice, "What have you to do with me,
Jesus, Son of God Most High? Do not torture me, I beseech you."

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For already He had been commanding the
foul spirit to come out of the man. For many a time it had seized and
held him, and they had repeatedly put him in chains and fetters and kept
guard over him, but he used to break the chains to pieces, and, impelled
by the demon, to escape into the Desert.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> "What is your name?" Jesus asked him.
"Legion," he replied--because a great number of demons had entered into
him;

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> and they besought Him not to command them
to be gone into the Bottomless Pit.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now there was a great herd of swine there
feeding on the hill-side; and the demons begged Him to give them leave
to go into them, and He gave them leave.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> The demons came out of the man and left
him, and entered into the swine; and the herd rushed violently over the
cliff into the Lake and were drowned.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> The swineherds, seeing what had happened,
fled and reported it both in town and country;

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> whereupon the people came out to see what
had happened. They came to Jesus, and they found the man from whom the
demons had gone out sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his
right mind; and they were terrified.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And those who had seen it told them how
the demoniac was cured.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> Then the whole population of the
Gerasenes and of the adjacent districts begged Him to depart from them;
for their terror was great. So He went on board and returned.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> But the man from whom the demons had gone
out earnestly asked permission to go with Him; but He sent him away.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> "Return home," He said, "and tell there
all that God has done for you." So he went and published through the
whole town all that Jesus had done for him.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> Now when Jesus was returning, the people
gave Him a warm welcome; for they had all been looking out for Him.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> Just then there came a man named Jair, a
Warden of the Synagogue, who threw himself at the feet of Jesus, and
entreated Him to come to his house;

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> for he had an only daughter, about twelve
years old, and she was dying. And as He went, the dense throng crowded
on Him.

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> And a woman who for twelve years had been
afflicted with haemorrhage--and had spent on doctors all she had, but
none of them had been able to cure her--

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> came close behind Him and touched the
tassel of His robe; and instantly her flow of blood stopped.

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> "Who is it touched me?" Jesus asked. And
when all denied having done so, Peter and the rest said, "Rabbi, the
crowds are hemming you in and pressing on you."

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> "Some one has touched me," Jesus replied,
"for I feel that power has gone out from me."

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> Then the woman, perceiving that she had
not escaped notice, came trembling, and throwing herself down at His
feet she stated before all the people the reason why she had touched Him
and how she was instantly cured.

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> "Daughter," said He, "your faith has
cured you; go, and be at peace."

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> While He was still speaking, some one
came to the Warden of the Synagogue from his house and said, "Your
daughter is dead; trouble the Rabbi no further."

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> Jesus heard the words and said to him,
"Have no fear. Only believe, and she shall be restored to life."

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> So He came to the house, but allowed no
one to go in with Him but Peter and John and James and the girl's father
and mother.

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> The people were all weeping aloud and
beating their breasts for her; but He said, "Leave off wailing; for she
is not dead, but asleep."

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> And they jeered at Him, knowing that she
was dead.

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> He, however, took her by the hand and
called aloud, "Child, awake!"

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> And her spirit returned, and instantly
she stood up; and He directed them to give her some food.

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Her parents were astounded; but He forbad
them to mention the matter to any one.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then calling the Twelve together He
conferred on them power and authority over all the demons and to cure
diseases;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and sent them out to proclaim the Kingdom
of God and to cure the sick.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And He commanded them, "Take nothing for
your journey; neither stick nor bag nor bread nor money; and do not have
an extra under garment.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Whatever house you enter, make that your
home, and from it start afresh.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Wherever they refuse to receive you, as you
leave that town shake off the very dust from your feet as a protest
against them."

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> So they departed and visited village after
village, spreading the Good News and performing cures everywhere.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Now Herod the Tetrarch heard of all that
was going on; and he was bewildered because of its being said by some
that John had come back to life,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> by others that Elijah had appeared, and by
others that some one of the ancient Prophets had come back to life.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And Herod said, "John I have beheaded; but
who is this, of whom I hear such reports?" And he sought for an
opportunity of seeing Jesus.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The Apostles, on their return, related to
Jesus all they had done. Then He took them and withdrew to a quiet
retreat, to a town called Bethsaida.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> But the immense crowd, aware of this,
followed Him; and receiving them kindly He proceeded to speak to them of
the Kingdom of God, and those who needed to be restored to health, He
cured.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Now when the day began to decline, the
Twelve came to Him and said, "Send the people away, that they may go to
the villages and farms round about and find lodging and a supply of
food; because here we are in an uninhabited district."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> "You yourselves," He said, "must give
them food." "We have nothing," they replied, "but five loaves and a
couple of fish, unless indeed we were to go and buy provisions for all
this host of people."

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> (For there were about 5,000 adult men.)
But He said to His disciples, "Make them sit down in parties of about
fifty each."

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> They did so, making them all, without
exception, sit down.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Then He took the five loaves and the two
fish, and looking up to Heaven He blessed them and broke them into
portions which He gave to the disciples to distribute to the people.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> So they ate and were fully satisfied, all
of them; and what they had remaining over was gathered up, twelve
baskets of fragments.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> One day when He was praying by Himself
the disciples were present; and He asked them, "Who do the people say
that I am?"

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> "John the Baptist," they replied; "but
others say Elijah; and others that some one of the ancient Prophets has
come back to life."

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> "But you," He asked, "who do you say that
I am?" "God's Anointed One," replied Peter.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And Jesus strictly forbad them to tell
this to any one;

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> and He said, "The Son of Man must suffer
much cruelty, be rejected by the Elders and High Priests and Scribes,
and be put to death, and on the third day be raised to life again."

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And He said to all, "If any one is
desirous of following me, let him ignore self and take up his cross day
by day, and so be my follower.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> For whoever desires to save his life
shall lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake shall save it.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Why, what benefit is it to a man to have
gained the whole world, but to have lost or forfeited his own self.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> For whoever shall have been ashamed of me
and my teachings, of him the Son of Man will be ashamed when He comes in
His own and the Father's glory and in that of the holy angels.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> I tell you truly that there are some of
those who stand here who will certainly not taste death till they have
seen the Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> It was about eight days after this that
Jesus, taking with Him Peter, John, and James, went up the mountain to
pray.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And while He was praying the appearance
of His face underwent a change, and His clothing became white and
radiant.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And suddenly there were two men
conversing with Him, who were Moses and Elijah.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> They came in glory, and kept speaking
about His death, which He was so soon to undergo in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Now Peter and the others were weighed
down with sleep; but, keeping themselves awake all through, they saw His
glory, and the two men standing with Him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And when they were preparing to depart
from Him, Peter said to Jesus, "Rabbi, we are thankful to you that we
are here. Let us put up three tents--one for you, one for Moses, and one
for Elijah." He did not know what he was saying.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But while he was thus speaking, there
came a cloud which spread over them; and they were awe-struck when they
had entered into the cloud.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Then there came a voice from within the
cloud: "This is My Son, My Chosen One: listen to Him."

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> After this voice had spoken, Jesus was
found alone. They kept it to themselves, and said not a word to any one
at that time about what they had seen.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> On the following day, when they were come
down from the mountain, a great crowd came to meet Him;

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> and a man from the crowd called out,
"Rabbi, I beg you to pity my son, for he is my only child.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> At times a spirit seizes him and he
suddenly cries out. It convulses him, and makes him foam at the mouth,
and does not leave him till it has well-nigh covered him with bruises.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> I entreated your disciples to expel the
spirit, but they could not."

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> "O unbelieving and perverse generation!"
replied Jesus; "how long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring
your son here to me."

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> Now while the youth was coming, the
spirit dashed him to the ground and cruelly convulsed him. But Jesus
rebuked the foul spirit, and cured the youth and gave him back to his
father.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And all were awe-struck at the mighty
power of God. And while every one was expressing wonder at all that He
was doing, He said to his disciples,

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> "As for you, store these my sayings in
your memory; for, before long, the Son of Man will be betrayed into the
hands of men."

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> But they did not understand His meaning:
it was veiled from them that they might not perceive it, and they were
afraid to ask Him about it.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> Now there arose a dispute among them,
which of them was to be the greatest.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And Jesus, knowing the reasoning that was
in their hearts, took a young child and made him stand by His side

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> and said to them, "Whoever for my sake
receives this little child, receives me; and whoever receives me,
receives Him who sent me. For the lowliest among you all--he is the
greatest."

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> "Rabbi," replied John, "we have seen a
man making use of your name to expel demons; and we forbad him, because
he does not come with us."

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> "Do not forbid him," said Jesus, "for he
who is not against you is on your side."

<span id="an_9:51">9:51</span> Now when the time drew near for Him to be
received up again into Heaven, He proceeded with fixed purpose towards
Jerusalem, and sent messengers before Him.

<span id="an_9:52">9:52</span> They went and entered a village of the
Samaritans to make ready for Him.

<span id="an_9:53">9:53</span> But the people there would not receive
Him, because He was evidently going to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:54">9:54</span> When the disciples James and John saw
this, they said, "Master, do you wish us to order fire to come down from
Heaven and consume them?"

<span id="an_9:55">9:55</span> But He turned and rebuked them.

<span id="an_9:56">9:56</span> And they went to another village.

<span id="an_9:57">9:57</span> And, as they proceeded on their way, a
man came to Him and said, "I will follow you wherever you go."

<span id="an_9:58">9:58</span> "The foxes have holes," said Jesus, "and
the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay
His head."

<span id="an_9:59">9:59</span> "Follow me," He said to another.
"Master," the man replied, "allow me first to go and bury my father."

<span id="an_9:60">9:60</span> "Leave the dead," Jesus rejoined, "to
bury their own dead; but you must go and announce far and wide the
coming of the Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_9:61">9:61</span> "Master," said yet another, "I will
follow you; but allow me first to go and say good-bye to my friends at
home."

<span id="an_9:62">9:62</span> Jesus answered him, "No one who has put
his hand to the plough, and then looks behind him, is fit for the
Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> After this the Lord appointed seventy
others, and sent them before Him, by twos, to go to every town or place
which He Himself intended to visit.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And He addressed them thus: "The harvest
is abundant, but the reapers are few: therefore entreat the Owner of the
harvest to send out more reapers into His fields. And now go.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Remember that I am sending you out as
lambs into the midst of wolves.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Carry no purse, bag, nor change of shoes;
and salute no one on your way."

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> "Whatever house you enter, first say,
\`Peace be to this house!'

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And if there is a lover of peace there,
your peace shall rest upon it; otherwise come back upon you.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And in that same house stay, eating and
drinking at their table; for the labourer deserves his wages. Do not
move from one house to another.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> "And whatever town you come to and they
receive you, eat what they put before you.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Cure the sick in that town, and tell
them, "\`The Kingdom of God is now at your door.'

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> "But whatever town you come to and they
will not receive you, go out into the broader streets and say,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> "\`The very dust of your town that
hangs about us we wipe off as a protest. Only be sure of this, that the
Kingdom of God is close at hand.'

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> "I tell you that it will be more
endurable for Sodom on the great day than for that town.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> "Alas for thee, Chorazin! Alas for
thee, Bethsaida! For had the miracles been performed in Tyre and Sidon
which have been performed in you, long ere now they would have repented,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> However, for Tyre and Sidon it will be
more endurable at the Judgement than for you.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And thou, Capernaum, shalt thou be
lifted high as Heaven? Thou shalt be driven down as low as Hades.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> "He who listens to you listens to me;
and he who disregards you disregards me, and he who disregards me
disregards Him who sent me."

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> When the Seventy returned, they
exclaimed joyfully, "Master, even the demons submit to us when we utter
your name."

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> "I saw Satan fall like a
lightning-flash out of Heaven," He replied.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> "I have given you power to tread
serpents and scorpions underfoot, and to trample on all the power of the
Enemy; and in no case shall anything do you harm.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Nevertheless rejoice not at this, that
the spirits submit to you; but rejoice that your names are registered in
Heaven."

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> On that same occasion Jesus was filled
by the Holy Spirit with rapturous joy. "I give Thee fervent thanks," He
exclaimed, "O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, that Thou hast hidden
these things from sages and men of understanding, and hast revealed them
to babes. Yes, Father, for such has been Thy gracious will.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> All things are delivered to me by my
Father; and no one knows who the Son is but the Father, nor who the
Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son may choose to reveal Him."

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And He turned towards His disciples and
said to them apart, "Blessed are the eyes which see what you see!

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> For I tell you that many Prophets and
kings have desired to see the things you see, and have not seen them,
and to hear the things you hear, and have not heard them."

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Then an expounder of the Law stood up
to test Him with a question. "Rabbi," he asked, "what shall I do to
inherit the Life of the Ages?"

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> "Go to the Law," said Jesus; "what is
written there? how does it read?"

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> &lt;"\`Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God,'"&gt; he replied, &lt;"\`with thy whole heart, thy whole soul, thy
whole strength, and thy whole mind; and thy fellow man as much as
thyself.'"&gt;

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> "A right answer," said Jesus; "do that,
and you shall live."

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> But he, desiring to justify himself,
said, "But what is meant by my \`fellow man'?"

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Jesus replied, "A man was once on his
way down from Jerusalem to Jericho when he fell among robbers, who after
both stripping and beating him went away, leaving him half dead.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Now a priest happened to be going down
that way, and on seeing him passed by on the other side.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> In like manner a Levite also came to
the place, and seeing him passed by on the other side.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But a certain Samaritan, being on a
journey, came where he lay, and seeing him was moved with pity.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> He went to him, and dressed his wounds
with oil and wine and bound them up. Then placing him on his own mule he
brought him to an inn, where he bestowed every care on him.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> The next day he took out two shillings
and gave them to the innkeeper. "\`Take care of him,' he said, \`and
whatever further expense you are put to, I will repay it you at my next
visit.'

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> "Which of those three seems to you to
have acted like a fellow man to him who fell among the robbers?"

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> "The one who showed him pity," he
replied. "Go," said Jesus, "and act in the same way."

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> As they pursued their journey He came
to a certain village, where a woman named Martha welcomed Him to her
house.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> She had a sister called Mary, who
seated herself at the Lord's feet and listened to His teaching.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Martha meanwhile was busy and
distracted in waiting at table, and she came and said, "Master, do you
not care that my sister is leaving me to do all the waiting? Tell her to
assist me."

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> "Martha, Martha," replied Jesus, "you
are anxious and worried about a multitude of things;

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> and yet only one thing is really
necessary. Mary has chosen the good portion and she shall not be
deprived of it."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> At one place where He was praying, when
He rose from His knees one of His disciples said to Him, "Master, teach
us to pray, just as John taught his disciples."

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> So He said to them, "When you pray, say,
\`Father may Thy name be kept holy; let Thy Kingdom come;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> give us day after day our bread for the
day;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and forgive us our sins, for we ourselves
also forgive every one who fails in his duty to us; and bring us not
into temptation.'"

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And He said to them, "Which of you shall
have a friend and shall go to him in the middle of the night and say,
"\`Friend, lend me three loaves of bread;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> for a friend of mine has just come to my
house from a distance, and I have nothing for him to eat'?

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> "And he from indoors shall answer, "\`Do
not pester me. The door is now barred, and I am here in bed with my
children. I cannot get up and give you bread.'

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> "I tell you that even if he will not rise
and give him the loaves because he is his friend, at any rate because of
his persistency he will rouse himself and give him as many as he
requires.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> "So I say to you, \`Ask, and what you ask
for shall be given to you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and the door
shall be opened to you.'

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For every one who asks, receives; and
he who seeks, finds; and to him who knocks, the door shall be opened.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And what father is there among you,
who, if his son asks for a slice of bread, will offer him a stone? or if
he asks for a fish, will instead of a fish offer him a snake?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> or if he asks for an egg, will offer
him a scorpion?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> If you then, with all your human
frailty, know how to give your children gifts that are good for them,
how much more certainly will your Father who is in Heaven give the Holy
Spirit to those who ask Him!"

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> On once occasion He was expelling a
dumb demon; and when the demon was gone out the dumb man could speak,
and the people were astonished.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> But some among them said, "It is by the
power of Baal-zebul, the Prince of the demons, that he expels the
demons."

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Others, to put Him to the test, asked
Him for a sign in the sky.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And, knowing their thoughts, He said to
them, "Every kingdom in which civil war rages goes to ruin: family
attacks family and is overthrown.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And if Satan really has engaged in
fierce conflict with himself, how shall his kingdom stand?--because you
say that I expel demons by the power of Baal-zebul.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And if it is by the power of Baal-zebul
that I expel the demons, by whom do your disciples expel them? They
therefore shall be your judges.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But if it is by the power of God that I
drive out the demons, it is evident that the Kingdom of God has come
upon you.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> "Whenever a strong man, fully armed and
equipped, is guarding his own castle, he enjoys peaceful possession of
his property;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> but as soon as another stronger than he
attacks him and overcomes him, he takes away that complete armour of his
in which he trusted, and distributes the plunder he has collected.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Whoever is not with me is against me,
and whoever is not gathering with me is scattering abroad.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> "When a foul spirit has left a man, it
roams about in the Desert, seeking a resting-place; but, unable to find
any, it says, \`I will return to the house I have left;"

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> and when it comes, it finds the house
swept clean and in good order.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Then it goes and brings with it seven
other spirits more malignant than itself, and they enter and dwell
there; and in the end that man's condition becomes worse than it was at
first.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> As He thus spoke a woman in the crowd
called out in a loud voice, "Blessed is the mother who carried you, and
the breasts that you have sucked."

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> "Nay rather," He replied, "they are
blessed who hear God's Message and carefully keep it."

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Now when the crowds came thronging upon
Him, He proceeded to say, "The present generation is a wicked
generation: it requires some sign, but no sign shall be given to it
except that of Jonah.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For just as Jonah became a sign to the
men of Nineveh, so the Son of Man will be a token to the present
generation.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The Queen of the South will awake at
the Judgement together with the men of the present generation, and will
condemn them; because she came from the extremity of the earth to hear
the wisdom of Solomon; but mark! One greater than Solomon is here.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> There will stand up men of Nineveh at
the Judgement together with the present generation, and will condemn it;
because they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and mark! One greater
than Jonah is here.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> "When any one lights a lamp, he never
puts it in the cellar or under the bushel, but on the lampstand, that
people who come in may see the light.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> The lamp of the body is the eye. When
your eyesight is good, your whole body also is lighted up; but when it
is defective, your body is darkened.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Consider therefore whether the light
that is in you is anything but mere darkness.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> If, however, your whole body is
penetrated with light, and has no part dark, it will be so lighted, all
of it, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light."

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> When He had thus spoken, a Pharisee
invited Him to breakfast at his house; so He entered and took His place
at table.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Now the Pharisee saw to his surprise
that He did not wash His hands before breakfasting.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> The Master however said to him, "Here
we see how you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup or plate, while
your secret hearts are full of greed and selfishness.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Foolish men! Did not He who made the
outside make the inside also?

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> But as to what is within, give alms,
and instantly all is clean in you.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> "But alas for you Pharisees! for you
pay tithes on your mint and rue and every kind of garden vegetable, and
are indifferent to justice and the love of God. These are the things you
ought to have attended to, while not neglecting the others.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> Alas for you Pharisees! for you love
the best seats in the synagogues, and you like to be bowed to in places
of public resort.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> Alas for you! for you are like the
tombs which lie hidden, and the people who walk over them are not aware
of their existence."

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> Hereupon one of the expounders of the
Law exclaimed, "Rabbi, in saying such things you reproach us also."

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> "Alas too for you expounders of the
Law!" replied Jesus, "for you load men with cumbrous burdens which you
yourselves will not touch with one of your fingers.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> Alas for you! for you repair the tombs
of the Prophets, whom your forefathers killed.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> It follows that you bear testimony to
the actions of your forefathers and that you fully approve thereof. They
slew, you build.

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> "For this reason also the Wisdom of God
has said, \`I will send Prophets and Apostles to them, of whom they will
kill some and persecute others,'

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> so that the blood of all the Prophets,
that is being shed from the creation of the world onwards, may be
required from the present generation.

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> Yes, I tell you that, from the blood of
Abel down to the blood of Zechariah who perished between the altar and
the House, it shall all be required from the present generation.

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> "Alas for you expounders of the Law!
for you have taken away the key of knowledge: you yourselves have not
entered, and those who wanted to enter you have hindered."

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> After He had left the house, the
Scribes and Pharisees commenced a vehement attempt to entangle Him and
make Him give off-hand answers on numerous points,

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> lying in wait to catch some unguarded
expression from His lips.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Meanwhile the people had come streaming
towards Him by tens of thousands, so that they were trampling one
another under foot. And now He proceeded to say to His disciples first,
"Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees, that is to say, beware of
hypocrisy.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> There is nothing that is covered up which
will not be uncovered, nor hidden which will not become known.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Whatever therefore you have said in the
dark, will be heard in the light; and what you have whispered within
closed doors will be proclaimed from the house-tops.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> "But to you who are my friends I say,
"\`Be not afraid of those who kill the body and after that can do
nothing further.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> I will warn you whom to fear: fear him
who after killing has power to throw into Gehenna: yes, I say to you,
fear him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Are not five sparrows sold for a penny?
and yet not one of them is a thing forgotten in God's sight.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But the very hairs on your heads are all
counted. Away with fear: you are more precious than a multitude of
sparrows.'

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> "And I tell you that every man who shall
have acknowledged me before men, the Son of Man will also acknowledge
before the angels of God.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> But he who disowns me before men will be
disowned before the angels of God.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> "Moreover every one who shall speak
against the Son of Man, may obtain forgiveness; but he who blasphemes
the Holy Spirit will never obtain forgiveness.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when they are bringing you before
synagogues and magistrates and governors, do not anxiously ponder the
manner or matter of your defence, nor what you are to say;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> for the Holy Spirit shall teach you at
that very moment what you must say."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Just then a man in the crowd appealed
to Him. "Rabbi," he said, "tell my brother to give me a share of the
inheritance."

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> "Man," He replied, "who has constituted
me a judge or arbitrator over you?"

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And to the people He said, "Take care,
be on your guard against all covetousness, for no one's life consists in
the superabundance of his possessions."

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And He spoke a parable to them. "A
certain rich man's lands," He said, "yielded abundant crops,

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> and he debated within himself, saying,
"\`What am I to do? for I have no place in which to store my crops.'

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> "And he said to himself, "\`This is
what I will do: I will pull down my barns and build larger ones, and in
them I will store up all my harvest and my wealth;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and I will say to my life, "\`Life, you
have ample possessions laid up for many years to come: take your ease,
eat, drink, enjoy yourself.'

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> "But God said to him, "\`Foolish man,
this night your life is demanded from you; and these preparations--for
whom shall they be?'

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> "So is it with him who amasses treasure
for himself, but has no riches in God."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then turning to His disciples He said,
"For this reason I say to you, \`Dismiss all anxious care for your
lives, inquiring what you are to eat, and for your bodies, what you are
to put on.'

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For life is a greater gift than food,
and the body is a greater gift than clothing.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Observe the ravens. They neither sow
nor reap, and have neither store-chamber nor barn. And yet God feeds
them. How far more precious are you than the birds!

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And which of you is able by anxious
thought to add a moment to his life?

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If then you are unable to do even a
very little thing, why be over-anxious about other matters?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Observe the lilies, how they grow. They
neither labour nor spin. And yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all
his splendour was as beautifully dressed as one of these.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if God so clothes the vegetation in
the fields, that blooms to-day and to-morrow will be thrown into the
oven, how much more certainly will He clothe you, you men of feeble
faith!

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> "Therefore, do not be asking what you
are to eat nor what you are to drink; and do not waver between hope and
fear.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> For though the nations of the world
pursue these things, as for you, your Father knows that you need them.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> But make His Kingdom the object of your
pursuit, and these things shall be given you in addition.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> "Dismiss your fears, little flock: your
Father finds a pleasure in giving you the Kingdom.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> Sell your possessions and give alms.
Provide yourselves with purses that will never wear out, a treasure
inexhaustible in Heaven, where no thief can come nor moth consume.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> For where your wealth is stored, there
also will your heart be.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> "Have your girdles on, and let your
lamps be alight;

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> and be yourselves like men waiting for
their master--on the look-out till he shall return from the wedding
feast--that, when he comes and knocks, they may open the door instantly.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> Blessed are those servants, whom their
Master when He comes shall find on the watch. I tell you in solemn
truth, that He will tie an apron round Him, and will bid them recline at
table while He comes and waits on them.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And whether it be in the second watch
or in the third that He comes and finds them so, blessed are they.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> Of this be sure, that if the master of
the house had known what time the robber was coming, he would have kept
awake and not have allowed his house to be broken into.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Be you also ready, for at an hour when
you are not expecting Him the Son of Man will come."

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> "Master," said Peter, "are you
addressing this parable to us, or to all alike?"

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> "Who, then," replied the Lord, "is the
faithful and intelligent steward whom his Master will put in charge of
His household to serve out their rations at the proper times?

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> Blessed is that servant whom his Master
when He comes shall find so doing.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> I tell you truly that He will put him
in authority over all His possessions.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> But if that servant should say in his
heart, \`My Master is a long time in coming,' and should begin to beat
the menservants and the maids, and to eat and drink, drinking even to
excess;

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> that servant's Master will come on a
day when he is not expecting Him and at an hour that he knows not of,
and will punish him severely, and make him share the lot of the
unfaithful.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And that servant who has been told his
Master's will and yet made no preparation and did not obey His will,
will receive many lashes.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> But he who had not been told it and yet
did what deserved the scourge, will receive but few lashes. To
whomsoever much has been given, from him much will be required; and to
whom much has been entrusted, of him a larger amount will be demanded.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> "I came to throw fire upon the earth,
and what is my desire? Oh that it were even now kindled!

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> But I have a baptism to undergo; and
how am I pent up till it is accomplished!

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> Do you suppose that I came to give
peace on earth? No, I tell you that I came to bring dissension.

<span id="an_12:52">12:52</span> For from this time there will be in one
house five persons split into parties. Three will form a party against
two and two will form a party against three;

<span id="an_12:53">12:53</span> father against son and son against
father; mother attacking daughter and daughter her mother, mother-in-law
her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law her mother-in-law."

<span id="an_12:54">12:54</span> Then He said to the people also, "When
you see a cloud rising in the west, you immediately say, \`There is to
be a shower;' and it comes to pass.

<span id="an_12:55">12:55</span> And when you see a south wind blowing,
you say, \`It will be burning hot;' and it comes to pass.

<span id="an_12:56">12:56</span> Vain pretenders! You know how to read
the aspect of earth and sky. How is it you cannot read this present
time?

<span id="an_12:57">12:57</span> "Why, too, do you not of yourselves
arrive at just conclusions?

<span id="an_12:58">12:58</span> For when, with your opponent, you are
going before the magistrate, on the way take pains to get out of his
power; for fear that, if he should drag you before the judge, the judge
may hand you over to the officer of the court, and the officer lodge you
in prison.

<span id="an_12:59">12:59</span> Never, I tell you, will you get free
till you have paid the last farthing."

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Just at that time people came to tell Him
about the Galilaeans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> "Do you suppose," He asked in reply,
"that those Galilaeans were worse sinners than the mass of the
Galilaeans, because this happened to them?

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I tell you, certainly not. On the
contrary, if you are not penitent you will all perish as they did.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Or those eighteen on whom the tower at
Siloam fell, do you suppose they had failed in their duty more than all
the rest of the people who live in Jerusalem?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I tell you, certainly not. On the
contrary, if you do not repent you will all perish just as they did."

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And He gave them the following parable.
"A man," He said, "who had a fig-tree growing in his garden came to look
for fruit on it and could find none.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> So he said to the gardener, "\`See, this
is the third year I have come to look for fruit on this fig-tree and
cannot find any. Cut it down. Why should so much ground be actually
wasted?'

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> "But the gardener pleaded, "\`Leave it,
Sir, this year also, till I have dug round it and manured it.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> If after that it bears fruit, well and
good; if it does not, then you shall cut it down.'"

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Once He was teaching on the Sabbath in
one of the synagogues

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> where a woman was present who for
eighteen years had been a confirmed invalid: she was bent double, and
was unable to lift herself to her full height.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> But Jesus saw her, and calling to her,
He said to her, "Woman, you are free from your weakness."

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And He put His hands on her, and she
immediately stood upright and began to give glory to God.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Then the Warden of the Synagogue,
indignant that Jesus had cured her on a Sabbath, said to the crowd,
"There are six days in the week on which people ought to work. On those
days therefore come and get yourselves cured, and not on the Sabbath
day."

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> But the Lord's reply to him was,
"Hypocrites, does not each of you on the Sabbath untie his bullock or
his ass from the stall and lead him to water?

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And this woman, daughter of Abraham as
she is, whom Satan had bound for no less than eighteen years, was she
not to be loosed from this chain because it is the Sabbath day?"

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> When He had said this, all His
opponents were ashamed, while the whole multitude was delighted at the
many glorious things continually done by Him.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> This prompted Him to say, "What is the
Kingdom of God like? and to what shall I compare it?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> It is like a mustard seed which a man
drops into the soil in his garden, and it grows and becomes a tree in
whose branches the birds roost."

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And again He said, "To what shall I
compare the Kingdom of God?

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> It is like yeast which a woman takes
and buries in a bushel of flour, to work there till the whole is
leavened."

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> He was passing through town after town
and village after village, steadily proceeding towards Jerusalem,

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> when some one asked Him, "Sir, are
there but few who are to be saved?"

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> "Strain every nerve to force your way
in through the narrow gate," He answered; "for multitudes, I tell you,
will endeavour to find a way in and will not succeed.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> As soon as the Master of the house
shall have risen and shut the door, and you have begun to stand outside
and knock at the door and say, "\`Sir, open the door for us' --"\`I do
not know you,' He answers; \`you are no friends of mine.'

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> "Then you will plead, "\`We have eaten
and drunk in your company and you have taught in our streets.'

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> "But He will reply, "\`I tell you that
you are no friends of mine. Begone from me, all of you, wrongdoers that
you are.'

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> "There will be the weeping and gnashing
of teeth, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets
in the Kingdom of God, and yourselves being driven far away.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> They will come from east and west, from
north and south, and will sit down at the banquet in the Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And I tell you that some now last will
then be first, and some now first will then be last."

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Just at that time there came some
Pharisees who warned Him, saying, "Leave this place and continue your
journey; Herod means to kill you."

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> "Go," He replied, "and take this
message to that fox: "\`See, to-day and to-morrow I am driving out
demons and effecting cures, and on the third day I finish my course.'

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> "Yet I must continue my journey to-day
and to-morrow and the day following; for it is not conceivable that a
Prophet should perish outside of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou who
murderest the Prophets and stonest those who have been sent to thee, how
often have I desired to gather thy children just as a hen gathers her
brood under her wings, and you would not come!

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> See, your house is left to you. But I
tell you that you will never see me again until you say, &lt;\`Blessed
is He who comes in the name of the Lord!'"&gt;

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> One day--it was a Sabbath--He was taking
a meal at the house of one of the Rulers of the Pharisee party, while
they were closely watching Him.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> In front of Him was a man suffering from
dropsy.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> This led Jesus to ask the lawyers and
Pharisees, "Is it allowable to cure people on the Sabbath?"

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> They gave Him no answer; so He took hold
of the man, cured him, and sent him away.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Then He turned to them and said, "Which
of you shall have a child or an ox fall into a well on the Sabbath day,
and will not immediately lift him out?"

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> To this they could make no reply.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Then, when He noticed that the invited
guests chose the best seats, He used this as an illustration and said to
them,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> "When any one invites you to a wedding
banquet, do not take the best seat, lest perhaps some more honoured
guest than you may have been asked,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> and the man who invited you both will
come and will say to you, \`Make room for this guest,' and then you,
ashamed, will move to the lowest place.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> On the contrary, when you are invited
go and take the lowest place, that when your host comes round he may say
to you, \`My friend, come up higher.' This will be doing you honour in
the presence of all the other guests.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For whoever uplifts himself will be
humbled, and he who humbles himself will be uplifted.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Also to His host, who had invited Him,
He said, "When you give a breakfast or a dinner, do not invite your
friends or brothers or relatives or rich neighbours, lest perhaps they
should invite you in return and a requital be made you.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> But when you entertain, invite the
poor, the crippled, the lame, and the blind;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and you will be blessed, because they
have no means of requiting you, but there will be requital for you at
the Resurrection of the righteous."

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> After listening to this teaching, one
of His fellow guests said to Him, "Blessed is he who shall feast in
God's Kingdom."

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> "A man once gave a great dinner,"
replied Jesus, "to which he invited a large number of guests.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> At dinner-time he sent his servant to
announce to those who had been invited, "\`Come, for things are now
ready.'

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> "But they all without exception began
to excuse themselves. The first told him, "\`I have purchased a piece of
land, and must of necessity go and look at it. Pray hold me excused.'

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> "A second pleaded, "\`I have bought
five yoke of oxen, and am on my way to try them. Pray hold me excused.'

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> "Another said, "\`I am just married. It
is impossible for me to come.'

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> "So the servant came and brought these
answers to his master, and they stirred his anger. "\`Go out quickly,'
he said, \`into the streets of the city--the wide ones and the narrow.
You will see poor men, and crippled, blind, lame: fetch them all in
here.'

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> "Soon the servant reported the result,
saying, "\`Sir, what you ordered is done, and there is room still.'

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> "\`Go out,' replied the master, \`to
the high roads and hedge-rows, and compel the people to come in, so that
my house may be filled.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> For I tell you that not one of those
who were invited shall taste my dinner.'"

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> On His journey vast crowds attended
Him, towards whom He turned and said,

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> "If any one is coming to me who does
not hate his father and mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters,
yes and his own life also, he cannot be a disciple of mine.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> No one who does not carry his own cross
and come after me can be a disciple of mine.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> "Which of you, desiring to build a
tower, does not sit down first and calculate the cost, asking if he has
the means to finish it? --

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> lest perhaps, when he has laid the
foundation and is unable to finish, all who see it shall begin to jeer
at him,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> saying, \`This man began to build, but
could not finish.'

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Or what king, marching to encounter
another king in war, does not first sit down and deliberate whether he
is able with ten thousand men to meet the one who is advancing against
him with twenty thousand?

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> If not, while the other is still a long
way off, he sends messengers and sues for peace.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Just as no one of you who does not
detach himself from all that belongs to him can be a disciple of mine.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> "Salt is good: but if even the salt has
become tasteless, what will you use to season it?

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> Neither for land nor dunghill is it of
any use; they throw it away. Listen, every one who has ears to listen
with!"

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now the tax-gatherers and the notorious
sinners were everywhere in the habit of coming close to Him to listen to
Him;

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> and this led the Pharisees and the
Scribes indignantly to complain, saying, "He gives a welcome to
notorious sinners, and joins them at their meals!"

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> So in figurative language He asked them,

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> "Which of you men, if he has a hundred
sheep and has lost one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in their
pasture and go in search of the lost one till he finds it?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And when he has found it, he lifts it on
his shoulder, glad at heart.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Then coming home he calls his friends and
neighbours together, and says, \`Congratulate me, for I have found my
sheep--the one I had lost.'

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> I tell you that in the same way there
will be rejoicing in Heaven over one repentant sinner--more rejoicing
than over ninety-nine blameless persons who have no need of repentance.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> "Or what woman who has ten silver coins,
if she loses one of them, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and
search carefully till she finds it?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And when she has found it, she calls
together her friends and neighbours, and says, "\`Congratulate me, for I
have found the coin which I had lost.'

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> "I tell you that in the same way there
is rejoicing in the presence of the angels of God over one repentant
sinner."

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> He went on to say, "There was a man who
had two sons.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> The younger of them said to his father,
"\`Father, give me the share of the property that comes to me.' "So he
divided his wealth between them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> No long time afterwards the younger son
got all together and travelled to a distant country, where he wasted his
money in debauchery and excess.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> At last, when he had spent everything,
there came a terrible famine throughout that country, and he began to
feel the pinch of want.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> So he went and hired himself to one of
the inhabitants of that country, who sent him on to his farm to tend
swine;

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> and he longed to make a hearty meal of
the pods the swine were eating, but no one gave him any.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> "But on coming to himself he said,
"\`How many of my father's hired men have more bread than they want,
while I here am dying of hunger!

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> I will rise and go to my father, and
will say to him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before you:

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> I no longer deserve to be called a son
of yours: treat me as one of your hired men.'

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> "So he rose and came to his father. But
while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and pitied him,
and ran and threw his arms round his neck and kissed him tenderly.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> "\`Father,' cried the son, \`I have
sinned against Heaven and before you: no longer do I deserve to be
called a son of yours.'

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> "But the father said to his servants,
"\`Fetch a good coat quickly--the best one--and put it on him; and bring
a ring for his finger and shoes for his feet.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Fetch the fat calf and kill it, and let
us feast and enjoy ourselves;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> for my son here was dead and has come
to life again: he was lost and has been found.' "And they began to be
merry.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> "Now his elder son was out on the farm;
and when he returned and came near home, he heard music and dancing.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Then he called one of the lads to him
and asked what all this meant.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> "\`Your brother has come,' he replied;
\`and your father has had the fat calf killed, because he has got him
home safe and sound.'

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> "Then he was angry and would not go in.
But his father came out and entreated him.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> "\`All these years,' replied the son,
\`I have been slaving for you, and I have never at any time disobeyed
any of your orders, and yet you have never given me so much as a kid,
for me to enjoy myself with my friends;

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> but now that this son of yours is come
who has eaten up your property among his bad women, you have killed the
fat calf for him.'

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> "\`You my dear son,' said the father,
\`are always with me, and all that is mine is also yours.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> We are bound to make merry and rejoice,
for this brother of yours was dead and has come back to life, he was
lost and has been found.'"

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> He said also to His disciples: "There was
a rich man who had a steward, about whom a report was brought to him,
that he was wasting his property.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> He called him and said, "\`What is this I
hear about you? Render an account of your stewardship, for I cannot let
you hold it any longer.'

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> "Then the steward said within himself,
"\`What am I to do? For my master is taking away the stewardship from
me. I am not strong enough for field labour: to beg, I should be
ashamed.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I see what to do, in order that when I am
discharged from the stewardship they may give me a home in their own
houses.'

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> "So he called all his master's debtors,
one by one, and asked the first, \`How much are you in debt to my
master?'

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> "\`A hundred firkins of oil,' he replied.
"\`Here is your account,' said the steward: \`sit down quickly and
change it into fifty firkins.'

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> "To a second he said, "\`And how much do
you owe?' "\`A hundred quarters of wheat,' was the answer. "\`Here is
your account,' said he: \`change it into eighty quarters.'

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> "And the master praised the dishonest
steward for his shrewdness; for, in relation to their own
contemporaries, the men of this age are shrewder than the sons of Light.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> "But I charge you, so to use the wealth
which is ever tempting to dishonesty as to win friends who, when it
fails, shall welcome you to the tents that never perish.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> The man who is honest in a very small
matter is honest in a great one also; and he who is dishonest in a very
small matter is dishonest in a great one also.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> If therefore you have not proved
yourselves faithful in dealing with the wealth that is tainted with
fraud, who will entrust to you the true good?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And if you have not been faithful in
dealing with that which is not your own, who will give you that which is
your own?

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> "No servant can be in bondage to two
masters. For either he will hate one and love the other, or else he will
cling fast to one and scorn the other. You cannot be bondservants both
of God and of gold."

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> To all this the Pharisees listened,
bitterly jeering at Him; for they were lovers of money.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> "You are they," He said to them, "who
boast of their own goodness before men, but God sees your hearts; for
that which holds a proud position among men is detestable in God's
sight.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> The Law and the Prophets continued
until John came: from that time the Good News of the Kingdom of God has
been spreading, and all classes have been forcing their way into it.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> But it is easier for earth and sky to
pass away than for one smallest detail of the Law to fall to the ground.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Every man who divorces his wife and
marries another commits adultery; and he who marries her when so
divorced from her husband commits adultery.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> "There was once a rich man who
habitually arrayed himself in purple and fine linen, and enjoyed a
splendid banquet every day,

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> while at his outer door there lay a
beggar, Lazarus by name,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> covered with sores and longing to make
a full meal off the scraps flung on the floor from the rich man's table.
Nay, the dogs, too, used to come and lick his sores.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> "But in course of time the beggar died;
and he was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also
died, and had a funeral.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And in Hades, being in torment, he
looked and saw Abraham in the far distance, and Lazarus resting in his
arms.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> So he cried aloud, and said, "\`Father
Abraham, take pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger
in water and cool my tongue, for I am in agony in this flame.'

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> "\`Remember, my child,' said Abraham,
\`that you had all your good things during your lifetime, and that
Lazarus in like manner had his bad things. But, now and here, he is
receiving consolation and you are in agony.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And, besides all this, a vast chasm is
immovably fixed between us and you, put there in order that those who
desire to cross from this side to you may not be able, nor any be able
to cross over from your side to us.'

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> "\`I entreat you then, father,' said
he, \`to send him to my father's house.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> For I have five brothers. Let him
earnestly warn them, lest they also come to this place of torment.'

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> "\`They have Moses and the Prophets,'
replied Abraham; \`let them hear them.'

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> "\`No, father Abraham,' he pleaded;
\`but if some one goes to them from the dead, they will repent.'

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> "\`If they are deaf to Moses and the
Prophets,' replied Abraham, \`they would not be led to believe even if
some one should rise from the dead.'"

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Jesus said to His disciples, "It is
inevitable that causes of stumbling should come; but alas for him
through whom they come!

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> It would be well for him if, with a
millstone round his neck, he were lying at the bottom of the sea, rather
than that he should cause even one of these little ones to fall.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Be on your guard. "If your brother acts
wrongly, reprove him; and if he is sorry, forgive him;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> and if seven times in a day he acts
wrongly towards you, and seven times turns again to you and says, \`I am
sorry,' you must forgive him."

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the Apostles said to the Lord, "Give
us faith."

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> "If your faith," replied the Lord, "is
like a mustard seed, you might command this black-mulberry-tree, \`Tear
up your roots and plant yourself in the sea,' and instantly it would
obey you.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> But which of you who has a servant
ploughing, or tending sheep, will say to him when he comes in from the
farm, \`Come at once and take your place at table,'

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> and will not rather say to him, \`Get my
dinner ready, make yourself tidy, and wait upon me till I have finished
my dinner, and then you shall have yours'?

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Does he thank the servant for obeying his
orders?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So you also, when you have obeyed all
the orders given you, must say, "\`There is no merit in our service:
what we have done is only what we were in duty bound to do.'"

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> As they pursued their journey to
Jerusalem, He passed through Samaria and Galilee.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And as He entered a certain village,
ten men met Him who were lepers and stood at a distance.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> In loud voices they cried out, "Jesus,
Rabbi, take pity on us."

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Perceiving this, He said to them, "Go
and show yourselves to the Priests." And while on their way to do this
they were made clean.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> One of them, seeing that he was cured,
came back, adoring and praising God in a loud voice,

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> and he threw himself at the feet of
Jesus, thanking Him. He was a Samaritan.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> "Were not all ten made clean?" Jesus
asked; "but where are the nine?

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Have none been found to come back and
give glory to God except this foreigner?"

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And He said to him, "Rise and go: your
faith has cured you."

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> Being asked by the Pharisees when the
Kingdom of God was coming, He answered, "The Kingdom of God does not so
come that you can stealthily watch for it.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Nor will they say, \`See here!' or
\`See there!' --for the Kingdom of God is within you."

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Then, turning to His disciples, He
said, "There will come a time when you will wish you could see a single
one of the days of the Son of Man, but will not see one.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And they will say to you, \`See there!'
\`See here!' Do not start off and go in pursuit.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> For just as the lightning, when it
flashes, shines from one part of the horizon to the opposite part, so
will the Son of Man be on His day.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> But first He must endure much
suffering, and be rejected by the present generation.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> "And as it was in the time of Noah, so
will it also be in the time of the Son of Man.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> Men were eating and drinking, taking
wives and giving wives, up to the very day on which Noah entered the
Ark, and the Deluge came and destroyed them all.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> The same was true in the time of Lot:
they were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and
building;

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> but on the day that Lot left Sodom, God
rained fire and brimstone from the sky and destroyed them all.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> Exactly so will it be on the day that
the veil is lifted from the Son of Man.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> "On that day, if a man is on the roof
and his property indoors, let him not go down to fetch it; and, in the
same way, he who is in the field, let him not turn back.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> Remember Lot's wife.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Any man who makes it his object to keep
his own life safe, will lose it; but whoever loses his life will
preserve it.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> On that night, I tell you, there will
be two men in one bed: one will be taken away and the other left behind.

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> There will be two women turning the
mill together: one will be taken away and the other left behind."

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> \[\]

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> "Where, Master?" they inquired. "Where
the dead body is," He replied, "there also will the vultures flock
together."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> He also taught them by a parable that
they must always pray and never lose heart.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> "In a certain town," He said, "there was
a judge who had no fear of God and no respect for man.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And in the same town was a widow who
repeatedly came and entreated him, saying, "\`Give me justice and stop
my oppressor.'

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> "For a time he would not, but afterwards
he said to himself, "\`Though I have neither reverence for God nor
respect for man,

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> yet because she annoys me I will give her
justice, to prevent her from constantly coming to pester me.'"

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And the Lord said, "Hear those words of
the unjust judge.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And will not God avenge the wrongs of His
own People who cry aloud to Him day and night, although He seems slow in
taking action on their behalf?

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Yes, He will soon avenge their wrongs.
Yet, when the Son of Man comes, will He find faith on earth?"

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And to some who relied on themselves as
being righteous men, and looked down upon all others, He addressed this
parable.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> "Two men went up to the Temple to
pray," He said; "one being a Pharisee and the other a tax-gatherer.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The Pharisee, standing erect, prayed as
follows by himself: "\`O God, I thank Thee that I am not like other
people--I am not a thief nor a cheat nor an adulterer, nor do I even
resemble this tax-gatherer.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> I fast twice a week. I pay the tithe on
all my gains.'

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> "But the tax-gatherer, standing far
back, would not so much as lift his eyes to Heaven, but kept beating his
breast and saying, "\`O God, be reconciled to me, sinner that I am.'

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> "I tell you that this man went home
more thoroughly absolved from guilt than the other; for every one who
uplifts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be
uplifted."

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> On one occasion people also brought
with them their infants, for Him to touch them; but the disciples,
noticing this, proceeded to find fault with them.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Jesus however called the infants to
Him. "Let the little children come to me," He said; "do not hinder them;
for it is to those who are childlike that the Kingdom of God belongs.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> I tell you in solemn truth that,
whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a little child will
certainly not enter it."

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The question was put to Him by a Ruler:
"Good Rabbi, what shall I do to inherit the Life of the Ages?"

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> "Why do you call me good?" replied
Jesus; "there is no one good but One, namely God.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> You know the Commandments: &lt;\`Do not
commit adultery;' \`Do not murder;' \`Do not steal;' \`Do not lie in
giving evidence;' \`Honour thy father and thy mother.'"&gt;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> "All of those," he replied, "I have
kept from my youth."

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> On receiving this answer Jesus said to
him, "There is still one thing wanting in you. Sell everything you
possess and give the money to the poor, and you shall have wealth in
Heaven; and then come, follow me."

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> But on hearing these words he was
deeply sorrowful, for he was exceedingly rich.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Jesus saw his sorrow, and said, "With
how hard a struggle do the possessors of riches ever enter the Kingdom
of God!

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Why, it is easier for a camel to go
through a needle's eye than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> "Who then can be saved?" exclaimed the
hearers.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> "Things impossible with man," He
replied, "are possible with God."

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Then Peter said, "See, we have given up
our homes and have followed you."

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> "I solemnly tell you," replied Jesus,
"that there is no one who has left house or wife, or brothers or parents
or children, for the sake of God's Kingdom,

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> who shall not certainly receive many
times as much in this life, and in the age that is coming the Life of
the Ages."

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Then He drew the Twelve to Him and
said, "See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything written in the
Prophets which refers to the Son of Man will be fulfilled.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For He will be given up to the
Gentiles, and be mocked, outraged and spit upon.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> They will scourge Him and put Him to
death, and on the third day He will rise to life again."

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Nothing of this did they understand.
The words were a mystery to them, nor could they see what He meant.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> As Jesus came near to Jericho, there
was a blind man sitting by the way-side begging.

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> He heard a crowd of people going past,
and inquired what it all meant.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> "Jesus the Nazarene is passing by,"
they told him.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Then, at the top of his voice, he cried
out, "Jesus, son of David, take pity on me."

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> Those in front reproved him and tried
to silence him; but he continued shouting, louder than ever, "Son of
David, take pity on me."

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> At length Jesus stopped and desired
them to bring the man to Him; and when he had come close to Him He asked
him,

<span id="an_18:41">18:41</span> "What shall I do for you?" "Sir," he
replied, "let me recover my sight."

<span id="an_18:42">18:42</span> "Recover your sight," said Jesus: "your
faith has cured you."

<span id="an_18:43">18:43</span> No sooner were the words spoken than
the man regained his sight and followed Jesus, giving glory to God; and
all the people, seeing it, gave praise to God.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> So He entered Jericho and was passing
through the town.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> There was a man there called Zacchaeus,
who was the local surveyor of taxes, and was wealthy.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> He was anxious to see what sort of man
Jesus was; but he could not because of the crowd, for he was short in
stature.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> So he ran on in front and climbed up a
mulberry tree to see Him; for He was about to pass that way.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> As soon as Jesus came to the place, He
looked up and said to him, "Zacchaeus, come down quickly, for I must
stay at your house to-day."

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> So he came down in haste, and welcomed
Him joyfully.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> When they all saw this, they began to
complain with indignation. "He has gone in to be the guest of a
notorious sinner!" they said.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Zacchaeus however stood up, and
addressing the Lord said, "Here and now, Master, I give half my property
to the poor, and if I have unjustly exacted money from any man, I pledge
myself to repay to him four times the amount."

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> Turning towards him, Jesus replied,
"To-day salvation has come to this house, seeing that he too is a son of
Abraham.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> For the Son of Man has come to seek and
to save that which was lost."

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> As they were listening to His words, He
went on to teach them by a parable, because He was near to Jerusalem and
they supposed that the Kingdom of God was going to appear immediately.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> So He said to them, "A man of noble
family travelled to a distant country to obtain the rank of king, and to
return.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And he called ten of his servants and
gave each of them a pound, instructing them to trade with the money
during his absence.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> "Now his countrymen hated him, and sent
a deputation after him to say, \`We are not willing that he should
become our king.'

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And upon his return, after he had
obtained the sovereignty, he ordered those servants to whom he had given
the money to be summoned before him, that he might learn their success
in trading.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> "So the first came and said, "\`Sir,
your pound has produced ten pounds more.'

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> "\`Well done, good servant,' he
replied; \`because you have been faithful in a very small matter, be in
authority over ten towns.'

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> "The second came, and said, "\`Your
pound, Sir, has produced five pounds.'

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> "So he said to this one also, "\`And
you, be the governor of five towns.'

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> "The next came. "\`Sir,' he said,
\`here is your pound, which I have kept wrapt up in a cloth.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> For I was afraid of you, because you
are a severe man: you take up what you did not lay down, and you reap
what you did not sow.'

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> "\`By your own words,' he replied, \`I
will judge you, you bad servant. You knew me to be a severe man, taking
up what I did not lay down, and reaping what I did not sow:

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> why then did you not put my money into
a bank, that when I came I might have received it back with interest?

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> "And he said to those who stood by,
"\`Take the pound from him and give it to him who has the ten pounds.'

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> ("They said to him, "\`Sir, he already
has ten pounds.')

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> "\`I tell you that to every one who has
anything, more shall be given; and from him who has not anything, even
what he has shall be taken away.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> But as for those enemies of mine who
were unwilling that I should become their king, bring them here, and cut
them to pieces in my presence.'"

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> After thus speaking, He journeyed
onward, proceeding up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And when he was come near Bethphage and
Bethany, at the Mount called the Oliveyard, He sent two of the disciples
on in front,

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> saying to them, "Go into the village
facing you. On entering it you will find an ass's foal tied up which no
one has ever yet ridden: untie it, and bring it here.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And if any one asks you, \`Why are you
untying the colt?' simply say, \`The Master needs it.'"

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> So those who were sent went and found
things as He had told them.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And while they were untying the colt
the owners called out, "Why are you untying the colt?"

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> and they replied, "The Master needs
it."

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> Then they brought it to Jesus, and
after throwing their outer garments on the colt they placed Jesus on it.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> So He rode on, while they carpeted the
road with their garments.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And when He was now getting near
Jerusalem, and descending the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of
the disciples began in their joy to praise God in loud voices for all
the mighty deeds they had witnessed.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> &lt;"Blessed is&gt; the King," they
cried, &lt;"who comes in the name of the Lord:&gt; in Heaven peace, and
glory in the highest realms."

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> Thereupon some of the Pharisees in the
crowd appealed to Him, saying, "Rabbi, reprove your disciples."

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> "I tell you," He replied, "that if
\*they\* became silent, the very stones would cry out."

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> When He came into full view of the
city, He wept aloud over it, and exclaimed,

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> "O that at this time thou hadst
known--yes even thou--what makes peace possible! But now it is hid from
thine eyes.

<span id="an_19:43">19:43</span> For the time is coming upon thee when
thy foes will throw up around thee earthworks and a wall, investing thee
and hemming thee in on every side.

<span id="an_19:44">19:44</span> And they will dash thee to the ground
and thy children within thee, and will not leave one stone upon another
within thee; because thou hast not recognized the time of thy
visitation."

<span id="an_19:45">19:45</span> Then Jesus entered the Temple and
proceeded to drive out the dealers.

<span id="an_19:46">19:46</span> "It is written," He said, &lt;"\`And My
house shall be the House of Prayer,'&gt; but you have made it &lt;a
robbers' cave."&gt;

<span id="an_19:47">19:47</span> And day after day He taught in the
Temple, while the High Priests and the Scribes were devising some means
of destroying Him, as were also the leading men of the people.

<span id="an_19:48">19:48</span> But they could not find any way of
doing it, for the people all hung upon His lips.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> On one of those days while He was
teaching the people in the Temple and proclaiming the Good News, the
High Priests came upon Him, and the Scribes,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> together with the Elders, and they asked
Him, "Tell us, By what authority are you doing these things? And who is
it that gave you this authority?"

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> "I also will put a question to you, "He
said;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> "was John's baptism of Heavenly or of
human origin?"

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> So they debated the matter with one
another. "If we say \`Heavenly,'" they argued, "he will say, \`Why did
you not believe him?'

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And if we say, \`human,' the people will
all stone us; for they are thoroughly convinced that John was a
Prophet."

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And they answered that they did not know
the origin of it.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> "Nor will I tell you," said Jesus, "by
what authority I do these things."

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Then He proceeded to speak a parable to
the people. "There was a man," He said, "who planted a vineyard, let it
out to vine-dressers, and went abroad for a considerable time.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> At vintage-time he sent a servant to
the vine-dressers, for them to give him a share of the crop; but the
vine-dressers beat him cruelly and sent him away empty-handed.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Then he sent a second servant; and him
too they beat and ill treated and sent away empty-handed.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Then again he sent a third; and this
one also they wounded and drove away.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Then the owner of the vineyard said,
"\`What am I to do? I will send my son--my dearly-loved son: they will
probably respect him.'

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> "But when the vine-dressers saw him,
they discussed the matter with one another, and said, "\`This is the
heir: let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.'

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> "So they turned him out of the vineyard
and murdered him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> He will come and put these
vine-dressers to death, and give the vineyard to others." "God forbid!"
exclaimed the hearers.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> He looked at them and said, "What then
does that mean which is written, &lt;"\`The Stone which the builders
rejected has been made the cornerstone'?&gt;

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Every one who falls on that stone will
be severely hurt, but on whomsoever it falls, he will be utterly
crushed."

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> At this the Scribes and the High
Priests wanted to lay hands on Him, then and there; only they were
afraid of the people. For they saw that in this parable He had referred
to them.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> So, after impatiently watching their
opportunity, they sent spies who were to act the part of good and honest
men, that they might fasten on some expression of His, so as to hand Him
over to the ruling power and the Governor's authority.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> So they put a question to Him. "Rabbi,"
they said, "we know that you say and teach what is right and that you
make no distinctions between one man and another, but teach God's way
truly.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Is it allowable to pay a tax to Caesar,
or not?"

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> But He saw through their knavery and
replied,

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> "Show me a shilling; whose likeness and
inscription does it bear?" "Caesar's," they said.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> "Pay therefore," He replied, "what is
Caesar's to Caesar--and what is God's to God."

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> There was nothing here that they could
lay hold of before the people, and marvelling at His answer they said no
more.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Next some of the Sadducees came forward
(who deny that there is a Resurrection), and they asked Him,

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> "Rabbi, Moses made it a law for us that
if a man's brother should die, leaving a wife but no children, the man
shall marry the widow and raise up a family for his brother.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Now there were seven brothers. The
first of them took a wife and died childless.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> The second and the third also took her;

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> and all seven, having done the same,
left no children when they died.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> Finally the woman also died.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> The woman, then--at the
Resurrection--whose wife shall she be? for they all seven married her."

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> "The men of this age," replied Jesus,
"marry, and the women are given in marriage.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> But as for those who shall have been
deemed worthy to find a place in that other age and in the Resurrection
from among the dead, the men do not marry and the women are not given in
marriage.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> For indeed they cannot die again; they
are like angels, and are sons of God through being sons of the
Resurrection.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> But that the dead rise to life even
Moses clearly implies in the passage about the Bush, where he calls the
Lord &lt;\`The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.'&gt;

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> He is not a God of dead, but of living
men, for to Him are all living."

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> Then some of the Scribes replied,
"Rabbi, you have spoken well."

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> From that time, however, no one
ventured to challenge Him with a single question.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> But He asked them, "How is it they say
that the Christ is a son of David?

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> Why, David himself says in the Book of
Psalms, &lt;"\`The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at My right hand

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> Until I have made thy foes a footstool
under they feet.'&gt;

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> "David himself therefore calls Him
Lord, and how can He be his son?"

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> Then, in the hearing of all the people,
He said to the disciples,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> "Beware of the Scribes, who like to
walk about in long robes, and love to be bowed to in places of public
resort and to occupy the best seats in the synagogues or at a dinner
party;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> who swallow up the property of widows
and mask their wickedness by making long prayers. They will be punished
far more severely than others."

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Looking up He saw the people throwing
their gifts into the Treasury--the rich people.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> He also saw a poor widow dropping in two
farthings,

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and He said, "In truth I tell you that
this widow, so poor, has thrown in more than any of them.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> For from what they could well spare they
have all of them contributed to the offerings, but she in her need has
thrown in all she had to live on."

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> When some were remarking about the
Temple, how it was embellished with beautiful stones and dedicated
gifts, He said,

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> "As to these things which you now admire,
the time is coming when there will not be one stone left here upon
another which will not be pulled down."

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> "Rabbi, when will this be?" they asked
Him, "and what will be the token given when these things are about to
take place?"

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> "See to it," He replied, "that you are
not misled; for many will come assuming my name and professing, \`I am
He,' or saying, \`The time is close at hand.' Do not go and follow them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> But when you hear of wars and turmoils,
be not afraid; for these things must happen first, but the end does not
come immediately."

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Then He said to them, &lt;"Nation will
rise in arms against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.&gt;

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And there will be great earthquakes,
and in places famines and pestilence; and there will be terrible sights
and wonderful tokens from Heaven.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> "But before all these things happen
they will lay hands on you and persecute you. They will deliver you up
to synagogues and to prison, and you will be brought before kings and
governors for my sake.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> In the end all this will be evidence of
your fidelity.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> "Make up your minds, however, not to
prepare a defence beforehand,

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> for I will give you utterance and
wisdom which none of your opponents will be able to withstand or reply
to.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> You will be betrayed even by parents,
brothers, relatives, friends; and some of you they will put to death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> You will be the objects of universal
hatred because you are called by my name;

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> and yet not a hair of your heads shall
perish.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> By your patient endurance you will
purchase your lives.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> "But when you see Jerusalem with armies
encamping round her on every side, then be certain that her overthrow is
close at hand.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Then let those who shall be in Judaea
escape to the hills; let those who are in the city leave it, and those
who are in the country not enter in.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> For those are the &lt;days of
vengeance&gt; and of fulfilling all that is written.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> "Alas for the women who at that time
are with child or who have infants; for there will be great distress in
the land, and anger towards this People.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> They will fall by the sword, or be
carried off into slavery among all the Gentiles. And Jerusalem will be
trampled under foot by the Gentiles, till the appointed times of the
Gentiles have expired.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> "There will be signs in sun, moon, and
stars; and on earth anguish among the nations in their bewilderment at
the roaring of the sea and its billows;

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> while men's hearts are fainting for
fear, and for anxious expectation of what is coming on the world. For
&lt;the forces which control the heavens will be disordered and
disturbed.&gt;

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And then will they see the &lt;Son of
Man coming in a cloud&gt; with great power and glory.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> But when all this is beginning to take
place, grieve no longer. Lift up your heads, because your deliverance is
drawing near."

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And He spoke a parable to them. "See,"
He said, "the fig-tree and all the trees.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> As soon as they have shot out their
leaves, you know at a glance that summer is now near.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> So also, when you see these things
happening, you may be sure that the Kingdom of God is near.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> I tell you in solemn truth that the
present generation will certainly not pass away without all these things
having first taken place.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Earth and sky will pass away, but it is
certain that my words will not pass away.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> "But take heed to yourselves, lest your
souls be weighed down with self-indulgence and drunkenness or the
anxieties of this life, and that day come upon you, suddenly, like a
falling trap;

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> for it will come on all dwellers on the
face of the whole earth.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> But beware of slumbering; and every
moment pray that you may be fully strengthened to escape from all these
coming evils, and to take your stand in the presence of the Son of Man."

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> His habit at this time was to teach in
the Temple by day, but to go out and spend the night on the Mount called
the Oliveyard.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> And all the people came to Him in the
Temple, early in the morning, to listen to Him.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Meanwhile the Festival of the Unleavened
Bread, called the Passover, was approaching,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> and the High Priests and the Scribes were
contriving how to destroy Him. But they feared the people.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Satan, however, entered into Judas (the
man called Iscariot) who was one of the Twelve.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> He went and conferred with the High
Priests and Commanders as to how he should deliver Him up to them.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> This gave them great pleasure, and they
agreed to pay him.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> He accepted their offer, and then looked
out for an opportunity to betray Him when the people were not there.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> When the day of the Unleavened Bread
came--the day for the Passover lamb to be sacrificed--

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Jesus sent Peter and John with
instructions. "Go," He said, "and prepare the Passover for us, that we
may eat it."

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> "Where shall we prepare it?" they asked.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> "You will no sooner have entered the
city," He replied, "than you will meet a man carrying a pitcher of
water. Follow him into the house to which he goes,

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> and say to the master of the house,
"\`The Rabbi asks you, Where is the room where I can eat the Passover
with my disciples?'

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> "And he will show you a large furnished
room upstairs. There make your preparations."

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> So they went and found all as He had
told them; and they got the Passover ready.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> When the time was come, and He had
taken His place at table, and the Apostles with Him,

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> He said to them, "Earnestly have I
longed to eat this Passover with you before I suffer;

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> for I tell you that I certainly shall
not eat one again till its full meaning has been brought out in the
Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Then, having received the cup and given
thanks, He said, "Take this and share it among yourselves;

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> for I tell you that from this time I
will never drink the produce of the vine till the Kingdom of God has
come."

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Then, taking a Passover biscuit, He
gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body
which is being given on your behalf: this do in remembrance of me."

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He gave them the cup in like manner,
when the meal was over. "This cup," He said, "is the new Covenant
ratified by my blood which is to be poured out on your behalf.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yet the hand of him who is betraying me
is at the table with me.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> For indeed the Son of Man goes on His
way--His pre-destined way; yet alas for that man who is betraying Him!"

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Thereupon they began to discuss with
one another which of them it could possibly be who was about to do this.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> There arose also a dispute among them
which of them should be regarded as greatest.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But He said to them, "The kings of the
Gentiles are their masters, and those who exercise authority over them
are called Benefactors.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> With you it is not so; but let the
greatest among you be as the younger, and the leader be like him who
serves.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For which is the greater--he who sits
at table, or he who waits on him? Is it not he who sits at table? But my
position among you is that of one who waits on others.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> You however have remained with me amid
my trials;

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> and I covenant to give you, as my
Father has covenanted to give me, a Kingdom--

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> so that you shall eat and drink at my
table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones as judges over the twelve tribes
of Israel.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> "Simon, Simon, I tell you that Satan
has obtained permission to have all of you to sift as wheat is sifted.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> But \*I\* have prayed for \*you\* that
your faith may not fail, and you, when at last you have come back to
your true self, must strengthen your brethren."

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> "Master," replied Peter, "with you I am
ready to go both to prison and to death."

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> "I tell you, Peter," said Jesus, "that
the cock will not crow to-day till you have three times denied that you
know me."

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> Then He asked them, "When I sent you
out without purse or bag or shoes, was there anything you needed?" "No,
nothing," they replied.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> "But now," said He, "let the one who
has a purse take it, and he who has a bag must do the same. And let him
who has no sword sell his outer garment and buy one.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> For I tell you that those words of
Scripture must yet find their fulfilment in me: &lt;\`And He was
reckoned among the lawless';&gt; for indeed that saying about me has its
accomplishment."

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> "Master, here are two swords," they
exclaimed. "That is enough," He replied.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> On going out, He proceeded as usual to
the Mount of Olives, and His disciples followed Him.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> But when He arrived at the place, He
said to them, "Pray that you may not come into temptation."

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> But He Himself withdrew from them about
a stone's throw, and knelt down and prayed repeatedly, saying,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> "Father, if it be Thy will, take this
cup away from me; yet not my will but Thine be done!"

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> And there appeared to Him an angel from
Heaven, strengthening Him;

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> while He--an agony of distress having
come upon Him--prayed all the more with intense earnestness, and His
sweat became like clots of blood dropping on the ground.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> When He rose from his prayer and came
to His disciples, He found them sleeping for sorrow.

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> "Why are you sleeping?" He said; "stand
up; and pray that you may not come into temptation."

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> While He was still speaking there came
a crowd with Judas, already mentioned as one of the Twelve, at their
head. He went up to Jesus to kiss Him.

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> "Judas," said Jesus, "are you betraying
the Son of Man with a kiss?"

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> Those who were about Him, seeing what
was likely to happen, asked Him, "Master, shall we strike with the
sword?"

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> And one of them struck a blow at the
High Priest's servant and cut off his right ear.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> "Permit me thus far," said Jesus. And
He touched the ear and healed it.

<span id="an_22:52">22:52</span> Then Jesus said to the High Priests and
Commanders of the Temple and Elders, who had come to arrest Him, "Have
you come out as if to fight with a robber, with swords and cudgels?

<span id="an_22:53">22:53</span> While day after day I was with you in
the Temple, you did not lay hands upon me; but to you belongs this
hour--and the power of darkness."

<span id="an_22:54">22:54</span> And they arrested Him and led Him away,
and brought Him to the High Priest's house, while Peter followed a good
way behind.

<span id="an_22:55">22:55</span> And when they had lighted a fire in the
middle of the court and had seated themselves in a group round it, Peter
was sitting among them,

<span id="an_22:56">22:56</span> when a maidservant saw him sitting by
the fire, and, looking fixedly at him, she said, "This man also was with
him."

<span id="an_22:57">22:57</span> But he denied it, and declared, "Woman,
I do not know him."

<span id="an_22:58">22:58</span> Shortly afterwards a man saw him and
said, "You, too, are one of them." "No, man, I am not," said Peter.

<span id="an_22:59">22:59</span> After an interval of about an hour some
one else stoutly maintained: "Certainly this fellow also was with him,
for in fact he is a Galilaean."

<span id="an_22:60">22:60</span> "Man, I don't know what you mean,"
replied Peter. No sooner had he spoken than a cock crowed.

<span id="an_22:61">22:61</span> The Master turned and looked on Peter;
and Peter recollected the Master's words, how He had said to him, "This
very day, before the cock crows, you will disown me three times."

<span id="an_22:62">22:62</span> And he went out and wept aloud
bitterly.

<span id="an_22:63">22:63</span> Meanwhile the men who held Jesus in
custody repeatedly beat Him in cruel sport,

<span id="an_22:64">22:64</span> or blindfolded Him, and then challenged
Him. "Prove to us," they said, "that you are a prophet, by telling us
who it was that struck you."

<span id="an_22:65">22:65</span> And they said many other insulting
things to Him.

<span id="an_22:66">22:66</span> As soon as it was day, the whole body
of the Elders, both High Priests and Scribes, assembled. Then He was
brought into their Sanhedrin, and they asked Him,

<span id="an_22:67">22:67</span> "Are you the Christ? Tell us." "If I
tell you," He replied, "you will certainly not believe;

<span id="an_22:68">22:68</span> and if I ask you questions, you will
certainly not answer.

<span id="an_22:69">22:69</span> But from this time forward the Son of
Man will be seated at the right hand of God's omnipotence."

<span id="an_22:70">22:70</span> Thereupon they cried out with one
voice, "You, then, are the Son of God?" "It is as you say," He answered;
"I am He."

<span id="an_22:71">22:71</span> "What need have we of further
evidence?" they said; "for we ourselves have heard it from his own
lips."

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then the whole assembly rose and brought
Him to Pilate, and began to accuse Him.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> "We have found this man," they said, "an
agitator among our nation, forbidding the payment of tribute to Caesar,
and claiming to be himself an anointed king."

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then Pilate asked Him, "You, then, are
the King of the Jews?" "It is as you say," He replied.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Pilate said to the High Priests and to
the crowd, "I can find no crime in this man."

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But they violently insisted. "He stirs up
the people," they said, "throughout all Judaea with His teaching--even
from Galilee (where He first started) to this city."

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> On hearing this, Pilate inquired, "Is
this man a Galilaean?"

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And learning that He belonged to Herod's
jurisdiction he sent Him to Herod, for he too was in Jerusalem at that
time.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> To Herod the sight of Jesus was a great
gratification, for, for a long time, he had been wanting to see Him,
because he had heard so much about Him. He hoped also to see some
miracle performed by Him.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> So he put a number of questions to Him,
but Jesus gave him no reply.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Meanwhile the High Priests and the
Scribes were standing there and vehemently accusing Him.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Then, laughing to scorn the claims of
Jesus, Herod (and his soldiers with him) made sport of Him, dressed Him
in a gorgeous costume, and sent Him back to Pilate.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And on that very day Herod and Pilate
became friends again, for they had been for some time at enmity.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Then calling together the High Priests
and the Rulers and the people, Pilate said,

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> "You have brought this man to me on a
charge of corrupting the loyalty of the people. But, you see, I have
examined him in your presence and have discovered in the man no ground
for the accusations which you bring against him.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> No, nor does Herod; for he has sent him
back to us; and, you see, there is nothing he has done that deserves
death.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> I will therefore give him a light
punishment and release him."

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> \[\]

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Then the whole multitude burst out into
a shout. "Away with this man," they said, "and release Barabbas to us"

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> --Barabbas! who had been lodged in jail
for some time in connexion with a riot which had occurred in the city,
and for murder.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> But Pilate once more addressed them,
wishing to set Jesus free.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> They, however, persistently shouted,
"Crucify, crucify him!"

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> A third time he appealed to them: "Why,
what crime has the man committed? I have discovered in him nothing that
deserves death. I will therefore give him a light punishment and release
him."

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> But they urgently insisted, demanding
with frantic outcries that He should be crucified; and their clamour
prevailed.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> So Pilate gave judgement, yielding to
their demand.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> The man who was lying in prison charged
with riot and murder and for whom they clamoured he set free, but Jesus
he gave up to be dealt with as they desired.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> As soon as they led Him away, they laid
hold on one Simon, a Cyrenaean, who was coming in from the country, and
on his shoulders they put the cross, for him to carry it behind Jesus.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> A vast crowd of the people also
followed Him, and of women who were beating their breasts and wailing
for Him.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> But Jesus turned towards them and said,
"Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves and
for your children.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> For a time is coming when they will
say, \`Blessed are the women who never bore children, and the breasts
which have never given nourishment.'

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Then will they begin to say to the
mountains, \`Fall on us;' and to the hills, \`Cover us.'

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> For if they are doing these things in
the case of the green tree, what will be done in that of the dry?"

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> They brought also two others,
criminals, to put them to death with Him.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> When they reached the place called
\`The Skull,' there they nailed Him to the cross, and the criminals
also, one at His right hand and one at His left.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Jesus prayed, "Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they are doing." And they divided His garments
among them, drawing lots for them;

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> and the people stood looking on. The
Rulers, too, repeatedly uttered their bitter taunts. "This fellow," they
said, "saved others: let him save himself, if he is God's Anointed, the
Chosen One."

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> And the soldiers also made sport of
Him, coming and offering Him sour wine and saying,

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> "Are \*you\* the King of the Jews? Save
yourself, then!"

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> There was moreover a writing over His
head: THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> Now one of the criminals who had been
crucified insulted Him, saying, "Are not you the Christ? Save yourself
and us."

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> But the other, answering, reproved him.
"Do you also not fear God," he said, "when you are actually suffering
the same punishment?

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> And we indeed are suffering justly, for
we are receiving due requital for what we have done. But He has done
nothing amiss."

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> And he said, "Jesus, remember me when
you come in your Kingdom."

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> "I tell you in solemn truth," replied
Jesus, "that this very day you shall be with me in Paradise."

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> It was now about noon, and a darkness
came over the whole country till three o'clock in the afternoon.

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> The sun was darkened, and the curtain
of the Sanctuary was torn down the middle,

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> and Jesus cried out in a loud voice,
and said, "Father, to Thy hands I entrust my spirit." And after uttering
these words He yielded up His spirit.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> The Captain, seeing what had happened,
gave glory to God, saying, "Beyond question this man was innocent."

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> And all the crowds that had come
together to this sight, after seeing all that had occurred, returned to
the city beating their breasts.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> But all His acquaintances, and the
women who had been His followers after leaving Galilee, continued
standing at a distance and looking on.

<span id="an_23:50">23:50</span> There was a member of the Council of
the name of Joseph, a kind-hearted and upright man,

<span id="an_23:51">23:51</span> who came from the Jewish town of
Arimathaea and was awaiting the coming of the Kingdom of God. He had not
concurred in the design or action of the Council,

<span id="an_23:52">23:52</span> and now he went to Pilate and asked for
the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_23:53">23:53</span> Then, taking it down, he wrapped it in
a linen sheet and laid it in a tomb in the rock, where no one else had
yet been put.

<span id="an_23:54">23:54</span> It was the Preparation Day, and the
Sabbath was near at hand.

<span id="an_23:55">23:55</span> The women--those who had come with
Jesus from Galilee--followed close behind, and saw the tomb and how His
body was placed.

<span id="an_23:56">23:56</span> Then they returned, and prepared spices
and perfumes. On the Sabbath they rested in obedience to the
Commandment.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And, on the first day of the week, at
early dawn, they came to the tomb bringing the spices they had prepared.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> But they found the stone rolled back from
the tomb,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> and on entering they found that the body
of the Lord Jesus was not there.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> At this they were in great perplexity,
when suddenly there stood by them two men whose raiment flashed like
lightning.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> The women were terrified; but, as they
stood with their faces bowed to the ground, the men said to them, "Why
do you search among the dead for Him who is living?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> He is not here. He has come back to life.
Remember how He spoke to you while He was still in Galilee,

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> when He told you that the Son of Man must
be betrayed into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the
third day rise again."

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Then they remembered His words,

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> and returning from the tomb they reported
all this to the Eleven and to all the rest.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> The women were Mary of Magdala, Joanna,
and Mary the mother of James; and they and the rest of the women related
all this to the Apostles.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> But the whole story seemed to them an
idle tale; they could not believe the women.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Peter, however, rose and ran to the
tomb. Stooping and looking in, he saw nothing but the linen cloths: so
he went away to his own home, wondering at what had happened.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> On that same day two of the disciples
were walking to Emmaus, a village seven or eight miles from Jerusalem,

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> and were conversing about all these
recent events;

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> and, in the midst of their conversation
and discussion, Jesus Himself came and joined them,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> though they were prevented from
recognizing Him.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> "What is the subject," He asked them,
"on which you are talking so earnestly, as you walk?" And they stood
still, looking full of sorrow.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Then one of them, named Cleopas,
answered, "Are you a stranger lodging alone in Jerusalem, that you have
known nothing of the things that have lately happened in the city?"

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> "What things?" He asked. "The things
about Jesus the Nazarene," they said, "who was a Prophet powerful in
work and word before God and all the people;

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> and how our High Priests and Rulers
delivered Him up to be sentenced to death, and crucified Him.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> But we were hoping that it was He who
was about to ransom Israel. Yes, and moreover it was the day before
yesterday that these things happened.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And, besides, some of the women of our
company have amazed us. They went to the tomb at daybreak,

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> and, finding that His body was not
there, they came and declared to us that they had also seen a vision of
angels who said that He was alive.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> Thereupon some of our party went to the
tomb and found things just as the women had said; but Jesus Himself they
did not see."

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> "O dull-witted men," He replied, "with
minds so slow to believe all that the Prophets have spoken!

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Was there not a necessity for the
Christ thus to suffer, and then enter into His glory?"

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> And, beginning with Moses and all the
Prophets, He explained to them the passages in Scripture which refer to
Himself.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> When they had come near the village to
which they were going, He appeared to be going further.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> But they pressed Him to remain with
them. "Because," said they, "it is getting towards evening, and the day
is nearly over." So He went in to stay with them.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> But as soon as He had sat down with
them, and had taken the bread and had blessed and broken it, and was
handing it to them,

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> their eyes were opened and they
recognized Him. But He vanished from them.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> "Were not our hearts," they said to one
another, "burning within us while He talked to us on the way and
explained the Scriptures to us?"

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> So they rose and without an hour's
delay returned to Jerusalem, and found the Eleven and the rest met
together, who said to them,

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> "Yes, it is true: the Master has come
back to life. He has been seen by Simon."

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Then they related what had happened on
the way, and how He had been recognized by them in the breaking of the
bread.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> While they were thus talking, He
Himself stood in their midst and said, "Peace be to you!"

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> Startled, and in the utmost alarm, they
thought they were looking at a spirit;

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> but He said to them, "Why such alarm?
And why are there such questionings in your minds?

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> See my hands and my feet--it is my very
self. Feel me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see I
have."

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> And then He showed them His hands and
His feet.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> But, while they still could not believe
it for joy and were full of astonishment, He asked them, "Have you any
food here?"

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> And they gave Him a piece of roasted
fish,

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> and He took it and ate it in their
presence.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> And He said to them, "This is what I
told you while I was still with you--that everything must be fulfilled
that is written in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and the Psalms
concerning me."

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> Then He opened their minds to
understand the Scriptures,

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> and He said, "Thus it is written that
the Christ would suffer and on the third day rise again from among the
dead;

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> and that proclamation would be made, in
His name, of repentance and forgiveness of sins to all the nations,
beginning in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> You are witnesses as to these things.

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And remember that I am about to send
out my Father's promised gift to rest upon you. But, as for you, wait
patiently in the city until you are clothed with power from on high."

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> And He brought them out to within view
of Bethany, and then lifted up His hands and blessed them.

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> And while He was blessing them, He
parted from them and was carried up into Heaven.

<span id="an_24:52">24:52</span> They worshipped Him, and returned to
Jerusalem with great joy.

<span id="an_24:53">24:53</span> Afterwards they were continually in
attendance at the Temple, blessing God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John](joh.md)
