[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Next](mar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Matthew

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The Genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of
David, the son of Abraham.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Abraham was the father of Isaac; Isaac of
Jacob; Jacob of Judah and his brothers.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Judah was the father (by Tamar) of Perez
and Zerah; Perez of Hezron; Hezron of Ram;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Ram of Amminadab; Amminadab of Nahshon;
Nahshon of Salmon;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Salmon (by Rahab) of Boaz; Boaz (by Ruth)
of Obed; Obed of Jesse;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Jesse of David--the King. David (by Uriah's
widow) was the father of Solomon;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Solomon of Rehoboam; Rehoboam of Abijah;
Abijah of Asa;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Asa of Jehoshaphat; Jehoshaphat of Jehoram;
Jehoram of Uzziah;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Uzziah of Jotham; Jotham of Ahaz; Ahaz of
Hezekiah;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hezekiah of Manasseh; Manasseh of Amon;
Amon of Josiah;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Josiah of Jeconiah and his brothers at
the period of the Removal to Babylon.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> After the Removal to Babylon Jeconiah had
a son Shealtiel; Shealtiel was the father of Zerubbabel;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Zerubbabel of Abiud; Abiud of Eliakim;
Eliakim of Azor;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Azor of Zadok; Zadok of Achim; Achim of
Eliud;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Eliud of Eleazar; Eleazar of Matthan;
Matthan of Jacob;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and Jacob of Joseph the husband of Mary,
who was the mother of JESUS who is called CHRIST.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> There are therefore, in all, fourteen
generations from Abraham to David; fourteen from David to the Removal to
Babylon; and fourteen from the Removal to Babylon to the Christ.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> The circumstances of the birth of Jesus
Christ were these. After his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph, before
they were united in marriage, she was found to be with child through the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> But Joseph her husband, being a
kind-hearted man and unwilling publicly to disgrace her, had determined
to release her privately from the betrothal.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But while he was contemplating this step,
an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, "Joseph, son
of David, do not be afraid to bring home your wife Mary, for she is with
child through the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> She will give birth to a Son, and you are
to call His name JESUS for He it is who will save His People from their
sins."

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> All this took place in fulfilment of what
the Lord had spoken through the Prophet,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> &lt;"Mark! The maiden will be with child
and will give birth to a son, and they will call His name Immanuel"&gt;
--a word which signifies &lt;\`God with us'&gt;.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> When Joseph awoke, he did as the angel of
the Lord had commanded, and brought home his wife,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> but did not live with her until she had
given birth to a son. The child's name he called JESUS.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now after the birth of Jesus, which took
place at Bethlehem in Judaea in the reign of King Herod, excitement was
produced in Jerusalem by the arrival of certain Magi from the east,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> inquiring, "Where is the newly born king of
the Jews? For we have seen his Star in the east, and have come here to
do him homage."

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Reports of this soon reached the king, and
greatly agitated not only him but all the people of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> So he assembled all the High Priests and
Scribes of the people, and anxiously asked them where the Christ was to
be born.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> "At Bethlehem in Judaea," they replied;
"for so it stands written in the words of the Prophet,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> &lt;"\`And thou, Bethlehem in the land of
Judah, by no means the least honorable art thou among princely places in
Judah! For from thee shall come a prince--one who shall be the Shepherd
of My People Israel.'"&gt;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Thereupon Herod sent privately for the Magi
and ascertained from them the exact time of the star's appearing.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He then directed them to go to Bethlehem,
adding, "Go and make careful inquiry about the child, and when you have
found him, bring me word, that I too may come and do him homage."

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> After hearing what the king said, they went
to Bethlehem, while, strange to say, the star they had seen in the east
led them on until it came and stood over the place where the babe was.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When they saw the star, the sight filled
them with intense joy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> So they entered the house; and when they
saw the babe with His mother Mary, they prostrated themselves and did
Him homage, and opening their treasure-chests offered gifts to
Him--gold, frankincense, and myrrh.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But being forbidden by God in a dream to
return to Herod, they went back to their own country by a different
route.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> When they were gone, and angel of the
Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said, "Rise: take the babe and
His mother and escape to Egypt, and remain there till I bring you word.
For Herod is about to make search for the child in order to destroy
Him."

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> So Joseph roused himself and took the
babe and His mother by night and departed into Egypt.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> There he remained till Herod's death,
that what the Lord had said through the Prophet might be fulfilled,
&lt;"Out of Egypt I called My Son."&gt;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Herod, finding that the Magi had
trifled with him, was furious, and sent and massacred all the boys under
two years of age, in Bethlehem and all its neighbourhood, according to
the date he had so carefully ascertained from the Magi.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then were these words, spoken by the
Prophet Jeremiah, fulfilled,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> &lt;"A voice was heard in Ramah, wailing
and bitter lamentation: It was Rachel bewailing her children, and she
refused to be comforted because there were no more."&gt;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But after Herod's death an angel of the
Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, and said to him,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> "Rise from sleep, and take the child and
His mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking
the child's life are dead."

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> So he roused himself and took the child
and His mother and came into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But hearing that Archelaus had succeeded
his father Herod on the throne of Judaea, he was afraid to go there; and
being instructed by God in a dream he withdrew into Galilee,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and went and settled in a town called
Nazareth, in order that these words spoken through the Prophets might be
fulfilled, &lt;"He shall be called a Nazarene."&gt;

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> About this time John the Baptist made his
appearance, preaching in the Desert of Judaea.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> "Repent," he said, "for the Kingdom of the
Heavens is now close at hand."

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> He it is who was spoken of through the
Prophet Isaiah when he said, &lt;"The voice of one crying aloud, \`In
the desert prepare ye a road for the Lord: make His highway
straight.'"&gt;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> This man John wore a garment of camel's
hair, and a loincloth of leather; and he lived upon locusts and wild
honey.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then large numbers of people went out to
him--people from Jerusalem and from all Judaea, and from the whole of
the Jordan valley--

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and were baptized by him in the Jordan,
making full confession of their sins.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But when he saw many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming for baptism, he exclaimed, "O vipers' brood, who has
warned you to flee from the coming wrath?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Therefore let your lives prove your change
of heart;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and do not imagine that you can say to
yourselves, \`We have Abraham as our forefather,' for I tell you that
God can raise up descendants for Abraham from these stones.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And already the axe is lying at the root
of the trees, so that every tree which does not produce good fruit will
quickly be hewn down and thrown into the fire.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> I indeed am baptizing you in water on a
profession of repentance; but He who is coming after me is mightier than
I: His sandals I am not worthy to carry for a moment; He will baptize
you in the Holy Spirit and in fire.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> His winnowing-shovel is in His hand, and
He will make a thorough clearance of His threshing-floor, gathering His
wheat into the storehouse, but burning up the chaff in unquenchable
fire."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Just at that time Jesus, coming from
Galilee to the Jordan, presents Himself to John to be baptized by him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> John protested. "It is I," he said, "who
have need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?"

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> "Let it be so on this occasion," Jesus
replied; "for so we ought to fulfil every religious duty." Then he
consented;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and Jesus was baptized, and immediately
went up from the water. At that moment the heavens opened, and he saw
the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting upon Him,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> while a voice came from Heaven, saying,
"This is My Son, the dearly loved, in whom is My delight."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> At that time Jesus was led up by the Spirit
into the Desert in order to be tempted by the Devil.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> There He fasted for forty days and nights;
and after that He suffered from hunger.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> So the Tempter came and said, "If you are
the Son of God, command these stones to turn into loaves."

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> "It is written," replied Jesus, &lt;"\`It
is not on bread alone that a man shall live, but on whatsoever God shall
appoint.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the Devil took Him to the Holy City
and caused Him to stand on the roof of the Temple,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and said, "If you are God's Son, throw
yourself down; for it is written, &lt;"\`To His angels He will give
orders concerning thee, and on their hands they shall bear thee up, lest
at any moment thou shouldst strike thy foot against a stone.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> "Again it is written," replied Jesus,
&lt;"\`Thou shalt not put the Lord thy God to the proof.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then the Devil took Him to the top of an
exceedingly lofty mountain, from which he caused Him to see all the
Kingdoms of the world and their splendour,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> and said to Him, "All this I will give you,
if you will kneel down and do me homage."

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> "Begone, Satan!" Jesus replied; "for it
is written, &lt;\`To the Lord thy God thou shalt do homage, and to Him
alone shalt thou render worship.'"&gt;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thereupon the Devil left Him, and angels
at once came and ministered to Him.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now when Jesus heard that John was thrown
into prison, He withdrew into Galilee,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and leaving Nazareth He went and settled
at Capernaum, a town by the Lake on the frontiers of Zebulun and
Naphtali,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> in order that these words, spoken through
the Prophet Isaiah, might be fulfilled,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> &lt;"Zebulun's land and Naphtali's land;
the road by the Lake; the country beyond the Jordan; Galilee of the
Nations!

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The people who were dwelling in darkness
have seen a brilliant light; and on those who were dwelling in the
region of the shadow of death, on them light has dawned."&gt;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> From that time Jesus began to preach.
"Repent," He said, "for the Kingdom of the Heavens is now close at
hand."

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And walking along the shore of the Lake
of Galilee He saw two brothers--Simon called Peter and his brother
Andrew--throwing a drag-net into the Lake; for they were fishers.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And He said to them, "Come and follow me,
and I will make you fishers of men."

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> So they immediately left their nets and
followed Him. As He went further on,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> He saw two other brothers, James the son
of Zabdi and his brother John, in the boat with their father Zabdi
mending their nets; and He called them.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And they at once left the boat and their
father, and followed Him.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Then Jesus travelled through all Galilee,
teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the Good News of the
Kingdom, and curing every kind of disease and infirmity among the
people.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Thus His fame spread through all Syria;
and they brought all the sick to Him, the people who were suffering from
various diseases and pains--demoniacs, epileptics, paralytics; and He
cured them.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And great crowds followed Him, coming
from Galilee, from the Ten Towns, from Jerusalem, and from beyond the
district on the other side of the Jordan.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Seeing the multitude of people, Jesus went
up the Hill. There He seated Himself, and when His disciples came to
Him,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> He proceeded to teach them, and said:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for to
them belongs the Kingdom of the Heavens.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> "Blessed are the mourners, for they shall
be comforted.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> "Blessed are the meek, for they as heirs
shall obtain possession of the earth.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst
for righteousness, for they shall be completely satisfied.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> "Blessed are the compassionate, for they
shall receive compassion.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> "Blessed are the peacemakers, for it is
they who will be recognized as sons of God.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> "Blessed are those who have borne
persecution in the cause of Righteousness, for to them belongs the
Kingdom of the Heavens.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> "Blessed are you when they have insulted
and persecuted you, and have said every cruel thing about you falsely
for my sake.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Be joyful and triumphant, because your
reward is great in the Heavens; for so were the Prophets before you
persecuted.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> "\*You\* are the salt of the earth; but
if salt has become tasteless, in what way can it regain its saltness? It
is no longer good for anything but to be thrown away and trodden on by
the passers by.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> \*You\* are the light of the world; a
town cannot be hid if built on a hill-top.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Nor is a lamp lighted to be put under a
bushel, but on the lampstand; and then it gives light to all in the
house.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Just so let your light shine before all
men, in order that they may see your holy lives and may give glory to
your Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> "Do not for a moment suppose that I have
come to abrogate the Law or the Prophets: I have not come to abrogate
them but to give them their completion.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Solemnly I tell you that until Heaven and
earth pass away, not one iota or smallest detail will pass away from the
Law until all has taken place.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Whoever therefore breaks one of these
least commandments and teaches others to break them, will be called the
least in the Kingdom of the Heavens; but whoever practises them and
teaches them, he will be acknowledged as great in the Kingdom of the
Heavens.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For I assure you that unless your
righteousness greatly surpasses that of the Scribes and the Pharisees,
you will certainly not find entrance into the Kingdom of the Heavens.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> "You have heard that it was said to the
ancients, &lt;\`Thou shalt not commit murder',&gt; and whoever commits
murder will be answerable to the magistrate.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But I say to you that every one who
becomes angry with his brother shall be answerable to the magistrate;
that whoever says to his brother \`Raca,' shall be answerable to the
Sanhedrin; and that whoever says, \`You fool!' shall be liable to the
Gehenna of Fire.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> If therefore when you are offering your
gift upon the altar, you remember that your brother has a grievance
against you,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> leave your gift there before the altar,
and go and make friends with your brother first, and then return and
proceed to offer your gift.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Come to terms without delay with your
opponent while you are yet with him on the way to the court; for fear he
should obtain judgement from the magistrate against you, and the
magistrate should give you in custody to the officer and you be thrown
into prison.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> I solemnly tell you that you will
certainly not be released till you have paid the very last farthing.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> "You have heard that it was said,
&lt;\`Thou shalt not commit adultery.'&gt;

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> But I tell you that whoever looks at a
woman and cherishes lustful thoughts has already in his heart become
guilty with regard to her.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> If therefore your eye, even the right
eye, is a snare to you, tear it out and away with it; it is better for
you that one member should be destroyed rather than that your whole body
should be thrown into Gehenna.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And if your right hand is a snare to you,
cut it off and away with it; it is better for you that one member should
be destroyed rather than that your whole body should go into Gehenna.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> "It was also said, &lt;\`If any man puts
away his wife, let him give her a written notice of divorce.'&gt;

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> But I tell you that every man who puts
away his wife except on the ground of unfaithfulness causes her to
commit adultery, and whoever marries her when so divorced commits
adultery.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> "Again, you have heard that it was said
to the ancients, &lt;\`Thou shalt not swear falsely, but shalt perform
thy vows to the Lord.'&gt;

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But I tell you not to swear at all;
neither by Heaven, for it is God's throne;

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> nor by the earth, for it is the footstool
under His feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the Great King.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> And do not swear by your head, for you
cannot make one hair white or black.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> But let your language be, \`Yes, yes,' or
\`No, no.' Anything in excess of this comes from the Evil one.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> "You have heard that it was said,
&lt;\`Eye for eye, tooth for tooth.'&gt;

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But I tell you not to resist a wicked
man, but if any one strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other to
him as well.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> If any one wishes to go to law with you
and to deprive you of your under garment, let him take your outer one
also.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And whoever shall compel you to convey
his goods one mile, go with him two.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> To him who asks, give: from him who would
borrow, turn not away.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> "You have heard that it was said,
&lt;\`Thou shalt love thy neighbour&gt; and hate thine enemy.'

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> But I command you all, love your enemies,
and pray for your persecutors;

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> that so you may become true sons of your
Father in Heaven; for He causes His sun to rise on the wicked as well as
the good, and sends rain upon those who do right and those who do wrong.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if you love only those who love you,
what reward have you earned? Do not even the tax-gatherers do that?

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> And if you salute only your near
relatives, what praise is due to you? Do not even the Gentiles do the
same?

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> You however are to be complete in
goodness, as your Heavenly Father is complete.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> "But beware of doing your good actions in
the sight of men, in order to attract their gaze; if you do, there is no
reward for you with your Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> \`When you give in charity, never blow a
trumpet before you as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and streets in
order that their praises may be sung by men. I solemnly tell you that
they already have their reward.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> But when you are giving in charity, let not
your left hand perceive what your right hand is doing,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> that your charities may be in secret; and
then your Father--He who sees in secret--will recompense you.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> "And when praying, you must not be like the
hypocrites. They are fond of standing and praying in the synagogues or
at the corners of the wider streets, in order that men may see them. I
solemnly tell you that they already have their reward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But you, whenever you pray, go into your
own room and shut the door: then pray to your Father who is in secret,
and your Father--He who sees in secret--will recompense you.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> "And when praying, do not use needless
repetitions as the Gentiles do, for they expect to be listened to
because of their multitude of words.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Do not, however, imitate them; for your
Father knows what things you need before ever you ask Him.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> "In this manner therefore pray: \`Our
Father who art in Heaven, may Thy name be kept holy;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> let Thy kingdom come; let Thy will be
done, as in Heaven so on earth;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> give us to-day our bread for the day;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> and forgive us our shortcomings, as we
also have forgiven those who have failed in their duty towards us;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and bring us not into temptation, but
rescue us from the Evil one.'

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> "For if you forgive others their
offences, your Heavenly Father will forgive you also;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> but if you do not forgive others their
offences, neither will your Father forgive yours.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> "When any of you fast, never assume
gloomy looks as the hypocrites do; for they disfigure their faces in
order that it may be evident to men that they are fasting. I solemnly
tell you that they already have their reward.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But, whenever you fast, pour perfume on
your hair and wash your face,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> that it may not be apparent to men that
you are fasting, but to your Father who is in secret; and your
Father--He who sees in secret--will recompense you.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> "Do not lay up stores of wealth for
yourselves on earth, where the moth and wear-and-tear destroy, and where
thieves break in and steal.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But amass wealth for yourselves in
Heaven, where neither the moth nor wear-and-tear destroys, and where
thieves do not break in and steal.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> For where your wealth is, there also will
your heart be.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> "The eye is the lamp of the body. If then
your eyesight is good, your whole body will be well lighted;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> but if your eyesight is bad, your whole
body will be dark. If however the very light within you is darkness, how
dense must the darkness be!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> "No man can be the bondservant of two
masters; for either he will dislike one and like the other, or he will
attach himself to one and think slightingly of the other. You cannot be
the bondservants both of God and of gold.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> For this reason I charge you not to be
over-anxious about your lives, inquiring what you are to eat or what you
are to drink, nor yet about your bodies, inquiring what clothes you are
to put on. Is not the life more precious than its food, and the body
than its clothing?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Look at the birds which fly in the air:
they do not sow or reap or store up in barns, but your Heavenly Father
feeds them: are not you of much greater value than they?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Which of you by being over-anxious can
add a single foot to his height?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And why be anxious about clothing? Learn
a lesson from the wild lilies. Watch their growth. They neither toil nor
spin,

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> and yet I tell you that not even Solomon
in all his magnificence could array himself like one of these.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And if God so clothes the wild herbage
which to-day flourishes and to-morrow is thrown into the oven, is it not
much more certain that He will clothe you, you men of little faith?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Do not be over-anxious, therefore, asking
\`What shall we eat?' or \`What shall we drink?' or \`What shall we
wear?'

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> For all these are questions that Gentiles
are always asking; but your Heavenly Father knows that you need these
things--all of them.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> But make His Kingdom and righteousness
your chief aim, and then these things shall all be given you in
addition.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Do not be over-anxious, therefore, about
to-morrow, for to-morrow will bring its own cares. Enough for each day
are its own troubles.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> "Judge not, that you may not be judged;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> for your own judgement will be dealt--and
your own measure meted--to yourselves.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And why do you look at the splinter in your
brother's eye, and not notice the beam which is in your own eye?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Or how say to your brother, \`Allow me to
take the splinter out of your eye,' while the beam is in your own eye?

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Hypocrite, first take the beam out of your
own eye, and then you will see clearly how to remove the splinter from
your brother's eye.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> "Give not that which is holy to the dogs,
nor throw your pearls to the swine; otherwise they will trample them
under their feet and then turn and attack you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> "Ask, and it will be given to you; seek,
and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For it is always he who asks that receives,
he who seeks that finds, and he who knocks that has the door opened to
him.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> What man is there among you, who if his son
shall ask him for bread will offer him a stone?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Or if the son shall ask him for a fish
will offer him a snake?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If you then, imperfect as you are, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father
in Heaven give good things to those who ask Him!

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Everything, therefore, be it what it may,
that you would have men do to you, do you also the same to them; for in
this the Law and the Prophets are summed up.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> "Enter by the narrow gate; for wide is
the gate and broad the road which leads to ruin, and many there are who
enter by it;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> because narrow is the gate and contracted
the road which leads to Life, and few are those who find it.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> "Beware of the false teachers--men who
come to you in sheep's fleeces, but beneath that disguise they are
ravenous wolves.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> By their fruits you will easily recognize
them. Are grapes gathered from thorns or figs from brambles?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Just so every good tree produces good
fruit, but a poisonous tree produces bad fruit.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor a
poisonous tree good fruit.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Every tree which does not yield good
fruit is cut down and thrown aside for burning.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> So by their fruits at any rate, you will
easily recognize them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> "Not every one who says to me, \`Master,
Master,' will enter the Kingdom of the Heavens, but only those who are
obedient to my Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Many will say to me on that day,
"\`Master, Master, have we not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy name
expelled demons, and in Thy name performed many mighty works?'

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> "And then I will tell them plainly, "\`I
never knew you: begone from me, you doers of wickedness.'

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> "Every one who hears these my teachings
and acts upon them will be found to resemble a wise man who builds his
house upon rock;

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> and the heavy rain falls, the swollen
torrents come, and the winds blow and beat against the house; yet it
does not fall, for its foundation is on rock.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And every one who hears these my
teachings and does not act upon them will be found to resemble a fool
who builds his house upon sand.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The heavy rain descends, the swollen
torrents come, and the winds blow and burst upon the house, and it
falls; and disastrous is the fall."

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> When Jesus had concluded this discourse,
the crowds were filled with amazement at His teaching,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> for He had been teaching them as one who
had authority, and not as their Scribes taught.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Upon descending from the hill country He
was followed by immense crowds.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And a leper came to Him, and throwing
himself at His feet, said, "Sir, if only you are willing you are able to
cleanse me."

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> So Jesus put out His hand and touched him,
and said, "I am willing: be cleansed." Instantly he was cleansed from
his leprosy;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> and Jesus said to him, "Be careful to tell
no one, but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift which
Moses appointed as evidence for them."

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> After His entry into Capernaum a Captain
came to Him, and entreated Him.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> "Sir," he said, "my servant at home is
lying ill with paralysis, and is suffering great pain."

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> "I will come and cure him," said Jesus.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> "Sir," replied the Captain, "I am not a fit
person to receive you under my roof: merely say the word, and my servant
will be cured.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For I myself am also under authority, and
have soldiers under me. To one I say \`Go,' and he goes, to another
\`Come,' and he comes, and to my slave \`Do this or that,' and he does
it."

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Jesus listened to this reply, and was
astonished, and said to the people following Him, "I solemnly tell you
that in no Israelite have I found faith as great as this.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And I tell you that many will come from
the east and from the west and will recline at table with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in the Kingdom of the Heavens,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> while the natural heirs of the Kingdom
will be driven out into the darkness outside: there will be the weeping
aloud and the gnashing of teeth."

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Jesus said to the Captain, "Go, and
just as you have believed, so be it for you." And the servant recovered
precisely at that time.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> After this Jesus went to the house of
Peter, whose mother-in-law he found ill in bed with fever.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He touched her hand and the fever left
her: and then she rose and waited upon Him.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> In the evening many demoniacs were
brought to Him, and with a word He expelled the demons; and He cured all
the sick,

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> in order that this prediction of the
Prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled, &lt;"He took on Him our weaknesses,
and bore the burden of our diseases."&gt;

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Seeing great crowds about Him Jesus had
given directions to cross to the other side of the Lake,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> when a Scribe came and said to Him,
"Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go."

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> "Foxes have holes," replied Jesus, "and
birds have nests; but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay His head."

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Another of the disciples said to Him,
"Sir, allow me first to go and bury my father."

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> "Follow me," said Jesus, "and leave the
dead to bury their own dead."

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Then He went on board a fishing-boat, and
His disciples followed Him.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> But suddenly there arose a great storm on
the Lake, so that the waves threatened to engulf the boat; but He was
asleep.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> So they came and woke Him, crying,
"Master, save us, we are drowning!"

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> "Why are you so easily frightened," He
replied, "you men of little faith?" Then He rose and reproved the winds
and the waves, and there was a perfect calm;

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and the men, filled with amazement,
exclaimed, "What kind of man is this? for the very winds and waves obey
him!"

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> On His arrival at the other side, in the
country of the Gadarenes, there met Him two men possessed by demons,
coming from among the tombs: they were so dangerously fierce that no one
was able to pass that way.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> They cried aloud, "What hast Thou to do
with us, Thou Son of God? Hast Thou come here to torment us before the
time?"

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Now at some distance from them a vast
herd of swine were feeding.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> So the demons entreated Him. "If Thou
drivest us out," they said, "send us into the herd of swine."

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> "Go," He replied. Then they came out from
the men and went into the swine, whereupon the entire herd instantly
rushed down the cliff into the Lake and perished in the water.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> The swineherds fled, and went and told
the whole story in the town, including what had happened to the
demoniacs.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> So at once the whole population came out
to meet Jesus; and when they saw Him, they besought Him to leave their
country.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Accordingly He went on board, and crossing
over came to His own town.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Here they brought to Him a paralytic lying
on a bed. Seeing their faith Jesus said to the paralytic, "Take courage,
my child; your sins are pardoned."

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> "Such language is impious," said some of
the Scribes among themselves.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Knowing their thoughts Jesus said, "Why are
you cherishing evil thoughts in your hearts?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Why, which is easier? --to say, \`Your sins
are pardoned,' or to say \`Rise up and walk'?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But, to prove to you that the Son of Man
has authority on earth to pardon sins" --He then says to the paralytic,
"Rise, and take up your bed and go home."

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he got up, and went off home.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the crowds were awe-struck when they
saw it, and ascribed the glory to God who had entrusted such power to a
man.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Passing on thence Jesus saw a man called
Matthew sitting at the Toll Office, and said to him, "Follow me." And he
arose, and followed Him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And while He was reclining at table, a
large number of tax-gathers and notorious sinners were of the party with
Jesus and His disciples.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> The Pharisees noticed this, and they
inquired of His disciples, "Why does your Teacher eat with the
tax-gatherers and notorious sinners?"

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> He heard the question and replied, "It is
not men in good health who require a doctor, but the sick.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But go and learn what this means,
&lt;\`It is mercy that I desire, not sacrifice';&gt; for I did not come
to appeal to the righteous, but to sinners."

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> At that time John's disciples came and
asked Jesus, "Why do we and the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do
not?"

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> "Can the bridegroom's party mourn," He
replied, "as long as the bridegroom is with them? But other days will
come (when the Bridegroom has been taken from them) and then they will
fast.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> No one ever mends an old cloak with a
patch of newly woven cloth. Otherwise, the patch put on would tear away
some of the old, and a worse hole would be made.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Nor do people pour new wine into old
wineskins. Otherwise, the skins would split, the wine would escape, and
the skins be destroyed. But they put new wine into fresh skins, and both
are saved."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> While He was thus speaking, a Ruler came
up and profoundly bowing said, "My daughter is just dead; but come and
put your hand upon her and she will return to life."

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Jesus rose and followed him, as did
also His disciples.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But a woman who for twelve years had been
afflicted with haemorrhage came behind Him and touched the tassel of His
cloak;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> for she said to herself, "If I but touch
His cloak, I shall be cured."

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Jesus turned and saw her, and said,
"Take courage, daughter; your faith has cured you." And the woman was
restored to health from that moment.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Entering the Ruler's house, Jesus saw the
flute-players and the crowd loudly wailing,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> and He said, "Go out of the room; the
little girl is not dead, but asleep." And they laughed at Him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> When however the place was cleared of the
crowd, Jesus went in, and on His taking the little girl by the hand, she
rose up.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And the report of this spread throughout
all that district.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> As Jesus passed on, two blind men
followed Him, shouting and saying, "Pity us, Son of David."

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when He had gone indoors, they came
to Him. "Do you believe that I can do this?" He asked them. "Yes, Sir,"
they replied.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> So He touched their eyes and said,
"According to your faith let it be to you."

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Then their eyes were opened. And assuming
a stern tone Jesus said to them, "Be careful to let no one know."

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But they went out and published His fame
in all that district.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And as they were leaving His presence a
dumb demoniac was brought to Him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> When the demon was expelled, the dumb man
could speak. And the crowds exclaimed in astonishment, "Never was such a
thing seen in Israel."

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But the Pharisees maintained, "It is by
the power of the Prince of the demons that he drives out the demons."

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Jesus continued His circuits through
all the towns and the villages, teaching in their synagogues and
proclaiming the Good News of the Kingdom, and curing every kind of
disease and infirmity.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And when He saw the crowds He was touched
with pity for them, because they were distressed and were fainting on
the ground like sheep which have no shepherd.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Then He said to His disciples, "The
harvest is abundant, but the reapers are few;

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> therefore entreat the Owner of the
Harvest to send out reapers into His fields."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then He called to Him His twelve
disciples and gave them authority over foul spirits, to drive them out;
and to cure every kind of disease and infirmity.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Now the names of the twelve Apostles were
these: first, Simon called Peter, and his brother Andrew; James the son
of Zabdi, and his brother John;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and
Matthew the tax-gatherer, James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Simon the Cananaean, and Judas the
Iscariot, who also betrayed Him.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> These twelve Jesus sent on a mission,
after giving them their instructions: "Go not," He said, "among the
Gentiles, and enter no Samaritan town;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> but, instead of that, go to the lost
sheep of Israel's race.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And as you go, preach and say, \`The
Kingdom of the Heavens is close at hand.'

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Cure the sick, raise the dead to life,
cleanse lepers, drive out demons: you have received without payment,
give without payment.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> "Provide no gold, nor even silver nor
copper to carry in your pockets;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> no bag for your journey, nor change of
linen, nor shoes, nor stick; for the labourer deserves his food.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> "Whatever town or village you enter,
inquire for some good man; and make his house your home till you leave
the place.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> When you enter the house, salute it;

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> and if the house deserves it, the peace
you invoke shall come upon it. If not, your peace shall return to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And whoever refuses to receive you or
even to listen to your Message, as you leave that house or town, shake
off the very dust from your feet.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> I solemnly tell you that it will be
more endurable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of
Judgement than for that town.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> "Remember it is I who am sending you
out, as sheep into the midst of wolves; prove yourselves as sagacious as
serpents, and as innocent as doves.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But beware of men; for they will
deliver you up to appear before Sanhedrins, and will flog you in their
synagogues;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and you will even be put on trial
before governors and kings for my sake, to bear witness to them and to
the Gentiles.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But when they have delivered you up,
have no anxiety as to how you shall speak or what you shall say; for at
that very time it shall be given you what to say;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> for it is not you who will speak: it
will be the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Brother will betray brother to death,
and father, child; and children will rise against their own parents and
will put them to death.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And you will be objects of universal
hatred because you are called by my name; but he who holds out to the
End--he will be saved.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Whenever they persecute you in one
town, escape to the next; for I solemnly tell you that you will not have
gone the round of all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> "The learner is never superior to his
teacher, and the servant is never superior to his master.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Enough for the learner to be on a level
with his teacher, and for the servant to be on a level with his master.
If they have called the master of the house Baal-zebul, how much more
will they slander his servants?

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Fear them not, however; there is
nothing veiled which will not be uncovered, nor secret which will not
become known.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> What I tell you in the dark, speak in
the light; and what is whispered into your ear, proclaim upon the roofs
of the houses.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> "And do not fear those who kill the
body, but cannot kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Do not two sparrows sell for a
halfpenny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your
Father's leave.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> But as for you, the very hairs on your
heads are all numbered.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Away then with fear; you are more
precious than a multitude of sparrows.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> "Every man who acknowledges me before
men I also will acknowledge before my Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But whoever disowns me before men I
also will disown before my Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> "Do not suppose that I came to bring
peace to the earth: I did not come to bring peace but a sword.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> For I came to set a man against his
father, &lt;a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against
her mother-in-law;

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> and a man's own family will be his
foes.&gt;

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> Any one who loves father or mother more
than me is not worthy of me, and any one who loves son or daughter more
than me is not worthy of me;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> and any one who does not take up his
cross and follow where I lead is not worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> To save your life is to lose it, and to
lose your life for my sake is to save it.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> "Whoever receives you receives me, and
whoever receives me receives Him who sent me.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Every one who receives a prophet,
because he is a prophet, will receive a prophet's reward, and every one
who receives a righteous man, because he is a righteous man, will
receive a righteous man's reward.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And whoever gives one of these little
ones even a cup of cold water to drink because he is a disciple, I
solemnly tell you that he will not lose his reward."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> When Jesus had concluded His instructions
to His twelve disciples, He left in order to teach and to proclaim His
Message in the neighbouring towns.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now John had heard in prison about the
Christ's doings, and he sent some of his disciples to inquire:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> "Are you the Coming One, or is it a
different person that we are to expect?"

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> "Go and report to John what you see and
hear," replied Jesus;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> "blind eyes receive sight, and cripples
walk; lepers are cleansed, and deaf ears hear; the dead are raised to
life, and the poor have the Good News proclaimed to them;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and blessed is every one who does not
stumble and fall because of my claims."

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When the messengers had taken their
leave, Jesus proceeded to say to the multitude concerning John, "What
did you go out into the Desert to gaze at? A reed waving in the wind?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But what did you go out to see? A man
luxuriously dressed? Those who wear luxurious clothes are to be found in
kings' palaces.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But why did you go out? To see a prophet?
Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> This is he of whom it is written,
&lt;"\`See I am sending My messenger before Thy face, and he will make
Thy road ready before Thee.'&gt;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> "I solemnly tell you that among all of
woman born no greater has ever been raised up than John the Baptist; yet
one who is of lower rank in the Kingdom of the Heavens is greater than
he.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But from the time of John the Baptist
till now, the Kingdom of the Heavens has been suffering violent assault,
and the violent have been seizing it by force.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For all the Prophets and the Law taught
until John.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And (if you are willing to receive it)
he is the Elijah who was to come.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Listen, every one who has ears!

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> "But to what shall I compare the
present generation? It is like children sitting in the open places, who
call to their playmates.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> "\`We have played the flute to you,'
they say, \`and you have not danced: we have sung dirges, and you have
not beaten your breasts.'

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> "For John came neither eating nor
drinking, and they say, \`He has a demon.'

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> The Son of Man came eating and
drinking, and they exclaim, \`See this man! --given to gluttony and
tippling, and a friend of tax-gatherers and notorious sinners!' And yet
Wisdom is vindicated by her actions."

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then began He to upbraid the towns
where most of His mighty works had been done--because they had not
repented.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> "Alas for thee, Chorazin!" He cried.
"Alas for thee, Bethsaida! For had the mighty works been done in Tyre
and Sidon which have been done in both of you, they would long ere now
have repented, covered with sackcloth and ashes.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Only I tell you that it will be more
endurable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of Judgement than for you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And thou, Capernaum, shalt thou be
exalted even to Heaven? Even to Hades shalt thou descend. For had the
mighty works been done in Sodom which have been done in thee, it would
have remained until now.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Only I tell you all, that it will be
more endurable for the land of Sodom on the day of Judgement than for
thee."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> About that time Jesus exclaimed, "I
heartily praise Thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and of earth, that Thou
hast hidden these things from sages and men of discernment, and hast
unveiled them to babes.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Yes, Father, for such has been Thy
gracious will.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> "All things have been handed over to me
by my Father, and no one fully knows the Son except the Father, nor does
any one fully know the Father except the Son and all to whom the Son
chooses to reveal Him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> "Come to me, all you toiling and
burdened ones, and \*I\* will give you rest.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Take my yoke upon you and learn from
me; for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your
souls.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For it is good to bear my yoke, and my
burden is light."

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> About that time Jesus passed on the
Sabbath through the wheatfields; and His disciples became hungry, and
began to gather ears of wheat and eat them.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> But the Pharisees saw it and said to Him,
"Look! your disciples are doing what the Law forbids them to do on the
Sabbath."

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> "Have you never read," He replied, "what
David did when he and his men were hungry?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> how he entered the House of God and ate
the Presented Loaves, which it was not lawful for him or his men to eat,
nor for any except the priests?

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And have you not read in the Law how on
the Sabbath the priests in the Temple break the Sabbath without
incurring guilt?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But I tell you that there is here that
which is greater than the Temple.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And if you knew what this means, &lt;\`It
is mercy I desire, not sacrifice'&gt;, you would not have condemned
those who are without guilt.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For the Son of Man is the Lord of the
Sabbath."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Departing thence He went to their
synagogue,

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> where there was a man with a shrivelled
arm. And they questioned Him, "Is it right to cure people on the
Sabbath?" Their intention was to bring a charge against Him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> "Which of you is there," He replied,
"who, if he has but a single sheep and it falls into a hole on the
Sabbath, will not lay hold of it and lift it out?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Is not a man, however, far superior to
a sheep? Therefore it is right to do good on the Sabbath."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then He said to the man, "Stretch out
your arm." And he stretched it out, and it was restored quite sound like
the other.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But the Pharisees after leaving the
synagogue consulted together against Him, how they might destroy Him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Aware of this, Jesus departed
elsewhere; and a great number of people followed Him, all of whom He
cured.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But He gave them strict injunctions not
to blaze abroad His doings,

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> that those words of the Prophet Isaiah
might be fulfilled,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> &lt;"This is My servant whom I have
chosen, My dearly loved One in whom My soul takes pleasure. I will put
My spirit upon Him, and He will announce justice to the nations.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He will not wrangle or raise His voice,
nor will His voice be heard in the broadways.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> A crushed reed He will not utterly
break, nor will He quench the still smouldering wick, until He has led
on Justice to victory.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And on His name shall the nations rest
their hopes."&gt;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> At that time a demoniac was brought to
Him, blind and dumb; and He cured him, so that the dumb man could speak
and see.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And the crowds of people were all
filled with amazement and said, "Can this be the Son of David?"

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The Pharisees heard it and said, "This
man only expels demons by the power of Baal-zebul, the Prince of
demons."

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Knowing their thoughts He said to them,
"Every kingdom in which civil war has raged suffers desolation; and
every city or house in which there is internal strife will be brought
low.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And if Satan is expelling Satan, he has
begun to make war on himself: how therefore shall his kingdom last?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And if it is by Baal-zebul's power that
I expel the demons, by whose power do your disciples expel them? They
therefore shall be your judges.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if it is by the power of the Spirit
of God that I expel the demons, it is evident that the Kingdom of God
has come upon you.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Again, how can any one enter the house
of a strong man and carry off his goods, unless first of all he masters
and secures the strong man: then he will ransack his house.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> "The man who is not with me is against
me, and he who is not gathering with me is scattering abroad.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> This is why I tell you that men may
find forgiveness for every other sin and impious word, but that for
impious speaking against the Holy Spirit they shall find no forgiveness.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And whoever shall speak against the Son
of Man may obtain forgiveness; but whoever speaks against the Holy
Spirit, neither in this nor in the coming age shall he obtain
forgiveness."

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> "Either grant the tree to be wholesome
and its fruit wholesome, or the tree poisonous and its fruit poisonous;
for the tree is known by its fruit.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> O vipers' brood, how can you speak what
is good when you are evil? For it is from the overflow of the heart that
the mouth speaks.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> A good man from his good store produces
good things, and a bad man from his bad store produces bad things.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> But I tell you that for every careless
word that men shall speak they will be held accountable on the day of
Judgement.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> For each of you by his words shall be
justified, or by his words shall be condemned."

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> Then He was accosted by some of the
Scribes and of the Pharisees who said, "Teacher, we wish to see a sign
given by you."

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> "Wicked and faithless generation!" He
replied, "they clamour for a sign, but none shall be given to them
except the sign of the Prophet Jonah.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> For just as &lt;Jonah was three days in
the sea-monster's belly,&gt; so will the Son of Man be three days in the
heart of the earth.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> There will stand up men of Nineveh at
the Judgement together with the present generation, and will condemn it;
because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and mark! there is One
greater than Jonah here.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> The Queen of the south will awake at
the Judgement together with the present generation, and will condemn it;
because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, and mark! there is One greater than Solomon here.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> "No sooner however has the foul spirit
gone out of the man, then he roams about in places where there is no
water, seeking rest but finding none.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Then he says, \`I will return to my
house that I left;' and he comes and finds it unoccupied, swept clean,
and in good order.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> Then he goes and brings back with him
seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they come in and dwell
there; and in the end that man's condition becomes worse than it was at
first. So will it be also with the present wicked generation."

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> While He was still addressing the
people His mother and His brothers were standing on the edge of the
crowd desiring to speak to Him.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> So some one told Him, "Your mother and
your brothers are standing outside, and desire to speak to you."

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> "Who is my mother?" He said to the man;
"and who are my brothers?"

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> And pointing to His disciples He added,
"See here are my mother and my brothers.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> To obey my Father who is in
Heaven--that is to be my brother and my sister and my mother."

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> That same day Jesus had left the house
and was sitting on the shore of the Lake,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> when a vast multitude of people crowded
round Him. He therefore went on board a boat and sat there, while all
the people stood on the shore.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He then spoke many things to them in
figurative language. "The sower goes out," He said, "to sow.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> As he sows, some of the seed falls by the
way-side, and the birds come and peck it up.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Some falls on rocky ground, where it has
but scanty soil. It quickly shows itself above ground, because it has no
depth of earth;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> but when the sun is risen, it is scorched
by the heat, and through having no root it withers up.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Some falls among the thorns; but the
thorns spring up and stifle it.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But a portion falls upon good ground, and
gives a return, some a hundred for one, some sixty, some thirty.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Listen, every one who has ears!"

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> (And His disciples came and asked Him,
"Why do you speak to them in figurative language?"

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> "Because," He replied, "while to you it
is granted to know the secrets of the Kingdom of the Heavens, to them it
is not.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For whoever has, to him more shall be
given, and he shall have abundance; but whoever has not, from him even
what he has shall be taken away.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> I speak to them in figurative language
for this reason, that while looking they do not see, and while hearing
they neither hear nor understand.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And in regard to them the prophecy of
Isaiah is receiving signal fulfilment: &lt;"\`You will hear and hear and
by no means understand, and you will look and look and by no means see.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For this people's mind is stupefied,
their hearing has become dull, and their eyes they have closed; to
prevent their ever seeing with their eyes, or hearing with their ears,
or understanding with their minds, and turning back, so that I might
heal them.'&gt;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> "But as for you, blessed are your eyes,
for they see, and your ears, for they hear.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For I solemnly tell you that many
Prophets and holy men have longed to see the sights you see, and have
not seen them, and to hear the words you hear, and have not heard them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> "To you then I will explain the parable
of the Sower.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> When a man hears the Message concerning
the Kingdom and does not understand it, the Evil one comes and catches
away what has been sown in his heart. This is he who has received the
seed by the road-side.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> He who has received the seed on the
rocky ground is the man who hears the Message and immediately receives
it with joy.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> It has struck no root, however, within
him. He continues for a time, but when suffering comes, or persecution,
because of the Message, he at once stumbles and falls.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> He who has received the seed among the
thorns is the man who hears the Message, but the cares of the present
age and the delusions of riches quite stifle the Message, and it becomes
unfruitful.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But he who has received the seed on
good ground is he who hears and understands. Such hearers give a return,
and yield one a hundred for one, another sixty, another thirty.")

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Another parable He put before them.
"The Kingdom of the Heavens," He said, "may be compared to a man who has
sown good seed in his field,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> but during the night his enemy comes,
and over the first seed he sows darnel among the wheat, and goes away.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> But when the blade shoots up and the
grain is formed, then appears the darnel also.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> "So the farmer's men come and ask him,
"\`Sir, was it not good seed that you sowed on your land? Where then
does the darnel come from?'

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> "\`Some enemy has done this,' he said.
"\`Shall we go, and collect it?' the men inquire.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> "\`No,' he replied, \`for fear that
while collecting the darnel you should at the same time root up the
wheat with it.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Leave both to grow together until the
harvest, and at harvest-time I will direct the reapers, Collect the
darnel first, and make it up into bundles to burn it, but bring all the
wheat into my barn.'"

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Another parable He put before them.
"The Kingdom of the Heavens," He said, "is like a mustard-seed, which a
man takes and sows in his ground.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> It is the smallest of all seeds, and
yet when full-grown it is larger than any herb and forms a tree, so that
the birds come and build in its branches."

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Another parable He spoke to them. "The
Kingdom of the Heavens," He said, "is like yeast which a woman takes and
buries in a bushel of flour, for it to work there till the whole mass
has risen."

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> All this Jesus spoke to the people in
figurative language, and except in figurative language He spoke nothing
to them,

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> in fulfilment of the saying of the
Prophet, &lt;"I will open my mouth in figurative language, I will utter
things kept hidden since the creation of all things."&gt;

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> When He had dismissed the people and
had returned to the house, His disciples came to Him with the request,
"Explain to us the parable of the darnel sown in the field."

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> "The sower of the good seed," He
replied, "is the Son of Man;

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> the field is the world; the good
seed--these are the sons of the Kingdom; the darnel, the sons of the
Evil one.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> The enemy who sows the darnel is \*the
Devil\*; the harvest is the Close of the Age; the reapers are the
angels.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> As then the darnel is collected
together and burnt up with fire, so will it be at the Close of the Age.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> The Son of Man will commission His
angels, and they will gather out of His Kingdom all causes of sin and
all who violate His laws;

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> and these they will throw into the
fiery furnace. There will be the weeping aloud and the gnashing of
teeth.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Then will the righteous shine out like
the sun in their Father's Kingdom. Listen, every one who has ears!

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> "The Kingdom of the Heavens is like
treasure buried in the open country, which a man finds, but buries
again, and, in his joy about it, goes and sells all he has and buys that
piece of ground.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> "Again the Kingdom of the Heavens is
like a jewel merchant who is in quest of choice pearls.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> He finds one most costly pearl; he goes
away; and though it costs all he has, he buys it.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> "Again the Kingdom of the Heavens is
like a draw-net let down into the sea, which encloses fish of all sorts.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> When full, they haul it up on the
beach, and sit down and collect the good fish in baskets, while the
worthless they throw away.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> So will it be at the Close of the Age.
The angels will go forth and separate the wicked from among the
righteous,

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> and will throw them into the fiery
furnace. There will be the weeping aloud and the gnashing of teeth."

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> "Have you understood all this?" He
asked. "Yes," they said.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> "Therefore," He said, "remember that
every Scribe well trained for the Kingdom of the Heavens is like a
householder who brings out of his storehouse new things and old."

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> Jesus concluded this series of parables
and then departed.

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> And He came into His own country and
proceeded to teach in their synagogue, so that they were filled with
astonishment and exclaimed, "Where did he obtain such wisdom, and these
wondrous powers?

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not
his mother called Mary? And are not his brothers, James, Joseph, Simon
and Judah?

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> And his sisters--are they not all
living here among us? Where then did he get all this?"

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> So they turned angrily away from Him.
But Jesus said to them, "There is no prophet left without honour except
in his own country and among his own family."

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> And He performed but few mighty deeds
there because of their want of faith.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> About that time Herod the Tetrarch heard
of the fame of Jesus,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> and he said to his courtiers, "This is
John the Baptist: he has come back to life--and that is why these
miraculous Powers are working in him."

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Herod had arrested John, and had put
him in chains, and imprisoned him, for the sake of Herodias his brother
Philip's wife,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> because John had persistently said to
him, "It is not lawful for you to have her."

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And he would have liked to put him to
death, but was afraid of the people, because they regarded John as a
Prophet.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But when Herod's birthday came, the
daughter of Herodias danced before all the company, and so pleased Herod

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> that with an oath he promised to give her
whatever she asked.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> So she, instigated by her mother, said,
"Give me here on a dish the head of John the Baptist."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The king was deeply vexed, yet because of
his repeated oath and of the guests at his table he ordered it to be
given her,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and he sent and beheaded John in the
prison.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The head was brought on a dish and
given to the young girl, and she took it to her mother.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Then John's disciples went and removed
the body and buried it, and came and informed Jesus.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Upon receiving these tidings, Jesus
went away by boat to an uninhabited and secluded district; but the
people heard of it and followed Him in crowds from the towns by land.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> So Jesus went out and saw an immense
multitude, and felt compassion for them, and cured those of them who
were out of health.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> But when evening was come, the
disciples came to Him and said, "This is an uninhabited place, and the
best of the day is now gone; send the people away to go into the
villages and buy something to eat."

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> "They need not go away," replied Jesus;
"you yourselves must give them something to eat."

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> "We have nothing here," they said, "but
five loaves and a couple of fish."

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> "Bring them here to me," He said,

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> and He told all the people to sit down
on the grass. Then He took the five loaves and the two fish, and after
looking up to heaven and blessing them, He broke up the loaves and gave
them to the disciples, and the disciples distributed them to the people.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> So all ate, and were fully satisfied.
The broken portions that remained over they gathered up, filling twelve
baskets.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Those who had eaten were about 5,000
adult men, without reckoning women and children.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Immediately afterwards He made the
disciples go on board the boat and cross to the opposite shore, leaving
Him to dismiss the people.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> When He had done this, He climbed the
hill to pray in solitude. Night came on, and he was there alone.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> Meanwhile the boat was far out on the
Lake, buffeted and tossed by the waves, the wind being adverse.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> But towards daybreak He went to them,
walking over the waves.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> When the disciples saw Him walking on
the waves, they were greatly alarmed. "It is a spirit," they exclaimed,
and they cried out with terror.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> But instantly Jesus spoke to them, and
said, "There is no danger; it is I; do not be afraid."

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> "Master," answered Peter, "if it is
you, bid me come to you upon the water."

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> "Come," said Jesus. Then Peter climbed
down from the boat and walked upon the water to go to Him.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But when he felt the wind he grew
frightened, and beginning to sink he cried out, "Master, save me."

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Instantly Jesus stretched out His hand
and caught hold of him, saying to him, "O little faith, why did you
doubt?"

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> So they climbed into the boat, and the
wind lulled;

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> and the men on board fell down before
him and said, "You are indeed God's Son."

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> When they had quite crossed over, they
put ashore at Gennesaret;

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> and the men of the place, recognizing
Him, sent word into all the country round. So they brought all the sick
to Him,

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> and they entreated Him that they might
but touch the tassel of His outer garment; and all who did so were
restored to perfect health.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then there came to Jesus a party of
Pharisees and Scribes from Jerusalem, who inquired,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> "Why do your disciples transgress the
tradition of the Elders by not washing their hands before meals?"

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> "Why do you, too," He retorted,
"transgress God's commands for the sake of your tradition?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For God said, &lt;\`Honour thy father and
thy mother';&gt; and &lt;\`Let him who reviles father or mother be
certainly put to death';&gt;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> but you--this is what you say: \`If a man
says to his father or mother, That is consecrated, whatever it is, which
otherwise you should have received from me--

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> he shall be absolved from honouring his
father'; and so you have abrogated God's Word for the sake of your
tradition.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Hypocrites! well did Isaiah prophesy of
you,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> &lt;"\`This is a People who honour Me
with their lips, while their heart is far away from Me;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> but it is in vain they worship Me, while
they lay down precepts which are mere human rules.'"&gt;

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Then, when He had called the people to
Him, Jesus said, "Hear and understand.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> It is not what goes into a man's mouth
that defiles him; but it is what comes out of his mouth--\*that\*
defiles a man."

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then His disciples came and said to
Him, "Do you know that the Pharisees were greatly shocked when they
heard those words?"

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> "Every plant," He replied, "which my
Heavenly Father has not planted will be rooted up.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Leave them alone. They are blind guides
of the blind; and if a blind man leads a blind man, both will fall into
some pit."

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> "Explain to us this figurative
language," said Peter.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> "Are even you," He answered, "still
without intellingence?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Do you not understand that whatever
enters the mouth passes into the stomach and is afterwards ejected from
the body?

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> But the things that come out of the
mouth proceed from the heart, and it is these that defile the man.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For out of the heart proceed wicked
thoughts, murder, adultery, fornication, theft, perjury, impiety of
speech.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> These are the things which defile the
man; but eating with unwashed hands does not defile."

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Leaving that place, Jesus withdrew into
the vicinity of Tyre and Sidon.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Here a Canaanitish woman of the
district came out and persistently cried out, "Sir, Son of David, pity
me; my daughter is cruelly harassed by a demon."

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But He answered her not a word. Then
the disciples interposed, and begged Him, saying, "Send her away because
she keeps crying behind us."

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> "I have only been sent to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel," He replied.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Then she came and threw herself at His
feet and entreated Him. "O Sir, help me," she said.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> "It is not right," He said, "to take
the children's bread and throw it to the dogs."

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> "Be it so, Sir," she said, "for even
the dogs eat the scraps which fall from their masters' tables."

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> "O woman," replied Jesus, "great is
your faith: be it done to you as you desire." And from that moment her
daughter was restored to health.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Again, moving thence, Jesus went along
by the Lake of Galilee; and ascending the hill, He sat down there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Soon great crowds came to Him, bringing
with them those who were crippled in feet or hands, blind or dumb, and
many besides, and they hastened to lay them at His feet. And He cured
them,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> so that the people were amazed to see
the dumb speaking, the maimed with their hands perfect, the lame
walking, and the blind seeing; and they gave the glory to the God of
Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> But Jesus called His disciples to Him
and said, "My heart yearns over this mass of people, for it is now the
third day that they have been with me and they have nothing to eat. I am
unwilling to send them away hungry, lest they should faint on the road."

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> "Where can we," asked the disciples,
"get bread enough in this remote place to satisfy so vast a multitude?"

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> "How many loaves have you?" Jesus
asked. "Seven," they said, "and a few small fish."

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> So He bade all the people sit down on
the ground,

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> and He took the seven loaves and the
fish, and after giving thanks He broke them up and then distributed them
to the disciples, and they to the people.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And they all ate and were satisfied.
The broken portions that remained over they took up--seven full hampers.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> Those who ate were 4,000 adult men,
without reckoning women and children.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> He then dismissed the people, went on
board the boat, and came into the district of Magadan.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Here the Pharisees and Sadducees came to
Him; and, to make trial of Him, they asked Him to show them a sign in
the sky.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> He replied, "In the evening you say, \`It
will be fine weather, for the sky is red;'

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and in the morning, \`It will be rough
weather to-day, for the sky is red and murky.' You learn how to
distinguish the aspect of the heavens, but the signs of the times you
cannot.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> A wicked and faithless generation are
eager for a sign; but none shall be given to them except the sign of
Jonah." and He left them and went away.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> When the disciples arrived at the other
side of the Lake, they found that they had forgotten to bring any bread;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> and when Jesus said to them, "See to it:
beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees,"

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> they reasoned among themselves, saying,
"It is because we have not brought any bread."

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Jesus perceived this and said, "Why are
you reasoning among yourselves, you men of little faith, because you
have no bread?

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Do you not yet understand? nor even
remember the 5,000 and the five loaves, and how many basketfuls you
carried away,

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> nor the 4,000 and the seven loaves, and
how many hampers you carried away?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> How is it you do not understand that it
was not about bread that I spoke to you? But beware of the yeast of the
Pharisees and Sadducees."

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then they perceived that He had not
warned them against bread-yeast, but against the teaching of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> When He arrived in the neighbourhood of
Caesarea Philippi, Jesus questioned His disciples. "Who do people say
that the Son of Man is?" He asked.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> "Some say John the Baptist," they
replied; "others Elijah; others Jeremiah or one of the Prophets."

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> "But you, who do you say that I am?" He
asked again.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> "You," replied Simon Peter, "are the
Christ, the Son of the ever-living God."

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> "Blessed are you, Simon Bar-jonah,"
said Jesus; "for mere human nature has not revealed this to you, but my
Father in Heaven.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And I declare to you that you are
Peter, and that upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the might of
Hades shall not triumph over it.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> I will give you the keys of the Kingdom
of the Heavens; and whatever you bind on earth shall remain bound in
Heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall remain loosed in Heaven."

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then He urged His disciples to tell no
one that He was the Christ.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> From this time Jesus began to explain
to His disciples that He must go to Jerusalem, and suffer much cruelty
from the Elders and the High Priests and the Scribes, and be put to
death, and on the third day be raised to life again.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Then Peter took Him aside and began
taking Him to task. "Master," he said, "God forbid; this will not be
your lot."

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> But He turned and said to Peter, "Get
behind me, Adversary; you are a hindrance to me, because your thoughts
are not God's thoughts, but men's."

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Then Jesus said to His disciples, "If
any one desires to follow me, let him renounce self and take up his
cross, and so be my follower.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> For whoever desires to save his life
shall lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake shall find it.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Why, what benefit will it be to a man
if he gains the whole world but forfeits his life? Or what shall a man
give to buy back his life?

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> For the Son of Man is soon to come in
the glory of the Father with His angels, and then will He requite every
man according to his actions.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> I solemnly tell you that some of those
who are standing here will certainly not taste death till they have seen
the Son of Man coming in His Kingdom."

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Six day later, Jesus took with Him Peter
and the brothers James and John, and brought them up a high mountain to
a solitary place.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> There in their presence His form
underwent a change; His face shone like the sun, and His raiment became
as white as the light.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And suddenly Moses and Elijah appeared to
them conversing with Him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Then Peter said to Jesus, "Master, we are
thankful to you that we are here. If you approve, I will put up three
tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah."

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He was still speaking when a luminous
cloud spread over them; and a voice was heard from within the cloud,
which said, "This is My Son dearly beloved, in whom is My delight.
Listen to Him."

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> On hearing this voice, the disciples fell
on their faces and were filled with terror.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> But Jesus came and touched them, and
said, "Rouse yourselves and have no fear."

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> So they looked up, and saw no one but
Jesus.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> As they were descending the mountain,
Jesus laid a command upon them. "Tell no one," He said, "of the sight
you have seen till the Son of Man has risen from among the dead."

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> "Why then," asked the disciples, "do
the Scribes say that Elijah must first come?"

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> "Elijah was indeed to come," He
replied, "and would reform everything.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But I tell you that he has already
come, and they did not recognize him, but dealt with him as they chose.
And before long the Son of Man will be treated by them in a similar
way."

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then it dawned upon the disciples that
it was John the Baptist about whom He had spoken to them.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When they had returned to the people,
there came to Him a man who fell on his knees before Him and besought
Him.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> "Sir," he said, "have pity on my son,
for he is an epileptic and is very ill. Often he falls into the fire and
often into the water.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> I have brought him to your disciples,
and they have not been able to cure him."

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> "O unbelieving and perverse
generation!" replied Jesus; "how long shall I be with you? how long
shall I endure you? Bring him to me."

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Then Jesus reprimanded the demon, and
it came out and left him; and the boy was cured from that moment.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Then the disciples came to Jesus
privately and asked Him, "Why could not we expel the demon?"

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> "Because your faith is so small," He
replied; "for I solemnly declare to you that if you have faith like a
mustard-seed, you shall say to this mountain, \`Remove from this place
to that,' and it will remove; and nothing shall be impossible to you.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> But an evil spirit of this kind is only
driven out by prayer and fasting."

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> As they were travelling about in
Galilee, Jesus said to them, "The Son of Man is about to be betrayed
into the hands of men;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> they will put Him to death, but on the
third day He will be raised to life again." And they were exceedingly
distressed.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> After their arrival at Capernaum the
collectors of the half-shekel came and asked Peter, "Does not your
Teacher pay the half-shekel?"

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> "Yes," he replied, and then went into
the house. But before he spoke a word Jesus said, "What think you,
Simon? From whom do this world's kings receive customs or capitation
tax? from their own children, or from others?"

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> "From others," he replied. "Then the
children go free," said Jesus.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> "However, lest we cause them to sin, go
and throw a hook into the Lake, and take the first fish that comes up.
When you open its mouth, you will find a shekel in it: bring that coin
and give it to them for yourself and me."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Just then the disciples came to Jesus and
asked, "Who ranks higher than others in the Kingdom of the Heavens?"

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> So He called a young child to Him, and,
bidding him stand in the midst of them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> said, "In solemn truth I tell you that
unless you turn and become like little children, you will in no case be
admitted into the Kingdom of the Heavens.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Whoever therefore shall humble himself as
this young child, he it is who is superior to others in the Kingdom of
the Heavens.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And whoever for my sake receives one
young child such as this, receives me.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But whoever shall occasion the fall of
one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be better for him
to have a millstone hung round his neck and to be drowned in the depths
of the sea.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> "Alas for the world because of causes of
falling! They cannot but come, but alas for each man through whom they
come!

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> If your hand or your foot is causing you
to fall into sin, cut it off and away with it. It is better for you to
enter into Life crippled in hand or foot than to remain in possession of
two sound hands or feet but be thrown into the fire of the Ages.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And if your eye is causing you to fall
into sin, tear it out and away with it; it is better for you to enter
into Life with only one eye, than to remain in possession of two eyes
but be thrown into the Gehenna of fire.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> "Beware of ever despising one of these
little ones, for I tell you that in Heaven their angels have continual
access to my Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> \[\]

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> What do you yourselves think? Suppose a
man gets a hundred sheep and one of them strays away, will he not leave
the ninety-nine on the hills and go and look for the one that is
straying?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And if he succeeds in finding it, in
solemn truth I tell you that he rejoices over it more than he does over
the ninety-nine that have not gone astray.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Just so it is not the will of your
Father in Heaven that one of these little ones should be lost.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> "If your brother acts wrongly towards
you, go and point out his fault to him when only you and he are there.
If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But if he will not listen to you, go
again, and ask one or two to go with you, that every word spoken may be
attested by two or three witnesses.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> If he refuses to hear them, appeal to
the Church; and if he refuses to hear even the Church, regard him just
as you regard a Gentile or a tax-gatherer.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> I solemnly tell you that whatever you
as a Church bind on earth will in Heaven be held as bound, and whatever
you loose on earth will in Heaven be held to be loosed.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> I also solemnly tell you that if two of
you here on earth agree together concerning anything whatever that they
shall ask, the boon will come to them from my Father who is in Heaven.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> For where there are two or three
assembled in my name, there am I in the midst of them."

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> At this point Peter came to Him with
the question, "Master, how often shall my brother act wrongly towards me
and I forgive him? seven times?"

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> "I do not say seven times," answered
Jesus, "but seventy times seven times.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> "For this reason the Kingdom of the
Heavens may be compared to a king who determined to have a settlement of
accounts with his servants.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> But as soon as he began the settlement,
one was brought before him who owed 10,000 talents,

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> and was unable to pay. So his master
ordered that he and his wife and children and everything that he had
should be sold, and payment be made.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> The servant therefore falling down,
prostrated himself at his feet and entreated him. "\`Only give me time,'
he said, \`and I will pay you the whole.'

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> "Whereupon his master, touched with
compassion, set him free and forgave him the debt.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> But no sooner had that servant gone
out, than he met with one of his fellow servants who owed him 100
shillings; and seizing him by the throat and nearly strangling him he
exclaimed, "\`Pay me all you owe.'

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> "His fellow servant therefore fell at
his feet and entreated him, "\`Only give me time,' he said, \`and I will
pay you.'

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> "He would not, however, but went and
threw him into prison until he should pay what was due.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> His fellow servants, therefore, seeing
what had happened, were exceedingly angry; and they came and told their
master without reserve all that had happened.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> At once his master called him and said,
"\`Wicked servant, I forgave you all that debt, because you entreated
me:

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> ought not you also to have had pity on
your fellow servant, just as I had pity on you?'

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> "So his master, greatly incensed,
handed him over to the jailers until he should pay all he owed him.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> "In the same way my Heavenly Father
will deal with you, if you do not all of you forgive one another from
your hearts."

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> When Jesus had finished these discourses,
He removed from Galilee and came into that part of Judaea which lay
beyond the Jordan.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And a vast multitude followed him, and He
cured them there.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Then came some of the Pharisees to Him to
put Him to the proof by the question, "Has a man a right to divorce his
wife whenever he chooses?"

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> "Have you not read," He replied, "that He
who made them &lt;\`made them'&gt; from the beginning &lt;\`male and
female,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and said, For this reason a man shall
leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two shall
be one'?&gt;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Thus they are no longer two, but \`one'!
What therefore God has joined together, let not man separate."

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> "Why then," said they, "did Moses command
the husband to give her \`a written notice of divorce,' and so put her
away?"

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> "Moses," He replied, "in consideration of
the hardness of your nature permitted you to put away your wives, but it
has not been so from the beginning.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I tell you that whoever divorces his
wife for any reason except her unfaithfulness, and marries another
woman, commits adultery."

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> "If this is the case with a man in
relation to his wife," said the disciples to Him, "it is better not to
marry."

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> "It is not every man," He replied, "who
can receive this teaching, but only those on whom the grace has been
bestowed.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> There are men who from their birth have
been disabled from marriage, others who have been so disabled by men,
and others who have disabled themselves for the sake of the Kingdom of
the Heavens. He who is able to receive this, let him receive it."

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then young children were brought to Him
for Him to put His hands on them and pray; but the disciples interfered.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Jesus however said, "Let the little
children come to me, and do not hinder them; for it is to those who are
childlike that the Kingdom of the Heavens belongs."

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> So He laid His hands upon them and went
away.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> "Teacher," said one man, coming up to
Him, "what that is good shall I do in order to win the Life of the
Ages?"

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> "Why do you ask me," He replied, "about
what is good? There is only One who is truly good. But if you desire to
enter into Life, keep the Commandments."

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> "Which Commandments?" he asked. Jesus
answered, &lt;"\`Thou shalt not kill;' \`Thou shalt not commit
adultery;' \`Thou shalt not steal;' \`Thou shalt not lie in giving
evidence;'

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> \`Honour thy father and thy mother';
and \`Thou shalt love thy fellow man as much as thyself.'"&gt;

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> "All of these," said the young man, "I
have carefully kept. What do I still lack?"

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> "If you desire to be perfect," replied
Jesus, "go and sell all that you have, and give to the poor, and you
shall have wealth in Heaven; and come, follow me."

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> On hearing those words the young man
went away much cast down; for he had much property.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> So Jesus said to His disciples, "I
solemnly tell you that it is with difficulty that a rich man will enter
the Kingdom of the Heavens.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> Yes, I tell you, it is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> These words utterly amazed the
disciples, and they asked, "Who then can be saved?"

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Jesus looked at them and said, "With
men this is impossible, but with God everything is possible."

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then Peter said to Jesus, "See, \*we\*
have forsaken everything and followed you; what then will be \*our\*
reward?"

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> "I solemnly tell you," replied Jesus,
"that in the New Creation, when the Son of Man has taken His seat on His
glorious throne, all of you who have followed me shall also sit on
twelve thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And whoever has forsaken houses, or
brothers or sisters, or father or mother, or children or lands, for my
sake, shall receive many times as much and shall have as his inheritance
the Life of the Ages.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> "But many who are now first will be
last, and many who are now last will be first.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> "For the Kingdom of the Heavens is like
an employer who went out early in the morning to hire men to work in his
vineyard,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> and having made an agreement with them
for a shilling a day, sent them into his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> About nine o'clock he went out and saw
others loitering in the market-place.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> To these also he said, "\`You also, go
into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.'

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> "So they went. Again about twelve, and
about three o'clock, he went out and did the same.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And going out about five o'clock he found
others loitering, and he asked them, "\`Why have you been standing here
all day long, doing nothing?'

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> "\`Because no one has hired us,' they
replied. "\`You also, go into the vineyard,' he said.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> "When evening came, the master said to
his steward, "\`Call the men and pay them their wages. Begin with the
last set and finish with the first.'

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> "When those came who had begun at five
o'clock, they received a shilling apiece;

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> and when the first came, they expected
to get more, but they also each got the shilling.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> So when they had received it, they
grumbled against the employer, saying,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> "\`These who came last have done only
one hour's work, and you have put them on a level with us who have
worked the whole day and have borne the scorching heat.'

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> "\`My friend,' he answered to one of
them, \`I am doing you no injustice. Did you not agree with me for a
shilling?

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Take your money and go. I choose to
give this last comer just as much as I give you.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Have I not a right to do what I choose
with my own property? Or are you envious because I am generous?'

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> "So the last shall be first, and the
first last."

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Jesus was now going up to Jerusalem,
and He took the twelve disciples aside by themselves, and on the way He
said to them,

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> "We are going up to Jerusalem, and
there the Son of Man will be betrayed to the High Priests and Scribes.
They will condemn Him to death,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> and hand Him over to the Gentiles to be
made sport of and scourged and crucified; and on the third day He will
be raised to life."

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Then the mother of the sons of Zabdi
came to Him with her sons, and knelt before Him to make a request of
Him.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> "What is it you desire?" He asked.
"Command," she replied, "that these my two sons may sit one at your
right hand and one at your left in your Kingdom."

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> "None of you know what you are asking
for," said Jesus; "can you drink out of the cup from which I am about to
drink?" "We can," they replied.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> "You shall drink out of my cup," He
said, "but a seat at my right hand or at my left it is not for me to
allot, but it belongs to those for whom it has been prepared by my
Father."

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> The other ten heard of this, and their
indignation was aroused against the two brothers.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> But Jesus called them to Him, and said,
"You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their
great men exercise authority over them.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Not so shall it be among you; but
whoever desires to be great among you shall be your servant,

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> and whoever desires to be first among
you shall be your bondservant;

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> just as the Son of Man came not to be
served but to serve, and to give His life as the redemption-price for
many."

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> As they were leaving Jericho, an
immense crowd following Him,

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> two blind men sitting by the roadside
heard that it was Jesus who was passing by, and cried aloud, "Sir, Son
of David, pity us."

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> The people angrily tried to silence
them, but they cried all the louder. "O Sir, Son of David, pity us,"
they said.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> So Jesus stood still and called to
them. "What shall I do for you?" He asked.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> "Sir, let our eyes be opened," they
replied.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Moved with compassion, Jesus touched
their eyes, and immediately they regained their sight and followed Him.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> When they were come near Jerusalem and
had arrived at Bethphage and the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of the
disciples on in front,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> saying to them, "Go to the village you
see facing you, and as you enter it you will find a she-ass tied up and
a foal with her. Untie her and bring them to me.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And if any one says anything to you, say,
\`The Master needs them,' and he will at once send them."

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> This took place in order that the
Prophet's prediction might be fulfilled:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> &lt;"Tell the Daughter of Zion, \`See,
thy King is coming to thee, gentle, and yet mounted on an ass, even on a
colt the foal of a beast of burden.'"&gt;

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> So the disciples went and did as Jesus
had instructed them:

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> they brought the she-ass and the foal,
and threw their outer garments on them. So He sat on them;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> and most of the crowd kept spreading
their garments along the road, while others cut branches from the trees
and carpeted the road with them,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> and the multitudes--some of the people
preceding Him and some following--sang aloud, &lt;"God save the Son of
David! Blessings on Him who comes in the Lord's name! God in the highest
Heavens save Him!"&gt;

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When He thus entered Jerusalem, the
whole city was thrown into commotion, every one inquiring, "Who is
this?"

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> "This is Jesus, the Prophet, from
Nazareth in Galilee," replied the crowds.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Entering the Temple, Jesus drove out
all who were buying and selling there, and overturned the
money-changers' tables and the seats of the pigeon-dealers.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> "It is written," He said, &lt;"\`My
House shall be called the House of Prayer',&gt; but you are making it
&lt;a robbers' cave."&gt;

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And the blind and the lame came to Him
in the Temple, and He cured them.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> But when the High Priests and the
Scribes saw the wonderful things that He had done and the children who
were crying aloud in the Temple, &lt;"God save the Son of David,"&gt;
they were filled with indignation.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> "Do you hear," they asked Him, "what
these children are saying?" "Yes," He replied; "have you never read,
&lt;\`Out of the mouths of infants and of babes at the breast Thou hast
brought forth the praise which is due'?"&gt;

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> So He left them and went out of the
city to Bethany and passed the night there.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Early in the morning as He was on His
way to return to the city He was hungry,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> and seeing a fig-tree on the road-side
He went up to it, but found nothing on it but leaves. "On you," He said,
"no fruit shall ever again grow." And immediately the fig-tree withered
away.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> When the disciples saw it they
exclaimed in astonishment, "How instantaneously the fig-tree has
withered away!"

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> "I solemnly tell you," said Jesus,
"that if you have an unwavering faith, you shall not only perform such a
miracle as this of the fig-tree, but that even if you say to this
mountain, \`Be thou lifted up and hurled into the sea,' it shall be
done;

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> and everything, whatever it be, that
you ask for in your prayers, if you have faith, you shall obtain."

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> He entered the Temple; and while He was
teaching, the High Priests and the Elders of the people came to Him and
asked Him, "By what authority are you doing these things? and who gave
you this authority?"

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> "And I also have a question to ask
\*you\*," replied Jesus, "and if you answer me, I in turn will tell you
by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> John's Baptism, whence was it? --had it
a heavenly or a human origin?" So they debated the matter among
themselves. "If we say \`a heavenly origin,'" they argued, "he will say,
\`Why then did you not believe him?'

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> and if we say \`a human origin' we have
the people to fear, for they all hold John to have been a Prophet."

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> So they answered Jesus, "We do not
know." "Nor do I tell you," He replied, "by what authority I do these
things."

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> "But give me your judgement. There was
a man who had two sons. He came to the elder of them, and said, "\`My
son, go and work in the vineyard to-day.'

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> "\`I will not,' he replied. "But
afterwards he was sorry, and went.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> He came to the second and spoke in the
same manner. His answer was, "\`I will go, Sir.' "But he did not go.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Which of the two did as his father
desired?" "The first," they said. "I solemnly tell you,' replied Jesus,
"that the tax-gatherers and the notorious sinners are entering the
Kingdom of God in front of you.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> For John came to you observing all
sorts of ritual, and you put no faith in him: the tax-gatherers and the
notorious sinners did put faith in him, and you, though you saw this
example set you, were not even afterwards sorry so as to believe him.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> "Listen to another parable. There was a
householder who planted a vineyard, made a fence round it, dug a
wine-tank in it, and built a strong lodge; then let the place to
vine-dressers, and went abroad.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> When vintage-time approached, he sent
his servants to the vine-dressers to receive his share of the grapes;

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> but the vine-dressers seized the
servants, and one they cruelly beat, one they killed, one they pelted
with stones.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Again he sent another party of servants
more numerous than the first; and these they treated in the same manner.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> Later still he sent to them his son,
saying, "\`They will respect my son.'

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> "But the vine-dressers, when they saw
the son, said to one another, "\`Here is the heir: come, let us kill him
and get his inheritance.'

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> "So they seized him, dragged him out of
the vineyard, and killed him.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> When then the owner of the vineyard
comes, what will he do to those vine-dressers?"

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> "He will put the wretches to a wretched
death," was the reply, "and will entrust the vineyard to other
vine-dressers who will render the produce to him at the vintage season."

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> "Have you never read in the
Scriptures," said Jesus, &lt;"\`The Stone which the builders rejected
has been made the Cornerstone: this Cornerstone came from the Lord, and
is wonderful in our eyes'?&gt;

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> "That, I tell you, is the reason why
the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and given to a nation
that will exhibit the power of it.

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> He who falls on this stone will be
severely hurt; but he on whom it falls will be utterly crushed."

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> After listening to His parables the
High Priests and the Pharisees perceived that He was speaking about
them;

<span id="an_21:46">21:46</span> but though they were eager to lay hands
upon Him, they were afraid of the people, for by them He was regarded as
a Prophet.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Again Jesus spoke to them in figurative
language.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> "The Kingdom of the Heavens," He said,
"may be compared to a king who celebrated the marriage of his son,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> and sent his servants to call the invited
guests to the wedding, but they were unwilling to come.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> "Again he sent other servants with a
message to those who were invited. "\`My breakfast is now ready," he
said, \`my bullocks and fat cattle are killed, and every preparation is
made: come to the wedding.'

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> "They however gave no heed, but went, one
to his home in the country, another to his business;

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> and the rest seized the king's servants,
maltreated them, and murdered them.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> So the king's anger was stirred, and he
sent his troops and destroyed those murderers and burnt their city.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Then he said to his servants, "\`The
wedding banquet is ready, but those who were invited were unworthy of
it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Go out therefore to the crossroads, and
everybody you meet invite to the wedding.'

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> "So they went out into the roads and
gathered together all they could find, both bad and good, and the
banqueting hall was filled with guests.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> "Now the king came in to see the
guests; and among them he discovered one who was not wearing a
wedding-robe.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> "\`My friend,' he said, \`how is it
that you came in here without a wedding robe?'

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> "The man stood speechless. Then the
king said to the servants, "\`Bind him hand and foot and fling him into
the darkness outside: there will be the weeping aloud and the gnashing
of teeth.'

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> "For there are many called, but few
chosen."

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees went and consulted
together how they might entrap Him in His conversation.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> So they sent to Him their disciples
together with the Herodians; who said, "Teacher, we know that you are
truthful and that you faithfully teach God's truth; and that no fear of
man misleads you, for you are not biased by men's wealth or rank.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Give us your judgement therefore: is it
allowable for us to pay a poll-tax to Caesar, or not?"

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Perceiving their wickedness, Jesus
replied, "Why are you hypocrites trying to ensnare me?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Show me the tribute coin." And they
brought Him a shilling.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> "Whose likeness and inscription," He
asked, "is this?"

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> "Caesar's," they replied. "Pay
therefore," He rejoined, "what is Caesar's to Caesar; and what is God's
to God."

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> They heard this, and were astonished;
then left Him, and went their way.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> On the same day a party of Sadducees
came to Him, contending that there is no resurrection. And they put this
case to Him.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> "Teacher," they said, "Moses enjoined,
&lt;\`If a man die childless, his brother shall marry his widow, and
raise up a family for him.'&gt;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Now we had among us seven brothers. The
eldest of them married, but died childless, leaving his wife to his
brother.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> So also did the second and the third,
down to the seventh,

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> till the woman also died, after
surviving them all.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> At the Resurrection, therefore, whose
wife of the seven will she be? for they all married her."

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> The reply of Jesus was, "You are in
error, through ignorance of the Scriptures and of the power of God.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For in the Resurrection, men neither
marry nor are women given in marriage, but they are like angels in
Heaven.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> But as to the Resurrection of the dead,
have you never read what God says to you,

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> &lt;\`I am the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob'?&gt; He is not the God of dead, but of
living men."

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> All the crowd heard this, and were
filled with amazement at His teaching.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> Now the Pharisees came up when they
heard that He had silenced the Sadducees,

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> and one of them, an expounder of the
Law, asked Him as a test question,

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> "Teacher, which is the greatest
Commandment in the Law?"

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> &lt;"\`Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God,'"&gt; He answered, &lt;"\`with thy whole heart, thy whole soul, thy
whole mind.'&gt;

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> This is the greatest and foremost
Commandment.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And the second is similar to it:
&lt;\`Thou shalt love thy fellow man as much as thyself.'

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> The whole of the Law and the Prophets
is summed up in these two Commandments."

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> While the Pharisees were still
assembled there, Jesus put a question to them.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> "What think you about the Christ," He
said, "whose son is He?" "David's," they replied.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> "How then," He asked, "does David,
taught by the Spirit, call Him Lord, when he says,

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> &lt;"\`The Lord said to my Lord, sit at
My right hand until I have put thy foes beneath thy feet'?&gt;

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> "If therefore David calls Him Lord, how
can He be his son?"

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> No one could say a word in reply, nor
from that day did any one venture again to put a question to Him.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Jesus addressed the crowds and His
disciples.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> "The Scribes," He said, "and the
Pharisees sit in the chair of Moses.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Therefore do and observe everything that
they command you; but do not imitate their lives, for though they tell
others what to do, they do not do it themselves.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Heavy and cumbrous burdens they bind
together and load men's shoulders with them, while as for themselves,
not with one finger do they choose to lift them.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And everything they do they do with a
view to being observed by men; for they widen their phylacteries and
make the tassels large,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> and love the best seats at a dinner party
or in the synagogues,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> and like to be bowed to in places of
public resort, and to be addressed by men as \`Rabbi.'

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> "As for you, do not accept the title of
\`Rabbi,' for one alone is your Teacher, and you are all brothers.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And call no one on earth your Father, for
One alone is your Father--the Heavenly Father.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And do not accept the name of
\`leader,' for your Leader is one alone--the Christ.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> He who is the greatest among you shall
be your servant;

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> and one who exalts himself shall be
abased, while one who abases himself shall be exalted.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> "But alas for you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites, for you lock the door of the Kingdom of the
Heavens against men; you yourselves do not enter, nor do you allow those
to enter who are seeking to do so.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> \[\]

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> "Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for you scour sea and land in order to win one convert--and
when he is gained, you make him twice as much a son of Gehenna as
yourselves.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> "Alas for you, you blind guides, who
say, "\`Whoever swears by the Sanctuary it is nothing; but whoever
swears by the gold of the Sanctuary, is bound by the oath.'

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> "Blind fools! Why, which is greater?
--the gold, or the Sanctuary which has made the gold holy?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And you say, "\`Whoever swears by the
altar, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the offering lying on it is
bound by the oath.'

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> "You are blind! Why, which is greater?
--the offering, or the altar which makes the offering holy?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> He who swears by the altar swears both
by it and by everything on it;

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> he who swears by the Sanctuary swears
both by it and by Him who dwells in it;

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> and he who swears by Heaven swears both
by the throne of God and by Him who sits upon it.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> "Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for you pay the tithe on mint, dill, and cumin, while you
have neglected the weightier requirements of the Law--just judgement,
mercy, and faithful dealing. These things you ought to have done, and
yet you ought not to have left the others undone.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> You blind guides, straining out the
gnat while you gulp down the camel!

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> "Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for you wash clean the outside of the cup or dish, while
within they are full of greed and self-indulgence.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Blind Pharisee, first wash clean the
inside of the cup or dish, and then the outside will be clean also.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> "Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for you are just like whitewashed sepulchres, the outside of
which pleases the eye, though inside they are full of dead men's bones
and of all that is unclean.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> The same is true of you: outwardly you
seem to the human eye to be good and honest men, but, within, you are
full of insincerity and disregard of God's Law.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> "Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for you repair the sepulchres of the Prophets and keep in
order the tombs of the righteous,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> and your boast is, "\`If we had lived
in the time of our forefathers, we should not have been implicated with
them in the murder of the Prophets.'

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> "So that you bear witness against
yourselves that you are descendants of those who murdered the Prophets.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Fill up the measure of your
forefathers' guilt.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> O serpents, O vipers' brood, how are
you to escape condemnation to Gehenna?

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> "For this reason I am sending to you
Prophets and wise men and Scribes. Some of them you will put to
death--nay, crucify; some of them you will flog in your synagogues and
chase from town to town;

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> that all the innocent blood shed upon
earth may come on you, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of
Zechariah the son of Berechiah whom you murdered between the Sanctuary
and the altar.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> I tell you in solemn truth that all
these things will come upon the present generation.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou who
murderest the Prophets and stonest those who have been sent to thee! how
often have I desired to gather thy children to me, just as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and you would not come!

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> See, your house will now be left to you
desolate!

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For I tell you that you will never see
me again until you say, &lt;\`Blessed be He who comes in the name of the
Lord.'"&gt;

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Jesus had left the Temple and was going
on His way, when His disciples came and called His attention to the
Temple buildings.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> "You see all these?" He replied; "in
solemn truth I tell you that there will not be left here one stone upon
another that will not be pulled down."

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Afterwards He was on the Mount of Olives
and was seated there when the disciples came to Him, apart from the
others, and said, "Tell us when this will be; and what will be the sign
of your Coming and of the Close of the Age?"

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> "Take care that no one misleads you,"
answered Jesus;

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> "for many will come assuming my name and
saying \`I am the Christ;' and they will mislead many.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And before long you will hear of wars and
rumours of wars. Do not be alarmed, for such things must be; but the End
is not yet.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> &lt;For nation will rise in arms against
nation, kingdom against kingdom,&gt; and there will be famines and
earthquakes in various places;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> but all these miseries are but like the
early pains of childbirth.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> "At that time they will deliver you up to
punishment and will put you to death; and you will be objects of hatred
to all the nations because you are called by my name.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then &lt;will many stumble and
fall,&gt; and they will betray one another and hate one another.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Many false prophets will rise up and
lead multitudes astray;

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> and because of the prevalent disregard
of God's law the love of the great majority will grow cold;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> but those who stand firm to the End
shall be saved.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And this Good News of the Kingdom shall
be proclaimed throughout the whole world to set the evidence before all
the Gentiles; and then the End will come.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> "When you have seen (to use the
language of the Prophet Daniel) the &lt;\`Abomination of
Desolation',&gt; standing in the Holy Place" --let the reader observe
those words--

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> "then let those who are in Judaea
escape to the hills;

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> let him who is on the roof not go down
to fetch what is in his house;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> nor let him who is outside the city
stay to pick up his outer garment.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And alas for the women who at that time
are with child or have infants!

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> "But pray that your flight may not be
in winter, nor on the Sabbath;

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> for it &lt;will be&gt; a time of great
&lt;suffering, such as never has been from the beginning of the world
till now,&gt; and assuredly never will be again.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And if those days had not been cut
short, no one would escape; but for the sake of God's own People those
days will be cut short.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> "If at that time any one should say to
you, \`See, here is the Christ!' or \`Here!' give no credence to it.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For there will rise up false Christs
and false prophets, displaying wonderful signs and prodigies, so as to
deceive, were it possible, even God's own People.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Remember, I have forewarned you.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> If therefore they should say to you,
\`See, He is in the Desert!' do not go out there: or \`See, He is
indoors in the room!' do not believe it.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> For just as the lightning flashes in
the east and is seen to the very west, so will be the Coming of the Son
of Man.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Wherever the dead body is, there will
the vultures flock together.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> "But immediately after those times of
distress &lt;the sun will be darkened, the moon will not shed her light,
the stars will fall from the firmament, and the forces which control the
heavens will be disordered and disturbed.&gt;

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> Then will appear the Sign of the Son of
Man in the sky; and &lt;then will all the nations of the earth
lament,&gt; when they see the Son of Man &lt;coming on the clouds of the
sky&gt; with great power and glory.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And He will send out His angels
&lt;with a loud trumpet-blast,&gt; and &lt;they will bring together His
own People to Him from north, south, east and west--from one extremity
of the world to the other.&gt;

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> "Now learn from the fig-tree the lesson
it teaches. As soon as its branches have now become soft and it is
bursting into leaf, you all know that summer is near.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> So you also, when you see all these
signs, may be sure that He is near--at your very door.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> I tell you in solemn truth that the
present generation will certainly not pass away without all these things
having first taken place.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Earth and sky will pass away, but it is
certain that my words will not pass away.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> "But as to that day and the exact time
no one knows--not even the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but the Father
alone.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> \`For as it was in the time of Noah, so
it will be at the Coming of the Son of Man.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> At that time, before the Deluge, men
were busy eating and drinking, taking wives or giving them, up to the
very day when Noah entered the Ark,

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> nor did they realise any danger till
the Deluge came and swept them all away; so will it be at the Coming of
the Son of Man.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> Then will two men be in the open
country: one will be taken away, and one left behind.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> Two women will be grinding at the mill:
one will be taken away, and one left behind.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> Be on the alert therefore, for you do
not know the day on which your Lord is coming.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> But of this be assured, that if the
master of the house had known the hour at which the robber was coming,
he would have kept awake, and not have allowed his house to be broken
into.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> Therefore you also must be ready; for
it is at a time when you do not expect Him that the Son of Man will
come.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> "Who therefore is the loyal and
intelligent servant to whom his master has entrusted the control of his
household to give them their rations at the appointed time?

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> Blessed is that servant whom his master
when he comes shall find so doing!

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> In solemn truth I tell you that he will
give him the management of all his wealth.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> But if the man, being a bad servant,
should say in his heart, \`My master is a long time in coming,'

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> and should begin to beat his fellow
servants, while he eats and drinks with drunkards;

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> the master of that servant will arrive
on a day when he is not expecting him and at an hour of which he has not
been informed;

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> he will treat him with the utmost
severity and assign him a place among the hypocrites: there will be the
weeping and the gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> "Then will the Kingdom of the Heavens be
found to be like ten bridesmaids who took their torches and went out to
meet the bridegroom.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Five of them were foolish and five were
wise.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> For the foolish, when they took their
torches, did not provide themselves with oil;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> but the wise, besides their torches, took
oil in their flasks.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> The bridegroom was a long time in coming,
so that meanwhile they all became drowsy and fell asleep.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> But at midnight there is a loud cry,
"\`The bridegroom! Go out and meet him!'

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> "Then all those bridesmaids roused
themselves and trimmed their torches.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> "\`Give us some of your oil,' said the
foolish ones to the wise, \`for our torches are going out.'

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> "\`But perhaps,' replied the wise,
\`there will not be enough for all of us. Go to the shops rather, and
buy some for yourselves.'

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> "So they went to buy. But meanwhile the
bridegroom came; those bridesmaids who were ready went in with him to
the wedding banquet; and the door was shut.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> "Afterwards the other bridesmaids came
and cried, "\`Sir, Sir, open the door to us.'

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> "\`In solemn truth I tell you,' he
replied, \`I do not know you.'

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> "Keep awake therefore; for you know
neither the day nor the hour.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> "Why, it is like a man who, when going
on his travels, called his bondservants and entrusted his property to
their care.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> To one he gave five talents, to another
two, to another one--to each according to his individual capacity; and
then started from home.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Without delay the one who had received
the five talents went and employed them in business, and gained five
more.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> In the same way he who had the two
gained two more.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> But the man who had received the one
went and dug a hole and buried his master's money.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> "After a long lapse of time the master
of those servants returned, and had a reckoning with them.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> The one who had received the five
talents came and brought five more, and said, "\`Sir, it was five
talents that you entrusted to me: see, I have gained five more.'

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> "\`You have done well, good and
trustworthy servant,' replied his master; \`you have been trustworthy in
the management of a little, I will put you in charge of much: share your
master's joy.'

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> "The second, who had received the two
talents, came and said, "\`Sir, it was two talents you entrusted to me:
see, I have gained two more.'

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> "\`Good and trustworthy servant, you
have done well,' his master replied; \`you have been trustworthy in the
management of a little, I will put you in charge of much: share your
master's joy.'

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> "But, next, the man who had the one
talent in his keeping came and said, "\`Sir, I knew you to be a severe
man, reaping where you had not sown and garnering what you had not
winnowed.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> So being afraid I went and buried your
talent in the ground: there you have what belongs to you.'

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> "\`You wicked and slothful servant,'
replied his master, \`did you know that I reap where I have not sown,
and garner what I have not winnowed?

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Your duty then was to deposit my money
in some bank, and so when I came I should have got back my property with
interest.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> So take away the talent from him, and
give it to the man who has the ten.'

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> (For to every one who has, more shall
be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him who has nothing,
even what he has shall be taken away.)

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> \`But as for this worthless servant,
put him out into the darkness outside: \*there\* will be the weeping and
the gnashing of teeth.'

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> "When the Son of Man comes in His
glory, and all the angels with Him, then will He sit upon His glorious
throne,

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> and all the nations will be gathered
into His presence. And He will separate them from one another, just as a
shepherd separates the sheep from the goats;

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> and will make the sheep stand at His
right hand, and the goats at His left.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> "Then the King will say to those at His
right, "\`Come, my Father's blessed ones, receive your inheritance of
the Kingdom which has been divinely intended for you ever since the
creation of the world.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> For when I was hungry, you gave me
food; when I was thirsty, you gave me drink; when I was homeless, you
gave me a welcome;

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> when I was ill-clad, you clothed me;
when I was sick, you visited me; when I was in prison, you came to see
me.'

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> "\`When, Lord,' the righteous will
reply, \`did we see Thee hungry, and feed Thee; or thirsty, and give
Thee drink?

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> When did we see Thee homeless, and give
Thee a welcome? or ill-clad, and clothe Thee?

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> When did we see Thee sick or in prison,
and come to see Thee?'

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> "But the King will answer them, "\`In
solemn truth I tell you that in so far as you rendered such services to
one of the humblest of these my brethren, you rendered them to myself.'

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> "Then will He say to those at His left,
"\`Begone from me, with the curse resting upon you, into the Fire of the
Ages, which has been prepared for the Devil and his angels.

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> For when I was hungry, you gave me
nothing to eat; when thirsty, you gave me nothing to drink;

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> when homeless, you gave me no welcome;
ill-clad, you clothed me not; sick or in prison, you visited me not.'

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> "Then will they also answer, "\`Lord,
when did we see Thee hungry or thirsty or homeless or ill-clad or sick
or in prison, and not come to serve Thee?'

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> "But he will reply, "\`In solemn truth
I tell you that in so far as you withheld such services from one of the
humblest of these, you withheld them from me.'

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> "And these shall go away into the
Punishment of the Ages, but the righteous into the Life of the Ages."

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> When Jesus had ended all these
discourses, He said to His disciples,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> "You know that in two days' time the
Passover comes. And the Son of Man will be delivered up to be
crucified."

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Then the High Priests and Elders of the
People assembled in the court of the palace of the High Priest Caiaphas,

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> and consulted how to get Jesus into their
power by stratagem and put Him to death.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> But they said, "Not during the Festival,
lest there be a riot among the people."

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Now when Jesus was come to Bethany and
was at the house of Simon the Leper,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> a woman came to Him with a jar of very
costly, sweet-scented ointment, which she poured over His head as He
reclined at table.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> "Why such waste?" indignantly exclaimed
the disciples;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> "for this might have been sold for a
considerable sum, and the money given to the poor."

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> But Jesus heard it, and said to them,
"Why are you vexing her? For she has done a most gracious act towards
me.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> The poor you always have with you, but
me you have not always.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> In pouring this ointment over me, her
object was to prepare me for burial.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> In solemn truth I tell you that
wherever in the whole world this Good News shall be proclaimed, this
deed of hers shall be spoken of in memory of her."

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> At that time one of the Twelve, the one
called Judas Iscariot, went to the High Priests

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> and said, "What are you willing to give
me if I betray him to you?" So they weighed out to him thirty shekels,

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> and from that moment he was on the look
out for an opportunity to betray Him.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> On the first day of the Unleavened
Bread the disciples came to Jesus with the question, "Where shall we
make preparations for you to eat the Passover?"

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> "Go into the city," He replied, "to a
certain man, and tell him, \`The Teacher says, My time is close at hand.
It is at your house that I shall keep the Passover with my disciples.'"

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> The disciples did as Jesus directed
them, and got the Passover ready.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> When evening came, He was at table with
the twelve disciples,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> and the meal was proceeding, when Jesus
said, "In solemn truth I tell you that one of you will betray me."

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Intensely grieved they began one after
another to ask Him, "Can it be I, Master?"

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> "The one who has dipped his fingers in
the bowl with me," He answered, "is the man who will betray me.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> The Son of Man is indeed going as is
written concerning Him; but alas for that man by whom the Son of Man is
betrayed! It had been a happy thing for that man if he had never been
born."

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> Then Judas, the disciple who was
betraying Him, asked, "Can it be I, Rabbi?" "It is you," He replied.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> During the meal Jesus took a Passover
biscuit, blessed it and broke it. He then gave it to the disciples,
saying, "Take this and eat it: it is my body."

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And He took the cup and gave thanks,
and gave it to them saying, "Drink from it, all of you;

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> for this is my blood which is to be
poured out for many for the remission of sins--the blood which ratifies
the Covenant.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> I tell you that I will never again take
the produce of the vine till that day when I shall drink the new wine
with you in my Father's Kingdom."

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> So they sang the hymn and went out to
the Mount of Olives.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Then said Jesus, "This night all of you
will stumble and fail in your fidelity to me; for it is written, &lt;\`I
will strike the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered
in all directions.'&gt;

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> But after I have risen to life again I
will go before you into Galilee."

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> "All may stumble and fail," said Peter,
"but I never will."

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> "In solemn truth I tell you," replied
Jesus, "that this very night, before the cock crows, you will three
times disown me."

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> "Even if I must die with you," declared
Peter, "I will never disown you." In like manner protested all the
disciples.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Then Jesus came with them to a place
called Gethsemane. And He said to the disciples, "Sit down here, whilst
I go yonder and there pray."

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And He took with Him Peter and the two
sons of Zabdi. Then He began to be full of anguish and distress,

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> and He said to them, "My soul is
crushed with anguish to the very point of death; wait here, and keep
awake with me."

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> Going forward a short distance He fell
on His face and prayed. "My Father," He said, "if it is possible, let
this cup pass away from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou
willest."

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> Then He came to the disciples and found
them asleep, and He said to Peter, "Alas, none of you could keep awake
with me for even a single hour!

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> Keep awake, and pray that you may not
enter into temptation: the spirit is right willing, but the body is
frail."

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> Again a second time He went away and
prayed, saying, "My Father, if it is impossible for this cup to pass
without my drinking it, Thy will be done."

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> He came and again found them asleep,
for they were very tired.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> So He left them, and went away once
more and prayed a third time, again using the same words.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Then He came to the disciples and said,
"Sleep on and rest. See, the moment is close at hand when the Son of Man
is to be betrayed into the hands of sinful men.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> Rouse yourselves. Let us be going. My
betrayer is close at hand."

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> He had scarcely finished speaking when
Judas came--one of the Twelve--accompanied by a great crowd of men armed
with swords and bludgeons, sent by the High Priests and Elders of the
People.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> Now the betrayer had agreed upon a sign
with them, to direct them. He had said, "The one whom I kiss is the man:
lay hold of him."

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> So he went straight to Jesus and said,
"Peace to you, Rabbi!" And he kissed Him eagerly.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> "Friend," said Jesus, "carry out your
intention." Then they came and laid their hands on Jesus and seized Him
firmly.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> But one of those with Jesus drew his
sword and struck the High Priest's servant, cutting off his ear.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> "Put back your sword again," said
Jesus, "for all who draw the sword shall perish by the sword.

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Or do you suppose I cannot entreat my
Father and He would instantly send to my help more than twelve legions
of angels?

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> In that case how are the Scriptures to
be fulfilled which declare that thus it must be?"

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> Then said Jesus to the crowds, "Have
you come out as if to fight with a robber, with swords and bludgeons to
apprehend me? Day after day I have been sitting teaching in the Temple,
and you did not arrest me.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> But all this has taken place in order
that the writings of the Prophets may be fulfilled." At this point the
disciples all left Him and fled.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> But the officers who had laid hold of
Jesus led Him away to Caiaphas the High Priest, at whose house the
Scribes and the Elders had assembled.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> And Peter kept following Him at a
distance, till he came even to the court of the High Priest's palace,
where he entered and sat down among the officers to see the issue.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> Meanwhile the High Priests and the
whole Sanhedrin were seeking false testimony against Jesus in order to
put Him to death;

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> but they could find none, although many
false witnesses came forward. At length there came two

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> who testified, "This man said, \`I am
able to pull down the Sanctuary of God and three days afterwards to
build a new one.'"

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> Then the High Priest stood up and asked
Him, "Have you no answer to make? What is it these men are saying in
evidence against you?"

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> Jesus however remained silent. Again
the High Priest addressed Him. "In the name of the ever-living God," he
said, "I now put you on your oath. Tell us whether you are the Christ,
the Son of God."

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> "I am He," replied Jesus. "But I tell
you that, later on, you will see &lt;the Son of Man sitting at the right
hand&gt; of Omnipotence, &lt;and coming on the clouds of the sky."&gt;

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> Then the High Priest tore his robes and
exclaimed, "Impious language! What further need have we of witnesses!
See, you have now heard the impiety.

<span id="an_26:66">26:66</span> What is your verdict?" "He deserves to
die," they replied.

<span id="an_26:67">26:67</span> Then they spat in His face, and struck
Him--some with the fist, some with the open hand--

<span id="an_26:68">26:68</span> while they taunted Him, saying,
"Christ, prove yourself a Prophet by telling us who it was that struck
you."

<span id="an_26:69">26:69</span> Peter meanwhile was sitting outside in
the court of the palace, when one of the maidservants came over to him
and said, "You too were with Jesus the Galilaean."

<span id="an_26:70">26:70</span> He denied it before them all, saying,
"I do not know what you mean."

<span id="an_26:71">26:71</span> Soon afterwards he went out and stood
in the gateway, when another girl saw him, and said, addressing the
people there, "This man was with Jesus the Nazarene."

<span id="an_26:72">26:72</span> Again he denied it with an oath. "I do
not know the man," he said.

<span id="an_26:73">26:73</span> A short time afterwards the people
standing there came and said to Peter, "Certainly you too are one of
them, for your brogue shows it."

<span id="an_26:74">26:74</span> Then with curses and oaths he declared,
"I do not know the man." Immediately a cock crowed,

<span id="an_26:75">26:75</span> and Peter recollected the words of
Jesus, how He had said, "Before the cock crows you will three times
disown me." And he went out and wept aloud, bitterly.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> When morning came all the High Priests
and the Elders of the people consulted together against Jesus to put Him
to death;

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> and binding Him they led Him away and
handed Him over to Pilate the Governor.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Then when Judas, who had betrayed Him,
saw that He was condemned, smitten with remorse he brought back the
thirty shekels to the High Priests and Elders

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> and said, "I have sinned, in betraying to
death one who is innocent." "What does that matter to us?" they replied;
it is your business."

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Flinging the shekels into the Sanctuary
he left the place, and went and hanged himself.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> When the High Priests had gathered up the
money they said, "It is illegal to put it into the Treasury, because it
is the price of blood."

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> So after consulting together they spent
the money in the purchase of the Potter's Field as a burial place for
people not belonging to the city;

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> for which reason that piece of ground
received the name, which it still bears, of \`the Field of Blood.'

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then were fulfilled the words spoken by
the Prophet Jeremiah, &lt;"And I took the thirty shekels, the price of
the prized one on whom Israelites had set a price,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and gave them for the potter's field,
as the Lord directed me."&gt;

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Meanwhile Jesus was brought before the
Governor, and the latter put the question, "Are you the King of the
Jews?" "I am their King," He answered.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> When however the High Priests and the
Elders kept bringing their charges against Him, He said not a word in
reply.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> "Do you not hear," asked Pilate, "what
a mass of evidence they are bringing against you?"

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But He made no reply to a single
accusation, so that the Governor was greatly astonished.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> "Now it was the Governor's custom at
the Festival to release some one prisoner, whomsoever the populace
desired;

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> and at this time they had a notorious
prisoner called Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> So when they were now assembled Pilate
appealed to them. "Whom shall I release to you," he said, "Barabbas, or
Jesus the so-called Christ?"

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> For he knew that it was from envious
hatred that Jesus had been brought before him.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> While he was sitting on the tribunal a
message came to him from his wife. "Have nothing to do with that
innocent man," she said, "for during the night I have suffered terribly
in a dream through him."

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> The High Priests, however, and the
Elders urged the crowd to ask for Barabbas and to demand the death of
Jesus.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> So when the Governor a second time
asked them, "Which of the two shall I release to you?" --they cried,
"Barabbas!"

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> "What then," said Pilate, "shall I do
with Jesus, the so-called Christ?" With one voice they shouted, "Let him
be crucified!"

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> "Why, what crime has he committed?"
asked Pilate. But they kept on furiously shouting, "Let him be
crucified!"

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> So when he saw that he could gain
nothing, but that on the contrary there was a riot threatening, he
called for water and washed his hands in sight of them all, saying, "I
am not responsible for this murder: you must answer for it."

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> "His blood," replied all the people,
"be on us and on our children!"

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Then he released Barabbas to them, but
Jesus he ordered to be scourged, and gave Him up to be crucified.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Then the Governor's soldiers took Jesus
into the Praetorium, and called together the whole battalion to make
sport of Him.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> Stripping off His garments, they put on
Him a general's short crimson cloak.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> They twisted a wreath of thorny twigs
and put it on His head, and they put a sceptre of cane in His right
hand, and kneeling to Him they shouted in mockery, "Long live the King
of the Jews!"

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> Then they spat upon Him, and taking the
cane they repeatedly struck Him on the head with it.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> At last, having finished their sport,
they took off the cloak, clothed Him again in His own garments, and led
Him away for crucifixion.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Going out they met a Cyrenaean named
Simon; whom they compelled to carry His cross,

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> and so they came to a place called
Golgotha, which means \`Skull-ground.'

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Here they gave Him a mixture of wine
and gall to drink, but having tasted it He refused to drink it.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> After crucifying Him, they divided His
garments among them by lot,

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> and sat down there on guard.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> Over His head they placed a written
statement of the charge against Him: THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> At the same time two robbers were
crucified with Him, one at His right hand and the other at His left.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And the passers-by reviled Him. They
shook their heads at Him

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> and said, "You who would pull down the
Sanctuary and build a new one within three days, save yourself. If you
are God's Son, come down from the cross."

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> In like manner the High Priests also,
together with the Scribes and the Elders, taunted Him.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> "He saved others," they said, "himself
he cannot save! He is the King of Israel! Let him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe in him.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> His trust is in God: let God deliver
him now, if He will have him; for he said, \`I am God's Son.'"

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> Insults of the same kind were heaped on
Him even by the robbers who were being crucified with Him.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Now from noon until three o'clock in
the afternoon there was darkness over the whole land;

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> but about three o'clock Jesus cried out
in a loud voice, &lt;"Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?"&gt; that is to say,
&lt;"My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken me?"&gt;

<span id="an_27:47">27:47</span> "The man is calling for Elijah," said
some of the bystanders.

<span id="an_27:48">27:48</span> One of them ran forthwith, and filling
a sponge with sour wine put it on the end of a cane and offered it Him
to drink;

<span id="an_27:49">27:49</span> while the rest said, "Let us see
whether Elijah is coming to deliver him."

<span id="an_27:50">27:50</span> But Jesus uttered another loud cry and
then yielded up His spirit.

<span id="an_27:51">27:51</span> Immediately the curtain of the
Sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom: the earth quaked; the
rocks split;

<span id="an_27:52">27:52</span> the tombs opened; and many of God's
people who were asleep in death awoke.

<span id="an_27:53">27:53</span> And coming out of their tombs after
Christ's resurrection they entered the holy city and showed themselves
to many.

<span id="an_27:54">27:54</span> As for the Captain and the soldiers who
were with Him keeping guard over Jesus, when they witnessed the
earthquake and the other occurrences they were filled with terror, and
exclaimed, "Assuredly he was God's Son."

<span id="an_27:55">27:55</span> And there were a number of women there
looking on from a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee
ministering to His necessities;

<span id="an_27:56">27:56</span> among them being Mary of Magdala, Mary
the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zabdi.

<span id="an_27:57">27:57</span> Towards sunset there came a wealthy
inhabitant of Arimathaea, named Joseph, who himself also had become a
disciple of Jesus.

<span id="an_27:58">27:58</span> He went to Pilate and begged to have
the body of Jesus, and Pilate ordered it to be given to him.

<span id="an_27:59">27:59</span> So Joseph took the body and wrapped it
in a clean sheet of fine linen.

<span id="an_27:60">27:60</span> He then laid it in his own new tomb
which he had hewn in the solid rock, and after rolling a great stone
against the door of the tomb he went home.

<span id="an_27:61">27:61</span> Mary of Magdala and the other Mary were
both present there, sitting opposite to the sepulchre.

<span id="an_27:62">27:62</span> On the next day, the day after the
Preparation, the High Priests and the Pharisees came in a body to
Pilate.

<span id="an_27:63">27:63</span> "Sir," they said, "we recollect that
during his lifetime that impostor pretended that after two days he was
to rise to life again.

<span id="an_27:64">27:64</span> So give orders for the sepulchre to be
securely guarded till the third day, for fear his disciples should come
by night and steal the body, and then tell the people that he has come
back to life; and so the last imposture will be more serious than the
first."

<span id="an_27:65">27:65</span> "You can have a guard," said Pilate:
"go and make all safe, as best you can."

<span id="an_27:66">27:66</span> So they went and made the sepulchre
secure, sealing the stone besides setting the guard.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> After the Sabbath, in the early dawn of
the first day of the week, Mary of Magdala and the other Mary came to
see the sepulchre.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> But to their amazement there had been a
great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord had descended from Heaven,
and had come and rolled back the stone, and was sitting upon it.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> His appearance was like lightning, and
his raiment white as snow.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> For fear of him the guards trembled
violently, and became like dead men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> But the angel said to the women, "As for
you, dismiss your fears. I know that it is Jesus that you are looking
for--the crucified One.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> He is not here: He has come back to life,
as He foretold. Come and see the place where He lay.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And go quickly and tell His disciples
that He has risen from the dead and is going before you into Galilee:
there you shall see Him. Remember, I have told you."

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They quickly left the tomb and ran, still
terrified but full of unspeakable joy, to carry the news to His
disciples.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And then suddenly they saw Jesus coming
to meet them. "Peace be to you," He said. And they came and clasped His
feet, bowing to the ground before Him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then He said, "Dismiss all fear! Go and
take word to my brethren to go into Galilee, and there they shall see
me."

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> While they went on this errand, some of
the guards came into the city and reported to the High Priests every
detail of what had happened.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> So the latter held a conference with
the Elders, and after consultation with them they heavily bribed the
soldiers,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> telling them to say, "His disciples
came during the night and stole his body while we were asleep."

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> "And if this," they added, "is reported
to the Governor, we will satisfy him and screen you from punishment."

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> So they took the money and did as they
were instructed; and this story was noised about among the Jews, and is
current to this day.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> As for the eleven disciples, they
proceeded into Galilee, to the hill where Jesus had arranged to meet
them.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> There they saw Him and prostrated
themselves before Him. Yet some doubted.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Jesus however came near and said to
them, "All power in Heaven and over the earth has been given to me.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Go therefore and make disciples of all
the nations; baptize them into the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> and teach them to obey every command
which I have given you. And remember, I am with you always, day by day,
until the Close of the Age."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark](mar)
