[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simon Peter, a bondservant and Apostle of
Jesus Christ: To those to whom there has been allotted the same precious
faith as that which is ours through the righteousness of our God and of
our Saviour Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May more and more grace and peace be
granted to you in a full knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> seeing that His divine power has given us
all things that are needful for life and godliness, through our
knowledge of Him who has appealed to us by His own glorious perfections.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> It is by means of these that He has granted
us His precious and wondrous promises, in order that through them you
may, one and all, become sharers in the very nature of God, having
completely escaped the corruption which exists in the world through
earthly cravings.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But for this very reason--adding, on your
part, all earnestness-- along with your faith, manifest also a noble
character: along with a noble character, knowledge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> along with knowledge, self-control; along
with self-control, power of endurance;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> along with power of endurance, godliness;
along with godliness, brotherly affection; and along with brotherly
affection, love.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If these things exist in you, and
continually increase, they prevent your being either idle or unfruitful
in advancing towards a full knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For the man in whom they are lacking is
blind and cannot see distant objects, in that he has forgotten that he
has been cleansed from his old sins.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For this reason, brethren, be all the
more in earnest to make sure that God has called you and chosen you; for
it is certain that so long as you practise these things, you will never
stumble.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And so a triumphant admission into the
eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ will be freely
granted to you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For this reason I shall always persist in
reminding you of these things, although you know them and are stedfast
believers in truth which you already possess.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But I think it right, so long as I remain
in the body, my present dwelling-place, to arouse you by such reminders.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> For I know that the time for me to lay
aside my body is now rapidly drawing near, even as our Lord Jesus Christ
has revealed to me.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So on every possible occasion I will also
do my best to enable you to recall these things after my departure.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For when we made known to you the power
and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, we were not eagerly following
cleverly devised legends, but we had been eye-witnesses of His majesty.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> He received honour and glory from God the
Father, and out of the wondrous glory words such as these were spoken to
Him, "This is My dearly-loved Son, in whom I take delight."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And we ourselves heard these words come
from Heaven, when we were with Him on the holy mountain.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And in the written word of prophecy we
have something more permanent; to which you do well to pay attention--as
to a lamp shining in a dimly-lighted place--until day dawns and the
morning star rises in your hearts.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But, above all, remember that no prophecy
in Scripture will be found to have come from the prophet's own
prompting;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> for never did any prophecy come by human
will, but men sent by God spoke as they were impelled by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But there were also false prophets among
the people, as there will be teachers of falsehood among you also, who
will cunningly introduce fatal divisions, disowning even the Sovereign
Lord who has redeemed them, and bringing on themselves swift
destruction.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And in their immoral ways they will have
many eager disciples, through whom religion will be brought into
disrepute.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Thirsting for riches, they will trade on
you with their canting talk. From of old their judgement has been
working itself out, and their destruction has not been slumbering.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For God did not spare angels when they had
sinned, but hurling them down to Tartarus consigned them to caves of
darkness, keeping them in readiness for judgement.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And He did not spare the ancient world,
although He preserved Noah, a herald of righteousness, with seven
others, when He brought a deluge on the world of the ungodly.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He reduced to ashes the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and condemned them to overthrow, making them an example to
people who might in future be living godless lives.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But when righteous Lot was sore distressed
by the gross misconduct of immoral men He rescued him.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (For their lawless deeds were torture, day
after day, to the pure soul of that righteous man--all that he saw and
heard whilst living in their midst.)

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Since all this is so, the Lord knows how to
rescue godly men from temptation, and on the other hand how to keep the
unrighteous under punishment in readiness for the Day of Judgement,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and especially those who are abandoned to
sensuality--craving, as they do, for polluted things, and scorning
control. Fool-hardy and self-willed, they do not tremble when speaking
evil of glorious beings;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> while angels, though greater than they in
might and power, do not bring any insulting accusation against such in
the presence of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But these men, like brute beasts, created
(with their natural instincts) only to be captured or destroyed, are
abusive in matters of which they are ignorant, and in their corruption
will perish,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> being doomed to receive a requital for
their guilt. They reckon it pleasure to feast daintily in broad
daylight. They are spots and blemishes, while feeding luxuriously at
their love-feasts, and banqueting with you.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Their very eyes are full of
adultery--being eyes which never cease from sin. These men set traps to
catch unstedfast souls, their own hearts being well trained in greed.
They are fore-doomed to God's curse!

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Forsaking the straight road, they have
gone astray, having eagerly followed in the steps of Balaam, the son of
Beor, who was bent on securing the wages of unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But he was rebuked for his transgression:
a dumb ass spoke with a human voice and checked the madness of the
Prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These people are wells without water,
mists driven along by a storm, men for whom the dense darkness has been
reserved.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For, while they pour out their frivolous
and arrogant talk, they use earthly cravings--every kind of
immorality--as a bait to entrap men who are just escaping from the
influence of those who live in error.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they promise them freedom, although
they are themselves the slaves of what is corrupt. For a man is the
slave of any one by whom he has been worsted in fight.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For if, after escaping from the
pollutions of the world through a full knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, people are once more entangled in these pollutions and are
overcome, their last state has become worse than their first.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For it would have been better for them
not to have fully known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing
it, to turn back from the holy commandments in which they were
instructed.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Their case is that described in the true
proverb, &lt;"A dog returns to what he has vomited,"&gt; and also in the
other proverb, "The sow has washed itself and now goes back to roll in
its filth."

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This letter which I am now writing to you,
dear friends, is my second letter. In both my letters I seek to revive
in your honest minds the memory of certain things,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> so that you may recall the words spoken
long ago by the holy Prophets, and the commandments of our Lord and
Saviour given you through your Apostles.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But, above all, remember that, in the last
days, men will come who make a mock at everything--men governed only by
their own passions,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and, asking, "What has become of His
promised Return? For from the time our forefathers fell asleep all
things continue as they have been ever since the creation of the world."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For they are wilfully blind to the fact
that there were heavens which existed of old, and an earth, the latter
arising out of water and extending continuously through water, by the
command of God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and that, by means of these, the then
existing race of men was overwhelmed with water and perished.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the present heavens and the present
earth are, by the command of the same God, kept stored up, reserved for
fire in preparation for a day of judgement and of destruction for the
ungodly.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But there is one thing, dear friends, which
you must not forget. With the Lord one day resembles a thousand years
and a thousand years resemble one day.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The Lord is not slow in fulfilling His
promise, in the sense in which some men speak of slowness. But He bears
patiently with you, His desire being that no one should perish but that
all should come to repentance.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The day of the Lord will come like a
thief--it will be a day on which the heavens will pass away with a
rushing noise, the elements be destroyed in the fierce heat, and the
earth and all the works of man be utterly burnt up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Since all these things are thus
pre-destined to dissolution, what sort of men ought you to be found to
be in all holy living and godly conduct,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> eagerly looking forward to the coming of
the day of God, by reason of which the heavens, all ablaze, will be
destroyed, and the elements will melt in the fierce heat?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But in accordance with His promise we are
expecting new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness will
dwell.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Therefore, dear friends, since you have
these expectations, earnestly seek to be found in His presence, free
from blemish or reproach, in peace.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And always regard the patient forbearance
of our Lord as salvation, as our dear brother Paul also has written to
you in virtue of the wisdom granted to him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> That is what he says in all his letters,
when speaking in them of these things. In those letters there are some
statements hard to understand, which ill-taught and unprincipled people
pervert, just as they do the rest of the Scriptures, to their own ruin.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> You, therefore, dear friends, having been
warned beforehand, must continually be on your guard so as not to be led
astray by the false teaching of immoral men nor fall from your own
stedfastness.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But be always growing in the grace and
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To Him be all glory,
both now and to the day of Eternity!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1.md)
