[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eph)  [Next](col.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Philippians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Timothy, bondservants of Christ
Jesus: To all God's people in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the
ministers of the Church and their assistants.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May grace and peace be granted to you from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank my God at my every remembrance of
you--

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> always when offering any prayer on behalf
of you all, finding a joy in offering it.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I thank my God, I say, for your cooperation
in spreading the Good News, from the time it first came to you even
until now.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For of this I am confident, that He who has
begun a good work within you will go on to perfect it in preparation for
the day of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And I am justified in having this
confidence about you all, because, both during my imprisonment and when
I stand up in defence of the Good News or to confirm its truth, I have
you in my heart, sharers as you all are in the same grace as myself.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For God is my witness how I yearn over all
of you with tender Christian affection.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And it is my prayer that your love may be
more and more accompanied by clear knowledge and keen perception, for
testing things that differ,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> so that you may be men of transparent
character, and may be blameless, in preparation for the day of Christ,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> being filled with these fruits of
righteousness which come through Jesus Christ-- to the glory and praise
of God.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now I would have you know, brethren, that
what I have gone through has turned out to the furtherance of the Good
News rather than otherwise.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And thus it has become notorious among
all the Imperial Guards, and everywhere, that it is for the sake of
Christ that I am a prisoner;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and the greater part of the brethren,
made confident in the Lord through my imprisonment, now speak of God's
Message without fear, more boldly than ever.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Some indeed actually preach Christ out of
envy and contentiousness but there are also others who do it from good
will.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These latter preach Him from love to me,
knowing that I am here for the defence of the Good News;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> while the others proclaim Him from
motives of rivalry, and insincerely, supposing that by this they are
embittering my imprisonment.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> What does it matter, however? In any case
Christ is preached--either perversely or in honest truth; and in that I
rejoice, yes, and will rejoice.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For I know that it will result in my
salvation through your prayers and a bountiful supply of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> in fulfilment of my eager expectation and
hope that I shall never have reason to feel ashamed, but that by my
perfect freedom of speech Christ will be glorified in me, now as always,
either by my life or by my death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For, with me, to live is Christ and to
die is gain.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But since to live means a longer stay on
earth, that implies more labour for me--and not unsuccessful labour; and
which I am to choose I cannot tell.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> I am in a dilemma, my earnest desire
being to depart and be with Christ, for that is far, far better.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> But for your sakes it is more important
that I should still remain in the body.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> I am convinced of this, and I know that I
shall remain, and shall go on working side by side with you all, to
promote your progress and joy in the faith;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> so that, as Christians, you may have
additional reason for glorying about me as the result of my being with
you again.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Only let the lives you live be worthy of
the Good News of the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you
or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing
fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for
the faith of the Good News.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Never for a moment quail before your
antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending
destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation--a
token coming from God.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For you have had the privilege granted
you on behalf of Christ--not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer
on His behalf;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> maintaining, as you do, the same kind of
conflict that you once saw in me and which you still hear that I am
engaged in.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> If then I can appeal to you as the
followers of Christ, if there is any persuasive power in love and any
common sharing of the Spirit, or if you have any tender-heartedness and
compassion, make my joy complete by being of one mind,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> united by mutual love, with harmony of
feeling giving your minds to one and the same object.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Do nothing in a spirit of factiousness or
of vainglory, but, with true humility, let every one regard the rest as
being of more account than himself;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> each fixing his attention, not simply on
his own interests, but on those of others also.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Let the same disposition be in you which
was in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Although from the beginning He had the
nature of God He did not reckon His equality with God a treasure to be
tightly grasped.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Nay, He stripped Himself of His glory, and
took on Him the nature of a bondservant by becoming a man like other
men.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And being recognized as truly human, He
humbled Himself and even stooped to die; yes, to die on a cross.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> It is in consequence of this that God has
also so highly exalted Him, and has conferred on Him the Name which is
supreme above every other,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> in order that in the Name of JESUS every
knee should bow, of beings in Heaven, of those on the earth, and of
those in the underworld,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and that every tongue should confess that
JESUS CHRIST is LORD, to the glory of God the Father.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Therefore, my dearly-loved friends, as I
have always found you obedient, labour earnestly with fear and
trembling--not merely as though I were present with you, but much more
now since I am absent from you--labour earnestly, I say, to make sure of
your own salvation.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For it is God Himself whose power creates
within you the desire to do His gracious will and also brings about the
accomplishment of the desire.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Be ever on your guard against a grudging
and contentious spirit,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> so that you may always prove yourselves
to be blameless and spotless--irreproachable children of God in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you are seen as
heavenly lights in the world,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> holding out to them a Message of Life. It
will then be my glory on the day of Christ that I did not run my race in
vain nor toil in vain.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Nay, even if my life is to be poured as a
libation upon the sacrificial offering of your faith, I rejoice, and I
congratulate you all.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And I bid you also share my gladness, and
congratulate me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But, if the Lord permits it, I hope
before long to send Timothy to you, that I, in turn, may be cheered by
getting news of you.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For I have no one likeminded with him,
who will cherish a genuine care for you.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Everybody concerns himself about his own
interests, not about those of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But you know Timothy's approved
worth--how, like a child working with his father, he has served with me
in furtherance of the Good News.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> So it is he that I hope to send as soon
as ever I see how things go with me;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> but trusting, as I do, in the Lord, I
believe that I shall myself also come to you before long.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Yet I deem it important to send
Epaphroditus to you now--he is my brother and comrade both in labour and
in arms, and is your messenger who has ministered to my needs.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> I send him because he is longing to see
you all and is distressed at your having heard of his illness.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> For it is true that he has been ill, and
was apparently at the point of death; but God had pity on him, and not
only on him, but also on me, to save me from having sorrow upon sorrow.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> I am therefore all the more eager to send
him, in the hope that when you see him again you may be glad and I may
have the less sorrow.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Receive him therefore with heartfelt
Christian joy, and hold in honour men like him;

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> because it was for the sake of Christ's
work that he came so near death, hazarding, as he did, his very life in
endeavouring to make good any deficiency that there might be in your
gifts to me.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In conclusion, my brethren, be joyful in
the Lord. For me to give you the same warnings as before is not irksome
to me, while so far as you are concerned it is a safe precaution.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beware of \`the dogs,' the bad workmen, the
self-mutilators.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For we are the true circumcision--we who
render to God a spiritual worship and make our boast in Christ Jesus and
have no confidence in outward ceremonies:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> although I myself might have some excuse
for confidence in outward ceremonies. If any one else claims a right to
trust in them, far more may I:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> circumcised, as I was, on the eighth day, a
member of the race of Israel and of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew
sprung from Hebrews; as to the Law a Pharisee;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> as to zeal, a persecutor of the Church; as
to the righteousness which comes through Law, blameless.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Yet all that was gain to me--for Christ's
sake I have reckoned it loss.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Nay, I even reckon all things as pure loss
because of the priceless privilege of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. And
for His sake I have suffered the loss of everything, and reckon it all
as mere refuse, in order that I may win Christ and be found in union
with Him,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not having a righteousness of my own,
derived from the Law, but that which arises from faith in Christ--the
righteousness which comes from God through faith.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> I long to know Christ and the power which
is in His resurrection, and to share in His sufferings and die even as
He died;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> in the hope that I may attain to the
resurrection from among the dead.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I do not say that I have already won the
race or have already reached perfection. But I am pressing on, striving
to lay hold of the prize for which also Christ has laid hold of me.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Brethren, I do not imagine that I have
yet laid hold of it. But this one thing I do--forgetting everything
which is past and stretching forward to what lies in front of me,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> with my eyes fixed on the goal I push on
to secure the prize of God's heavenward call in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Therefore let all of us who are mature
believers cherish these thoughts; and if in any respect you think
differently, that also God will make clear to you.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But whatever be the point that we have
already reached, let us persevere in the same course.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Brethren, vie with one another in
imitating me, and carefully observe those who follow the example which
we have set you.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For there are many whom I have often
described to you, and I now even with tears describe them, as being
enemies to the Cross of Christ.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Their end is destruction, their bellies
are their God, their glory is in their shame, and their minds are
devoted to earthly things.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> We, however, are free citizens of Heaven,
and we are waiting with longing expectation for the coming from Heaven
of a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> who, in the exercise of the power which
He has even to subject all things to Himself, will transform this body
of our humiliation until it resembles His own glorious body.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, my brethren, dearly loved and
longed for, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord, my dearly-loved
ones.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> I entreat Euodia, and I entreat Syntyche,
to be of one mind, as sisters in Christ.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Yes, and I beg you also, my faithful
yoke-fellow, to help these women who have shared my toil in connection
with the Good News, together with Clement and the rest of my fellow
labourers, whose names are recorded in the Book of Life.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Always be glad in the Lord: I will repeat
it, be glad.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Let your forbearing spirit be known to
every one--the Lord is near.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Do not be over-anxious about anything, but
by prayer and earnest pleading, together with thanksgiving, let your
request be unreservedly made known in the presence of God.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And then the peace of God, which transcends
all our powers of thought, will be a garrison to guard your hearts and
minds in union with Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Finally, brethren, whatever is true,
whatever wins respect, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is
lovable, whatever is of good repute--if there is any virtue or anything
deemed worthy of praise--cherish the thought of these things.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The doctrines and the line of conduct which
I taught you--both what you heard and what you saw in me-- hold fast to
them; and God who gives peace will be with you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> But I rejoice with a deep and holy joy
that now at length you have revived your thoughtfulness for my welfare.
Indeed you have always been thoughtful for me, although opportunity
failed you.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I do not refer to this through fear of
privation, for (for my part) I have learned, whatever be my outward
experiences, to be content.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I know both how to live in humble
circumstances and how to live amid abundance. I am fully initiated into
all the mysteries both of fulness and of hunger, of abundance and of
want.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> I have strength for anything through Him
who gives me power.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Yet I thank you for taking your share in
my troubles.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And you men and women of Philippi also
know that at the first preaching of the Good News, when I had left
Macedonia, no other Church except yourselves held communication with me
about giving and receiving;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> because even in Thessalonica you sent
several times to minister to my needs.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Not that I crave for gifts from you, but
I do want to see abundant fruit bring you honour.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> I have enough of everything--and more
than enough. My wants are fully satisfied now that I have received from
the hands of Epaphroditus the generous gifts which you sent me--they are
a fragrant odor, an acceptable sacrifice, truly pleasing to God.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But my God--so great is His wealth of
glory in Christ Jesus--will fully supply every need of yours.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And to our God and Father be the glory
throughout the Ages of the Ages! Amen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> My Christian greetings to every one of
God's people. The brethren who are with me send their greetings.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> All God's people here greet
you--especially the members of Caesar's household.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with your spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians](col.md)
