[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a bondservant of Jesus Christ, called
to be an Apostle, set apart to proclaim God's Good News,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> which God had already promised through His
Prophets in Holy Writ, concerning His Son,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> who, as regards His human descent, belonged
to the posterity of David,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> but as regards the holiness of His Spirit
was decisively proved by His Resurrection to be the Son of God--I mean
concerning Jesus Christ our Lord,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> through whom we have received grace and
Apostleship in His service in order to win men to obedience to the
faith, among all Gentile peoples,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> among whom you also, called, as you have
been, to belong to Jesus Christ, are numbered:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> To all God's loved ones who are in Rome,
called to be saints. May grace and peace be granted to you from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> First of all, I thank my God through Jesus
Christ for what He has done for all of you; for the report of your faith
is spreading through the whole world.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I call God to witness--to whom I render
priestly and spiritual service by telling the Good News about His Son--
how unceasingly I make mention of you in His presence,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> always in my prayers entreating that now,
at length, if such be His will, the way may by some means be made clear
for me to come to you.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I am longing to see you, in order to
convey to you some spiritual help, so that you may be strengthened;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> in other words that while I am among you
we may be mutually encouraged by one another's faith, yours and mine.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I desire you to know, brethren, that
I have many a time intended to come to you--though until now I have been
disappointed--in order that among you also I might gather some fruit
from my labours, as I have already done among the rest of the Gentile
nations.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I am already under obligations alike to
Greek-speaking races and to others, to cultured and to uncultured
people:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> so that for my part I am willing and
eager to proclaim the Good News to you also who are in Rome.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the Good News. It
is God's power which is at work for the salvation of every one who
believes--the Jew first, and then the Gentile.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For in the Good News a righteousness
which comes from God is being revealed, depending on faith and tending
to produce faith; as the Scripture has it, &lt;"The righteous man shall
live by faith."&gt;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For God's anger is being revealed from
Heaven against all impiety and against the iniquity of men who through
iniquity suppress the truth. God is angry:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> because what may be known about Him is
plain to their inmost consciousness; for He Himself has made it plain to
them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For, from the very creation of the world,
His invisible perfections--namely His eternal power and divine
nature--have been rendered intelligible and clearly visible by His
works, so that these men are without excuse.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For when they had come to know God, they
did not give Him glory as God nor render Him thanks, but they became
absorbed in useless discussions, and their senseless minds were
darkened.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> While boasting of their wisdom they
became utter fools,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and, instead of worshipping the
imperishable God, they worshipped images resembling perishable man or
resembling birds or beasts or reptiles.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> For this reason, in accordance with their
own depraved cravings, God gave them up to uncleanness, allowing them to
dishonour their bodies among themselves with impurity.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> For they had bartered the reality of God
for what is unreal, and had offered divine honours and religious service
to created things, rather than to the Creator--He who is for ever
blessed. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> This then is the reason why God gave them
up to vile passions. For not only did the women among them exchange the
natural use of their bodies for one which is contrary to nature, but the
men also,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> in just the same way--neglecting that for
which nature intends women--burned with passion towards one another, men
practising shameful vice with men, and receiving in their own selves the
reward which necessarily followed their misconduct.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And just as they had refused to continue
to have a full knowledge of God, so it was to utterly worthless minds
that God gave them up, for them to do things which should not be done.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Their hearts overflowed with all sorts of
dishonesty, mischief, greed, malice. They were full of envy and murder,
and were quarrelsome, crafty, and spiteful.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> They were secret backbiters, open
slanderers; hateful to God, insolent, haughty, boastful; inventors of
new forms of sin, disobedient to parents, destitute of common sense,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> faithless to their promises, without
natural affection, without human pity.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> In short, though knowing full well the
sentence which God pronounces against actions such as theirs, as things
which deserve death, they not only practise them, but even encourage and
applaud others who do them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> You are therefore without excuse, O man,
whoever you are who sit in judgement upon others. For when you pass
judgement on your fellow man, you condemn yourself; for you who sit in
judgement upon others are guilty of the same misdeeds;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and we know that God's judgement against
those who commit such sins is in accordance with the truth.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And you who pronounce judgement upon those
who do such things although your own conduct is the same as theirs--do
you imagine that you yourself will escape unpunished when God judges?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Or is it that you think slightingly of His
infinite goodness, forbearance and patience, unaware that the goodness
of God is gently drawing you to repentance?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The fact is that in the stubbornness of
your impenitent heart you are treasuring up against yourself anger on
the day of Anger--the day when the righteousness of God's judgements
will stand revealed.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> &lt;To each man He will make an award
corresponding to his actions;&gt;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to those on the one hand who, by lives of
persistent right-doing, are striving for glory, honour and immortality,
the Life of the Ages;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> while on the other hand upon the
self-willed who disobey the truth and obey unrighteousness will fall
anger and fury, affliction and awful distress,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> coming upon the soul of every man and woman
who deliberately does wrong--upon the Jew first, and then upon the
Gentile;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> whereas glory, honour and peace will be
given to every one who does what is good and right--to the Jew first and
then to the Gentile.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For God pays no attention to this world's
distinctions.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For all who have sinned apart from the
Law will also perish apart from the Law, and all who have sinned whilst
living under the Law, will be judged by the Law.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> It is not those that merely hear the Law
read who are righteous in the sight of God, but it is those that obey
the Law who will be pronounced righteous.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For when Gentiles who have no Law obey by
natural instinct the commands of the Law, they, without having a Law,
are a Law to themselves;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> since they exhibit proof that a knowledge
of the conduct which the Law requires is engraven on their hearts, while
their consciences also bear witness to the Law, and their thoughts, as
if in mutual discussion, accuse them or perhaps maintain their
innocence--

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> on the day when God will judge the
secrets of men's lives by Jesus Christ, as declared in the Good News as
I have taught it.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And since you claim the name of Jew, and
find rest and satisfaction in the Law, and make your boast in God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and know the supreme will, and can test
things that differ--being a man who receives instruction from the Law--

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and have persuaded yourself that, as for
you, you are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> a schoolmaster for the dull and ignorant,
a teacher of the young, because in the Law you possess an outline of
real knowledge and an outline of the truth:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> you then who teach your fellow man, do
you refuse to teach yourself? You who cry out against stealing, are you
yourself a thief?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> You who forbid adultery, do you commit
adultery? You who loathe idols, do you plunder their temples?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> You who make your boast in the Law, do
you offend against its commands and so dishonour God?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> &lt;For the name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentile nations because of you,&gt; as Holy Writ declares.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Circumcision does indeed profit, if you
obey the Law; but if you are a Law-breaker, the fact that you have been
circumcised counts for nothing.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> In the same way if an uncircumcised man
pays attention to the just requirements of the Law, shall not his lack
of circumcision be overlooked, and,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> although he is a Gentile by birth, if he
scrupulously obeys the Law, shall he not sit in judgement upon you who,
possessing, as you do, a written Law and circumcision, are yet a
Law-breaker?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For the true Jew is not the man who is
simply a Jew outwardly, and true circumcision is not that which is
outward and bodily.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> But the true Jew is one inwardly, and
true circumcision is heart-circumcision--not literal, but spiritual; and
such people receive praise not from men, but from God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> What special privilege, then, has a Jew? Or
what benefit is to be derived from circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The privilege is great from every point of
view. First of all, because the Jews were entrusted with God's truth.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For what if some Jews have proved
unfaithful? Shall their faithlessness render God's faithfulness
worthless?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> No, indeed; let us hold God to be true,
though every man should prove to be false. As it stands written,
&lt;"That Thou mayest be shown to be just in the sentence Thou
pronouncest, and gain Thy cause when Thou contendest."&gt;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if our unrighteousness sets God's
righteousness in a clearer light, what shall we say? (Is God
unrighteous--I speak in our everyday language-- when He inflicts
punishment?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> No indeed; for in that case how shall He
judge all mankind?)

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> If, for instance, a falsehood of mine has
made God's truthfulness more conspicuous, redounding to His glory, why
am I judged all the same as a sinner?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And why should we not say--for so they
wickedly misrepresent us, and so some charge us with arguing--"Let us do
evil that good may come"? The condemnation of those who would so argue
is just.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What then? Are we Jews more highly
estimated than they? Not in the least; for we have already charged all
Jews and Gentiles alike with being in thraldom to sin.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Thus it stands written, &lt;"There is not
one righteous man.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> There is not one who is really wise, nor
one who is a diligent seeker after God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All have turned aside from the right
path; they have every one of them become corrupt. There is no one who
does what is right--no, not so much as one."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> "Their throats resemble an opened grave;
with their tongues they have been talking deceitfully." "The venom of
vipers lies hidden behind their lips."

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> "Their mouths are full of cursing and
bitterness."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> "Their feet move swiftly to shed blood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Ruin and misery mark their path;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and the way to peace they have not
known."

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> "There is no fear of God before their
eyes."&gt;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But it cannot be denied that all that the
Law says is addressed to those who are living under the Law, in order
that every mouth may be stopped, and that the whole world may await
sentence from God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For on the ground of obedience to Law no
man living will be declared righteous before Him. Law simply brings a
sure knowledge of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But now a righteousness coming from God
has been brought to light apart from any Law, both Law and Prophets
bearing witness to it--

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> a righteousness coming from God, which
depends on faith in Jesus Christ and extends to all who believe. No
distinction is made;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> for all alike have sinned, and all
consciously come short of the glory of God,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> gaining acquittal from guilt by His free
unpurchased grace through the deliverance which is found in Christ
Jesus.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> He it is whom God put forward as a
Mercy-seat, rendered efficacious through faith in His blood, in order to
demonstrate His righteousness-- because of the passing over, in God's
forbearance, of the sins previously committed--

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> with a view to demonstrating, at the
present time, His righteousness, that He may be shown to be righteous
Himself, and the giver of righteousness to those who believe in Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where then is there room for your
boasting? It is for ever shut out. On what principle? On the ground of
merit? No, but on the ground of faith.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> For we maintain that it is as the result
of faith that a man is held to be righteous, apart from actions done in
obedience to Law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Is God simply the God of the Jews, and
not of the Gentiles also? He is certainly the God of the Gentiles also,

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> unless you can deny that it is one and
the same God who will pronounce the circumcised to be acquitted on the
ground of faith, and the uncircumcised to be acquitted through the same
faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Do we then by means of this faith abolish
the Law? No, indeed; we give the Law a firmer footing.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What then shall we say that Abraham, our
earthly forefather, has gained?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For if he was held to be righteous on the
ground of his actions, he has something to boast of; but not in the
presence of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For what says the Scripture? &lt;"And
Abraham believed God, and this was placed to his credit as
righteousness."&gt;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But in the case of a man who works, pay is
not reckoned a favour but a debt;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> whereas in the case of a man who pleads no
actions of his own, but simply believes in Him who declares the ungodly
free from guilt, his faith is placed to his credit as righteousness.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In this way David also tells of the
blessedness of the man to whose credit God places righteousness, apart
from his actions.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> &lt;"Blessed,"&gt; he says, &lt;"are those
whose iniquities have been forgiven, and whose sins have been covered
over.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Blessed is the man of whose sin the Lord
will not take account."&gt;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> This declaration of blessedness, then, does
it come simply to the circumcised, or to the uncircumcised as well? For
&lt;Abraham's faith&gt;--so we affirm--&lt;was placed to his credit as
righteousness.&gt;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> What then were the circumstances under
which this took place? Was it after he had been circumcised, or before?

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Before, not after. And he received
circumcision as a sign, a mark attesting the reality of the
faith-righteousness which was his while still uncircumcised, that he
might be the forefather of all those who believe even though they are
uncircumcised--in order that this righteousness might be placed to their
credit;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and the forefather of the circumcised,
namely of those who not merely are circumcised, but also walk in the
steps of the faith which our forefather Abraham had while he was as yet
uncircumcised.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Again, the promise that he should inherit
the world did not come to Abraham or his posterity conditioned by Law,
but by faith-righteousness.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if it is the righteous through Law
who are heirs, then faith is useless and the promise counts for nothing.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For the Law inflicts punishment; but
where no Law exists, there can be no violation of Law.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> All depends on faith, and for this
reason--that acceptance with God might be an act of pure grace,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> so that the promise should be made sure
to all Abraham's true descendants; not merely to those who are righteous
through the Law, but to those who are righteous through a faith like
that of Abraham. Thus in the sight of God in whom he believed, who gives
life to the dead and makes reference to things that do not exist, as
though they did, Abraham is the forefather of all of us. As it is
written, &lt;"I have appointed you to be the forefather of many
nations."&gt;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Under utterly hopeless circumstances he
hopefully believed, so that he might become the forefather of many
nations, in agreement with the words &lt;"Equally numerous shall your
posterity be."&gt;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And, without growing weak in faith, he
could contemplate his own vital powers which had now decayed--for he was
nearly 100 years old--and Sarah's barrenness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Nor did he in unbelief stagger at God's
promise, but became mighty in faith, giving glory to God,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and being absolutely certain that
whatever promise He is bound by He is able also to make good.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For this reason also his faith &lt;was
placed to his credit as righteousness.&gt;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Nor was the fact of its being placed to
his credit put on record for his sake only;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> it was for our sakes too. Faith, before
long, will be placed to the credit of us also who are believers in Him
who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who was surrendered to death because of
the offences we had committed, and was raised to life because of the
acquittal secured for us.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Standing then acquitted as the result of
faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> through whom also, as the result of faith,
we have obtained an introduction into that state of favour with God in
which we stand, and we exult in hope of some day sharing in God's glory.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And not only so: we also exult in our
sufferings, knowing as we do, that suffering produces fortitude;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> fortitude, ripeness of character; and
ripeness of character, hope;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and that this hope never disappoints,
because God's love for us floods our hearts through the Holy Spirit who
has been given to us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For already, while we were still helpless,
Christ at the right moment died for the ungodly.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Why, it is scarcely conceivable that any
one would die for a simply just man, although for a good and lovable man
perhaps some one, here and there, will have the courage even to lay down
his life.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But God gives proof of His love to us in
Christ's dying for us while we were still sinners.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If therefore we have now been pronounced
free from guilt through His blood, much more shall we be delivered from
God's anger through Him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For if while we were hostile to God we
were reconciled to Him through the death of His Son, it is still more
certain that now that we are reconciled, we shall obtain salvation
through Christ's life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And not only so, but we also exult in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now obtained that
reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> What follows? This comparison. Through
one man sin entered into the world, and through sin death, and so death
passed to all mankind in turn, in that all sinned.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For prior to the Law sin was already in
the world; only it is not entered in the account against us when no Law
exists.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Yet Death reigned as king from Adam to
Moses even over those who had not sinned, as Adam did, against Law. And
in Adam we have a type of Him whose coming was still future.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But God's free gift immeasurably
outweighs the transgression. For if through the transgression of the one
individual the mass of mankind have died, infinitely greater is the
generosity with which God's grace, and the gift given in His grace which
found expression in the one man Jesus Christ, have been bestowed on the
mass of mankind.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And it is not with the gift as it was
with the results of one individual's sin; for the judgement which one
individual provoked resulted in condemnation, whereas the free gift
after a multitude of transgressions results in acquittal.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For if, through the transgression of the
one individual, Death made use of the one individual to seize the
sovereignty, all the more shall those who receive God's overflowing
grace and gift of righteousness reign as kings in Life through the one
individual, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> It follows then that just as the result
of a single transgression is a condemnation which extends to the whole
race, so also the result of a single decree of righteousness is a
life-giving acquittal which extends to the whole race.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For as through the disobedience of the
one individual the mass of mankind were constituted sinners, so also
through the obedience of the One the mass of mankind will be constituted
righteous.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Now Law was brought in later on, so that
transgression might increase. But where sin increased, grace has
overflowed;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> in order that as sin has exercised kingly
sway in inflicting death, so grace, too, may exercise kingly sway in
bestowing a righteousness which results in the Life of the Ages through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> To what conclusion, then, shall we come?
Are we to persist in sinning in order that the grace extended to us may
be the greater?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> No, indeed; how shall we who have died to
sin, live in it any longer?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And do you not know that all of us who have
been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into His death?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Well, then, we by our baptism were buried
with Him in death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from among
the dead by the Father's glorious power, we also should live an entirely
new life.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For since we have become one with Him by
sharing in His death, we shall also be one with Him by sharing in His
resurrection.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> This we know--that our old self was nailed
to the cross with Him, in order that our sinful nature might be deprived
of its power, so that we should no longer be the slaves of sin;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> for he who has paid the penalty of death
stands absolved from his sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But, seeing that we have died with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with Him;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> because we know that Christ, having come
back to life, is no longer liable to die.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Death has no longer any power over Him.
For by the death which He died He became, once for all, dead in relation
to sin; but by the life which He now lives He is alive in relation to
God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> In the same way you also must regard
yourselves as dead in relation to sin, but as alive in relation to God,
because you are in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Let not Sin therefore reign as king in
your mortal bodies, causing you to be in subjection to their cravings;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and no longer lend your faculties as
unrighteous weapons for Sin to use. On the contrary surrender your very
selves to God as living men who have risen from the dead, and surrender
your several faculties to God, to be used as weapons to maintain the
right.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For Sin shall not be lord over you, since
you are subjects not of Law, but of grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Are we therefore to sin because we are no
longer under the authority of Law, but under grace? No, indeed!

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Do you not know that if you surrender
yourselves as bondservants to obey any one, you become the bondservants
of him whom you obey, whether the bondservants of Sin (with death as the
result) or of Duty (resulting in righteousness)?

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thanks be to God that though you were
once in thraldom to Sin, you have now yielded a hearty obedience to that
system of truth in which you have been instructed.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> You were set free from the tyranny of
Sin, and became the bondservants of Righteousness--

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> your human infirmity leads me to employ
these familiar figures--and just as you once surrendered your faculties
into bondage to Impurity and ever-increasing disregard of Law, so you
must now surrender them into bondage to Righteousness ever advancing
towards perfect holiness.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For when you were the bondservants of
sin, you were under no sort of subjection to Righteousness.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> At that time, then, what benefit did you
get from conduct which you now regard with shame? Why, such things
finally result in death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But now that you have been set free from
the tyranny of Sin, and have become the bondservants of God, you have
your reward in being made holy, and you have the Life of the Ages as the
final result.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wages paid by Sin are death; but
God's free gift is the Life of the Ages bestowed upon us in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Brethren, do you not know--for I am writing
to people acquainted with the Law--that it is during our lifetime that
we are subject to the Law?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> A wife, for instance, whose husband is
living is bound to him by the Law; but if her husband dies the law that
bound her to him has now no hold over her.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> This accounts for the fact that if during
her husband's life she lives with another man, she will be stigmatized
as an adulteress; but that if her husband is dead she is no longer under
the old prohibition, and even though she marries again, she is not an
adulteress.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> So, my brethren, to you also the Law died
through the incarnation of Christ, that you might be wedded to Another,
namely to Him who rose from the dead in order that we might yield fruit
to God.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For whilst we were under the thraldom of
our earthly natures, sinful passions-- made sinful by the Law--were
always being aroused to action in our bodily faculties that they might
yield fruit to death.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But seeing that we have died to that which
once held us in bondage, the Law has now no hold over us, so that we
render a service which, instead of being old and formal, is new and
spiritual.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What follows? Is the Law itself a sinful
thing? No, indeed; on the contrary, unless I had been taught by the Law,
I should have known nothing of sin as sin. For instance, I should not
have known what covetousness is, if the Law had not repeatedly said,
&lt;"Thou shalt not covet."&gt;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Sin took advantage of this, and by means of
the Commandment stirred up within me every kind of coveting; for apart
from Law sin would be dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Once, apart from Law, I was alive, but when
the Commandment came, sin sprang into life, and I died;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and, as it turned out, the very
Commandment which was to bring me life, brought me death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For sin seized the advantage, and by
means of the Commandment it completely deceived me, and also put me to
death.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So that the Law itself is holy, and the
Commandment is holy, just and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Did then a thing which is good become
death to me? No, indeed, but sin did; so that through its bringing about
death by means of what was good, it might be seen in its true light as
sin, in order that by means of the Commandment the unspeakable
sinfulness of sin might be plainly shown.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For we know that the Law is a spiritual
thing; but I am unspiritual--the slave, bought and sold, of sin.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For what I do, I do not recognize as my
own action. What I desire to do is not what I do, but what I am averse
to is what I do.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But if I do that which I do not desire to
do, I admit the excellence of the Law,

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> and now it is no longer I that do these
things, but the sin which has its home within me does them.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For I know that in me, that is, in my
lower self, nothing good has its home; for while the will to do right is
present with me, the power to carry it out is not.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For what I do is not the good thing that
I desire to do; but the evil thing that I desire not to do, is what I
constantly do.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> But if I do that which I desire not to
do, it can no longer be said that it is I who do it, but the sin which
has its home within me does it.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find therefore the law of my nature to
be that when I desire to do what is right, evil is lying in ambush for
me.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For in my inmost self all my sympathy is
with the Law of God;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> but I discover within me a different Law
at war with the Law of my understanding, and leading me captive to the
Law which is everywhere at work in my body--the Law of sin.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> (Unhappy man that I am! who will rescue
me from this death-burdened body?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our
Lord!) To sum up then, with my understanding, I--my true self--am in
servitude to the Law of God, but with my lower nature I am in servitude
to the Law of sin.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> There is therefore now no condemnation to
those who are in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> for the Spirit's Law-- telling of Life in
Christ Jesus--has set me free from the Law that deals only with sin and
death.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For what was impossible to the
Law--powerless as it was because it acted through frail humanity--God
effected. Sending His own Son in a body like that of sinful human nature
and as a sacrifice for sin, He pronounced sentence upon sin in human
nature;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> in order that in our case the requirements
of the Law might be fully met. For our lives are regulated not by our
earthly, but by our spiritual natures.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For if men are controlled by their earthly
natures, they give their minds to earthly things. If they are controlled
by their spiritual natures, they give their minds to spiritual things.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Because for the mind to be given up to
earthly things means death; but for it to be given up to spiritual
things means Life and peace.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Abandonment to earthly things is a state of
enmity to God. Such a mind does not submit to God's Law, and indeed
cannot do so.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And those whose hearts are absorbed in
earthly things cannot please God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> You, however, are not devoted to earthly,
but to spiritual things, if the Spirit of God is really dwelling in you;
whereas if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, such a one does not
belong to Him.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> But if Christ is in you, though your body
must die because of sin, yet your spirit has Life because of
righteousness.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And if the Spirit of Him who raised up
Jesus from the dead is dwelling in you, He who raised up Christ from the
dead will give Life also to your mortal bodies because of His Spirit who
dwells in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Therefore, brethren, it is not to our
lower natures that we are under obligation that we should live by their
rule.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For if you so live, death is near; but
if, through being under the sway of the spirit, you are putting your old
bodily habits to death, you will live.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For those who are led by God's Spirit
are, all of them, God's sons.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> You have not for the second time acquired
the consciousness of being--a consciousness which fills you with terror.
But you have acquired a deep inward conviction of having been adopted as
sons--a conviction which prompts us to cry aloud, "Abba! our Father!"

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Spirit Himself bears witness, along
with our own spirits, to the fact that we are children of God;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and if children, then heirs too--heirs of
God and co-heirs with Christ; if indeed we are sharers in Christ's
sufferings, in order that we may also be sharers in His glory.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Why, what we now suffer I count as
nothing in comparison with the glory which is soon to be manifested in
us.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For all creation, gazing eagerly as if
with outstretched neck, is waiting and longing to see the manifestation
of the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For the Creation fell into subjection to
failure and unreality (not of its own choice, but by the will of Him who
so subjected it).

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Yet there was always the hope that at
last the Creation itself would also be set free from the thraldom of
decay so as to enjoy the liberty that will attend the glory of the
children of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For we know that the whole of Creation is
groaning together in the pains of childbirth until this hour.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And more than that, we ourselves, though
we possess the Spirit as a foretaste and pledge of the glorious future,
yet we ourselves inwardly sigh, as we wait and long for open recognition
as sons through the deliverance of our bodies.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> It is \*in hope\* that we have been
saved. But an object of hope is such no longer when it is present to
view; for when a man has a thing before his eyes, how can he be said to
hope for it?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But if we hope for something which we do
not see, then we eagerly and patiently wait for it.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> In the same way the Spirit also helps us
in our weakness; for we do not know what prayers to offer nor in what
way to offer them. But the Spirit Himself pleads for us in yearnings
that can find no words,

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and the Searcher of hearts knows what the
Spirit's meaning is, because His intercessions for God's people are in
harmony with God's will.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Now we know that for those who love God
all things are working together for good--for those, I mean, whom with
deliberate purpose He has called.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For those whom He has known beforehand He
has also pre-destined to bear the likeness of His Son, that He might be
the Eldest in a vast family of brothers;

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> and those whom He has pre-destined He
also has called; and those whom He has called He has also declared free
from guilt; and those whom He has declared free from guilt He has also
crowned with glory.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What then shall we say to this? If God is
on our side, who is there to appear against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He who did not withhold even His own Son,
but gave Him up for all of us, will He not also with Him freely give us
all things?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who shall impeach those whom God has
chosen? God declares them free from guilt.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Who is there to condemn them? Christ
Jesus died, or rather has risen to life again. He is also at the right
hand of God, and is interceding for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who shall separate us from Christ's love?
Shall affliction or distress, persecution or hunger, nakedness or danger
or the sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> As it stands written in the Scripture,
&lt;"For Thy sake they are, all day long, trying to kill us. We have
been looked upon as sheep destined for slaughter."&gt;

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> Yet amid all these things we are more
than conquerors through Him who has loved us.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For I am convinced that neither death nor
life, neither the lower ranks of evil angels nor the higher, neither
things present nor things future, nor the forces of nature,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> nor height nor depth, nor any other
created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God which
rests upon us in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I am telling you the truth as a Christian
man--it is no falsehood, for my conscience enlightened, as it is, by the
Holy Spirit adds its testimony to mine--

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> when I declare that I have deep grief and
unceasing anguish of heart.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> For I could pray to be accursed from Christ
on behalf of my brethren, my human kinsfolk--for such the Israelites
are.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> To them belongs recognition as God's sons,
and they have His glorious Presence and the Covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the Temple service, and the ancient Promises.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> To them the Patriarchs belong, and from
them in respect of His human lineage came the Christ, who is exalted
above all, God blessed throughout the Ages. Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Not however that God's word has failed; for
all who have sprung from Israel do not count as Israel,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> nor because they are Abraham's true
children. But the promise was &lt;"Through Isaac shall your posterity be
reckoned."&gt;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> In other words, it is not the children by
natural descent who count as God's children, but the children made such
by the promise are regarded as Abraham's posterity.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For the words are the language of promise
and run thus, &lt;"About this time next year I will come, and Sarah
shall have a son."&gt;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Nor is that all: later on there was
Rebecca too. She was soon to bear two children to her husband, our
forefather Isaac--

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> and even then, though they were not then
born and had not done anything either good or evil, yet in order that
God's electing purpose might not be frustrated, based, as it was, not on
their actions but on the will of Him who called them, she was told,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> &lt;"The elder of them will be
bondservant to the younger."&gt;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> This agrees with the other Scripture
which says, &lt;"Jacob I have loved, but Esau I have hated."&gt;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What then are we to infer? That there is
injustice in God?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> No, indeed; the solution is found in His
words to Moses, &lt;"Wherever I show mercy it shall be nothing but
mercy, and wherever I show compassion it shall be simply
compassion."&gt;

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And from this we learn that everything is
dependent not on man's will or endeavour, but upon God who has mercy.
For the Scripture said to Pharaoh,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> &lt;"It is for this very purpose that I
have lifted you so high--that I may make manifest in you My power, and
that My name may be proclaimed far and wide in all the earth."&gt;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> This is a proof that wherever He chooses
He shows mercy, and wherever he chooses He hardens the heart.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> "Why then does God still find fault?" you
will ask; "for who is resisting His will?"

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Nay, but who are you, a mere man, that
you should cavil against GOD? &lt;Shall the thing moulded say to him who
moulded it, "Why have you made me thus?"&gt;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Or has not the potter rightful power over
the clay to make out of the same lump one vessel for more honourable and
another for less honourable uses?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And what if God, while choosing to make
manifest the terrors of His anger and to show what is possible with Him,
has yet borne with long-forbearing patience with the subjects of His
anger who stand ready for destruction,

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> in order to make known His infinite
goodness towards the subjects of His mercy whom He has prepared
beforehand for glory,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> even towards us whom He has called not
only from among the Jews but also from among the Gentiles?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> So also in Hosea He says, &lt;"I will
call that nation My People which was not My People, and I will call her
beloved who was not beloved.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And in the place where it was said to
them, \`No people of Mine are you,' there shall they be called sons of
the everliving God."&gt;

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Isaiah cries aloud concerning Israel,
&lt;"Though the number of the sons of Israel be like the sands of the
sea, only a remnant of them shall be saved;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> for the Lord will hold a reckoning upon
the earth, making it efficacious and brief."&gt;

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Even as Isaiah says in an earlier place,
&lt;"Were it not that the Lord, the God of Hosts, had left us some few
descendants, we should have become like Sodom, and have come to resemble
Gomorrah."&gt;

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> To what conclusion does this bring us?
Why, that the Gentiles, who were not in pursuit of righteousness, have
overtaken it--a righteousness, however, which arises from faith;

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> while the descendants of Israel, who were
in pursuit of a Law that could give righteousness, have not arrived at
one.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And why? Because they were pursuing a
righteousness which should arise not from faith, but from what they
regarded as merit. They stuck their foot against the stone which lay in
their way;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> in agreement with the statement of
Scripture, &lt;"See, I am placing on Mount Zion a stone for people to
stumble at, and a rock for them to trip over, and yet he whose faith
rests upon it shall never have reason to feel ashamed."&gt;

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Brethren, the longing of my heart, and my
prayer to God, on behalf of my countrymen is for their salvation.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For I bear witness that they possess an
enthusiasm for God, but it is an unenlightened enthusiasm.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Ignorant of the righteousness which God
provides and building their hopes upon a righteousness of their own,
they have refused submission to God's righteousness.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For as a means of righteousness Christ is
the termination of Law to every believer.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Moses says that he whose actions conform
to the righteousness required by the Law shall live by that
righteousness.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the righteousness which is based on
faith speaks in a different tone. "Say not in your heart," it declares,
"\`Who shall ascend to Heaven?'" --that is, to bring Christ down;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> "nor \`Who shall go down into the
abyss?'" --that is, to bring Christ up again from the grave.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what does it say? "The Message is
close to you, in your mouth and in your heart;" that is, the Message
which we are publishing about the faith--

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that if with your mouth you confess Jesus
as Lord and in your heart believe that God brought Him back to life, you
shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For with the heart men believe and
obtain righteousness, and with the mouth they make confession and obtain
salvation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The Scripture says, &lt;"No one who
believes in Him shall have reason to feel ashamed."&gt;

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Jew and Gentile are on precisely the
same footing; for the same Lord is Lord over all, and is infinitely kind
to all who call upon Him for deliverance.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For &lt;"every one, without exception,
who calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved."&gt;

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But how are they to call on One in whom
they have not believed? And how are they to believe in One whose voice
they have never heard? And how are they to hear without a preacher?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And how are men to preach unless they
have been sent to do so? As it is written, &lt;"How beautiful are the
feet of those who bring glad tidings of good!"&gt;

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But, some will say, they have not all
hearkened to the Good News. No, for Isaiah asks, &lt;"Lord, who has
believed the Message they have heard from us?"&gt;

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And this proves that faith comes from a
Message heard, and that the Message comes through its having been spoken
by Christ.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But, I ask, have they not heard? Yes,
indeed: &lt;"To the whole world the preachers' voices have sounded
forth, and their words to the remotest parts of the earth."&gt;

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But again, did Israel fail to
understand? Listen to Moses first. He says, &lt;"I will fire you with
jealousy against a nation which is no nation, and with fury against a
nation devoid of understanding."&gt;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And Isaiah, with strange boldness,
exclaims, &lt;"I have been found by those who were not looking for Me, I
have revealed Myself to those who were not inquiring of Me."&gt;

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> While as to Israel he says, &lt;"All
day long I have stretched out My arms to a self-willed and fault-finding
people."&gt;

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I ask then, Has God cast off His People?
No, indeed. Why, I myself am an Israelite, of the posterity of Abraham
and of the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God has not cast off His People whom He
knew beforehand. Or are you ignorant of what Scripture says in speaking
of Elijah--how he pleaded with God against Israel, saying,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> &lt;"Lord, they have put Thy Prophets to
death, and have overthrown Thy altars; and, now that I alone remain,
they are thirsting for my blood"?&gt;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But what did God say to him in reply?
&lt;"I have reserved for Myself 7,000 men who have never bent the knee
to Baal."&gt;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> In the same way also at the present time
there has come to be a remnant whom God in His grace has selected.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But if it is in His grace that He has
selected them, then His choice is no longer determined by human actions.
Otherwise grace would be grace no longer.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> How then does the matter stand? It stands
thus. That which Israel are in earnest pursuit of, they have not
obtained; but God's chosen servants have obtained it, and the rest have
become hardened.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And so Scripture says, &lt;"God has given
them a spirit of drowsiness--eyes to see nothing with and ears to hear
nothing with--even until now."&gt;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And David says, &lt;"Let their very food
become a snare and a trap to them, a stumbling-block and a retribution.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Let darkness come over their eyes that
they may be unable to see, and make Thou their backs continually to
stoop."&gt;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I ask, however, "Have they stumbled so
as to be finally ruined?" No, indeed; but by their lapse salvation has
come to the Gentiles in order to arouse the jealousy of the descendants
of Israel;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and if their lapse is the enriching of
the world, and their overthrow the enriching of the Gentiles, will not
still greater good follow their restoration?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> But to you Gentiles I say that, since I
am an Apostle specially sent to the Gentiles, I take pride in my
ministry,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> trying whether I can succeed in rousing
my own countrymen to jealousy and thus save some of them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For if their having been cast aside has
carried with it the reconciliation of the world, what will their being
accepted again be but Life out of death?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Now if the firstfruits of the dough are
holy, so also is the whole mass; and if the root of a tree is holy, so
also are the branches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And if some of the branches have been
pruned away, and you, although you were but a wild olive, have been
grafted in among them and have become a sharer with others in the rich
sap of the root of the olive tree,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> beware of glorying over the natural
branches. Or if you are so glorying, do not forget that it is not you
who uphold the root: the root upholds you.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> "Branches have been lopped off," you
will say, "for the sake of my being grafted in."

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> This is true; yet it was their unbelief
that cut them off, and you only stand through your faith.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Do not be puffed up with pride. Tremble
rather--for if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will He
spare you.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Notice therefore God's kindness and
God's severity. On those who have fallen His severity has descended, but
upon you His kindness has come, provided that you do not cease to
respond to that kindness. Otherwise you will be cut off also.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Moreover, if they turn from their
unbelief, they too will be grafted in. For God is powerful enough to
graft them in again;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> and if you were cut from that which by
nature is a wild olive and contrary to nature were grafted into the good
olive tree, how much more certainly will these natural branches be
grafted on their own olive tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For there is a truth, brethren, not
revealed hitherto, of which I do not wish to leave you in ignorance, for
fear you should attribute superior wisdom to yourselves--the truth, I
mean, that partial blindness has fallen upon Israel until the great mass
of the Gentiles have come in;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and so all Israel will be saved. As is
declared in Scripture, &lt;"From Mount Zion a Deliverer will come: He
will remove all ungodliness from Jacob;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> and this shall be My Covenant with
them; when I have taken away their sins."&gt;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> In relation to the Good News, the Jews
are God's enemies for your sakes; but in relation to God's choice they
are dearly loved for the sake of their forefathers.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For God does not repent of His free
gifts nor of His call;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> but just as you were formerly
disobedient to Him, but now have received mercy at a time when they are
disobedient,

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> so now they also have been disobedient
at a time when you are receiving mercy; so that to them too there may
now be mercy.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For God has locked up all in the prison
of unbelief, that upon all alike He may have mercy.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Oh, how inexhaustible are God's
resources and God's wisdom and God's knowledge! How impossible it is to
search into His decrees or trace His footsteps!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> &lt;"Who has ever known the mind of the
Lord, or shared His counsels?"

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> "Who has first given God anything, so
as to receive payment in return?"&gt;

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> For the universe owes its origin to
Him, was created by Him, and has its aim and purpose in Him. To Him be
the glory throughout the Ages! Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I plead with you therefore, brethren, by
the compassionsof God, to present all your faculties to Him as a living
and holy sacrifice acceptable to Him. This with you will be an act of
reasonable worship.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And do not follow the customs of the
present age, but be transformed by the entire renewal of your minds, so
that you may learn by experience what God's will is--that will which is
good and beautiful and perfect.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For through the authority graciously
given to me I warn every individual among you not to value himself
unduly, but to cultivate sobriety of judgement in accordance with the
amount of faith which God has allotted to each one.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For just as there are in the one human
body many parts, and these parts have not all the same function;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> so collectively we form one body in
Christ, while individually we are linked to one another as its members.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But since we have special gifts which
differ in accordance with the diversified work graciously entrusted to
us, if it is prophecy, let the prophet speak in exact proportion to his
faith;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> if it is the gift of administration, let
the administrator exercise a sound judgement in his duties.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> The teacher must do the same in his
teaching; and he who exhorts others, in his exhortation. He who gives
should be liberal; he who is in authority should be energetic and alert;
and he who succours the afflicted should do it cheerfully.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Let your love be perfectly sincere.
Regard with horror what is evil; cling to what is right.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> As for brotherly love, be affectionate
to one another; in matters of worldly honour, yield to one another.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Do not be indolent when zeal is
required. Be thoroughly warm-hearted, the Lord's own servants,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> full of joyful hope, patient under
persecution, earnest and persistent in prayer.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Relieve the necessities of God's
people; always practise hospitality.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Invoke blessings on your
persecutors--blessings, not curses.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep
with those who weep.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Have full sympathy with one another. Do
not give your mind to high things, but let humble ways content you.
&lt;Do not be wise in your own conceits.&gt;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Pay back to no man evil for evil.
&lt;Take thought for what is right and seemly in every one's esteem.&gt;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> If you can, so far as it depends on
you, live at peace with all the world.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Do not be revengeful, my dear friends,
but give way before anger; for it is written, &lt;"\`Revenge belongs to
Me: I will pay back,'&gt; says the Lord."

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> On the contrary, therefore, &lt;if your
enemy is hungry, give him food; if he is thirsty, quench his thirst. For
by doing this you will be heaping burning coals upon his head.&gt;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Do not be overcome by evil, but
overcome the evil with goodness.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let every individual be obedient to those
who rule over him; for no one is a ruler except by God's permission, and
our present rulers have had their rank and power assigned to them by
Him.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Therefore the man who rebels against his
ruler is resisting God's will; and those who thus resist will bring
punishment upon themselves.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For judges and magistrates are to be
feared not by right-doers but by wrong-doers. You desire--do you not?
--to have no reason to fear your ruler. Well, do the thing that is
right, and then he will commend you.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For he is God's servant for your benefit.
But if you do what is wrong, be afraid. He does not wear the sword to no
purpose: he is God's servant--an administrator to inflict punishment
upon evil-doers.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> We must obey therefore, not only in order
to escape punishment, but also for conscience' sake.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Why, this is really the reason you pay
taxes; for tax-gatherers are ministers of God, devoting their energies
to this very work.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Pay promptly to all men what is due to
them: taxes to those to whom taxes are due, toll to those to whom toll
is due, respect to those to whom respect is due, honour to those to whom
honour is due.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Owe nothing to any one except mutual
love; for he who loves his fellow man has satisfied the demands of Law.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For the precepts, &lt;"Thou shalt not
commit adultery," "Thou shalt do no murder," "Thou shalt not steal,"
"Thou shalt not covet,"&gt; and all other precepts, are summed up in
this one command, &lt;"Thou shalt love thy fellow man as much as thou
lovest thyself."&gt;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Love avoids doing any wrong to one's
fellow man, and is therefore complete obedience to Law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Carry out these injunctions because you
know the critical period at which we are living, and that it is now high
time, to rouse yourselves from sleep; for salvation is now nearer to us
than when we first became believers.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The night is far advanced, and day is
about to dawn. We must therefore lay aside the deeds of darkness, and
clothe ourselves with the armour of Light.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Living as we do in broad daylight, let
us conduct ourselves becomingly, not indulging in revelry and
drunkenness, nor in lust and debauchery, nor in quarrelling and
jealousy.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> On the contrary, clothe yourselves with
the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for gratifying your earthly
cravings.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> I now pass to another subject. Receive as
a friend a man whose faith is weak, but not for the purpose of deciding
mere matters of opinion.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> One man's faith allows him to eat
anything, while a man of weaker faith eats nothing but vegetables.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Let not him who eats certain food look
down upon him who abstains from it, nor him who abstains from it find
fault with him who eats it; for God has received both of them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who are you that you should find fault
with the servant of another? Whether he stands or falls is a matter
which concerns his own master. But stand he will; for the Master can
give him power to stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> One man esteems one day more highly than
another; another esteems all days alike. Let every one be thoroughly
convinced in his own mind.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He who regards the day as sacred, so
regards it for the Master's sake; and he who eats certain food eats it
for the Master's sake, for he gives thanks to God; and he who refrains
from eating it refrains for the Master's sake, and he also gives thanks
to God.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For not one of us lives to himself, and
not one dies to himself.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> If we live, we live to the Lord: if we
die, we die to the Lord. So whether we live or die, we belong to the
Lord.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> For this was the purpose of Christ's
dying and coming to life--namely that He might be Lord both of the dead
and the living.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But you, why do you find fault with
your brother? Or you, why do you look down upon your brother? We shall
all stand before God to be judged;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> for it is written, &lt;"\`As I
live,'&gt; says the Lord, &lt;\`to Me every knee shall bow, and every
tongue shall make confession to God.'"&gt;

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So we see that every one of us will
give account of himself to God.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Therefore let us no longer judge one
another; but, instead of that, you should come to this judgement--that
we must not put a stumbling-block in our brother's path, nor anything to
trip him up.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> As one who lives in union with the Lord
Jesus, I know and am certain that in its own nature no food is
\`impure'; but if people regard any food as impure, to them it is.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If your brother is pained by the food
you are eating, your conduct is no longer controlled by love. Take care
lest, by the food you eat, you lead to ruin a man for whom Christ died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Therefore do not let the boon which is
yours in common be exposed to reproach.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> For the Kingdom of God does not consist
of eating and drinking, but of right conduct, peace and joy, through the
Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and whoever in this way devotedly
serves Christ, God takes pleasure in him, and men highly commend him.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Therefore let us aim at whatever makes
for peace and mutual upbuilding of character.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Do not for food's sake be throwing down
God's work. All food is pure; but a man is in the wrong if his food is a
snare to others.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> The right course is to forego eating
meat or drinking wine or doing anything that tends to your brother's
fall.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> As for you and your faith, keep your
faith to yourself in the presence of God. The man is to be congratulated
who does not pronounce judgement on himself in what his actions
sanction.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> But he who has misgivings and yet eats
meat is condemned already, because his conduct is not based on faith;
for all conduct not based on faith is sinful.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> As for us who are strong, our duty is to
bear with the weaknesses of those who are not strong, and not seek our
own pleasure.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Let each of us endeavour to please his
fellow Christian, aiming at a blessing calculated to build him up.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For even the Christ did not seek His own
pleasure. His principle was, &lt;"The reproaches which they addressed to
Thee have fallen on me."&gt;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For all that was written of old has been
written for our instruction, so that we may always have hope through the
power of endurance and the encouragement which the Scriptures afford.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And may God, the giver of power of
endurance and of that encouragement, grant you to be in full sympathy
with one another in accordance with the example of Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> so that with oneness both of heart and
voice you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Habitually therefore give one another a
friendly reception, just as Christ also has received you, and thus
promote the glory of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> My meaning is that Christ has become a
servant to the people of Israel in vindication of God's truthfulness--
in showing how sure are the promises made to our forefathers--

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and that the Gentiles also have glorified
God in acknowledgment of His mercy. So it is written, &lt;"For this
reason I will praise Thee among the Gentiles, and sing psalms in honour
of Thy name."&gt;

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And again the Psalmist says, &lt;"Be
glad, ye Gentiles, in company with His People."&gt;

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And again, &lt;"Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles, and let all the people extol Him."&gt;

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And again Isaiah says, &lt;"There shall
be the Root of Jesse and One who rises up to rule the Gentiles. On Him
shall the Gentiles build their hopes."&gt;

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> May God, the giver of hope, fill you
with continual joy and peace because you trust in Him--so that you may
have abundant hope through the power of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But as to you, brethren, I am
convinced-- yes, I Paul am convinced--that, even apart from my teaching,
you are already full of goodness of heart, and enriched with complete
Christian knowledge, and are also competent to instruct one another.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> But I write to you the more
boldly--partly as reminding you of what you already know--because of the
authority graciously entrusted to me by God,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> that I should be a minister of Christ
Jesus among the Gentiles, doing priestly duties in connexion with God's
Good News so that the sacrifice--namely the Gentiles--may be acceptable
to Him, being (as it is) an offering which the Holy Spirit has made
holy.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I can therefore glory in Christ Jesus
concerning the work for God in which I am engaged.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For I will not presume to mention any
of the results that Christ has brought about by other agency than mine
in securing the obedience of the Gentiles by word or deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> with power manifested in signs and
marvels, and through the power of the Holy Spirit. But--to speak simply
of my own labours--beginning in Jerusalem and the outlying districts, I
have proclaimed without reserve, even as far as Illyricum, the Good News
of the Christ;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> making it my ambition, however, not to
tell the Good News where Christ's name was already known, for fear I
should be building on another man's foundation.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But, as Scripture says, &lt;"Those
shall see, to whom no report about Him has hitherto come, and those who
until now have not heard shall understand."&gt;

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And it is really this which has again
and again prevented my coming to you.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But now, as there is no more unoccupied
ground in this part of the world, and I have for years past been eager
to pay you a visit,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> I hope, as soon as ever I extend my
travels into Spain, to see you on my way and be helped forward by you on
my journey, when I have first enjoyed being with you for a time.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But at present I am going to Jerusalem
to serve God's people,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> for Macedonia and Greece have kindly
contributed a certain sum in relief of the poor among God's people, in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Yes, they have kindly done this, and,
in fact, it was a debt they owed them. For seeing that the Gentiles have
been admitted in to partnership with the Jews in their spiritual
blessings, they in turn are under an obligation to render sacred service
to the Jews in temporal things.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> So after discharging this duty, and
making sure that these kind gifts reach those for whom they are
intended, I shall start for Spain, passing through Rome on my way there;

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> and I know that when I come to you it
will be with a vast amount of blessing from Christ.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> But I entreat you, brethren, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love which His Spirit inspires,
to help me by wrestling in prayer to God on my behalf,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> asking that I may escape unhurt from
those in Judaea who are disobedient, and that the service which I am
going to Jerusalem to render may be well received by the Church there,

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> in order that if God be willing I may
come to you with a glad heart, and may enjoy a time of rest with you.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> May God, who gives peace be with you
all! Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Herewith I introduce our sister Phoebe to
you, who is a servant of the Church at Cenchreae,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> that you may receive her as a fellow
Christian in a manner worthy of God's people, and may assist her in any
matter in which she may need help. For she has indeed been a kind friend
to many, including myself.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Greetings to Prisca and Aquila my fellow
labourers in the work of Christ Jesus--

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> friends who have endangered their own
lives for mine. I am grateful to them, and not I alone, but all the
Gentile Churches also.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Greetings, too, to the Church that meets
at their house. Greetings to my dear Epaenetus, who was the earliest
convert to Christ in the province of Asia;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> to Mary who has laboured strenuously
among you;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and to Andronicus and Junia, my
countrymen, who once shared my imprisonment. They are of note among the
Apostles, and are Christians of longer standing than myself.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Greetings to Ampliatus, dear to me in the
Lord;

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> to Urban, our fellow labourer in Christ,
and to my dear Stachys.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Greetings to Apella, that veteran
believer; and to the members of the household of Aristobulus.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Greetings to my countryman, Herodion;
and to the believing members of the household of Narcissus.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Greetings to those Christian workers,
Tryphaena and Tryphosa; also to dear Persis, who has laboured
strenuously in the Lord's work.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Greetings to Rufus, who is one of the
Lord's chosen people; and to his mother, who has also been a mother to
me.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Greetings to Asyncritus, Phlegon,
Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and to the brethren associated with them;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his
sister and Olympas, and to all God's people associated with them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.
All the Churches of Christ send greetings to you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> But I beseech you, brethren, to keep a
watch on those who are causing the divisions among you, and are leading
others into sin, in defiance of the instruction which you have received;
and habitually to shun them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For men of that stamp are not
bondservants of Christ our Lord, but are slaves to their own appetites;
and by their plausible words and their flattery they utterly deceive the
minds of the simple.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Your fidelity to the truth is
everywhere known. I rejoice over you, therefore, but I wish you to be
wise as to what is good, and simple-minded as to what is evil.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And before long, God the giver of peace
will crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you!

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Timothy, my fellow worker, sends you
greetings, and so do my countrymen Lucius, Jason and Sosipater.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I, Tertius, who write this letter, send
you Christian greetings.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Gaius, my host, who is also the host of
the whole Church, greets you. So do Erastus, the treasurer of the city,
and Quartus our brother.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> \[\]

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> To Him who has it in His power to make
you strong, as declared in the Good News which I am spreading, and the
proclamation concerning Jesus Christ, in harmony with the unveiling of
the Truth which in the periods of past Ages remained unuttered,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> but has now been brought fully to
light, and by the command of the God of the Ages has been made known by
the writings of the Prophets among all the Gentiles to win them to
obedience to the faith--

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> to God, the only wise, through Jesus
Christ, even to Him be the glory through all the Ages! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1)
