[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th1)  [Next](ti1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Weymouth New Testament: 2 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, Silas, and Timothy: To the Church of
the Thessalonians which is in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May grace and peace be granted to you from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Unceasing thanks are due from us to God on
your behalf, brethren. They are appropriate because your faith is
growing greatly, and the love of every one of you for all the others
goes on increasing.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> It so increases that we ourselves make
honourable mention of you among the Churches of God because of your
patience and faith amid all your persecutions and amid the afflictions
which you are enduring.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For these are a plain token of God's
righteous judgement, which has in view your being deemed worthy of
admission to God's Kingdom, for the sake of which, indeed, you are
sufferers.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> A plain token of God's righteous judgement,
I say, since it is a righteous thing for Him to requite with affliction
those who are now afflicting you;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and to requite with rest you who are
suffering affliction now--rest with us at the re-appearing of the Lord
Jesus from Heaven, attended by His mighty angels.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> He will come in flames of fire to take
vengeance on those who have no knowledge of God, and do not obey the
Good News as to Jesus, our Lord.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> They will pay the penalty of eternal
destruction, being banished from the presence of the Lord and from His
glorious majesty,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> when He comes on that day to be glorified
in His people and to be wondered at among all who have believed,
including you--because you believed the testimony which we brought for
your acceptance.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> It is with this view also that we
continually pray to our God for you, asking that He will count you
worthy of His call, and by His mighty power fully gratify your every
desire for what is truly good and make your work of faith complete;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> in order that the name of our Lord Jesus
may be glorified in you, and that you may be glorified in Him--so
wonderful is the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But with respect to the Coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ and our being gathered to meet Him, we entreat you,
brethren,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> not readily to become unsettled in mind or
troubled--either by any pretended spiritual revelation or by any message
or letter claiming to have been sent by us--through fancying that the
day of the Lord is now here.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let no one in any way deceive you, for that
day cannot come without the coming of the apostasy first, and the
appearing of the man of sin, the son of perdition, who sets himself
against,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and exalts himself above, every so-called
\`god' or object of worship, and goes the length of taking his seat in
the very temple of God, giving it out that he himself is God.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Do you not remember that while I was still
with you I used to tell you all this?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And now you know what restrains him, in
order that his true character may be revealed at his appointed time.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For lawlessness is already at work in
secret; but only until the man who is now exercising a restraining
influence is removed,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and then the Lawless one will be revealed,
whom the Lord Jesus will sweep away with the tempest of His anger, and
utterly overwhelm by the awful splendour of His Coming.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The appearing of the Lawless one will be
attended by various miracles and tokens and delusive marvels--for so
Satan works--

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and by every kind of wicked deception for
those who are on the way to perdition because they did not welcome into
their hearts the love of the truth, so that they might be saved.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And for this reason God sends them a
misleading influence that they may believe the lie;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> in order that all may come under
judgement who have refused to believe the truth and have taken pleasure
in unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And from us thanks are always due to God
on your behalf--brethren whom the Lord loves--because God from the
beginning has chosen you for salvation through the Spirit's sanctifying
influence and your belief in the truth.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> To this blessing God has called you by
our Good News, so that you may have a share in the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So then, brethren, stand your ground, and
hold fast to the teachings which you have received from us, whether by
word of mouth or by letter.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And may our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself--and God our Father who has loved us and has given us in His
grace eternal consolation and a bright hope--

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> comfort your hearts and make you stedfast
in every good work and word.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Finally, brethren, pray for us, asking that
the Lord's Message may be spread rapidly and its glory be displayed, as
it was displayed among you;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and that we may be delivered from
wrong-headed and wicked men; for it is not everybody who has faith.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But the Lord is faithful, and He will make
you stedfast and will guard you from the Evil one.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And we have confidence in the Lord in
regard to you that you are doing, and will do, what we command.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And may the Lord guide your hearts into the
love of God and into the patience of Christ.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But, by the authority of the Lord, we
command you, brethren, to stand aloof from every brother whose life is
disorderly and not in accordance with the teaching which all received
from us.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For you yourselves know that it is your
duty to follow our example. There was no disorder in our lives among
you,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> nor did we eat any one's bread without
paying for it, but we laboured and toiled, working hard night and day in
order not to be a burden to any of you.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> This was not because we had not a claim
upon you, but it arose from a desire to set you an example--for you to
imitate us.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For even when we were with you, we laid
down this rule for you: "If a man does not choose to work, neither shall
he eat."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For we hear that there are some of you
who live disorderly lives and are mere idle busybodies.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> To persons of that sort our
injunction--and our command by the authority of the Lord Jesus
Christ--is that they are to work quietly and eat their own
honestly-earned bread.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But you, brethren, must not grow weary in
the path of duty;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> and if any one refuses to obey these our
written instructions, mark that man and hold no communication with
him--so that he may be made to feel ashamed.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And yet do not regard him as an enemy,
but caution him as a brother.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And may the Lord of peace Himself
continually grant you peace in every sense. The Lord be with you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I Paul add the greeting with my own hand,
which is the credential in every letter of mine.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> This is my handwriting. May the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy](ti1.md)
