[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm01_03a)  [Next](mm01_05a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 1

## Question IV

### By which Devils are the Operations of Incubus and Succubus Practised?

        Is it Catholic to affirm that the functions of Incubi and
Succubi belong indifferently and equally to all unclean spirits? *And it
seems* that it is so; for to affirm the opposite would be to maintain
that there is some good order among them. It is argued that just as in
the computation of the Good there are degrees and orders (see S.
Augustine in his book on the nature of the Good), so also the
computation of the Evil is based upon confusion. But as among the good
Angels nothing can be without order, so among the bad all is disorder,
and therefore they all indifferently follows these practices. See *Job
x.*: A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where the light is as darkness.  
        Again, if they do not all indifferently follow these practices,
this quality in them comes either from their nature, or from sin, or
from punishment. But it does not come from their nature, since they are
all without distinction given to sin, as was set out in the preceding
question. For they are by nature impure spirits, yet not so unclean as
to pejorate their good parts; subtle in wickedness, eager to do harm,
swollen with pride, etc. Therefore these practices in them are due
either to sin or to punishment. Then again, where the sin is greater,
there is the punishment greater; and the higher angels sinned more
greatly, therefore their punishment they have the more to follow these
filthy practices. If this is not so, another reason will be given why
they do not indifferently practise these things.  
        And again, it is argued that where there is no discipline or
obedience, there all work without distinction; and it is submitted that
there is no discipline or obedience among devils, and no agreement.
*Proverbs* xiii.: Among the proud there is always contention.  
        Again, just as because of sin they will all equally be case into
Hell after the Day of Judgement, so before that time they are detained
in the lower mists on account of the duties assigned to them. We do not
read that there is equality on account of emancipation, therefore
neither is there equality in the matter of duty and temptation.  
        But *against* this there is the first gloss on I *Corinthians*
xv: As long as the world endures Angels are set over Angels, men over
men, and devils over devils. Also in *Job* xl it speaks of the scales of
Leviathan, which signify the members of the devil, how one cleaves to
another. Therefore there is among them diversity both of order and of
action.  
        Another question arises, whether or not the devils can be
restrained by the good Angels from pursuing these foul practices. It
must be said that the Angels to whose command the adverse Influences are
subject are called Powers, as S. Gregory says, and S. Augustine (*de
Trinitate*, 3). A rebellious and sinful spirit of life is subject to an
obedient, pious and just spirit of life. And those Creatures which are
more perfect and nearer to God have authority over the others: for the
whole order of preference is originally and in the first place in God,
and is shared by His creatures according as they approach more nearly to
Him. Therefore the good Angels, who are nearest to God on account of
their fruition in Him, which the devils lack, have preference over the
devils, and rule over them.  
        And when it is urged that devils work much harm without any
medium, or that they are not hindered because they are not subject to
good Angels who might prevent them; or that if they are so subject, then
the evil that is done by the subject is due to negligence on the part of
the master, and there seems to be some negligence among the good Angels:
the answer is that the Angels are ministers of the Divine wisdom. It
follows then that, as the Divine wisdom permits certain evil to be done
by bad Angels or men, for the sake of the good that He draws therefrom,
so also the good Angels do not altogether prevent wicked men or devils
from doing evil.  
        *Answer*. It is Catholic to maintain that there is a certain
order of interior and exterior actions, and a degree of preference among
devils. Whence it follows that certain abominations are committed by the
lowest orders, from which the higher orders are precluded on account of
the nobility of their natures. And this is generally said to arise from
a threefold congruity, in that such things harmonize with their nature,
with the Divine wisdom, and with their own wickedness.  
        But more particularly as touching their nature. It is agreed
that from the beginning of Creation some were always by nature superior,
since they differ among themselves as to form; and no two Angels are
alike in form. This follows the more general opinion, which also agrees
with the words of the Philosophers. Dionysus also lays it down in his
tenth chapter *On the Celestial Hierarchy* that in the same order there
are three separate degrees; and we must agree with this, since they are
both immaterial and incorporeal. See also S. Thomas (ii. 2). For sin
does not take away their nature, and the devils after the Fall did not
lose their natural gifts, as has been said before; and the operations of
things follow their natural conditions. Therefore both in nature and in
operation they are various and multiple.  
        This harmonizes also with the Divine wisdom; for that which is
ordained is ordained by God (*Romans* xiii). And since devils were
deputed by God for the temptation of men and the punishment of the
damned, therefore they work upon men from without by many and various
means.  
        It harmonizes also with their own wickedness. For since they are
at war with the human race, they fight in an orderly manner; for so they
think to do greater harm to men, and so they do. Whence it follows that
they do not share in an equal manner in their most unspeakable
abominations.  
        And this is more specifically proved as follows. For since, as
has been said, the operation follows the nature of the thing, it follows
also that those whose natures are subordinate must in turn be
subordinate to themselves in operation, just as is the case in corporeal
matters. For since the lower bodies are by natural ordination below the
celestial bodies, and their actions and motions are subject to the
actions and motions of the celestial bodies; and since the devils, as
has been said, differ among themselves in natural order; therefore they
also differ among themselves in their natural actions, both extrinsic
and instrinsic, and especially in the performance of the abominations in
question.  
        From which it is concluded that since the practice of these
abominations is for the most part foreign to the nobility of the angelic
nature, so also in human actions the foulest and beastliest acts are to
be considered by themselves, and not in relation to the duty of human
nature and procreation.  
        Finally, since some are believed to have fallen from every
order, it is not unsuitable to maintain that those devils who fell from
the lowest choir, and even in that held the lowest rank, are deputed to
and perform these and other abominations.  
        Also it must be carefully noted that, though the Scripture
speaks of Incubi and Succubi lusting after women, yet nowhere do we read
that Incubi and Succubi fell into vices against nature. We do not speak
only of sodomy, but of any other sin whereby the act is wrongfully
performed outside the rightful channel. And the very great enormity of
such as sin in this way is shown by the fact that all devils equally, of
whatsoever order, abominate and think shame to commit such actions. And
it seems that the gloss on *Ezekiel* xix means this, where it says: I
will give thee into the hands of the dwellers in Palestine, that is
devils, who shall blush at your iniquities, meaning vices against
nature. And the student will see what should be authoritatively
understood concerning devils. For no sin has God so often punished by
the shameful death of multitudes.  
        Indeed many say, and it is truly believed, that no one can
unimperilled persevere in the practice of such vices beyond the period
of the mortal life of Christ, which lasted for thirty-three years,
unless he should be saved by some special grace of the Redeemer. And
this is proved by the fact that there have often been ensnared by this
vice octogenarians and centenarians, who had up to that time ruled their
lives according to the discipline of Christ; and, having forsaken Him,
they have found the very greatest difficulty in obtaining deliverance,
and in abandoning themselves to such vices.  
        Moreover, the names of the devils indicate what order there is
among them, and what office is assigned to each. For though one and the
same name, that of devil, is generally used in Scripture because of
their various qualities, yet the Scriptures teach that One is set over
these filthy actions, just as certain other vices are subject to
Another. For it is the practice of Scripture and of speech to name every
unclean spirit Diabolus, from Dia, that is Two, and Bolus, that is
Morsel; for he kills two thing, the body and the soul. And this is in
accordance with etymology, although in Greek *Diabolus* means shut in
Prison, which also is apt, since he is not permitted to do as much harm
as he wishes. Or Diabolus may mean Downflowing, since he flowed down,
that is, fell down, both specifically and locally. He is also named
Demon, that is, Cunning over Blood, since he thirsts for and procures
sin with a threefold knowledge, being powerful in the subtlety of his
nature, in his age-long experience, and in the revelation of the good
spirits. He is called also Belial, which means Without Yoke or Master;
for he can fight against him to whom he should be subject. He is called
also Beelzebub, which means Lord of Flies, that is, of the souls of
sinners who have left the true faith of Christ. Also Satan, that is, the
Adversary; see I *S. Peter* ii: For your adversary the devil goeth
about, etc. Also Behemoth, that is, Beast, because he makes men
bestial.  
        But the very devil of Fornication, and the chief of that
abomination, is called Asmodeus, which means the Creature of Judgement:
for because of this kind of sin a terrible judgement was executed upon
Sodom and the four other cities. Similarly the devil of Pride is called
Leviathan, which means Their Addition; because when Lucifer tempted our
first parents he promised them, out of his pride, the addition of
Divinity. Concerning him the Lord said through Esaias: I shall visit it
upon Leviathan, that old and tortuous serpent. And the devil of Avarice
and Riches is called Mammon, whom also Christ mentions in the Gospel
(*S. Matthew* vi): Ye cannot serve God, etc.  
        To the arguments. *First*, that good can be found without evil,
but evil cannot be found without good; for it is poured upon a creature
that is good in itself. And therefore the devils, in so far as they have
a good nature, were ordained in the course of nature; and for their
actions see *Job* x.  
        *Secondly*, it can be said that the devils deputed to work are
not in Hell, but in the lower mists. And they have here an order among
themselves, which they will not have in Hell. From which it may be said
that all order ceased among them, as touching the attainment of
blessedness, at that time when they fell irrecoverably from such rank.
And it may be said that even in Hell there will be among them a
gradation of power, and of the affliction of punishments, inasmuch as
some, and not others, will be deputed to torment the souls. But this
gradation will come rather from God than from themselves, as will also
their torments.  
        *Thirdly*, when it is said that the higher devils, because they
sinned the more, are the more punished, and must therefore be the more
bound to the commission of these filthy acts, it is answered that sin
bears relation to punishment, and not to the act or operation of nature;
and therefore it is by reason of their nobility of nature that these are
not given to such filthiness, and it has nothing to do with their sin or
punishment. And though they are all impure spirits, and eager to do
harm, yet one is more so than another, in proportion as their natures
are the further thrust into darkness.  
        *Fourthly*, it is said that there is agreement among devils, but
of wickedness rather than friendship, in that they hate mankind, and
strive their utmost against justice. For such agreement is found among
the wicked, that they band themselves together, and depute those whose
talents seem suitable to the pursuit of particular iniquities.  
        *Fifthly*, although imprisonment is equally decreed for all, now
in the lower atmosphere and afterwards in Hell, yet not therefore are
equal penalties and duties equally ordained for them: for the nobler
they are in nature and the more potent in office, the heavier is the
torment to which they are subjected. See *Wisdom* vi: “The powerful
shall powerfully suffer torments.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question V](mm01_05a)  
What is the Source of the Increase of Works of Witchcraft? Whence comes
it that the Practice of Witchcraft hath so notably increased?  
