[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm01_04a)  [Next](mm01_06a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 1

## Question V

### What is the Source of the Increase of Works of Witchcraft? Whence comes it that the Practice of Witchcraft hath so notably increased?

        Is it in any way a Catholic opinion to hold that the origin and
growth of witchcraft proceed from the influence of the celestial bodies;
or from the abundant wickedness of men, and not from the abominations of
Incubi and Succubi? And it seems that it springs from man's own
wickedness. For S. Augustine says, in Book LXXXIII, that the cause of a
man's depravity lies in his own will, whether he sins at his own or at
another's suggestion. But a witch is depraved through sin, therefore the
cause of it is not the devil but human will. In the same place he speaks
of free-will, that everyone is the cause of his own wickedness. And he
reasons thus: that the sin of man proceeds from free-will, but the devil
cannot destroy free-will, for this would militate against liberty:
therefore the devil cannot be the cause of that or any other sin. Again,
in the book of Ecclesiastic Dogma it is said: Not all our evil thoughts
are stirred up by the devil, but sometimes they arise from the operation
of our own judgement.  
        Again, if the stars were not the cause of human actions both
good and bad, Astrologers would not so frequently foretell the truth
about the result of wars and other human acts: therefore they are in
some way a cause.  
        Again, the stars influence the devils themselves in the causing
of certain spells; and therefore they can all the more influence men.
Three proofs are adduced for this assumption. For certain men who are
called Lunatics are molested by devils more at one time than at another;
and the devils would not so behave, but would rather molest them at all
times, unless they themselves were deeply affected by certain phases of
the Moon. It is proved again from the fact the Necromancers observe
certain constellations for the invoking of devils, which they would not
do unless they knew that those devils were subject to the stars.  
        And this is also adduced as a proof; that according to S.
Augustine (*de Ciuitate Dei*, 10), the devils employ certain lower
bodies, such as herbs, stones, animals, and certain sounds and voices,
and figures. But since the heavenly bodies are of more potency than the
lower bodies, therefore the stars are a far greater influence than these
things. And witches are the more in subjection in that their deeds
proceed from the influence of those bodies, and not from the help of
evil spirits. And the argument is supported from I *Kings* xvi, where
Saul was vexed by a devil, but was calmed when David struck his harp
before him, and the evil departed.  
        *But against this*. It is impossible to produce an effect
without its cause; and the deeds of witches are such that they cannot be
done without the help of devils, as is shown by the description of
witches in S. Isidore, *Ethics* VIII. WItches are so called from the
enormity of their magic spells; for they disturb the elements and
confound the minds of men, and without any venomous draught, but merely
by virtue of incantations, destroy souls, etc. But this sort of effects
cannot be caused by the influence of the stars through the agency of a
man.  
        Besides, Aristotle says in his *Ethics* that it is difficult to
know what is the beginning of the operation of thought, and shows that
it must be something extrinsic. For everything that begins from a
beginning has some cause. Now a man begins to do that which he wills;
and he begins to will because of some pre-suggestion; and if this is
some precedent suggestion, it must either proceed from the infinite, or
there is some extrinsic beginning which first brings a suggestion to a
man. Unless indeed it be argued that this is a matter of chance, from
which it would follow that all human actions are fortuitous, which is
absurd. Therefore the beginning of good in the good is said to be God,
Who is not the cause of sin. But for the wicked, when a man begins to be
influenced towards and wills to commit sin, there must also be some
extrinsic cause of this. And this can be no other than the devil;
especially in the case of witches, as is shown above, for the stars
cannot influence such acts. Therefore the truth is plain.  
        Moreover, that which has power over the motive has also power
over the result which is caused by the motive. Now the motive of the
will is something perceived through the sense or the intellect, both of
which are subject to the power of the devil. For S. Augustine says in
Book 83: This evil, which is of the devil, creeps in by all the sensual
approaches; he places himself in figures, he adapts himself to colours,
he attaches himself to sounds, he lurks in angry and wrongful
conversation, he abides in smells, he impregnates with flavours and
fills with certain exhalations all the channels of the understanding.
Therefore it is seen that it is in the devil's power to influence the
will, which is directly the cause of sin.  
        Besides, everything which has a choice of two ways needs some
determining factor before it proceeds to the action. And the free-will
of man has the choice between good and ill; therefore when he embarks
upon sin, it needs that he is determined by something towards ill. And
this seems chiefly to be done by the devil, especially in the actions of
witches, whose will is made up for evil. Therefore it seems that the
evil will of the devil is the cause of evil will in man, especially in
witches. And the argument may be substantiated thus; that just as a good
Angel cleaves to good, so does a bad Angel to evil; but the former leads
a man into goodness, therefore the latter leads him into evil. For it
is, says Dionysius, the unalterable and fixed law of divinity, that the
lowest has it cause in the highest.  
        *Answer*. Such as contend that witchcraft has its origin in the
influence of the stars stand convicted of three errors. In the first
place, it is not possible that it originated from astromancers and
casters of horoscopes and fortune-tellers. For if it is asked whether
the vice of witchcraft in men is caused by the influence of the stars,
then, in consideration of the variety of men's characters, and for the
upholding of the true faith, a distinction must be maintained; namely,
that there are two ways in which it can be understood that men's
characters can be caused by the stars. Either completely and of
necessity, or by disposition and contingency. And as for the first, it
is not only false, but so heretical and contrary to the Christian
religion, that the true faith cannot be maintained in such an error. For
this reason, he who argues that everything of necessity proceeds from
the stars takes away all merit and, in consequence, all blame: also he
takes away Grace, and therefore Glory. For uprightness of character
suffers prejudice by this error, since the blame of the sinner redounds
upon the stars, licence to sin without culpability is conceded, and man
is committed to the worship and adoration of the stars.  
        But as for the contention that men's characters are
conditionally varied by the disposition of the stars, it is so far true
that is it not contrary to reason or faith. For it is obvious that the
disposition of a body variously causes many variations in the humours
and character of the soul; for generally the soul imitates the
complexions of the body, as it said in the Six Principles. Wherefore the
choleric are wrathful, the sanguine are kindly, the melancholy are
envious, and the phlegmatic are slothful. But this is not absolute; for
the soul is master of its body, especially when it is helped by Grace.
And we see many choleric who are gently, and melancholy who are kindly.
Therefore when the virtue of the stars influences the formation and
quality of a man's humours, it is agreed that they have some influence
over the character, but very distantly: for the virtue of the lower
nature has more effect on the quality of the humours than has the virtue
of the stars.  
        Wherefore S. Augustine (*de Ciuitate Dei*, V), where he resolves
a certain question of two brothers who fell ill and were cured
simultaneously, approves the reasoning of Hippocrates rather than that
of an Astronomer. For Hippocrates answered that it is owing to the
similarity of their humours; and the Astronomer answered that it was
owing the identity of their horoscopes. For the Physician's answer was
better, since he adduced the more powerful and immediate cause. Thus,
therefore, it must be said that the influence of the stars is to some
degree conducive to the wickedness of witches, if it be granted that
there is any such influence over the bodies that predisposes them to
this manner of abomination rather than to any other sort of works either
vicious or virtuous: but this disposition must not be said to be
necessary, immediate, and sufficient, but remote and contingent.  
        Neither is that objection valid which is based on the book of
the Philosophers on the properties of the elements, where it says that
kingdoms are emptied and lands depopulated at the conjunction of Jupiter
and Saturn; and it is argued from this that such things are to be
understood as being outside the free-will of men, and that therefore the
influence of the stars has power over free-will. For it is answered that
in this saying the Philosopher does not mean to imply that men cannot
resist the influence of that constellation towards dissensions, but that
they will not. For Ptolemy in *Almagest* says: A wise man will be the
master of the stars. For although, since Saturn has a melancholy and bad
influence and Jupiter a very good influence, the conjunction of Jupiter
and Saturn can dispose men to quarrels and discords; yet, through
free-will, men can resist that inclination, and very easily with the
help of God's grace.  
        And again it is no valid objection to quote S. John Damascene
where he says (Book II, chap. vi) that comets are often the sign of the
death of kings. For it will be answered that even if we follow the
opinion of S. John Damascene, which was, as is evident in the book
referred to, contrary to the opinion of the Philosophic Way, yet this is
no proof of the inevitability of human actions. For S. John considers
that a comet is not a natural creation, nor is it one of the stars set
in the firmament; wherefore neither its significance nor influence is
natural. For he says that comets are not of the stars which were created
in the beginning, but that they are made for a particular occasion, and
then dissolved, by Divine command. This then is the opinion of S. John
Damascene. But God by such a sign foretells the death of kings rather
than of other men, both because from this may arise the confusion of a
kingdom. And the Angels are more careful to watch over kings for the
general good; and kings are born and die under the ministry of Angels.  
        And there is no difficulty in the opinion of the Philosophers,
who say that a comet is a hot and dry conglomeration, generated in the
higher part of space near the fire, and that a conjoined globe of that
hot and dry vapour assumes the likeness of a star. But unincorporated
parts of that vapour stretch in long extremities joined to that globe,
and are a sort of adjunct to it. And according to this view, not of
itself but by accident, it predicts death which proceeds from hot and
dry infirmities. And since for the most part the rich are fed on things
of a hot and dry nature, therefore at such times many of the rich die;
among which the death of kings and princes is the most notable. And this
view is not far from the view of S. John Damascene, when carefully
considered, except as regards the operation and co-operation of the
Angels, which not even the philosophers can ignore. For indeed when the
vapours in their dryness and heat have nothing to do with the generation
of a comet, even then, for reasons already set out, a comet may be
formed by the operation of an Angel.  
        In this way the star which portended the death of the learned S.
Thomas was not one of the stars set in the firmament, but was formed by
an Angel from some convenient material, and, having performed it office,
was again dissolved.  
        From this we see that, whichever of those opinions we follow,
the stars have no inherent influence over the free-will, or,
consequently, over the malice and character of men.  
        It is to be noted also that Astronomers often foretell the
truth, and that their judgements are for the most part effective on one
province or one nation. And the reason is that they take their
judgements from the stars, which, according to the more probable view,
have a greater, though not an inevitable, influence over the actions of
mankind in general, that is, over one nation or province, than over one
individual person; and this because the greater part of one nation more
closely obeys the natural disposition of the body than does one single
man. But this is mentioned incidentally.  
        And the second of the three ways by which we vindicate the
Catholic standpoint is by refuting the errors of those who cast
Horoscopes and Mathematicians who worship the goddess of fortune. Of
these S. Isidore (*Ethics*, VIII. 9) says that those who cast Horoscopes
are so called from their examination of the stars at nativity, and are
commonly called Mathematicians; and in the same Book, chapter 2, he says
that Fortune has her name from fortuitousness. and is a sort of goddess
who mocks human affairs in a haphazard and fortuitous manner. Wherefore
she is called blind, since she runs here and there with no consideration
for desert, and comes indifferently to good and bad. So much for
Isidore. But to believe that there is such a goddess, or that the harm
done to bodies and creatures which is ascribed to witchcraft does not
actually proceed from witchcraft, but from that same goddess of Fortune,
is sheer idolatry: and also to assert that witches themselves were born
for that very purpose that they might perform such deeds in the world is
similarly alien to the Faith, and indeed to the general teaching of the
Philosophers. Anyone who pleases may refer to S. Thomas in the 3rd book
of his *Summa* of the Faith against the Gentiles. question 87, etc., and
he will find much to this effect.  
        Nevertheless one point must not be omitted, for the sake of
those who perhaps have not great quantity of books. It is there noted
that three things are to be considered in man, which are directed by
three celestial causes, namely, the act of the will, the act of the
intellect, and the act of the body. The first of these is governed
directly and soley by God, the second by an Angel, and the third by a
celestial body. For choice and will are directly governed by God for
good works, as the Scripture says in *Proverbs* xxi: The heart of the
king is in the hand of the Lord; he turneth it whithersoever he will.
And it says “the heart of the king” to signify that, as the great cannot
oppose His will, so are others even less able to do so. Also S. Paul
says: God who causeth us to wish and to perform that which is good.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question VI](mm01_06a)  
Concerning Witches who copulate with Devils. Why is it that Women are
chiefly addicted to Evil superstitions?  
