[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm01_13a)  [Next](mm01_15a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 1

## Question XIV

### The Enormity of Witches is Considered, and it is shown that the Whole Matter should be rightly Set Forth and Declared.

        Concerning the enormity of crimes, it is asked whether the
crimes of witches exceed, both in guilt, in pain, and in loss, all the
evils which God allows and has permitted from the beginning of the world
up till now. And it seems that they do not, especially as regards guilt.
For the sin which a man commits when he could easily avoid it is greater
than the sin which another man commits when he could not so easily avoid
it. This is shown by S. Augustine, *de Ciuit. Dei*: There is great
wickedness in sinning when it is so easy not to sin. But Adam, and
others who have sinned when in a state of perfection or even of grace,
could more easily because of the help of grace have avoided their sins —
especially Adam who was created in grace — than many witches, who have
not shared in such gifts. Therefore the sins of such are greater than
all the crimes of witches.  
        And again in respect of punishment: the greatest punishment is
due to the greater blame. But Adam's sin was the most heavily punished,
as is plainly proved by the fact that both his guilt and his punishment
are shown in all his posterity by the inheritance of original sin.
Therefore his sin is greater than all other sins.  
        And again, the same is argued in respect of loss. For according
to S. Augustine: A thing is evil in that it takes away from the good;
therefore where there is the more good lost, there the greater evil has
gone before. But the sin of our first parent brought the greatest loss
both to nature and to grace, since it deprived us of innocence and
immortality; and no subsequent sin has brought such loss, therefore,
etc.  
        But the contrary side: that which includes the most causes of
evil is the greater evil, and such are the sins of witches. For they
can, with God's permission, bring every evil upon that which is good by
nature and in form, as is declared in the Papal Bull. Besides, Adam
sinned only in doing that which was wrong in one of two ways; for it was
forbidden, but was not wrong in itself: but witches and other sinners
sin in doing that which is wrong in both ways, wrong in itself, and
forbidden, such as murders and many other forbidden things. Therefore
their sins are heavier than other sins.  
        Besides, sin which comes from definite malice is heavier than
sin which comes from ignorance. But witches, out of great malice,
despise the Faith and the sacraments of the Faith, as many of them have
confessed.  
        *Answer*. The evils which are perpetrated by modern witches
exceed all other sin which God has ever permitted to be done, as was
said in the title of this Question. And this can be shown in three ways,
in so far as they are sins involving perversity of character, though it
is different with the sins that contravene the other Theological
virtues. First in general, by comparing their works indifferently with
any other worldly crimes. Secondly in particular, by considering the
species of the superstition and into what pact they have entered with
the devil. And thirdly, by comparing their sins with the sins of the bad
Angels and even with that of our first parents.  
        And first, sin is threefold, involving guilt, punishment, and
loss. Good also is correspondingly threefold, involving righteousness,
felicity, and use. And righteousness corresponds with the guilt,
felicity with punishment, and use with loss.  
        That the guilt of witches exceeds all other sins is apparent in
this way. For according to the teaching of S. Thomas (II, 22, art. 2),
there is in the matter of sin much that may be considered whereby the
gravity or lightness of the sin may be deduced; and the same sin may be
found heavy in one and light in another. For example, we can say that in
fornication a young man sins, but an old man is mad. Yet those sins are,
simply speaking, the heavier which are not only attended by the more
extensive and more powerful circumstances, but are in their nature and
quantity of a more essentially serious sort.  
        And so we can say that, though the sin of Adam was in some
respects heavier than all other sins, inasmuch as he fell to the
instigation of a smaller temptation, since it came only from within; and
also because he could more easily have resisted on account of the
original justice in which he was created: nevertheless in the form and
quantity of sin, and in other respects which aggravate the sin the more
in that it is the cause of many yet heavier sins, the sins of witches
exceed all other sins. And this will be made still clearer in two
ways.  
        For one sin is said to be greater than another in one or other
of the following respects: in causality, as was the sin of Lucifer; in
generality, as Adam's sin; in hideousness, as was the sin of Judas; in
the difficulty of forgiving it, as is the sin against the Holy Ghost; in
danger, as in the sin of covetousness; in inclination, as is the sin of
the flesh; in the offending of the Divine Majesty, as is the sin of
idolatry and infidelity; in the difficulty of combating it, as the sin
of pride; in blindness of mind, as the sin of anger. Accordingly, after
the sin of Lucifer, the works of witches exceed all other sins, in
hideousness since they deny Him crucified, in inclination since the
commit nastiness of the flesh with devils, in blindness of mind since in
a pure spirit of malignity the rage and bring every injury upon the
souls and bodies of men and beasts, as has been shown from what has been
said before.  
        And this, indeed, is indicated, according to S. Isidore, by the
word. For they are called witches (*maleficae*) on account of the
enormity of their crimes, as has been said above.  
        Our contention is also deduced from the following. There are two
gradations in sin, a turning away, and a change of heart. See our
quotation from S. Augustine: Sin is to reject the incommutable good, and
to cleave to things that are variable. And the turning away from God is
as it were formal, just as the change of heart is as it were material.
Therefore the more a man is separated from God by it, the heavier is the
sin. And since infidelity is the chief cause of man's separation from
God, the infidelity of witches stands out as the greatest of sins. And
this is given the name of Heresy, which is Apostasy from the Faith; and
in this witches sin throughout their whole lives.  
        For the sin of infidelity consists in opposing the Faith; and
this may come about in two ways, by opposing a faith which has not yet
been received, or by opposing it after it has been received. Of the
first sort is the infidelity of the Pagans or Gentiles. In the second
way, the Christian Faith may be denied in two ways: either by denying
the prophecies concerning it, or by denying the actual manifestation of
its truth. And the first of these is the infidelity of the Jews, and the
second the infidelity of Heretics.  
        It is clear from this that the heresy of witches is the most
heinous of the three degrees of infidelity; and this fact is proved both
by reason and authority. For it is said in II. S. *Peter* ii: It has
been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than,
after they have known it, to turn from it. And it is reasonable to
suppose that, just as he who does not perform what he has promised
commits a greater sin than he who does not perform what he never
promised, so the infidelity of the heretics, who while professing the
faith of the Gospel fight against it by corrupting it, is a greater sin
than that of the Jews and Pagans.  
        And again, the Jews sin more greatly than the Pagans; for they
received the prophecy of the Christian Faith in the Old Law, which they
corrupt through badly interpreting it, which is not the case with the
Pagans. Therefore their infidelity is a greater sin than that of the
Gentiles, who never received the Faith of the Gospel. But concerning
Apostasy, S. Thomas says in the *Second of the Second*, question 12:
Apostasy means a turning away from God and religion, and this may happen
according to the different ways by which man is joined to God; that is,
by faith, or by the subjection of the will to obedience, or by religion
and Holy Orders. S. Raymund and Hostiensis say that Apostasy is a rash
departure from the state of faith or obedience or Religion. Now if that
which precedes is removed, that which follows from it is also removed;
but the converse proposition is not true. Therefore Apostasy from the
Faith is a greater sin than the other two forms of infidelity, since in
its case a precedent Religion has been removed.  
        But according to S. Raymund, a man is not to be judged an
Apostate or deserter, however far and long he may have strayed, unless
he shows by his subsequent life that he has not though of returning to
the Faith. And this would be shown in the case of a cleric if he were to
marry a wife, or commit some similar crime. In the same way it is an
Apostasy of disobedience when a man wilfully spurns the teaching of the
Church and the Bishops. And such a man must be convicted of his infamy,
and be excommunicated.  
        Now when we speak of the Apostasy of witches, we mean the
Apostasy of perfidy; and this is so much the more heinous, in that it
springs from a pact made with the enemy of the Faith and the way of
salvation. For witches are bound to make this pact, which is exacted by
that enemy either in part or wholly. For we Inquisitors have found some
witches who have denied all the articles of Faith, and others who have
denied only a certain number of them; but they are all bound to deny
true and sacramental confession. And so, even the Apostasy of Julian
does not seem to have been so great, although in other respects he did
more harm against the Church; but we cannot speak of that here.  
        But it may be incidentally objected that it is possible that
they may keep the Faith in the thoughts of their hearts, which God
alone, and not even any Angel, can see into; but do reverence and
obedience to the devil only in outward form. The answer to this seems to
be that there are two degrees of the Apostasy of perfidy. One consists
in outward acts of infidelity, without the formation of any pact with
the devil, as when one lives in the lands of the infidels and conforms
his life to that of the Mohammedans. The other consists in a pact made
with the devil by one who lives in Christian lands, In the first case,
men who keep the Faith in their hearts but deny it in their outward
acts, though they are not Apostates or Heretics, are guilty of deadly
sin. For in this way Solomon showed reverence to the gods of his wives.
And no one can be excused on the ground that he does this through fear;
for S. Augustine says: It is better to die of hunger than to be fed by
Idolaters. But however much witches may retain the Faith in their hearts
while denying it with their lips, they are still to be judged Apostates,
since they have made a treaty with death and a compact with hell.
Wherefore S. Thomas (II, 4), speaking of such magic works, and of those
who in any way seek help from devils, says: They are all Apostates from
the Faith, by reason of a pact made with the Devil, either in word, when
some invocation is used, or by some deed, even if there is no actual
sacrifice. For no man can serve two masters.  
        To the same effect writes Blessed Albertus Magnus, where he asks
whether the sin of Magicians and Astrologers is an Apostasy from the
Faith. And he answers: In such there is always Apostasy either of word
or of deed. For if any invocations are made, then there is an open pact
made with the devil, and it is plainly Apostasy in word. But if their
magic is simply a matter of action, then it is Apostasy in deed. And
since in all these there is abuse of the Faith, seeing that they look
for from the devil what they ought to look for from God, therefore they
are always to be judged Apostates. See how clearly they set forth two
degrees of Apostasy, understanding a third, namely, that of thought. And
even if this last is lacking, yet witches are judged to be Apostates in
word and deed. Therefore, as will be shown, they must be subject to the
punishment of Heretics and Apostates.  
        And there is in them a third enormity of crime, exceeding all
other heresies. For S. Augustine (XXVIII, 1 and 2) tells us that the
whole life of infidels is a sin; and the gloss on *Romans* xiv says that
everything which comes not of faith is sin. What then is to be thought
of the whole life of witches, that is, of all their other actions which
are not pleasing to the devil, such as fasting, attending church,
communicating, and other things? For in all these things they commit
deadly sin, as is shown as follows. So far have they fallen in sin that,
although they have not lost all power of amendment (since sin does not
corrupt the whole good of their nature, and a natural light yet remains
in them); yet, because of their homage given to the devil, and unless
they be absolved from it, all their works, even when they appear to be
good, are rather of an evil nature. And this is not seen to be the case
with other infidels.  
        For according to S. Thomas in the *Second of the Second*,
question 10, Whether every action of an infidel is a sin; he says that
the deeds of the unfaithful which are, of themselves, good, such as
fasting, almsgiving, and deeds of that sort, are no merit to them
because of their infidelity, which is a most grievous sin. Yet sin does
not corrupt the whole good of their nature, and there remains in them a
natural light. Therefore not ever deed of theirs is mortal sin, but only
those which proceed from their very infidelity, or are related to it.
For example, a Saracen fasts, to observe the law of Mohammed as to
fasting, and a Jew observes his Feast days; but in such things he is
guilty of mortal sin. And in this way is to be understood the above
dictum of S. Augustine, that the whole life of infidels is sin.

*That Witches Deserve the heaviest Punishment above All the Criminals of
the World.*

        The crimes of witches, then, exceed the sins of all others; and
we now declare what punishment they deserve, whether as Heretics or as
Apostates. Now Heretics, according to S. Raymund, are punished in
various ways, as by excommunication, deposition, confiscation of their
goods, and death. The reader can be fully informed concerning all these
by consulting the law relating to the sentence of excommunication.
Indeed even their followers, protectors, patrons and defenders incur the
heaviest penalties. For, besides the punishment of excommunication
inflicted upon them, Heretics, together with their patrons, protectors
and defenders, and with their children to the second generation on the
father's side, and to the first degree on the mother's side, are
admitted to no benefit or office of the Church. And if a Heretic have
Catholic children, for the heinousness of his crime they are deprived of
their paternal inheritance. And if a man be convicted, and refuse to be
converted and abjure his heresy, he must at once be burned, if he is a
layman. For if they who counterfeit money are summarily put to death,
how much more must they who counterfeit the Faith? But if he is a
cleric, after solemn degradation he is handed over to the secular Court
to be put to death. But if they return to the Faith, they are to be
imprisoned for life. But in practice they are treated more leniently
after recantation than they should be according to the judgement of the
Bishops and Inquisition, as will be shown in the Third Part, where the
various methods of sentencing such are treated of; that is to say, those
who are arrested and convicted and have recanted their error.  
        But to punish witches in these ways does not seem sufficient,
since they are not simple Heretics, but Apostates. More than this, in
their very apostasy they do not deny the Faith for any fear of men or
for any delight of the flesh, as has been said before; but, apart from
their abnegation, even give homage to the very devils by offering them
their bodies and souls. Is is clear enough from this that, however much
they are penitent and return to the Faith, they must not be punished
like other Heretics with lifelong imprisonment, but must be made to
suffer the extreme penalty. And because of the temporal injury which
they do to men and beasts in various ways, the laws demand this. Is is
even equally culpable to learn as it is to teach such iniquities, say
the laws concerning Soothsayers. Then how much more emphatically do they
speak concerning witches, where they say that the penalty for them is
the confiscation of their goods and decapitation. The laws also say much
concerning those who by witchcraft provoke a woman to lust, or,
conversely, cohabit with beasts. But these matters were touched upon on
the First Question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XV](mm01_15a)  
It is Shown that, on Account of the Sins of Witches, the Innocent are
often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes even for their Own Sins.  
