[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm01_08a)  [Next](mm01_10a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 1

## Question IX

### Whether Witches may work some Prestidigatory Illusion so that the Male Organ appears to be entirely removed and separate from the Body.

        Here is declared the truth about diabolic operations with regard
to the male organ. And to make plain the facts in this matter, it is
asked whether witches can with the help of devils really and actually
remove the member, or whether they only do so apparently by some glamour
or illusion. And that they can actually do so is argued *a fortiori*;
for since devils can do greater things than this, as killing them or
carrying them from place to place - as was shown above in the cases of
Job and Tobias - therefore they can also truly and actually remove men's
members.  
        Again, an argument is taken from the gloss on the visitations of
bad Angels, in the Psalms: God punishes by means of bad Angels, as He
often punished the People of Israel with various diseases, truly and
actually visited upon their bodies. Therefore the member is equally
subject to such visitations.  
        It may be said that this is done with the Divine permission. And
in that case, it has already been said that God allows more power of
witchcraft over the genital functions, on account of the first
corruption of sin which came to us from the act of generation, so also
He allows greater power over the actual genital organ, even to its
removal.  
        And again, it was a greater thing to turn Lot's wife into a
pillar of salt than it is to take away the male organ; and that
(*Genesis* xix) was a real and actual, not an apparent, metamorphosis
(for it is said that that pillar is still to be seen), And this was done
by a bad Angel; just as the good Angels struck the men of Sodom with
blindness, so that they could not find the door of the house. And so it
was with the other punishments of the men of Gomorrah. The gloss,
indeed, affirms that Lot's wife was herself tainted with that vice, and
therefore she was punished.  
        And again, whoever can create a natural shape can also take it
away. But devils have created many natural shapes, as is clear from
Pharao's magicians, who with the help of devils made frogs and serpents.
Also S. Augustine, in Book LXXXIII, says that those things which are
visibly done by the lower powers of the air cannot be considered to be
mere illusions; but even men are able, by some skilful incision, to
remove the male organ; therefore devils can do invisibly what others do
visibly.  
        But on the contrary side, S. Augustine (*de Ciuitate Dei*,
XVIII) says: It is not to be believed that, through the art or power of
devils, man's body can be changed into the likeness of a beast;
therefore it is equally impossible that that should be removed which is
essential to the truth of the human body, Also he says (*de Trinitate*,
III): It must not be thought that this substance of visible matter is
subject to the will of those fallen angels; for it is subject only to
God.  
        *Answer*. There is no doubt that certain witches can do
marvellous things with regard to male organs, for this agrees with what
has been seen and heard by many, and with the general account of what
has been known concerning that member through the senses of sight and
touch. And as to how this thing is possible, it is to be said that it
can be done in two ways, either actually and in fact, as the first
arguments have said, or through some prestige or glamour. But when it is
performed by witches, it is only a matter of glamour; although it is no
illusion in the opinion of the sufferer. For his imagination can really
and actually believe that something is not present, since by none of his
exterior sense, such as sight or touch, can he perceive that it is
present.  
        From this it may be said that there is a true abstraction of the
member in imagination, although not in fact; and several things are to
be noted as to how this happens. And first as to two methods by which it
can be done. It is no wonder that the devil can deceive the outer human
senses, since, as has been treated of above, he can illude the inner
senses, by bringing to actual perception ideas that are stored in the
imagination. Moreover, he deceives men in their natural functions,
causing that which is visible to be invisible to them, and that which is
tangible to be intangible, and the audible inaudible, and so with the
other senses. But such things are not true in actual fact, since they
are caused through some defect introduced in the sense, such as the eyes
or the ears, or the touch, by reason of which defect a man's judgement
is deceived.  
        And we can illustrate this from certain natural phenomena. For
sweet wine appears bitter on the tongue of the fevered, his taste being
deceived not by the actual fact, but through his disease. So also in the
case under consideration, the deception is not due to fact, since the
member is still actually in its place; but it is an illusion of the
sense with regard to it.  
        Again, as has been said above concerning the generative powers,
the devil can obstruct that action by imposing some other body of the
same colour and appearance, in such a way that some smoothly fashioned
body in the colour of flesh is interposed between the sight and touch,
and between the true body of the sufferer, so that it seems to him that
he can see and feel nothing but a smooth body with its surface
interrupted by no genital organ. See the sayings of S. Thomas (2 dist.
8. artic. 5) concerning glamours and illusions, and also in the second
of the second, 91, and in his questions concerning Sin; where he
frequently quotes that of S. Augustine in Book LXXXIII: This evil of the
devil creeps in through all the sensual approaches; he gives himself to
figures, he adapts himself to colours, he abides in sounds, he lurks in
smells, he infuses himself into flavours.  
        Besides, it is to be considered that such an illusion of the
sight and touch can be caused not only by the interposition of some
smooth unmembered body, but also by the summoning to the fancy or
imagination of certain forms and ideas latent in the mind, in such a way
that a thing is imagined as being perceived then for the first time.
For, as was shown in the preceding question, devils can by their own
power change bodies locally; and just as the disposition or humour can
be affected in this way, so can the natural functions. I speak of things
which appear natural to the imagination or senses. For Aristotle in the
*de Somno et Uigila* says, assigning the cause of apparitions in dreams,
that when an animal sleeps much blood flows to the inner consciousness,
and thence come ideas or impressions derived from actual previous
experiences stored in the mind. It has already been defined how thus
certain appearance convey the impressions of new experiences. And since
this can happen naturally, much more can the devil call to the
imagination the appearance of a smooth body unprovided with the virile
member, in such a way that the sense believe it to be an actual fact.  
        Secondly, some other methods are to be noted which are easier to
understand and to explain. For, according to S. Isidore (*Etym.* VIII,
9), a glamour is nothing but a certain delusion of the senses, and
especially of the eyes. And for this reason it is also called a
prestige, from *prestringo*, since the sight of the eyes is so fettered
that things seem to be other than they are. And Alexander of Hales, Part
2, says that a prestige, properly understood, is an illusion of the
devil, which is not caused by any change in matter, but only exists in
the mind of him who is deluded, either as to his inner or outer
perceptions.  
        Wherefore, in a manner of speaking, we may say even of human
prestidigitatory art, that it can be effected in three ways. For the
first, it can be done without devils, since it is artificially done by
the agility of men who show things and conceal them, as in the case of
the tricks of conjurers and ventriloquists. The second method is also
without the help of devils; as when men can use some natural virtue in
natural bodies or minerals so as to impart to such objects some other
appearance quite different from their true appearance. Wherefore,
according to S. Thomas (I, 114, 4), and several others, men, by the
smoke of certain smouldering or lighted herbs, can make rods appear to
be serpents.  
        The third method of delusion is effected with the help of
devils, the permission of God being granted. For it is clear that devils
have, of their nature, some power over certain earthly matters, which
they exercise upon them, when God permits, so that things appear to be
other than they are.  
        And as to this third method, it is to be noted that the devil
has fives ways in which he can delude anyone so that he thinks a thing
to be other than it is. First, by an artificial tricks, as has been
said; for that which a man can do by art, the devil can do even better.
Second, by a natural method, by the application, as has been said, and
interposition of some substance so as to hide the true body, or by
confusing it in man's fancy. The third way is when in an assumed body he
presents himself as being something which he is not; as witness the
story which S. Gregory tells in his *First Dialogue* of a Nun, who ate a
lettuce, which, however, as the devil confessed, was not a lettuce, but
the devil in the form of a lettuce, or in the lettuce itself. Or as when
he appeared to S. Antony in a lump of gold which he found in the desert.
Or as when he touches a real man, and makes him appear like a brute
animal, as will shortly be explained. The fourth method is when he
confuses the organ of sight, so that a clear thing seems hazy, or the
converse, or when an old woman appears to be a young girl. For even
after weeping the light appears different from what it was before. His
fifth method is by working in the imaginative power, and, by a
disturbance of the humours, effecting a transmutation in the forms
perceived by the senses, as has been treated of before, so that the
senses then perceive as it were fresh and new images. And accordingly,
by the last three of these methods, and even by the second, the devil
can cast a glamour over the senses of a man. Wherefore there is no
difficulty in his concealing the virile member by some prestige or
glamour. And a manifest proof or example of this, which was revealed to
us in our Inquisitorial capacity, will be set forth later, where more is
recounted of these and other matters in the Second Part of this
Treatise.

*How a Bewitchment can be Distinguished from a Natural Defect.*

        An incidental question, with certain other difficulties,
follows. Peter's member has been taken off, and he does not know whether
it is by witchcraft or in some other way by the devil's power, with the
permission of God. Are there any ways of determining or distinguishing
between these? It can be answered as follows. First, that those to whom
such things most commonly happen are adulterers or fornicators. For when
they fail to respond to the demand of their mistress, or if they wish to
desert them and attach themselves to other women, then their mistress,
out of vengeance, through some other power causes their members to be
taken off. Secondly, it can be distinguished by the fact that it is not
permanent. For if it is not due to witchcraft, then the loss is not
permanent, but it will be restored some time.  
        But here there arises another doubt, whether it is due to the
nature of the witchcraft that it is not permanent. It is answered that
it can be permanent, and last until death, just as the Canonists and
Theologians judge concerning the impediment of witchcraft in matrimony,
that the temporary can become permanent. For Godfrey says in his
*Summa*: A bewitchment cannot always be removed by him who caused it,
either because he is dead, or because he does not know how to remove it,
or because the charm has been lost. Wherefore we may say in the same way
that the charm which has been worked on Peter will be permanent if the
witch who did it cannot heal him.  
        For there are three degrees of witches. For some both heal and
harm; some harm, but cannot heal; and some seem able only to heal, that
is, to take away injuries, as will be shown later. For thus it happened
to us: Two witches were quarreling, and while they were taunting each
other one said: I am not so wicked as you, for I know how to heal those
whom I injure. The charm will also be permanent if, before it has been
healed, the witch departs, either by changing her dwelling or by dying.
For S. Thomas also says: Any charm may be permanent when it is such as
can have no human remedy; or if it has a remedy, it is not known to men,
or unlawful; although God can find a remedy through a holy Angel who can
coerce the devil, if not the witch.  
        However, the chief remedy against witchcraft is the sacrament of
Penitence. For bodily infirmity often proceeds from sin. And how the
charms or witches can be removed will be shown in the Second Part of
this Treatise, and in the Second QUestion, chapter VI, where other
different matters are treated of and explained.

*Solutions of the Arguments.*

        For the first, it is clear that there is no doubt but that, just
as, with God's permission, they can kill men, so also can devils taken
off that member, as well as others, truly and actually. But then the
devils do not work through the medium of witches, concerning which
mention has already been made. And from this the answer to the second
argument is also made clear. But this is to be said: that God allows
more power of witchcraft over the genital forces because, etc.; and
therefore even allows that that member should be truly and actually
taken off. But it is not valid to say that this always happens. For it
would not be after the manner of witchcraft for it to happen so; and
even the witches, when they do such works, do not pretend that they have
not the power to restore the member when they wish to and know how to do
so. From which it is clear that it is not actually taken off, but only
by a glamour. As for the third, concerning the metamorphosis of Lot's
wife, we say that this was actual, and not a glamour. And as to the
fourth, that devils can create certain substantial shapes, and therefore
can also remove them: it is to be said with regard to Pharaoh's
magicians that they made true serpents; and that devils can, with the
help of another agent, produce certain effects on imperfect creatures
which they cannot on men, who are God's chief care. For it is said: Does
God care for oxen? They can, nevertheless, with the permission of God,
do to men true and actual harm, as also they can create a glamour of
harm, and by this the answer to the last argument is made clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question X](mm01_10a)  
Whether Witches can by some Glamour Change Men into Beasts.  
