[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm01_01a)  [Next](mm01_03a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 1

## Question II

### If it be in Accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that in Order to bring about some Effect of Magic, the Devil must intimately co-operate with the Witch, or whether one without the other, that is to say, the Devil without the Witch, or conversely, could produce such an Effect.

        If it be in accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that
in order to bring about some effect of magic, the devil must intimately
co-operate with the witch, or whether one without the other, that is to
say, the devil without the witch, or conversely, could produce such an
effect.  
        And the first argument is this: That the devil can bring about
an effect of magic without the co-operation of any witch. So S.
Augustine holds. All things which visibly happen so that they can be
seen, may (it is believed) be the work of the inferior powers of the
air. But bodily ills and ailments are certainly not invisible, nay
rather, they are evident to the senses, therefore they can be brought
about by devils. Moreover, we learn from the Holy Scriptures of the
disasters which fell upon Job, how fire fell from heaven and striking
the sheep and the servants consumed them, and how a violent wind threw
down the four corners of a house so that it fell upon his children and
slew them all. The devil by himself without the co-operation of any
witches, but merely by God's permission alone, was able to bring about
all these disasters. Therefore he can certainly do many things which are
often ascribed to the work of witches.  
        And this is obvious from the account of the seven husbands of
the maiden Sara, whom a devil killed. Moreover, whatever a superior
power is able to do, it is able to do without reference to a power
superior to it, and a superior power can all the more work without
reference to an inferior power. But an inferior power can cause
hailstorms and bring about diseases without the help of a power greater
than itself. For Blessed Albertus Magnus in his work *De passionibus
aeris* says that rotten sage, if used as he explains, and thrown into
running water, will arouse most fearful tempests and storms.  
        Moreover, it may be said that the devil makes use of a witch,
not because he has need of any such agent, but because he is seeking the
perdition of the witch. We may refer to what Aristotle says in the 3rd
book of his *Ethics*. Evil is a voluntary act which is proved by the
fact that nobody performs an unjust action, and a man who commits a rape
does this for the sake of pleasure, not merely doing evil for evil's
sake. Yet the law punishes those who have done evil as if they had acted
merely for the sake of doing evil. Therefore if the devil works by means
of a witch he is merely employing an instrument; and since an instrument
depends upon the will of the person who employs it and does not act of
its own free will, therefore the guilt of the action ought not to be
laid to the charge of the witch, and in consequence she should not be
punished.

        But an opposite opinion holds that the devil cannot so easily
and readily do harm by himself to mankind, as he can harm them through
the instrumentality of witches, although they are his servants. In the
first place we may consider the act of generation. But for every act
which has an effect upon another some kind of contact must be
established, and because the devil, who is a spirit, can have no such
actual contact with a human body, since there is nothing common of this
kind between them, therefore he uses some human instruments, and upon
these he bestows the power of hurting by bodily touch. And many hold
this to be proven by the text, and the gloss upon the text, in the 3rd
chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the *Galatians*: O senseless Galatians,
who hath bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? And the gloss
upon this passage refers to those who have singularly fiery and baleful
eyes, who by a mere look can harm others, especially young children. And
Avicenna also bears this out, *Naturalism*, Book 3, c. the last, when he
says; “Very often the soul may have as much influence upon the body of
another to the same extent as it has upon its own body, for such is the
influence of the eyes of anyone who by his glance attracts and
fascinates another.” And the same opinion is maintained by Al-Gazali in
the 5th book and 10th c. of his *Physics*. Avicenna also suggests,
although he does not put this opinion forward as irrefutable, that the
power of the imagination can actually change or seem to change
extraneous bodies, in cases where the power of the imagination is too
unrestrained; and hence we father that the power of the imagination is
not to be considered as distinct from a man's other sensible powers,
since it is common to them all, but to some extent it includes all those
other powers. And this is true, because such a power of the imagination
can change adjacent bodies, as, for example, when a man is able to walk
along some narrow beam which is stretched down the middle of a street.
But yet if this beam were suspended over deep water he would not dare to
walk along it, because his imagination would most strongly impress upon
his mind the idea of falling, and therefore his body and the power of
his limbs would not obey his imagination, and they would not obey the
contrary thereto, that is to say, walking directly and without
hesitation. This change may be compared to the influence exercised by
the eyes of a person who has such influence, and so a mental change is
brought about although there is not any actual and bodily change.  
        Moreover, if it be argued that such a change is cause by a
living body owing to the influence of the mind upon some other living
body, this answer may be given. In the presence of a murderer blood
flows from the wounds in the corpse of the person he has slain.
Therefore without any mental powers bodies can produce wonderful
effects, and so a living man if he pass by near the corpse of a murdered
man, although he may not be aware of the dead body, is often seized with
fear.  
        Again, there are some things in nature which have certain hidden
powers, the reason for which man does not know; such, for example, is
the lodestone, which attracts steel and many other such things, which S.
Augustine mentions in the 20th book *Of the City of God*.

        And so women in order to bring about changes in the bodies of
others sometimes make use of certain things, which exceed our knowledge,
but this is without any aid from the devil. And because these remedies
are mysterious we must not therefore ascribe them to the power of the
devil as we should ascribe evil spells wrought by witches.  
        Moreover, witches use certain images and other strange periapts,
which they are wont to place under the lintels of the doors of houses,
or in those meadows where flocks are herding, or even where men
congregate, and thus they cast spells over their victims, who have
oft-times been known to die. But because such extraordinary effects can
proceed from these images it would appear that the influence of these
images is in proportion to the influence of the stars over human bodies,
for as natural bodies are influenced by heavenly bodies, so may
artificial bodies likewise be thus influenced. But natural bodies may
find the benefit of certain secret but good influences. Therefore
artificial bodies may receive such influence. Hence it is plain that
those who perform works of healing may well perform them by means of
such good influences, and this has no connexion at all with any evil
power.

        Moreover, it would seem that most extraordinary and miraculous
events come to pass by the working of the power of nature. For wonderful
and terrible and amazing things happen owing to natural forces. And this
S. Gregory points out in his *Second Dialogue*. The Saints perform
miracles, sometimes by a prayer, sometimes by their power alone. There
are examples of each; S. Peter by praying raised to life Tabitha, who
was dead. By rebuking Ananias and Sapphira, who were telling a lie, he
slew the without any prayer. Therefore a man by his mental influence can
change a material body into another, or he can change such a body from
health to sickness and conversely.  
        Moreover, the human body is nobler than any other body, but
because of the passions of the mind the human body changes and becomes
hot or cold, as is the case with angry men or men who are afraid: and so
even greater change takes place with regard to the effects of sickness
and death, which by their power can greatly change a material body.  
        But certain objections must be allowed. The influence of the
mind cannot make an impression upon any form except by the intervention
of some agent, as we have said above. And these are the words of S.
Augustine in the book which we have already quoted: It is incredible
that the angels who fell from Heaven should be obedient to any material
things, for the obey God only. And much less can a man of his natural
power bring about extraordinary and evil effects. The answer must be
made, there are even to-day many who err greatly on this point, making
excuses for witches and laying the whole blame upon the craft of the
devil, or ascribing the changes that they work to some natural
alteration. These errors may be easily made clear. First, by the
description of witches which S. Isidore gives in his *Etymologiae*, c.
9: Witches are so called on account of the blackness of their guilt,
that is to say, their deeds are more evil than those of any other
malefactors. He continues: They stir up and confound the elements by the
aid of the devil, and arouse terrible hailstorms and tempests. Moreover,
he says they distract the minds of men, driving them to madness, insane
hatred, and inordinate lusts. Again, he continues, by the terrible
influence of their spells alone, as it were by a draught of poison, they
can destroy life.  
        And the words of S. Augustine in his book on *The City of God*
are very much to the point, for he tells us who magicians and witches
really are. Magicians, who are commonly called witches, are thus termed
on account of the magnitude of their evil deeds. These are they who by
the permission of God disturb the elements, who drive to distraction the
minds of men, such as have lost their trust in God, and by the terrible
power of their evil spells, without any actual draught or poison, kill
human beings. As Lucan says: A mind which has not been corrupted by any
noxious drink perishes forspoken by some evil charm. For having summoned
devils to their aid they actually dare to heap harms upon mankind, and
even to destroy their enemies by their evil spells. And it is certain
that in operations of this kind the witch works in close conjunction
with the devil. Secondly, punishments are of four kinds: beneficial,
hurtful, wrought by witchcraft, and natural. Beneficial punishments are
meted out by the ministry of good Angels, just as hurtful punishments
proceed from evil spirits. Moses smote Egypt with ten plagues by the
ministry of good Angels, and the magicians were only able to perform
three of these miracles by the aid of the devil. And the pestilence
which fell upon the people for three days because of the sin of David
who numbered the people, and the 72,000 men who were slain in one night
in the army of Sennacherib, were miracles wrought by the Angels of God,
that is, by good Angels who feared God and knew that they were carrying
out His commands.  
        Destructive harm, however, is wrought by the medium of bad
angels, at whose hands the children of Israel in the desert were often
afflicted. And those harms which are simply evil and nothing more are
brought about by the devil, who works through the medium of sorcerers
and witches. There are also natural harms which in some manner depend
upon the conjunction of heavenly bodies, such as dearth, drought,
tempests, and similar effects of nature.

        It is obvious that there is a vast difference between all these
causes, circumstances, and happenings. For Job was afflicted by the
devil with a harmful disease, but this is nothing to the purpose. And if
anybody who is too clever and over-curious asks how it was that Job was
afflicted with this disease by the devil without the aid of some
sorcerer or witch, let him know that he is merely beating the air and
not informing himself as to the real truth. For in the time of Job there
were no sorcerers and witches, and such abominations were not yet
practised. But the providence of God wished that by the example of Job
the power of the devil even over good men might be manifested, so that
we might learn to be on our guard against Satan, and, moreover, by the
example of this holy patriarch the glory of God shines abroad, since
nothing happens save what is permitted by God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question III](mm01_03a)  
Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and Succubi.  
