[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm02a13a)  [Next](mm02a15a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 2

## Chapter XIV

### Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in Various Ways.

        When S. Paul said, Doth God care for oxen? he meant that, though
all things are subject to Divine providence, both man and beast each in
its degree, as the Psalmist says, yet the sons of men are especially in
His governance and under the protection of His wings. I say, therefore,
if men are injured by witches, with God's permission, both the innocent
and just as well as sinners, and if parents are bewitched in their
children, as being part of their possessions, who can then presume to
doubt that, with God's permission, various injuries can be brought by
witches upon cattle and the fruits of the earth, which are also part of
men's possessions? For so was Job stricken by the devil and lost all his
cattle. So also there is not even the smallest farm where women do not
injure each other's cows, by drying up their milk, and very often
killing them.  
        But first let us consider the smallest of these injuries, that
of drying up the milk. If it is asked how they can do this, it can be
answered that, according to Blessed Albert in his *Book on Animals*,
milk is naturally menstrual in any animal; and, like another flux in
women, when it is not stopped by some natural infirmity, it is due to
witchcraft that it is stopped. Now the flow of milk is naturally stopped
when the animal becomes pregnant; and it is stopped by an accidental
infirmity when the animal eats some herb the nature of which is to dry
up the milk and make the cow ill.  
        But they can cause this in various ways by witchcraft. For on
the more holy nights according to the instructions of the devil and for
the greater offence to the Divine Majesty of God, a witch will sit down
in a corner of her house with a pail between her legs, stick a knife or
some instrument in the wall or a post, and make as if to milk it with
her hands. Then she summons her familiar who always works with her in
everything, and tells him that she wishes to milk a certain cow from a
certain house, which is healthy and abounding in milk. And suddenly the
devil takes the milk from the udder of that cow, and brings it to where
the witch is sitting, as if it were flowing from the knife.  
        But when this is publicly preached to the people they get no bad
information by it; for however much anyone may invoke the devil, and
think that by this alone he can do this thing, he deceives himself,
because he is without the foundation of that perfidy, not having
rendered homage to the devil or abjured the Faith. I have set this down
because some have thought that several of the matter of which I have
written ought not to be preacher to the people, on account of the danger
of giving them evil knowledge; whereas it is impossible for anyone to
learn from a preacher how to perform any of the things that have been
mentioned. But they have been written rather to bring so great a crime
into detestation, and should be preached from the pulpit, so that judges
may be more eager to punish the horrible crime of the abnegation of the
Faith. Yet they should not always be preached in this way; for the
secular mind pays more attention to temporal losses, being more
concerned with earthly than spiritual matters; therefore when witches
can be accused of inflicting temporal loss, judges are more zealous to
punish them. But who can fathom the cunning of the devil?  
        I know of some men in a certain city who wished to eat some May
butter one May time. And as they were walking along they came to a
meadow and say down by a stream; and one of them, who had formed some
open or tacit pact with the devil, said: I will get you the best May
butter. And at once he took off his clothes and went into the stream,
not standing up but sitting with his back against the current; and while
the others looked on, he uttered certain words, and moved the water with
his hands behind his back; and in a short time he brought out a great
quantity of butter of the sort that the country women sell in the market
in May. And the others tasted it and declared that it was the very best
butter.  
        From this we can deduce first the following fact concerning
their practices. They are either true witches, by reason of an expressed
pact formed with the devil, or they know by some tacit understanding
that the devil will do what they ask. In the first case there is no need
for any discussion, for such are true witches. But in the second case,
then they owed the devil's help to the fact that they were blasphemously
offered to the devil by a midwife or by their own mothers.  
        But it may be objected that the devil perhaps brought the butter
without any compact, expressed or tacit, and without any previous
dedication to himself. It is answered that no one can ever use the
devil's help in such matters without invoking him; and that by that very
act of seeking help from the devil he is an apostate from the Faith.
This is the decision of S. Thomas in the *Second Book of Sentences*,
dist. 8, on the question, Whether it is apostasy from the Faith to use
the devil's help. And although Blessed Albert the Great agrees with the
other Doctors, yet he says more expressly that in such matters there is
always apostasy either in word or in deed. For if invocations,
conjurations, fumigations and adorations are used, then an open pact is
formed with the devil, even if there has been no surrender of body and
soul together with explicit abjuration of the Faith either wholly or in
part. For by the mere invocation of the devil a man commits open verbal
apostasy. But if there is no spoken invocation, but only a bare action
from which follows something that could not be done without the devil's
help, then whether a man does it be beginning in the name of the devil,
or with some other unknown words, or without any words but with that
intention; then, says Blessed Albert, it is apostasy of deed, because
that action is looked for from the devil. But since to expect or receive
anything from the devil is always a disparagement of the Faith, it is
also apostasy.  
        So it is concluded that, by whatever means that sorcerer
procured the butter, it was done with either a tacit or an expressed
pact with the devil; and since, if it had been with an expressed pact,
he would have behaved after the usual manner of witches, it is probably
that there was a tacit or secret pact, originating either from himself
or from his mother or a midwife. And I say that it arose from himself,
since he only went through certain motions, and expected the devil to
produce the effect.  
        The second conclusion we can draw from this and similar
practices is this. The devil cannot create new species of things;
therefore when natural butter suddenly came out of the water, the devil
did not do this by changing the water into milk, but by taking butter
from some place where it was kept and bringing it to the man's hand. Or
else he took natural milk from a natural cow and suddenly churned it
into natural butter; for while the art of women takes a little time to
make butter, the devil could do it in the shortest space of time and
bring it to the man.  
        It is in the same way that certain dealers in magic, when they
find themselves in need of wine or some such necessity, merely go out in
the night with a flask or vessel, and bring it back suddenly filled with
wine. For then the devil takes natural wine from some vessel and fills
their flasks for them.  
        And with regard to the manner whereby witches kill animals and
cattle, it should be said that they act very much as they do in the case
of men. They can bewitch them by a touch and a look, or by a look only;
or by placing under the threshold of the stable door, or near the place
where they go to water, some charm or periapt of witchcraft.  
        For in this way those witches who were burned at Ratisbon, of
whom we shall say more later on, were always incited by the devil to
bewitch the best horses and the fattest cattle. And when they were asked
how they did so, one of them named Agnes said that they hid certain
things under the threshold of the stable door. And, asked what sort of
things, she said: The bones of different kinds of animals. She was
further asked in whose name they did this, and answered, In the name of
the devil and all the other devils. And there was another of them, named
Anna, who had killed twenty-three horses in succession belonging to one
of the citizens who was a carrier. This man at last, when he had bought
his twenty-fourth horse and reduced to extreme poverty, stood in his
stable and said to the witch, who was standing in the door of her house:
“See, I have bought a horse, and I swear to God and His Holy Mother that
if this horse dies I shall kill you with my own hands.” At that the
witch was frightened, and left the horse alone. But when she was taken
and asked how she had done these things, she answered that she had done
nothing but dig a little hole, after which the devil had put in it
certain things unknown to her. From this it is concluded that the witch
co-operates sufficiently if it is only by a touch or a look; for the
devil is permitted no power of injuring creatures without some
co-operation on the part of the witch, as has been shown before. And
this is for the great offence to the Divine Majesty.  
        For shepherds have often seen animals in the fields give three
or four jumps into the air, and then suddenly fall to the ground and
die; and this is caused by the power of witches at the instance of the
devil.  
        In the diocese of Strasburg, between the town of Fiessen and
Mount Ferrer, a certain very rich man affirmed that more than forty oxen
and cows belonging to him and others had been bewitched in the Alps
within the space of one year, and that there had been no natural plague
or sickness to cause it. To prove this, he said that when cattle die
from some change plague or disease, they do not do so all at once, but
by degrees; but that this witchcraft had suddenly taken all the strength
from them, and therefore everyone judged that they had been killed by
witchcraft. I have said forty head of cattle, but I believe he put the
number higher than that. However, it is very true that many cattle are
said to have been bewitched in some districts, especially in the Alps;
and it is known that this form of witchcraft if unhappily most
widespread. We shall consider some similar cases later, in the chapter
where we discuss the remedies for cattle that have been bewitched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](mm02a15a)  
How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and Tempests, and Cause Lightning
to Blast both Men and Beasts.  
