[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mm02b06a)  [Next](mm02b08a.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 2

## Chapter VII

### Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and for animals that are Bewitched.

        With regard to the remedies for betwitched animals, and charms
against tempests, we must first note some unlawful remedies which are
practised by certain people. For these are done by means of
superstitious words or actions; as when men cure the worms in the
fingers or limbs by means of certain words or charms, the method of
deciding the legality of which has been explained in the preceding
chapter. There are others who do not sprinkle Holy Water over bewitched
cattle, but pour it into their mouths.  
        Beside the proofs we have already given that the remedy of words
is unlawful, William of Paris, whom we have often quoted, gives the
following reason. If there were any virtue in words as words, then it
would be due to one of three things: either their material, which is
air; or their form, which is sound; or their meaning; or else to all
three together. Now it cannot be due to air, which has no power to kill
unless it be poisonous; neither can it be due to sound, the power of
which is broken by a more solid object; neither can it be due to the
meaning, for in that case the words Devil or Death or Hell would always
be harmful, and the words Health and Goodness always be beneficial. Also
it cannot be due to all these three together; for when the parts of a
whole are invalid, the whole itself is also invalid.  
        And it cannot validly be objected that God gave virtue to words
just as He did to herbs and stones. For whatever virtue there is in
certain sacramental words and benedictions and lawful incantations
belongs to them, not as words, but by Divine institution and ordinance
according to God's promise. It is, as it were, a promise from God that
whoever does such and such a thing will receive such and such a grace.
And so the words of the sacraments are effective because of their
meaning; although some hold that they have an intrinsic virtue; but
these two opinions are not mutually inconsistent. But the case of other
words and incantations is clear from what has already been said; for the
mere composing or uttering or writing of words, as such, can have no
effect; but the invocation of the Divine Name, and public prayer, which
is a sacred protestation committing the effect to the Divine Will, are
beneficial.  
        We have treated above of remedies performed by actions which
seem to be unlawful. The following is a common practice in parts of
Swabia. On the first of May before sunrise the women of the village go
out and gather from the woods leaves and branches from willow trees, and
weave them into a wreath which they hang over the stable door, affirming
that all the cattle will then remain unhurt and safe from witchcraft for
a whole year. And in the opinion of those who hold that vanity may be
opposed by vanity, this remedy would not be unlawful; and neither would
be the driving away of diseases by unknown cantrips and incantations.
But without meaning and offence, we say that a woman or anyone else may
go out on the first or any other day of the month, without considering
the rising or the setting of the sun, and collect herbs or leaves and
branches, saying the Lord's Prayer or the Creed, and hang them over the
stable door in good faith, trusting to the will of God for their
protective efficacy; yet even so the practice is not above reproach, as
was shown in the preceding chapter in the words of S. Jerome; for even
if he is not invoked, the devil has some part in the efficacy of herbs
and stones.  
        It is the same with those who make the sign of the Cross with
leaves and consecrated flowers on Palm Sunday, and set it up among their
vines or crops; asserting that, although the crops all round should be
destroyed by hail, yet they will remain unharmed in their own fields.
Such matters should be decided upon according to the distinction of
which we have already treated.  
        Similarly there are women who, for the preservation of milk and
that cows should not be deprived of their milk by witchcraft, give
freely to the poor in God's name the whole of a Sunday's yield of milk;
and say that, by this sort of alms, the cows yield even more milk and
are preserved from witchcraft. This need not be regarded as
superstitious, provided that it is done out of pity for the poor, and
that they implore the Divine mercy for the protection of their cattle,
leaving the effect to the good pleasure of Divine providence.  
        Again, Nider in the First chapter of his *Præceptorium* says
that it is lawful to bless cattle, in the same way as sick men, by means
of written charms and sacred words, even if they have the appearance of
incantations, as long as the seven conditions we have mentioned are
observed. For he says that devout persons and virgins have been known to
sign a cow with the sign of the Cross, together with the Lord's Prayer
and the Angelic Salutation, upon which the devil's work has been driven
off, if it is due to witchcraft.  
        And in his *Formicarius* he tells that witches confess that
their witchcraft is obstructed by the reverent observation of the
ceremonies of the Church; as by the aspersion of Holy Water, or the
consumption of consecrated salt, by the lawful use of candles on the Day
of Purification and of blessed palms, and such things. For this reason
the Church uses these in her exorcisms, that they may lessen the power
of the devil.  
        Also, because when witches wish to deprive a cow of milk they
are in the habit of begging a little of the milk or butter which comes
from that cow, so that they may afterwards by their art bewitch the cow;
therefore women should take care, when they are asked by persons
suspected of this crime, not to give away the least thing to them.  
        Again, there are women who, when they have been turning a church
for a long while to no purpose, and if they suspect that this is due to
some witch, procure if possible a little butter from the house of that
witch. Then they make that butter into three pieces and throw them into
the churn, invoking the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; and so all witchcraft is put to flight. Here again it is a case
of opposing vanity to vanity, for the simple reason that the butter must
be borrowed from the suspected witch. But if it were done without this;
if with the invocation of the Holy Trinity and the Lord's Prayer the
woman were to commit the effect of the Divine Will, she would remain
beyond reproach. Nevertheless it is not a commendable practice to throw
in the three pieces of butter; for it would be better to banish the
witchcraft by means of sprinkling Holy Water or putting in some
exorcised salt, always with the prayers we have mentioned.  
        Again, since often the whole of a person's cattle are destroyed
by witchcraft, those who have suffered in this way ought to take care to
remove the soil under the threshold of the stable or stall, and where
the cattle go to water, and replace it with fresh soil sprinkled with
Holy Water. For witches have often confessed that they have placed some
instrument of witchcraft at the instance of devils, they have only had
to make a hole in which the devil has placed the instrument of
witchcraft; and that this was a visible object, such as a stone or a
piece of wood or a mouse or some serpent. For it is agreed that the
devil can perform such things by himself without the need of any
partner; but usually, for the perdition of her soul, he compels a witch
to co-operate with him.  
        In addition to the setting up of the sign of the Cross which we
have mentioned, the following procedure is practised against hailstorms
and tempests. Three of the hailstones are thrown into the fire with an
invocation of the Most Holy Trinity, and the Lord's Prayer and the
Angelic Salutation are repeated twice or three times, together with the
Gospel of S. John, *In the beginning was the Word*. And the sign of the
Cross is made in every direction towards each quarter of the world.
Finally, *The Word was made Flesh* is repeated three times, and three
times, “By the words of this Gospel may this tempest be dispersed.” And
suddenly, if the tempest is due to witchcraft, it will cease. This is
most true and need not be regarded with any suspicion. For if the
hailstones were thrown into the fire without the invocation of the
Divine Name, then it would be considered superstitious.  
        But it may be asked whether the tempest could not be stilled
without the use of those hailstones. We answer that it is the other
sacred words that are chiefly effective; but by throwing in the
hailstones a man means to torment the devil, and tries to destroy his
works by the invocation of the Holy Trinity. And he throws them into the
fire rather than into water, because the more quickly they are dissolved
the sooner is the devil's work destroyed. But he must commit to the
Divine Will the effect which is hoped for.  
        Relevant to this is the reply given by a witch to a Judge who
asked her if there were any means of stilling a tempest raised by
witchcraft. She answered: Yes, by this means. I adjure you, hailstorms
and winds, by the five wounds of Christ, and by the three nails which
pierced His hands and feet, and by the four Holy Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, that you be dissolved and fall as rain.  
        Many also confess, some freely and some under stress of torture,
that there are five things by which they are much hindered, sometimes
entirely, sometimes in part, sometimes so that they cannot harm his
friends. And these are, that a man should have a pure faith and keep the
commandments of God; that he should protect himself with the sign of the
Cross and with prayer; that he should reverence the rites and ceremonies
of the Church; that he should be diligent in the performance of public
justice; and that he should meditate aloud or in his heart on the
Passion of Christ. And of these things Nider also speaks. And for this
reason it is a general practice of the Church to ring bells as a
protection against storms, both that the devils may flee from them as
being consecrated to God and refrain from their wickedness, and also
that the people may be roused up to invoke God against tempests with the
Sacrament of the Altar and sacred words, following the very ancient
custom of the Church in France and Germany.  
        But since this method of carrying out the Sacrament to still a
storm seems to many a little superstitious, because they do not
understand the rules by which it is possible to distinguish between that
which is superstitious and that which is not; therefore it must be
considered that five rules are given by which anyone may know whether an
action is superstitious, that is, outside the observances of the
Christian religion, or whether it is in accordance with the due and
proper worship and honour of God, proceeding from the true virtue of
religion both in the thoughts of the heart and in the actions of the
body. For these are explained in the gloss on *Colossians* ii, where S.
Paul says: Which things have a show of wisdom in superstition; and the
gloss says: Superstition is religion observed without due discipline; as
was said before.  
        The first of these is, that in all our works the glory of God
ought to be our chief aim; as it is said: Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever else ye do, do all in the glory of God. Therefore in every
work relating to the Christian religion let care be taken that it is to
the glory of God, and that in it man should give the glory chiefly to
God, so that by that very work the mind of man may be put in subjection
to God. And although, according to this rule, the ceremonies and legal
procedures of the Old Testament are not now observed, since they are to
be understood figuratively, whereas the truth is made known in the New
Testament, yet the carrying out of the Sacrament or of Relics to still a
storm does not seem to militate against this rule.  
        The second rule is that care should be taken that the work is a
discipline to restrain concupiscence, or a bodily abstinence, but in the
way that is owed to virtue, that is, according to the rites of the
Church and moral doctrine. For S. Paul says, *Romans* xii: Let your
service be reasonable. And because of this rule, they are foolish who
make a vow not to comb their hair on the Sabbath, or who fast on Sunday,
saying, The better the day the better the deed, and such like. But again
it does not seem that it is superstitious to carry out the Sacrament,
etc.  
        The third rule is to be sure that what is done is in accordance
with the statutes of the Catholic Church, or with the witness of Holy
Scripture, or according at least to the rites of some particular Church,
or in accordance with universal use, which S. Augustine says may be
taken as a law. Accordingly when the Bishops of the English were in
doubt because the Mass was celebrated in different manners in different
Churches, S. Gregory wrote to them that they might use whatever methods
they found most pleasing to God, whether they followed the rites of the
Roman or of the Gallican or of any other Church. For the fact that
different Churches have different methods in Divine worship does not
militate against the truth, and therefore such customs are to be
preserved, and it is unlawful to neglect them. And so, as we said in the
beginning, it is a very ancient custom in the Churches of France and
some parts of Germany, after the consecration of the Eucharist to carry
It out into the open; and this cannot be unlawful, provided that It is
not carried exposed to the air, but enclosed and contained in a Pyx.  
        The fourth rule is to take care that what is done bears some
natural relation to the effect which is expected; for if it does not, it
is judged to be superstitious. On this account unknown characters and
suspected names, and the images or charts of necromancers and
astronomer, are altogether to be condemned as suspect. But we cannot say
that on this account it is superstitious to carry out Holy Relics or the
Eucharist as a protection against the plagues of the devil; for it is
rather a most religious and salutary practice, since in that Sacrament
lies all our help against the Adversary.  
        The fifth rule is to be careful that what is done should give no
occasion for scandal or stumbling; for in that case, although it be not
superstitious, yet because of the scandal it should be forgone or
postponed, or done secretly without scandal. Therefore if this carrying
of the Sacrament can be done without scandal, or even secretly, then it
should not be neglected. For by this rule many secular priests neglect
the use of benedictions by means of devout words either uttered over the
sick or bound round their necks. I say that nothing should be done, at
least publicly, if it can give any occasion of stumbling to other simple
folk.  
        Let this be enough on the subject of the remedies against
hailstorms, either by words or lawful actions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](mm02b08a.md)  
Certain Remedies prescribed against those Dark and Horrid Harms with
which Devils may Afflict Men.  
