[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mm02a01a)  [Next](mm02a03a.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 2

## Chapter II

### Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with Evil is made.

        The method by which they profess their sacrilege through an open
pact of fidelity to devils varies according to the several practices to
which different witches are addicted. And to understand this it first
must be noted that there are, as was shown in the First Part of this
treatise, three kinds of witches; namely, those who injure but cannot
cure; those who cure but, through some strange pact with the devil,
cannot injure; and those who both injure and cure. And among those who
injure, one class in particular stands out, which can perform every sort
of witchcraft and spell, comprehending all that all the others
individually can do. Wherefore, if we describe the method of profession
in their case, it will suffice also for all the other kinds. And this
class is made up of those who, against every instinct of human or animal
nature, are in the habit of eating and devouring the children of their
own species.  
        And this is the most powerful class of witches, who practise
innumerable other harms also. For they raise hailstorms and hurtful
tempests and lightnings; cause sterility in men and animals; offer to
devils, or otherwise kill, the children whom they do not devour. But
these are only the children who have not been re-born by baptism at the
font, for they cannot devour those who have been baptized, nor any
without God's permission. They can also, before the eyes of their
parents, and when no one is in sight, throw into the water children
walking by the water side; they make horses go mad under their riders;
they can transport themselves from place to place through the air,
either in body or in imagination; they can affect Judges and Magistrates
so that they cannot hurt them; they can cause themselves and other to
keep silence under torture; they can bring about a great trembling in
the hands and horror in the minds of those who would arrest them; they
can show to others occult things and certain future events, by the
information of devils, though this may sometimes have a natural cause
(see the question: *Whether devils can foretell the future*, in the
*Second Book of Sentences*); they can see absent things as if they were
present; they can turn the minds of men to inordinate love or hatred;
they can at times strike whom they will with lightning, and even kill
some men and animals; they can make of no effect the generative desires,
and even the power of copulation, cause abortion, kill infants in the
mother's womb by a mere exterior touch; they can at time bewitch men and
animals with a mere look, without touching them, and cause death; they
dedicate their own children to devils; and in short, as has been said,
they can cause all the plagues which other witches can only cause in
part, that is, when the Justice of God permits such things to be. All
these things this most powerful of all classes of witches can do, but
they cannot undo them.  
        But it is common to all of them to practise carnal copulation
with devils; therefore, if we show the method used by this chief class
in their profession of their sacrilege, anyone may easily understand the
method of the other classes.  
        There were such witches lately, thirty years ago, in the
district of Savoy, towards the State of Berne, as Nider tells in his
*Formicarius*. And there are now some in the country of Lombardy, in the
domains of the Duke of Austria, where the Inquisitor of Como, as we told
in the former Part, caused forty-one witches to be burned in one year;
and he was fifty-five years old, and still continues to labour in the
Inquisition.  
        Now the method of profession is twofold. One is a solemn
ceremony, like a solemn vow. The other is private, and can be made to
the devil at any hour alone. The first method is when witches meet
together in the conclave on a set day, and the devil appears to them in
the assumed body of a man, and urges them to keep faith with him,
promising them worldly prosperity and length of life; and they recommend
a novice to his acceptance. And the devil asks whether she will abjure
the Faith, and forsake the holy Christian religion and the worship of
the Anomalous Woman (for so they call the Most Blessed Virgin MARY), and
never venerate the Sacraments; and if he finds the novice or disciple
willing, then the devil stretches out his hand, and so does the novice,
and she swears with upraised hand to keep that covenant. And when this
is done, the devil at once adds that this is not enough; and when the
disciple asks what more must be done, the devil demands the following
oath of homage to himself: that she give herself to him, body and soul,
for ever, and do her utmost to bring others of both sexes into his
power. He adds, finally, that she is to make certain unguents from the
bones and limbs of children, especially those who have been baptized; by
all which means she will be able to fulfil all her wishes with his
help.  
        We Inquisitors had credible experience of this method in the
town of Breisach in the diocese of Basel, receiving full information
from a young girl witch who had been converted, whose aunt also had been
burned in the diocese of Strasburg. And she added that she had become a
witch by the method in which her aunt had first tried to seduce her.  
        For one day her aunt ordered her to go upstairs with her, and at
her command to go into a room where she found fifteen young men clothed
in green garments after the manner of German knights. And her aunt said
to her: Choose whom you wish from these young men, and he will take you
for his wife. And when she said she did not wish or any of them, she was
sorely beaten and at last consented, and was initiated according to the
aforesaid ceremony. She said also that she was often transported by
night with her aunt over vast distances, even from Strasburg to
Cologne.  
        This is she who occasioned our inquiry in the First Part into
the question whether witches are truly and bodily transported by devils
from place to place: and this was on account of the words of the Canon
(6, q. 5, *Episcopi*), which seem to imply that they are only so carried
in imagination; whereas they are at times actually and bodily
transported.  
        For when she was asked whether it was only in imagination and
phantastically that they so rode, through an illusion of devils, she
answered that they did so in both ways; according to the truth which we
shall declare later of the manner in which they are transferred from
place to place. She said also that the greatest injuries were inflicted
by midwives, because they were under an obligation to kill or offer to
devils as many children as possible; and that she had been severely
beaten by her aunt because she had opened a secret pot and found the
heads of a great many children. And much more she told us, having first,
as was proper, taken an oath to speak the truth.  
        And he account of the method of professing the devil's faith
undoubtedly agrees with what has been written by that most eminent
Doctor, John Nider, who even in our times has written very
illuminatingly; and it may be especially remarked that he tells of the
following which he had from an Inquisitor of the diocese of Edua, who
held many inquisitions on witches in that diocese, and caused many to be
burned.  
        For he says that this Inquisitor told him that in the Duchy of
Lausanne certain witches had cooked and eaten their own children, and
that the following was the method in which they became initiated into
such practices. The witches met together and, by their art, summoned a
devil in the form of a man, to whom the novice was compelled to swear to
deny the Christian religion, never to adore the Eucharist, and to tread
the Cross underfoot whenever she could do so secretly.  
        Here is another example from the same source. There was lately a
general report, brought to the notice of Peter the Judge in Boltingen,
that thirteen infants had been devoured in the State of Berne; and the
public justice exacted full vengeance on the murderers. And when Peter
asked one of the captive witches in what manner they ate children, she
replied: “This is the manner of it. We set our snares chiefly for
unbaptized children, and even for those that have been baptized,
especially when they have not been protected by the sign of the Cross
and prayers” (Reader, notice that, at the devil's command, they take the
unbaptized chiefly, in order that they may not be baptized), “and with
our spells we kill them in their cradles or even when they are sleeping
by their parents' side, in such a way that they afterwards are thought
to have been overlain or to have died some other natural death. Then we
secretly take them from their graves, and cook them in a cauldron, until
the whole flesh comes away from the bones to make a soup which may
easily be drunk. Of the more solid matter we make an unguent which is of
virtue to help us in our arts and pleasures and our transportations; and
with the liquid we fill a flask or skin, whoever drinks from which, with
the addition of a few other ceremonies, immediately acquires much
knowledge and becomes a leader in our sect.”  
        Here is another very clear and distinct example. A young man and
his wife, both witches, were imprisoned in Berne; and the man, shut up
by himself apart from her in a separate tower, said: “If I could obtain
pardon for my sins, I would willingly declare all that I know about
witchcraft; for I see that I ought to die.” And when he was told by the
learned clerks who were there that he could obtain complete pardon if he
truly repented, he joyfully resigned himself to death, and laid bare the
method by which he had first been infected with his heresy. “The
following,” he said, “is the manner in which I was seduced. It is first
necessary that, on a Sunday before the consecration of Holy Water, the
novice should enter the church with the masters, and there in their
presence deny Christ, his Faith, baptism, and the whole Church. And then
he must pay homage to the Little Master, for so and not otherwise do
they call the devil.” Here it is to be noted that this method agrees
with those that have been recounted; for it is immaterial whether the
devil is himself present or not, when homage is offered to him. For this
he does in his cunning, perceiving the temperament of the novice, who
might be frightened by his actual presence into retracting his vows,
whereas he would be more easily persuaded to consent by those who are
known to him. And therefore they call him the Little Master when he is
absent, that through seeming disparagement of his Master the novice may
feel less fear. “And then he drinks from the skin, which has been
mentioned, and immediately feels within himself a knowledge of all our
arts and an understanding of our rites and ceremonies. And in this
manner was I seduced. But I believe my wife to be so obstinate that she
would rather go straight to the fire than confess the smallest part of
the truth; but, alas! we are both guilty.” And as the young man said, so
it happened in every respect. For the young man confessed and was seen
to die in the greatest contrition; but the wife, though convicted by
witnesses, would not confess any of the truth, either under torture or
in death itself; but when the fire had been prepared by the gaoler,
cursed him in the most terrible words, and so was burned. And from these
examples their method of initiation in solemn conclave is made clear.  
        The other private method is variously performed. For sometimes
when men or women have been involved in some bodily or temporal
affliction, the devil comes to them speaking to them in person, and at
times speaking to them through the mouth of someone else; and he
promises that, if they will agree to his counsels, he will do for them
whatever they wish. But he starts from small things, as was said in the
first chapter, and leads gradually to the bigger things. We could
mention many examples which have come to our knowledge in the
Inquisition, but, since this matter presents no difficulty, it can
briefly be included with the previous matter.

*A Few Points are to be Noticed in the Explanation of their Oath of
Homage.*

        Now there are certain points to be noted concerning the homage
which the devil exacts, as, namely, for what reason and in what
different ways he does this. It is obvious that his principal motive is
to offer the greater offence to the Divine Majesty by usurping to
himself a creature dedicated to God, and thus more certainly to ensure
his disciple's future damnation, which is his chief object.
Nevertheless, it is often found by us that he has received such homage
for a fixed term of years at the time of the profession of perfidy; and
sometimes he exacts the profession only, postponing the homage to a
later day.  
        And let us declare that the profession consists in a total or
partial abnegation of the Faith: total, as has been said before, when
the Faith is entirely abjured; partial, when the original pact makes it
incumbent on the witch to observe certain ceremonies in opposition to
the decrees of the Church, such as fasting on Sundays, eating meat on
Fridays, concealing certain crimes at confession, or some such profane
thing. But let us declare that homage consists in the surrender of body
and soul.  
        And we can assign four reasons why the devil requires the
practice of such things. For we showed in the First Part of this
treatise, when we examined whether devils could turn the minds of men to
love or hatred, that they cannot enter the inner thoughts of the heart,
since this belongs to God alone. But the devil can arrive at a knowledge
of men's thoughts by conjecture, as will be shown later. Therefore, if
that cunning enemy sees that a novice will be hard to persuade, he
approaches her gently, exacting only small things that he may gradually
lead her to greater things.  
        Secondly, it must be believed that there is some diversity among
those who deny the Faith, since some do so with their lips but not in
their heart, and some both with their lips and in their heart. Therefore
the devil, wishing to know whether their profession comes from the heart
as well as from the lips, sets them a certain period, so that he may
understand their minds from their works and behaviour.  
        Thirdly, if after the lapse of a set time he find that she is
less willing to perform certain practices, and is bound to him only by
word but not in her heart, he presumes that the Divine Mercy has given
her the guardianship of a good Angel, which he knows to be of great
power. Then he casts her off, and tries to expose her to temporal
afflictions, so that he gain some profit from her despair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](mm02a03a.md)  
How they are Transported from Place to Place.  
