[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mm03_22a)  [Next](mm03_24a.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## Question XXIII

### The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the Case of one Accused upon a Light Suspicion

        THE fourth method of concluding the process on behalf of the
faith is used when, after the merits of the process have been diligently
examined in consultation with expert lawyers, the accused is found to
rest under only a light suspicion of heresy. And this is when the
accused is not taken in heresy, nor is convicted by her own confession
or by the evidence of the facts or by the legitimate production of
witnesses, and there are no other strong or vehement indications of
heresy against her; but only a small and light indications of such a
sort as, in the opinion of the Court, to engender a light suspicion
against her. And such a one must be required to abjure the heresy of
which she is accused; and then, if she relapses into heresy, she is not
liable to the punishment of backsliders, although she must be more
severely punished than would be the case if she had not previously
abjured the heresy (see the Canon c. *accusatus*). The following
procedure shall be followed in such a case. For such an accused, if the
matter be a public one, will publicly make the following abjuration in
the Church:  
        I, N., of such a Diocese, a citizen of such a city or place,
being on my trial, do swear before you the Lord Bishop of such a city,
and upon the Holy Gospels placed before me and upon which I set my hand,
that I believe in my heart and profess with my lips that Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Faith which the Holy Roman Church believes, confesses,
preaches, and observes. Also I swear that I believe in my heart and
profess with my lips that the Lord JESUS Christ, in company with all the
Saints, abominates the wicked heresy of witches; and that all who follow
or adhere to it will with the devil and his Angels be punished in
eternal fire unless they turn their hearts and are reconciled by the
penitence of the Holy Church. And there I abjure, renounce, and revoke
that heresy of which you, my Lord Bishop, and your Officers hold me
suspected: namely, that I have been familiar with witches, have
ignorantly defended their errors, have held in detestation their
Inquisitors and prosecutors, or that I have failed to bring their crimes
to light. Also I swear that I have never believed the aforesaid heresy,
nor do I believe, nor have I adhered, nor do I adhered to it, nor shall
I ever believe, adhere to, or teach it, nor do I intend to teach it. And
if I should hereafter be guilty of any of the aforesaid practices (which
God forbid), I shall willingly submit myself to the punishment provided
by law for such who are so forsworn; and I am ready to undergo any
penance which you see fit to enjoin me for those words or deeds of mine
for which you hold me deservedly suspect; and I swear to fulfill such
penance to the best of my strength, and to omit no part of it, so help
me God and these Holy Gospels.  
        The above abjuration shall be made in the common speech, so that
all may understand it. And when it is done, the Judge, if he is present,
or his deputy shall speak to her in the common speech to the following
effect:  
        My son (or daughter), you have not unworthily abjured the
suspicion which we entertained of you, and have purged yourself by the
aforesaid abjuration. Beware then lest hereafter you fall into the
heresy you have abjured. For although, if you should repent, you would
not be delivered up to the secular Court, since you made your abjuration
as one under a light, and not a strong, suspicion, yet you wold then be
far more severely punished than you would have been if you had not
abjured, and you would then rest under a strong instead of a light
suspicion. And when you should abjure as such, and afterwards should
relapse, you would suffer the due punishment of a backslider, and would
without mercy be delivered to the secular Court to endure the extreme
penalty.  
        But if she makes her abjuration secretly in the chamber of the
Bishop or Judge, which will be the case when the matter is not a public
one, she shall abjure in the same manner. And afterwards sentence shall
be pronounced as follows:  
        We, by the mercy of God Bishop of such a city, or (if he is
present) Judge in the territory subject to such a Prince, having
carefully seen and examined the merits of the process conducted by us
against you N., accused before us heresy, find that you have committed
such and such (naming them) which render you lightly suspected of
heresy, on account of which we have judged it proper to cause you to
abjure that heresy as one lightly suspected of it. But not for that can
you be dismissed unpunished. And that you may become more careful in the
future, having consulted with many eminent persons learned in the law
and with religious men, and having carefully weighed and digested the
whole matter, having only God before our eyes, and the irrefragable
truth of the Holy Catholic Faith, and with the Holy Gospels placed
before us that our sentence may proceed as from God’s countenance and
that our eyes may see with equity, and sitting in tribunal as Judge, we
condemn, sentence, or rather impose penance upon you N., standing in
person here in our presence, in the following manner. Namely, that never
hereafter shall you knowingly hold to, associate with, defend in your
speech, read (if you are well learned), or hereafter, etc. and let there
be set down that which she has committed, on account of which she was
held suspected of the crime of heresy. This sentence and penance were
given, etc.  
        And let the Notary take care that he sets it down in the process
that such abjuration was made as by one under a light, not a strong,
suspicion of heresy; for otherwise great danger might ensue.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XXIV](mm03_24a.md)  
The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of one under Strong
Suspicion  
