[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mm03_27a)  [Next](mm03_29a.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## Question XVIII

### The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but is Relapsed, Albeir now Penitent

        THE ninth method of arriving at a conclusive sentence in a
process on behalf of the faith is used when the person accused of
heresy, after a careful investigation of the circumstances of the
process in consultation with men of good judgement, is found to have
confessed her heresy and to be penitent, but that she has truly
relapsed. And this is when the accused herself confesses in Court before
the Bishop or Judges that she has at another time abjured all heresy,
and this is legally proved, and that she has afterwards fallen into such
a heresy or error: or that she has abjured some particular heresy, such
as that of witches, and has afterwards returned to it; but that
following better advice she is penitent, and believes the Catholic
faith, and returns to the unity of the Church. Such a one is not, if she
humbly ask for them, to be denied the sacraments of Penance and the
Eucharist; but however much she may repent, she is nevertheless to be
delivered up as a backslider to the secular Court to suffer the extreme
penalty. But it must be understood that this refers to one who had made
her abjuration as one manifestly taken in heresy, or as one strongly
suspected of heresy, and not to one who has so done as being under only
a light suspicion.  
        The following procedure must be observed in this case. When,
after mature and careful and, if necessary, repeated investigation by
learned men, it has been concluded that the said prisoner has actually
and prepense relapsed into heresy, the Bishop or Judge shall send to the
said prisoner in the place of detention two or three honest men,
especially religious or clerics, who are zealous for the faith, of whom
the prisoner has no suspicion, but rather places confidence in them; and
they shall go in to her at a suitable time and speak to her sweetly of
the contempt of this world and the miseries of this life, and of the
joys and glory of Paradise. And leading up from this, they shall
indicate to her on the part of the Bishop or Judge that she cannot
escape temporal death, and that she should therefore take care for the
safety of her soul, and prepare herself to confess her sins and receive
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And they shall visit her often,
persuading her to penitence and patience, strengthening her as much as
they can in the Catholic truth, and they shall diligently cause her to
confess, so that she may receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist at her
humble petition. For these Sacraments are not to be denied to such
offenders.  
        And when she has received these Sacraments, and been well
disposed by these men to salvation; after two or three days during which
they have strengthened her in the Catholic faith and induced her to
repentance, the Bishop or Judge of that place shall notify the bailiff
of the place or the authorities of the secular Court, that on such a day
at such an hour (not a Feast Day) he should be with his attendants in
such a square or place (but it must be outside a church) to receive from
their Court a certain backslider whom the Bishop and Judge will hand
over to him.  
        And on the morning of the day fixed, or on the day before, it
shall be publicly proclaimed throughout the city of place in those towns
and villages where such proclamations are customary, that on such a day
at such an hour in such a place there will be a sermon preached in
defence of the Faith, and that the Bishop and other Judges will condemn
a certain person who has relapsed into the sin of heresy, delivering her
up to secular justice.  
        But here it must be considered that, if he who has so relapsed
should have been ordained in any Holy Orders, or should be a priest or a
religious of any Order, before he is handed over he is to be degraded
and stripped of the privileges of his ecclesiastic order. And so, when
he has been degraded from all ecclesiastical office, let him be handed
over to secular justice to receive his due punishment.  
        When, therefore, such a one is to be degraded from his orders
and handed over to the secular Court, let the Bishop summon together all
the prelates and religious men of his Diocese. For in this case, though
not in others, only the Bishop together with the other prelates and
religious and learned men of his diocese can degrade one who has
received Holy Orders when he is to be delivered to the secular Court, or
is to be imprisoned for life for the sin of heresy.  
        On the day appointed for the degrading of the backslider and the
handing of him over to the secular Court, if he be a cleric, or, if he
be a layman, for leaving him to hear his definitive sentence, the people
shall gather together in some square or open place outside the church,
and the Inquisitor shall preach a sermon, and the prisoner shall be set
on a high place in the presence of the secular authorities. And if the
prisoner be a cleric who is to be degraded, the Bishop shall don his
Pontifical robes, together with the other prelates of his Diocese in
their vestments and copes, and the prisoner shall be clothed and robed
as if he were to minister his office; and the Bishop shall degrade him
from his order, beginning from the higher and proceeding to the lowest.
And just as in conferring Holy Orders the Bishop uses the words ordained
by the Church, so in degrading him he shall take off his chasuble and
stole, and so with the other vestments, using words of a directly
opposite meaning.  
        When this degradation has been accomplished, the proceedings
must continue in the legal and accustomed manner, and the Notary or
religious or clerk shall be bidden to read the sentence, which shall be
after the following manner, whether the prisoner be a layman or a
degraded cleric:  
        We, N., by the mercy of the God Bishop of such city, and Judge
in the territories of such Prince, seeing that we are legitimately
informed that you, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, have been
before us (or before such Bishop and Judges) accused of such heresy or
heresies (naming them), of which you were lawfully convicted by your own
confession and by witnesses, and that you had obstinately persisted in
them for so long, but afterwards, listening to better advice, publicly
in such a place abjured, renounced and revoked those heresies in the
form provided by the Church, on which account the said Bishop and
Inquisitor, believing that you had truly returned to the bosom of the
Holy Church of God, did absolve you from the sentence of excommunication
by which you were bound, enjoining upon you a salutary penance if with
true heart and faith unfeigned you had returned to the unity of the Holy
Church; but whereas after all the aforesaid and the lapse of so many
years you are again accused before us and have again fallen into such
heresies which you had abjured (naming them), and though it was sore
grief to us to hear such things of you, yet we were by justice compelled
to investigate the matter, to examine the witnesses, and to summon and
question you on oath, proceeding in each and every way as we are bidden
by the canonical institutions.  
        And since we wished to conclude this case without any doubt, we
convened in solemn council learned men of the Theological faculty and
men skilled in the Canon and the Civil Law, and in consultation with
them maturely and carefully examined all and singular which had been
done, said and seen in the process and diligently discussed each
circumstance, weighing all equally in the balance as it behoved us; and
we find both by the legitimate evidence of witnesses and by your own
confession received in Court that you have fallen into the heresies
which you had abjured. For we find that you have said or done such and
such (let all be named), on account of which, with the concurrence of
the said learned men, we have judged and now judge that you are a
backslider, according tot he canonical institutions, to which we refer
in grief and grieve to refer.  
        But since it has come to the knowledge of Us and of many honest
Catholic men that, by the inspiration of Divine grade, you have once
more returned to the bosom of the Church and to the truth of the faith
detesting the aforesaid errors and heresies and with true orthodoxy
unfeigned believing and protesting the Catholic faith, we have admitted
you to receive the Church's Sacraments of Penance and the Holy Eucharist
at your humble request. But since the Church of God has no more which it
can do in respect of you, seeing that it has acted so mercifully towards
you in the manner we have said, and you have abused that mercy by
falling back into the heresies which you had abjured: therefore We the
said Bishop and Judges, sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, having
before us the Holy Gospels that our judgement may proceed as from the
countenance of God and our eyes see with equity, and having before our
eyes only God and the irrefragable truth of the Holy Faith and the
extirpation of the plague of heresy; against you, N., in this place on
the day and at the hour before assigned to you for the hearing of your
definitive sentence, we pronounce in sentence that you have truly fallen
back into the sin of heresy, although you are penitent; and as one truly
so relapsed we cast you forth from this our ecclesiastical Court, and
leave you to be delivered to the secular arm. But we earnestly pray that
the said secular Court may temper its justice with mercy, and that there
be no bloodshed or danger of death.  
        And here the Bishop and his assessors shall withdraw, and the
secular Court shall perform its office.  
        It is to be noted that, although the Bishop and Inquisitor ought
to use their utmost diligence, both by their own efforts and those of
others, to induce the prisoner to repent and return to the Catholic
faith; yet, after he has repented and it has been decided in council
that, though he is penitent, he is nevertheless truly a backslider and
as such to be handed over in person to the secular Court, they ought not
to inform him of such sentence and punishment. therefore from that time,
neither before nor after the sentence should they present themselves
before him, that he be not moved in his spirit against them, a thing
which is very carefully to be avoided in death of this sort. But, as we
have said, let them send to him some honest men, especially those in
religious orders, or clerics, in whom he has confidence; and let them
inform him of the sentence to come and of his death, and strengthen him
in the faith, exhorting him to have patience; and let them visit him
after the sentence, and console him and pray with him, and not leave him
until he has rendered his spirit to his Creator.  
        Let them, therefore, beware and be on their guard not to do or
say anything which may enable the prisoner to anticipate his death, or
place themselves in an irregular position. And, as they have burdened
themselves with the care of his soul, let them then share also in his
punishment and guilt.  
        It must also be remarked that such a sentence which delivers up
a person to the secular Court ought not to be pronounced on a Festival
or Solemn Day, nor in a church, but outside in some open space. For it
is a sentence which leads to death; and it is more decent that it should
be delivered on an ordinary day and outside the church; for a Feast Day
and the church are dedicated to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XXIX](mm03_29a.md)  
The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but
is Impenitent, although not Relapsed  
