[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mm03_28a)  [Next](mm03_30a.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## Question XXIX

### The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but is Impenitent, although not Relapsed

        THE tenth method of completing a process on behalf of the Faith
by a final sentence is used when the person accused of heresy, after a
careful examination of the circumstances of the process in consultation
with skilled lawyers, is found to have confessed his heresy and to be
impenitent, though he has not relapsed into the heresy. Such a case is
very rarely found, but yet it has come within the experience of us
Inquisitors. In such a case, therefore, the Bishop and Judge must not be
in haste to sentence the prisoner, but must keep him well guarded and
fettered, and induce him to be converted, even to the extent of several
months, showing him that, by remaining impenitent, he will be damned in
body and soul.  
        But if neither by comforts nor hardships, nor by threatening nor
persuasion, can he be brought to renounce his errors, and the appointed
period of grace has expired, let the Bishop and Judges prepare to
deliver or abandon him to the secular Court; and they shall give notice
to the herald or bailiff or secular authorities that on such a day, not
a Feast, and at such an hour they should be in such a place with their
attendants outside a church, and that they will deliver to them a
certain impenitent heretic. None the less they shall themselves make
public proclamation in the customary places that on such a day at such a
time in the aforesaid place a sermon will be preached in defence of the
faith, and that they will hand over a certain heretic to secular
justice; and that all should come and be present, being granted the
customary Indulgences.  
        After this, the prisoner shall be delivered to the secular Court
in the following manner. But let him first be often admonished to
renounce his heresy and repent; but if he altogether refuses, let the
sentence be pronounced.  
        We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such a city, or Judge in
the territories of such Prince, seeing that you, N., of such a place in
such a Diocese, have been accused before us by public report and the
information of credible persons (naming them) of heresy, and that you
have for many years persisted in those heresies to the great hurt of
your immortal soul; and since we, whose duty it is to exterminate the
plague of heresy, wishing to be more certainly informed of this matter
and to see whether you walked in darkness or the light, have diligently
inquired into the said accusation, summoning and duly examining you, we
find that you are indeed infected with the said heresy.  
        But since it is the chief desire of our hearts to plant the Holy
Catholic Faith in the hearts of our people, and to eradicate the pest of
heresy, we have used diverse and various suitable methods, both by
ourselves and by others, to persuade you to renounce your said errors
and heresies in which you had stood, were standing, and even now
defiantly and obstinately stand with stubborn heart. But since the Enemy
of the human race is present in your heart, wrapping you up and
entangling you in the said errors, and you have refused and yet refuse
to abjure the said heresies, choosing rather the death of your soul in
hell and of your body in this world than to renounce the said heresies
and return to the bosom of the Church and cleanse your soul, and since
you are determined to remain in your sin:  
        Therefore inasmuch as you are bound by the chain of
excommunication from the Holy Church, and are justly cut off from the
number of the Lord's flock, and are deprived of the benefits of the
Church, the Church can do no more for you, having done all that was
possible. We the said Bishop and Judges on behalf of the Faith, sitting
in tribunal as Judges judging, and having before us the Holy Gospels
that our judgement may proceed as from the countenance of god and our
eyes see with equity, and having before our eyes only God and the truth
of the Holy Faith and the extirpation of the plague of heresy, on this
day and at this hour and place assigned to you for the hearing of your
final sentence, we give it as our judgement and sentence that you are
indeed an impenitent heretic, and as truly such to be delivered and
abandoned to the secular Court: wherefore by this sentence we cast you
away as an impenitent heretic from our ecclesiastical Court, and deliver
or abandon you to the power of the secular Court: praying the said Court
to moderate or temper its sentence of death against you. This sentence
was given, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XXX](mm03_30a.md)  
Of One who has Confessed to Heresy, is Relapsed, and is also
Impenitent  
