[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm03_14a)  [Next](mm03_16a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## Question XV

### Of the Continuing of the Torture, and of the Devices and Signs by which the Judge can Recognize a Witch; and how he ought to Protect himself from their Spells. Also how they are to be Shaved in Parts where they use to Conceal the Devil's Masks and Tokens; together with the due Setting Forth of Various Means of Overcoming the Obstinacy in Keeping Silence and Refusal to Confess. And it is the Tenth Action

        THE Judge should act as follows in the continuation of the
torture. First he should bear in mind that, just as the same medicine is
not applicable to all the members, but there are various and distinct
salves for each several member, so not all heretics or those accused of
heresy are to be subjected to the same method of questioning,
examination and torture as to the charges laid against them; but various
and different means are to be employed according to their various
natures and persons. Now a surgeon cuts off rotten limbs; and mangy
sheep are isolated from the healthy; but a prudent Judge will not
consider it safe to bind himself down to one invariable rule in his
method of dealing with a prisoner who is endowed with a witch's power of
taciturnity, and whose silence he is unable to overcome. For if the sons
of darkness were to become accustomed to one general rule they would
provide means of evading it as a well-known snare set for their
destruction.  
        Therefore a prudent and zealous Judge should seize his
opportunity and choose his method of conducting his examination
according to the answers or depositions of the witnesses, or as his own
previous experience or native wit indicates to him, using the following
precautions.  
        If he wishes to find out whether she is endowed with a witch's
power of preserving silence, let him take note whether she is able to
shed tears when standing in his presence, or when being tortured. For we
are taught both by the words of worthy men of old and by our own
experience that this is a most certain sign, and it has been found that
even if she be urged and exhorted by solemn conjurations to shed tears,
if she be a witch she will not be able to weep: although she will assume
a tearful aspect and smear her cheeks and eyes with spittle to make it
appear that she is weeping; wherefore she must be closely watched by the
attendants.  
        In passing sentence the Judge or priest may use some such method
as the following in conjuring her to true tears if she be innocent, or
in restraining false tears. Let him place his hand on the head of the
accused and say: I conjure you by the bitter tears shed on the Cross by
our Saviour the Lord JESUS Christ for the salvation of the world, and by
the burning tears poured in the evening hour over His wounds by the most
glorious Virgin MARY, His Mother, and by all the tears which have been
shed here in this world by the Saints and Elect of God, from whose eyes
He has now wiped away all tears, that if you be innocent you do now shed
tears, but if you be guilty that you shall by no means do so. In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.  
        And it is found by experience that the more they are conjured
the less are they able to weep, however hard they may try to do so, or
smear their cheeks with spittle. Nevertheless it is possible that
afterwards, in the absence of the Judge and not at the time or in the
place of torture, they may be able to weep in the presence of their
gaolers.  
        And as for the reason for a witch's inability to weep, it can be
said that the grace of tears is one of the chief gifts allowed to the
penitent; for S. Bernard tells us that the tears of the humble can
penetrate to heaven and conquer the unconquerable. Therefore there can
be no doubt that they are displeasing to the devil, and that he uses all
his endeavour to restrain them, to prevent a witch from finally
attaining to penitence.  
        But it may be objected that it might suit with the devil's
cunning, with God's permission, to allow even a witch to weep; since
tearful grieving, weaving and deceiving are said to be proper to women.
We may answer that in this case, since the judgements of God are a
mystery, if there is no other way of convicting the accused, by
legitimate witnesses or the evidence of the fact, and if she is not
under a strong or grave suspicion, she is to be discharged; but because
she rests under a slight suspicion by reason of her reputation to which
the witnesses have testified, she must be required to abjure the heresy
of witchcraft, as we shall show when we deal with the second method of
pronouncing sentence.  
        A second precaution is to be observed, not only at this point
but during the whole process, by the Judge and all his assessors;
namely, that they must not allow themselves to be touched physically by
the witch, especially in any contract of their bare arms or hands; but
they must always carry about them some salt consecrated on Palm Sunday
and some Blessed Herbs. For these can be enclosed together in Blessed
Wax and worn round the neck, as we showed in the Second Part when we
discussed the remedies against illnesses and diseases caused by
witchcraft; and that these have a wonderful protective virtue is known
not only from the testimony of witches, but from the use and practice of
the Church, which exorcizes and blesses such objects for this very
purpose, as is shown in the ceremony of exorcism when it is said, For
the banishing of all the power of the devil, etc.  
        But let it not be thought that physical contact of the joints or
limbs is the only thing to be guarded against; for sometimes, with God's
permission, they are able with the help of the devil to bewitch the
Judge by the mere sound of the words which they utter, especially at the
time when they are exposed to torture.  
        And we know from experience that some witches, when detained in
prison, have importunately begged their gaolers to grant them this one
thing, that they should be allowed to look at the Judge before he looks
at them; and by so getting the first sight of the Judge they have been
able so to alter the minds of the Judge or his assessors that they have
lost all their anger against them and have not presumed to molest them
in any way, but have allowed them to go free. He who knows and has
experienced it gives this true testimony; and would that they were not
able to effect such things!  
        Let judges not despise such precautions and protections, for by
holding them in little account after such warning they run the risk of
eternal damnation. For our Saviour said: If I had not come, and spoken
to them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse for their
sin. Therefore let the judges protect themselves in the above manner,
according to the provisions of the Church.  
        And if it can conveniently be done, the witch should be led
backward into the presence of the Judge and his assessors. And not only
at the present point, but in all that has preceded or shall follow it,
let him cross himself and approach her manfully, and with God's help the
power of that old Serpent will be broken. And no one need think that it
is superstitious to lead her in backwards; for, as we have often said,
the Canonists allow even more than this to be done for the protections
against witchcraft, and always say that it is lawful to oppose vanity
with vanity.  
        The third precaution to be observed in this tenth action is that
the hair should be shaved from every part of her body. The reason for
this is the same as that for stripping her of her clothes, which we have
already mentioned; for in order to preserve their power of silence they
are in the habit of hiding some superstitious object in their clothes or
in their hair, or even in the most secret parts of the their bodies
which must not be named.  
        But it may be objected that the devil might, without the use of
such charms, so harden the heart of a witch that she is unable to
confess her crimes; just as it is often found in the case of other
criminals, no matter how great the tortures to which they are exposed,
or how much they are convicted by the evidence of the facts and of
witnesses. We answer that it is true that the devil can affect such
taciturnity without the use of such charms; but he prefers to use them
for the perdition of souls and the greater offence to the Divine Majesty
of God.  
        This can be made clear from the example of a certain witch in
the town of Hagenau, whom we have mentioned in the Second Part of this
work. She used to obtain this gift of silence in the following manner:
she killed a newly-born first-born male child who had not been baptized,
and having roasted it in an oven together with other matters which it is
not expedient to mention, ground it to powder and ashes; and if any
witch or criminal carried about him some of this substance he would in
no way be able to confess his crimes.  
        Here it is clear that a hundred thousand children so employed
could not of their own virtue endow a person with such a power of
keeping silence; but any intelligent person can understand that such
means are used by the devil for the perdition of souls and to offend the
Divine Majesty.  
        Again, it may be objected that very often criminals who are not
witches exhibit the same power of keeping silence. In answer to this it
must be said tat this power of taciturnity can proceed from three
causes. First, from a natural hardness of heart; for some are
soft-hearted, or even feeble-minded, so that at the slightest torture
they admit everything, even some things which are not true; whereas
others are so hard that however much they are tortured the truth is not
to be had from them; and this is especially the case with those who have
been tortured before, even if their arms are suddenly stretched or
twisted.  
        Secondly, it may proceed from some instrument of witchcraft
carried about the person, as has been said, either in the clothes or in
the hairs of the body. And thirdly, even if the prisoner has no such
object secreted about her person, they are sometimes endowed with this
power by other witches, however far they may be removed from them. For a
certain witch at Issbrug used to boast that, if she had no more than a
thread from the garments of any prisoner, she could so work that however
much that prisoner were tortured, even to death, she would be unable to
confess anything. So the answer to this objection is clear.  
        But what is to be said of a case that happened in the Diocese of
Ratisbon? Certain heretics were convicted by their own confession not
only as impenitent but as open advocates of that perfidy; and when they
were condemned to death it happened that they remained unharmed in the
fire. At length their sentence was altered to death by drowning, but
this was no more effective. All were astonished, and some even began to
say that their heresy must be true; and the Bishop, in great anxiety for
his flock, ordered a three days' fast. When this had been devoutly
fulfilled, it came to the knowledge of someone that those heretics had a
magic charm sewed between the skin and the flesh under one arm; and when
this was found and removed, they were delivered to the flames and
immediately burned. Some say that a certain necromancer learned this
secret during a consultation with the devil, and betrayed it; but
however it became known, it is probably that the devil, who is always
scheming for the subversion of faith, was in some way compelled by
Divine power to reveal the matter.  
        From this it may be seen what a Judge ought to do when such a
case happens to him: namely, that he should rely upon the protection of
God, and by the prayers and fasting of devout persons drive away this
sort of devil's work from witches, in those cases where they cannot be
made to confess under torture even after their clothes have been changed
and all their hair has been shaved off and abraded.  
        Now in the parts of Germany such shaving, especially of the
secret parts, is not generally considered delicate, and therefore we
Inquisitors do not use it; but we cause the hair of their head to be cut
off, and placing a morsel of Blessed Wax in a cup of Holy Water and
invoking the most Holy Trinity, we give it them to drink three times on
a fasting stomach, and by the grace of God we have by this means caused
many to break their silence. But in other countries the Inquisitors
order the witch to be shaved all over her body. And the Inquisitor of
Como has informed us that last year, that is, in 1485, he ordered
forty-one witches to be burned, after they had been shaved all over. And
this was in the district and county of Burbia, commonly called
Wormserbad, in the territory of the Archduke of Austria, towards
Milan.  
        But it may be asked whether, in a time of need, when all other
means of breaking a witch's silence have failed, it would be lawful to
ask the advice in this matter of sorceresses who are able to cure those
who are bewitched. We answer that, whatever may have been doe in that
matter at Ratisbon, it is our earnest admonition in the Lord that no
one, no matter how great may be the need, should consult with
sorceresses on behalf of the State; and this because of the great
offence which is thereby caused to the Divine Majesty, when there are so
many other means open to us which we may use either in their own proper
form or in some equivalent form, so that the truth will be had from
their own mouths and they can be consigned to the flames; or failing
this, God will in the meantime provide some other death for the witch.  
        For there remain to us the following remedies against this power
of silence. First, let a man do all that lies in his own power by the
exercise of his qualities, persisting often with the methods we have
already mentioned, and especially on certain days, as will be shown in
the following Question. See II. *Corinthians* ix: That ye may abound in
all good works.  
        Secondly, if this should fail, let him consult with other
persons; for perhaps they may think of some means which has not occurred
to him, since there are various methods of counteracting witchcraft.  
        Thirdly, if these two fail, let him have recourse to devout
persons, as it is said in *Ecclesiasticus* xxxvii: Be continually with a
godly man, whom thou knowest to keep the commandments of the Lord. Also
let him invoke the Patron Saints of the country. But if all these fail,
let the Judge and all the people at once put their trust in God with
prayers and fasting, that the witchcraft may be removed by reason of
their piety. For so Josaphat prayed in II. *Paralipomenon* xx: When we
know no what we should do, we have this one refuge, that we should turn
our eyes to Thee. And without doubt God will not fail us in our need.  
        To this effect also S. Augustine speaks (26, q. 7, non
*obseruabitis*): Whosoever observes any divinations or auguries, or
attends to or consents to such as observe them, or gives credit to such
by following after their works, or goes into their houses, or introduces
them into his own house, or asks questions of them, let him know that he
has perverted the Christian faith and his baptism and is a pagan and
apostate and enemy of God, unless he is corrected by ecclesiastical
penances and is reconciled with God. Therefore let the Judge not fail
always to use the lawful remedies, as we have said, together with these
following final precautions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XVI](mm03_16a)  
Of the fit Time and of the Method of the Second Examination. And it is
the Eleventh Action, concerning the Final Precautions to be Observed by
the Judge  
