[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mm03_33a)  [Next](mm03_35a.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## Question XXXIV

### Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch who Annuls Spells wrought by Witchcraft; and of Witch Midwives and Archer-Wizards

        THE fifteenth method of bringing a process on behalf of the
faith to a definitive sentence is employed when the person accused of
heresy is not found to be one who casts injurious spells of witchcraft,
but one who removes them; and in such a case the procedure will be as
follows. The remedies which she uses will either be lawful or unlawful;
and if they are lawful, she is not to be judged a witch but a good
Christian. But we have already shown at length what sort of remedies are
lawful.  
        Unlawful remedies, on the other hand, are to be distinguished as
either absolutely unlawful, or in some respect unlawful. If they are
absolutely unlawful, these again can be divided into two classes,
according as they do or do not involve some injury to another party; but
in either case they are always accompanied by an expressed invocation of
devils. But if they are only in some respect unlawful, that is to say,
if they are practised with only a tacit, and not an expressed,
invocation of devils, such are to be judged rather vain than unlawful,
according to the Canonists and some Theologians, as we have already
shown.  
        Therefore the Judge, whether ecclesiastical or civil, must not
punish the first and last of the above practices, having rather to
commend the first and tolerate the last, since the Canonists maintain
that it is lawful to oppose vanity with vanity. But he must by no means
tolerate those who remove spells by an expressed invocation of devils,
especially those who in doing so bring some injury upon a third part;
and this last is said to happen when the spell is taken off one person
and transferred to another. And we have already made it clear in a
former part of this work that it makes no difference whether the person
to whom the spell is transferred be herself a witch or not or whether or
not she be the person who cast the original spell, or whether it be a
man or any other creature.  
        It may be asked what the Judge should do when such a person
maintains that she removes spells by lawful and not unlawful means; and
how the Judge can arrive at the truth of such a case. We answer that he
should summon her and ask her what remedies she uses; but he must not
rely only upon her word, for the ecclesiastical Judge whose duty it is
must make diligent inquiry, either himself or by means of some parish
priest who shall examine all his parishioners after placing them upon
oath, as to what remedies she uses. And if, as is usually the case, they
are found to be superstitious remedies, they must in no way be
tolerated, on account of the terrible penalties laid down by the Canon
Law, as will be shown.  
        Again, it may be asked how the lawful remedies can be
distinguished from the unlawful, since they always assert that they
remove spells by certain prayers and the use of herbs. We answer that
this will be easy, provided that a diligent inquiry be made. For
although they must necessarily conceal their superstitious remedies,
either that they may not be arrested, or that they may the more easily
ensnare the minds of the simple, and therefore make great show of their
use of prayers and herbs, yet they can be manifestly convicted by four
superstitious actions as sorceresses and witches.  
        For there are some who can divine secrets, and are able to tell
things which they could only know through the revelation of evil
spirits. For example: when the injured come to them to be healed, they
can discover and make known the cause of their injury; and they can
perfectly know this and tell it to those who consult them.  
        Secondly, they sometimes undertake to cure the injury or spell
of one person, but will have nothing to do with that of another. For in
the Diocese of Spires there is a witch in a certain place called
Zunhofen who, although she seems to heal many persons, confesses that
she can in no way heal certain others; and this is for no other reason
than, as the inhabitants of the place assert, that the spells case on
such person have been so potently wrought by other witches with the help
of devils that the devils themselves cannot remove them. For one devil
cannot or will not always yield to another.  
        Thirdly, it sometimes happens that they must make some
reservation or exception in their cure of such injuries. Such a case is
known to have occured in the town of Spires itself. And honest woman who
had been bewitched in her shins sent for a diviner of this sort to come
and heal her; and when the witch had entered her house and looked at
her, she made such an exception. For she said: It there are no scales
and hairs in the wound, I could take out all the other evil matter. And
she revealed the cause of the injury, although she had come from the
country from a distance of two miles, saying: You quarrelled with your
neighbour on such a day, and therefore this had happened to you. Then,
having extracted from the wound many other matters of various sorts,
which were not scales or hairs, she restored her to health.  
        Fourthly, they sometimes themselves observe, or cause to be
observed, certain superstitious ceremonies. For instance, they fix some
such time as before sunrise for people to visit them; or say that they
cannot heal injuries which were caused beyond the limits of the estate
on which they live, or that they can only heal two or three persons in a
year. Yet they do not heal them, but only seem to do so by creasing to
injure them.  
        We could add many other considerations as touching the condition
of such persons: as that, after the lapse of a certain time they have
incurred the reputation of leading a bad and sinful life, or that they
are adulteresses, or the survivors from covens of other witches.
Therefore their gift of healing is not derived from God on account of
the sanctity of their lives.  
        Here we must refer incidentally to witch midwives, who surpass
all other witches in their crimes, as we have shown in the First Part of
this work. And the number of them is so great that, as has been found
form their confessions, it is thought they there is scarcely any tiny
hamlet in which at least one is not to be found. And that the
magistrates may in some degree meet this danger, they should allow no
midwife to practise without having been first sworn as a good Catholic;
at the same time observing the other safeguards mentioned in the Second
Part of this work.  
        Here too we must consider archer-wizards, who constitute the
graver danger to the Christian religion in that they have obtained
protection on the estates of nobles and Princes who receive, patronize,
and defend them. But that all such receivers and protectors are more
damnable than all witches, especially in certain cases, is shown as
follows. The Canonists and Theologians divide into two classes the
patrons of such archer-wizards, according as they defend the error or
the person. They who defend the error are more damnable than the wizards
themselves, since they are judged to be not only heretics but
heresiarchs (24, quest. 3). And the laws do not make much special
mention of such patrons, because they do not distinguish them from other
heretics.  
        But there are others who, while not excusing the sin, yet defend
the sinner. These, for example, will do all in their power to protect
such wizards (or other heretics) from trial and punishment at the hands
of the Judge acting on behalf of the Faith.  
        Similarly there are those in public authority, that is to say,
public persons such as temporal Lords, and also spiritual Lords who have
temporal jurisdiction, who are, either by omission or commission,
patrons of such wizards and heretics.  
        They are their patrons by omission when they neglect to perform
their duty in regard to such wizards and suspects, or to their
followers, receivers, defenders and patrons, when they are required by
the Bishops or Inquisitors to do this: that is, by falling to arrest
them, by not guarding them carefully when they are arrested, by not
taking them to the place within their jurisdiction which has been
appointed for them, by not promptly executing the sentence passed upon
them, and by other such derelictions of their duty.  
        They are their patrons by commission when, after such heretics
have been arrested, they liberate them from prison without the licence
or order of the Bishop or Judge; or when they directly or indirectly
obstruct the trial, judgement, and sentence of such, or act in some
similar way. The penalties for this have been declared in the Second
Part of this work, where we treated of archer-wizards and other
enchanters of weapons.  
        It is enough now to say that all these are by law
excommunicated, and incur the twelve great penalties. And if they
continues obstinate in that excommunication for a year, they are then to
be condemned as heretics.  
        Who, then, are to be called receivers of such; and are they to
be reckoned as heretics? All they, we answer, who receive such
archer-wizards, enchanters of weapons, necromancers, or heretic witches
as are the subject of this whole work. And such receivers are of two
classes, as was the case with the defenders and patrons of such.  
        For there are some who do not receive them only once or twice,
but many times and often; and these are well called in Latin
*receptatores*, from the frequentative form of the verb. And receivers
of this class are sometimes blameless, since they act in ignorance and
there is no sinister suspicion attaching to them. But sometimes they are
to blame, as being well aware of the sins of those whom they receive;
for the Church always denounces these wizards as the most cruel enemies
of the faith. And if nevertheless temporal Lords receive, keep and
defend them, etc., they are and are rightly called receivers of
heretics. And with regard to such, the laws say that they are to be
excommunicated.  
        But others there are who do not often or many times receive such
wizards or heretics, but only once or twice; and these are not properly
called *receptatores*, but *receptores*, since they are not frequent
receivers. (Yet the Arch-deacon disagrees with this view; but it is no
great matter, for we are considering not words but deeds.)  
        But there is this difference between *receptatores* and
*receptores*: those temporal Princes are always *receptatores* who
simply will not or cannot drive away such heretics. But *receptores* may
be quite innocent.  
        Finally, it is asked who are they who are said to be obstructors
of the duty of Inquisitors and Bishops against such heretics; and
whether they are to be reckoned as heretics. We answer that such
obstructors are of two kinds. For there are some who cause a direct
obstruction, by rashly on their own responsibility releasing from gaol
those who have been detained on a charge of heresy, or by interfering
with the process of the Inquisition by wreaking some injury to witnesses
on behalf of the Faith because of the evidence they have given; or it
may be that the temporal Lord issues an order that none but himself may
try such a case, and that anyone charged with this crime should be
brought before no one but himself, and that the evidence should be given
only in his presence, or some similar order. And such, according to
Giovanni d'Andrea, are direct obstructors. They who directly obstruct
the process, judgement or sentence on behalf of the Faith, or help,
advise or favour others in doing so, although they are guilty of a great
sin, are not on that account to be judged heretics, unless it appears in
other ways that they are obstinately and wilfully involved in such
heresies of witches. But they are to be smitten with the sword of
excommunication; and if they stubbornly endure that excommunication for
a year, then are they to be condemned as heretics.  
        But others are indirect obstructors. These, as Giovanni d'Andrea
explains, are those who give such orders as that no one shall bear arms
for the capture of heretics except the servants of the said temporal
Lord. Such are less guilty than the former, and are not heretics; but
they, and also any who advise, help or patronize them in such actions,
are to be excommunicated; and if they obstinately remain in that
excommunication for a year, they are then to be condemned as if they
were heretics. And here it is to be understood that they are in such a
way to be condemned as heretics that if they are willing to return, they
are received back to mercy, having first abjured their error; but if
not, they are to be handed over to the secular Court as impenitents.  
        To sum up. Witch-midwives, like other witches, are to be
condemned and sentences according to the nature of their crimes; and
this is true also of those who, as we have said, remove spells of
witchcraft superstitiously and by the help of devils; for it can hardly
be doubted that, just as they are able to remove them, so can they
inflict them. And it is a fact that some definite agreement is formed
between witches and devils whereby some shall be able to hurt and others
to heal, that so they may more easily ensnare the minds of the simple
and recruit the ranks of their abandoned and hateful society.
Archer-wizards and enchanters of weapons, who are only protected by
being patronized, defended and received by temporal Lords, are subject
to the same penalties; and they who patronize them, etc., or obstruct
the officers of justice in their proceedings against them, are subject
to all the penalties to which the patrons of heretics are liable, and
are to be excommunicated. And if after they have obstinately endured
that excommunication for a year they wish to repent, let them abjure
that obstruction and patronage, and if not, they must be handed over as
impenitents to the secular Court. And even if they have not endured
their excommunication for a year, such obstructors can still be
proceeded against as patrons of heretics.  
        And all that has been said with regard to patrons, defenders,
receivers, and obstructors in the case of archer-wizards, etc., applies
equally in respect of all other witches who work various injuries to
men, animals, and the fruits of the earth. But even the witches
themselves, when in the court of conscience with humble and contrite
spirit they weep for their sins and make clean confession asking
forgiveness, are taken back to mercy. But when they are known, those
whose duty it is must proceed against them, summoning, examining, and
detaining them, and in all things proceeding in accordance with the
nature of their crimes to a definitive and conclusive sentence, as has
been shown, if they wish to avoid the snare of eternal damnation by
reason of the excommunication pronounced upon them by the Church when
they deliberately fail in their duty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XXXV](mm03_35a.md)  
Finally, of the Method of passing Sentence upon Witches who Enter or
Cause to be Entered an Appeal, whether such be Frivolous or Legitimate
and Just  
