[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm03_32a)  [Next](mm03_34a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## Question XXXIII

### Of the Method of passing Sentence upon one who has been Accused by another Witch, who has been or is to be Burned at the Stake

        The fourteenth method of finally concluding a process on behalf
of the Faith is used when the person accused of heresy, after a careful
discussion of the circumstances of the process with reference to the
informant in consultation with learned lawyers, is found to be accused
of that heresy only by another witch who has been or is to be burned.
And this can happen in thirteen ways in thirteen cases. For a person so
accused is either found innocent and is to be freely discharged; or she
is found to be generally defamed for that heresy; or it is found that,
in addition to her defamation, she is to be to some degree exposed to
torture; or she is found to be strongly suspected of heresy; or she is
found to be at the same time defamed and suspected; and so on up to
thirteen different cases, as was shown in the Twentieth Question.  
        The first case is when she is accused only by a witch in
custody, and is not convicted either by her own confession or by
legitimate witnesses, and there are no other indications found by reason
of which she can truly be regarded as suspect. In such a case she is to
be entirely absolved, even by the secular Judge himself who has either
burned the deponent or is about to burn her either on his own authority
or on that commissioned to him by the Bishop and Judge of the Ordinary
Court; and she shall be absolved in the manner explained in the
Twentieth Question.  
        The second case is when, in addition to being accused by a witch
in custody, she is also publicly defamed throughout the whole village or
city; so that she has always laboured under that particular defamation,
but, after the deposition of the witch, it has become aggravated.  
        In such a case the following should be the procedure. The Judge
should consider that, apart from the general report, nothing particular
has been proved against her by other credible witnesses in the village
or town; and although, perhaps, that witch has deposed some serious
charges against her, yet, since has lost her faith by denying it to the
devil, Judges should give no ready credence to her words, unless there
should be other circumstances which aggravate that report; and then the
case would fall under the third and following case. Therefore she should
be enjoined a canonical purgation, and the sentence should be pronounced
as shown in the Twenty-first Question.  
        And if the civil Judge orders this purgation to the be made
before the Bishop, and ends with a solemn declaration that, if she
should fail, then, as an example to others, she should be more severely
sentenced by both the ecclesiastical and civil Judges, well and good.
But if he wishes to conduct it himself, let him command her to find ten
or twenty compurgators of her own class, and proceed in accordance with
the second method of sentencing such: except that, if she has to be
excommunicated, then he must have recourse to the Ordinary; and this
would be the case if she refused to purge herself.  
        The third case, then, happens when the person so accused is not
convicted by her own confession, not by the evidence of the facts, nor
by credible witnesses, nor are there any other indications as to any
fact in which she had ever been marked by the other inhabitants of that
town or village, except her general reputation among them. But the
general report has become intensified by the detention of that witch in
custody, as that it is said that she had been her companion in
everything and had participated in her crimes. But even so, the accused
firmly denies all this, and nothing of it is known to other inhabitants,
or of anything to save good behaviour on her part, though her
companionship with the witch is admitted.  
        In such a case the following is the procedure. First they are to
be brought face to face, and their mutual answers and recriminations
noted, to see whether there is any inconsistency in their words by
reason of which the Judge can decide from her admissions and denials
whether he ought to expose her to torture; and if so, he can proceed as
in the third manner of pronouncing a sentence, explained in the
Twenty-second Question, submitting her to light tortures: at the same
time exercising every possible precaution, as we explained at length
towards the beginning of this Third Part, to find out whether she is
innocent or guilty.  
        The fourth case is when a person accused in this manner is found
to be lightly suspected, either because of her own confession or because
of the depositions of the other witch in custody. There are some who
include among those who should be thus lightly suspected those who go
and consult witches for any purpose, or have procured for themselves a
lover by stirring up hatred between married folk, or have consorted with
witches in order to obtain some temporal advantage. But such are to be
excommunicated as followers of heretics, according to the Canon c.
*excommunicamus*, where it says: Similarly we judge those to be heretics
who believe in their errors. For the effect is presumed from the facts.
Therefore it seems that such are to be more severely sentenced and
punished than those who are under a light suspicion of heresy and are to
be judged from light conjectures. For example, if they had performed
services for witches or carried their letters to them, they need not on
that account believe in their errors: yet they have not laid information
against them, and they have received wages and vails from them. But
whether or not such people are to be included in this case, according to
the opinion of learned men the procedure must be as in the case of those
under light suspicion, and the Judge will act as follows. Such a person
will either abjure heresy or will purge herself canonically, as was
explained in the fourth method of pronouncing sentence in the
Twenty-third Question.  
        However, it seems that the better course is for such a person to
be ordered to abjure heresy, for this is more in accordance with the
meaning of the Canon c. *excommunicamus*, where it speaks of those who
are found to be only under some notable suspicion. And if such should
relapse, they should not incur the penalty for backsliders. The
procedure will be as above explained in the fourth method of
sentencing.  
        The fifth case is when such person is found to be under a strong
suspicion, by reason, as before, of her own confession or of the
depositions of the other witch in custody. In this class some include
those who directly or indirectly obstruct the Court in the process of
trying a witch, provided that they do this wittingly.  
        Also they include all who give help, advice or protection to
those who cause such obstructions. Also those who instruct summoned or
captured heretics to conceal the truth or in some way falsify it. Also
all those who wittingly receive, or visit those whom they know to be
heretics, or associate with them, send them gifts, or show favour to
them; for all such actions, when done with full knowledge, bespeak
favour felt towards the sin, and not to the person. And therefore they
say that, when the accused is guilty of any of the above actions, and
has been proved so after trial, then she should be sentenced in the
fifth method, explained in the Twenty-fourth Question; so that she must
abjure all heresy, under pain of being punished as a backslider.  
        As to these contentions we may say that the Judge must take into
consideration the household and family of each several witch who has
been burned or is detained; for these are generally found to be
infected.  
        For witches are instructed by devils to offer to them even their
own children; therefore there can be no doubt that such children are
instructed in all manner of crimes, as is shown in the First Part of
this work.  
        Again, in a case of simple heresy it happens that, on account of
the familiarity between heretics who are akin to each other, when one is
convicted of heresy it follows that his kindred also are strongly
suspected; and the same is true of the heresy of witches.  
        But this present case is made clear in the chapter of the Canon
*inter sollicitudines*. For a certain Dean was, owing to his reputation
as a heretic, enjoined a canonical purgation; on account of his
familiarity with heretics, he had to make a public abjuration; and
through the scandal he was deprived of his benefice, so that the scandal
might be allayed.  
        The sixth case is when such a person is under a grave suspicion;
but no simple and bare deposition by another witch in custody can cause
this, for there must be in addition some indication of the facts,
derived from certain words or deeds uttered or committed by the witch in
custody, in which the accused is at least said to have taken some part,
and shared in the evil deeds of the deponent.  
        To understand this, the reader should refer to what was written
in the Nineteenth Question, especially concerning the grave degree of
suspicion, how it arise from grave and convincing conjectures; and how
the Judge is forced to believe, on mere suspicion, that a person is a
heretic, although perhaps in his heart he is a true Catholic. The
Canonists give an example of this by the case, in simple heresy, of a
man summoned to answer in the cause of the faith, and defiantly refusing
to appear, on which account he is excommunicated, and if he persists in
that state for a year, becomes gravely suspected of heresy.  
        And so likewise in the case of person accused in the way we are
considering, the indications of the facts are to be examined by which
she is rendered gravely suspect. Let us put the case that the witch in
custody has asserted that the accused has taken part in her evil works
of witchcraft, but the accused firmly denies it. What then is to be
done? It will be necessary to consider whether there are any facts to
engender a strong suspicion of her, and whether that strong suspicion
can become a grave one. Thus, if a man has been summoned to answer some
charge, and has obstinately refused to appear, he would come under a
light suspicion of heresy, even if he had not been summoned in a cause
concerning the Faith. But if he then refused to appear in a cause
concerning the Faith and was excommunicated for his obstinacy, then he
would be strongly suspected; for the light suspicion would become a
strong one; and if then he remained obstinate in excommunication for a
year, the strong suspicion would become a grave one. Therefore the Judge
will consider whether, by reason of her familiarity with the witch in
custody, the accused is under a strong suspicion, in the manner shown in
the fifth case above; and then he must consider whether there is
anything which may turn that strong suspicion into a grave one. For it
is presumed that it is possible for this to be the case, on account of
the accused having perhaps shared in the crimes of the detained witch,
if she has had frequent intercourse with her. Therefore the Judge must
proceed as in the sixth method of sentencing explained in the
Twenty-fifth Question. But it may be asked what the Judge is to do if
the person so accused by a witch in custody still altogether persists in
her denials, in spite of all indications against her. We answer as
follows:  
        First the Judge must consider whether those denials do or do not
proceed from the vice or witchcraft of taciturnity: and, as was shown in
the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Questions of this Third part, the Judge can
know this from her ability or inability to shed tears, or from her
insensibility under torture and quick recovery of her strength
afterwards. For then the grave suspicion would be aggravated; and in
such a case she is by no means to be freely discharged, but, according
to the sixth method of sentencing, she must be condemned to perpetual
imprisonment and penance.  
        But if she is not infected with the taciturnity of witches, but
feels the keenest pains in her torture (whereas others, as has been
said, become insensible to pain owing to the witchcraft of taciturnity),
then the Judge must fall back upon his last expedient of a canonical
purgation. And if this should be ordered by a secular Judge, it is
called a lawful vulgar purgation, since it cannot be classed with other
vulgar purgations. And if she should fail in this purgation she will be
judged guilty.  
        The seventh case is when the accused is not found guilty by his
own confession, by the evidence of the facts, or by legitimate
witnesses, but is only found to be accused by a witch in custody, and
there are also some indications found which bring him under light or
strong suspicion. As, for example, that he had had great familiarity
with witches; in which case he would, according to the Canon, have to
undergo a canonical purgation on account of the general report
concerning him; and on account of the suspicion against him he must
abjure heresy, under pain of being punished as a backslider if it was a
strong suspicion, but not if it was a light one.  
        The eighth case occurs when the person so accused is found to
have confessed that heresy, but to be penitent, and never to have
relapsed. But here it is to be noted that in this and the other cases,
where it is a question of those who have or have not relapsed, and who
are or are not penitent, these distinctions are made only for the
benefit of Judges who are not concerned with the infliction of the
extreme penalty. Therefore the civil Judge may proceed in accordance
with the Civil and Imperial Laws, as justice shall demand, in the case
of one who has confessed, no matter whether or not she be penitent, or
whether or not she have relapsed. Only he may have recourse to those
thirteen methods of pronouncing sentence, and act in accordance with
them, if any doubtful question should arise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question XXXIV](mm03_34a)  
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch who Annuls Spells wrought
by Witchcraft; and of Witch Midwives and Archer-Wizards  
