[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sadh03)  [Next](sadh05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

II

SOUL CONSCIOUSNESS

We have seen that it was the aspiration of ancient India to live and
move and have its joy in Brahma, the all-conscious and all- pervading
Spirit, by extending its field of consciousness over all the world. But
that, it may be urged, is an impossible task for man to achieve. If this
extension of consciousness be an outward process, then it is endless; it
is like attempting to cross the ocean after ladling out its water. By
beginning to try to realise all, one has to end by realising nothing.

But, in reality, it is not so absurd as it sounds. Man has every day to
solve this problem of enlarging his region and adjusting his burdens.
His burdens are many, too numerous for him to carry, but he knows that
by adopting a system he can lighten the weight of his load. Whenever
they feel too complicated and unwieldy, he knows it is because he has
not been able to hit upon the system which would have set everything in
place and distributed the weight evenly. This search for system is
really a search for unity, for synthesis; it is our attempt to harmonise
the heterogeneous complexity of outward materials by an inner
adjustment. In the search we gradually become aware that to find out the
One is to possess the All; that there, indeed, is our last and highest
privilege. It is based on the law of that unity which is, if we only
know it, our abiding strength. Its living principle is the power that is
in truth; the truth of that unity which comprehends multiplicity. Facts
are many, but the truth is one. The animal intelligence knows facts, the
human mind has power to apprehend truth. The apple falls from the tree,
the rain descends upon the earth--you can go on burdening your memory
with such facts and never come to an end. But once you get hold of the
law of gravitation you can dispense with the necessity of collecting
facts *ad infinitum*. You have got at one truth which governs numberless
facts. This discovery of truth is pure joy to man--it is a liberation of
his mind. For, a mere fact is like a blind lane, it leads only to
itself--it has no beyond. But a truth opens up a whole horizon, it leads
us to the infinite. That is the reason why, when a man like Darwin
discovers some simple general truth about Biology, it does not stop
there, but like a lamp shedding its light far beyond the object for
which it was lighted, it illumines the whole region of human life and
thought, transcending its original purpose. Thus we find that truth,
while investing all facts, is not a mere aggregate of facts--it
surpasses them on all sides and points to the infinite reality.

As in the region of knowledge so in that of consciousness, man must
clearly realise some central truth which will give him an outlook over
the widest possible field. And that is the object which the Upanishad
has in view when it says, *Know thine own Soul*. Or, in other words,
realise the one great principal of unity that there is in every man.

All our egoistic impulses, our selfish desires, obscure our true vision
of the soul. For they only indicate our own narrow self. When we are
conscious of our soul, we perceive the inner being that transcends our
ego and has its deeper affinity with the All.

Children, when they begin to learn each separate letter of the alphabet,
find no pleasure in it, because they miss the real purpose of the
lesson; in fact, while letters claim our attention only in themselves
and as isolated things, they fatigue us. They become a source of joy to
us only when they combine into words and sentences and convey an idea.

Likewise, our soul when detached and imprisoned within the narrow limits
of a self loses its significance. For its very essence is unity. It can
only find out its truth by unifying itself with others, and only then it
has its joy. Man was troubled and he lived in a state of fear so long as
he had not discovered the uniformity of law in nature; till then the
world was alien to him. The law that he discovered is nothing but the
perception of harmony that prevails between reason which is of the soul
of man and the workings of the world. This is the bond of union through
which man is related to the world in which he lives, and he feels an
exceeding joy when he finds this out, for then he realises himself in
his surroundings. To understand anything is to find in it something
which is our own, and it is the discovery of ourselves outside us which
makes us glad. This relation of understanding is partial, but the
relation of love is complete. In love the sense of difference is
obliterated and the human soul fulfils its purpose in perfection,
transcending the limits of itself and reaching across the threshold of
the infinite. Therefore love is the highest bliss that man can attain
to, for through it alone he truly knows that he is more than himself,
and that he is at one with the All.

This principal of unity which man has in his soul is ever active,
establishing relations far and wide through literature, art, and
science, society, statecraft, and religion. Our great Revealers are they
who make manifest the true meaning of the soul by giving up self for the
love of mankind. They face calumny and persecution, deprivation and
death in their service of love. They live the life of the soul, not of
the self, and thus they prove to us the ultimate truth of humanity. We
call them *Mahātmās,* "the men of the great soul."

It is said in one of the Upanishads: *It is not that thou lovest thy son
because thou desirest him, but thou lovest thy son because thou desirest
thine own soul.*  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) The meaning of
this is, that whomsoever we love, in him we find our own soul in the
highest sense. The final truth of our existence lies in this.
*Paramātmā*, the supreme soul, is in me, as well as in my son, and my
joy in my son is the realisation of this truth. It has become quite a
commonplace fact, yet it is wonderful to think upon, that the joys and
sorrows of our loved ones are joys and sorrows to us--nay they are more.
Why so? Because in them we have grown larger, in them we have touched
that great truth which comprehends the whole universe.

It very often happens that our love for our children, our friends, or
other loved ones, debars us from the further realisation of our soul. It
enlarges our scope of consciousness, no doubt, yet it sets a limit to
its freest expansion. Nevertheless, it is the first step, and all the
wonder lies in this first step itself. It shows to us the true nature of
our soul. From it we know, for certain, that our highest joy is in the
losing of our egoistic self and in the uniting with others. This love
gives us a new power and insight and beauty of mind to the extent of the
limits we set around it, but ceases to do so if those limits lose their
elasticity, and militate against the spirit of love altogether; then our
friendships become exclusive, our families selfish and inhospitable, our
nations insular and aggressively inimical to other races. It is like
putting a burning light within a sealed enclosure, which shines brightly
till the poisonous gases accumulate and smother the flame. Nevertheless
it has proved its truth before it dies, and made known the joy of
freedom from the grip of darkness, blind and empty and cold.

According to the Upanishads, the key to cosmic consciousness, to
God-consciousness, is in the consciousness of the soul. To know our soul
apart from the self is the first step towards the realisation of the
supreme deliverance. We must know with absolute certainty that
essentially we are spirit. This we can do by winning mastery over self,
by rising above all pride and greed and fear, by knowing that worldly
losses and physical death can take nothing away from the truth and the
greatness of our soul. The chick knows when it breaks through the
self-centered isolation of its egg that the hard shell which covered it
so long was not really a part of its life. That shell is a dead thing,
it has no growth, it affords no glimpse whatever of the vast beyond that
lies outside it. However pleasantly perfect and rounded it may be, it
must be given a blow to, it must be burst through and thereby the
freedom of light and air be won, and the complete purpose of bird life
be achieved. In Sanskrit, the bird has been called the twice-born. So
too the man who has gone through the ceremony of the discipline of
self-restraint and high thinking for a period of at least twelve years;
who has come out simple in wants, pure in heart, and ready to take up
all the responsibilities of life in a disinterested largeness of spirit.
He is considered to have had his rebirth from the blind envelopment of
self to the freedom of soul life; to have come into living relation with
his surroundings; to have become at one with the All.

I have already warned my hearers, and must once more warn them against
the idea that the teachers of India preached a renunciation of the world
and of self which leads only to the blank emptiness of negation. Their
aim was the realisation of the soul, or, in other words, gaining the
world in perfect truth. When Jesus said, "Blessed are the meek, for they
shall inherit the earth," he meant this. He proclaimed the truth that
when man gets rid of his pride of self then he comes into his true
inheritance. No more has he to fight his way into his position in the
world; it is secure for him everywhere by the immortal right of his
soul. Pride of self interferes with the proper function of the soul
which is to realise itself by perfecting its union with the world and
the world's God.

In his sermon to Sádhu Simha Buddha says, *It is true, Simha, that I
denounce activities, but only the activities that lead to the evil in
words, thoughts, or deeds. It is true, Simha, that I preach extinction,
but only the extinction of pride, lust, evil thought, and ignorance, not
that of forgiveness, love, charity, and truth.*

The doctrine of deliverance that Buddha preached was the freedom from
the thraldom of *Avidyā*. *Avidyā* is the ignorance that darkens our
consciousness, and tends to limit it within the boundaries of our
personal self. It is this *Avidyā*, this ignorance, this limiting of
consciousness that creates the hard separateness of the ego, and thus
becomes the source of all pride and greed and cruelty incidental to
self-seeking. When a man sleeps he is shut up within the narrow
activities of his physical life. He lives, but he knows not the varied
relations of his life to his surroundings,--therefore he knows not
himself. So when a man lives the life of *Avidyā* he is confined within
his self. It is a spiritual sleep; his consciousness is not fully awake
to the highest reality that surrounds him, therefore he knows not the
reality of his own soul. When he attains *Bodhi*, i.e. the awakenment
from the sleep of self to the perfection of consciousness, he becomes
Buddha.

Once I met two ascetics of a certain religious sect in a village of
Bengal. "Can you tell me," I asked them, "wherein lies the special
features of your religion?" One of them hesitated for a moment and
answered, "It is difficult to define that." The other said, "No, it is
quite simple. We hold that we have first of all to know our own soul
under the guidance of our spiritual teacher, and when we have done that
we can find him, who is the Supreme Soul, within us." "Why don't you
preach your doctrine to all the people of the world?" I asked. "Whoever
feels thirsty will of himself come to the river," was his reply. "But
then, do you find it so? Are they coming?" The man gave a gentle smile,
and with an assurance which had not the least tinge of impatience or
anxiety, he said, "They must come, one and all."

Yes, he is right, this simple ascetic of rural Bengal. Man is indeed
abroad to satisfy needs which are more to him than food and clothing. He
is out to find himself. Man's history is the history of his journey to
the unknown in quest of the realisation of his immortal self--his soul.
Through the rise and fall of empires; through the building up gigantic
piles of wealth and the ruthless scattering of them upon the dust;
through the creation of vast bodies of symbols that give shape to his
dreams and aspirations, and the casting of them away like the playthings
of an outworn infancy; through his forging of magic keys with which to
unlock the mysteries of creation, and through his throwing away of this
labour of ages to go back to his workshop and work up afresh some new
form; yes, through it all man is marching from epoch to epoch towards
the fullest realisation of his soul,--the soul which is greater than the
things man accumulates, the deeds he accomplishes, the theories he
builds; the soul whose onward course is never checked by death or
dissolution. Man's mistakes and failures have by no means been trifling
or small, they have strewn his path with colossal ruins; his sufferings
have been immense, like birth-pangs for a giant child; they are the
prelude of a fulfilment whose scope is infinite. Man has gone through
and is still undergoing martyrdoms in various ways, and his institutions
are the altars he has built whereto he brings his daily sacrifices,
marvellous in kind and stupendous in quantity. All this would be
absolutely unmeaning and unbearable if all along he did not feel that
deepest joy of the soul within him, which tries its divine strength by
suffering and proves its exhaustless riches by renunciation. Yes, they
are coming, the pilgrims, one and all--coming to their true inheritance
of the world; they are ever broadening their consciousness, ever seeking
a higher and higher unity, ever approaching nearer to the one central
Truth which is all-comprehensive.

Man's poverty is abysmal, his wants are endless till he becomes truly
conscious of his soul. Till then, the world to him is in a state of
continual flux-- a phantasm that is and is not. For a man who has
realised his soul there is a determinate centre of the universe around
which all else can find its proper place, and from thence only can he
draw and enjoy the blessedness of a harmonious life.

There was a time when the earth was only a nebulous mass whose particles
were scattered far apart through the expanding force of heat; when she
had not yet attained her definiteness of form and had neither beauty nor
purpose, but only heat and motion. Gradually, when her vapours were
condensed into a unified rounded whole through a force that strove to
bring all straggling matters under the control of a centre, she occupied
her proper place among the planets of the solar system, like an emerald
pendant in a necklace of diamonds. So with our soul. When the heat and
motion of blind impulses and passions distract it on all sides, we can
neither give nor receive anything truly. But when we find our centre in
our soul by the power of self-restraint, by the force that harmonises
all warring elements and unifies those that are apart, then all our
isolated impressions reduce themselves to wisdom, and all our momentary
impulses of heart find their completion in love; then all the petty
details of our life reveal an infinite purpose, and all our thoughts and
deeds unite themselves inseparably in an internal harmony.

The Upanishads say with great emphasis, *Know thou the One, the Soul.*
 <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) *It is the bridge leading to the
immortal being.*  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

This is the ultimate end of man, to find the *One* which is in him;
which is his truth, which is his soul; the key with which he opens the
gate of the spiritual life, the heavenly kingdom. His desires are many,
and madly they run after the varied objects of the world, for therein
they have their life and fulfilment. But that which is *one* in him is
ever seeking for unity--unity in knowledge, unity in love, unity in
purposes of will; its highest joy is when it reaches the infinite one
within its eternal unity. Hence the saying of the Upanishad, *Only those
of tranquil minds, and none else, can attain abiding joy, by realising
within their souls the Being who manifests one essence in a multiplicity
of forms.*  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)

\[Transcriber's note: The above footnote contains the \* mark in the
original printed version. This has been retained as is.\]

Through all the diversities of the world the one in us is threading its
course towards the one in all; this is its nature and this is its joy.
But by that devious path it could never reach its goal if it had not a
light of its own by which it could catch the sight of what it was
seeking in a flash. The vision of the Supreme One in our own soul is a
direct and immediate intuition, not based on any ratiocination or
demonstration at all. Our eyes naturally see an object as a whole, not
by breaking it up into parts, but by bringing all the parts together
into a unity with ourselves. So with the intuition of our Soul-
consciousness, which naturally and totally realises its unity in the
Supreme One.

Says the Upanishad: *This deity who is manifesting himself in the
activities of the universe always dwells in the heart of man as the
supreme soul. Those who realise him through the immediate perception of
the heart attain immortality.*  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md)

He is *Vishvakarma*; that is, in a multiplicity of forms and forces lies
his outward manifestation in nature; but his inner manifestation in our
soul is that which exists in unity. Our pursuit of truth in the domain
of nature therefore is through analysis and the gradual methods of
science, but our apprehension of truth in our soul is immediate and
through direct intuition. We cannot attain the supreme soul by
successive additions of knowledge acquired bit by bit even through all
eternity, because he is one, he is not made up of parts; we can only
know him as heart of our hearts and soul of our soul; we can only know
him in the love and joy we feel when we give up our self and stand
before him face to face.

The deepest and the most earnest prayer that has ever risen from the
human heart has been uttered in our ancient tongue: *O thou
self-revealing one, reveal thyself in me.*  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) We are in misery because we are creatures
of self--the self that is unyielding and narrow, that reflects no light,
that is blind to the infinite. Our self is loud with its own discordant
clamour--it is not the tuned harp whose chords vibrate with the music of
the eternal. Sighs of discontent and weariness of failure, idle regrets
for the past and anxieties for the future are troubling our shallow
hearts because we have not found our souls, and the self-revealing
spirit has not been manifest within us. Hence our cry, *O thou awful
one, save me with thy smile of grace ever and evermore.*  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) It is a stifling shroud of death, this
self-gratification, this insatiable greed, this pride of possession,
this insolent alienation of heart. *Rudra, O thou awful one, rend this
dark cover in twain and let the saving beam of thy smile of grace strike
through this night of gloom and waken my soul.*

*From unreality lead me to the real, from darkness to the light, from
death to immortality.*  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) But how can
one hope to have this prayer granted? For infinite is the distance that
lies between truth and untruth, between death and deathlessness. Yet
this measureless gulf is bridged in a moment when the self revealing one
reveals himself in the soul. There the miracle happens, for there is the
meeting-ground of the finite and infinite. *Father, completely sweep
away all my sins!*  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) For in sin man
takes part with the finite against the infinite that is in him. It is
the defeat of his soul by his self. It is a perilously losing game, in
which man stakes his all to gain a part. Sin is the blurring of truth
which clouds the purity of our consciousness. In sin we lust after
pleasures, not because they are truly desirable, but because the red
light of our passions makes them appear desirable; we long for things
not because they are great in themselves, but because our greed
exaggerates them and makes them appear great. These exaggerations, these
falsifications of the perspective of things, break the harmony of our
life at every step; we lose the true standard of values and are
distracted by the false claims of the varied interests of life
contending with one another. It is this failure to bring all the
elements of his nature under the unity and control of the Supreme One
that makes man feel the pang of his separation from God and gives rise
to the earnest prayer, *O God, O Father, completely sweep away all our
sins.*  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) *Give unto us that which is
good*  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) , the good which is the
daily bread of our souls. In our pleasures we are confined to ourselves,
in the good we are freed and we belong to all. As the child in its
mother's womb gets its sustenance through the union of its life with the
larger life of its mother, so our soul is nourished only through the
good which is the recognition of its inner kinship, the channel of its
communication with the infinite by which it is surrounded and fed. Hence
it is said, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for they shall be filled." For righteousness is the
divine food of the soul; nothing but this can fill him, can make him
live the life of the infinite, can help him in his growth towards the
eternal. *We bow to thee from whom come the enjoyments of our life.*
 <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) *We bow also to thee from whom
comes the good of our soul.*  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) *We
bow to thee who art good, the highest good*  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) , in whom we are united with everything,
that is, in peace and harmony, in goodness and love.

Man's cry is to reach his fullest expression. It is this desire for
self-expression that leads him to seek wealth and power. But he has to
discover that accumulation is not realisation. It is the inner light
that reveals him, not outer things. When this light is lighted, then in
a moment he knows that Man's highest revelation is God's own revelation
in him. And his cry is for this--the manifestation of his soul, which is
the manifestation of God in his soul. Man becomes perfect man, he
attains his fullest expression, when his soul realises itself in the
Infinite being who is *Āvih* whose very essence is expression.

The real misery of man is in the fact that he has not fully come out,
that he is self-obscured, lost in the midst of his own desires. He
cannot feel himself beyond his personal surroundings, his greater self
is blotted out, his truth is unrealised. The prayer that rises up from
his whole being is therefore, *Thou, who art the spirit of
manifestation, manifest thyself in me.*  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) This longing for the perfect expression
of his self is more deeply inherent in man than his hunger and thirst
for bodily sustenance, his lust for wealth and distinction. This prayer
is not merely one born individually of him; it is in depth of all
things, it is the ceaseless urging in him of the *Āvih*, of the spirit
of eternal manifestation. The revealment of the infinite in the finite,
which is the motive of all creation, is not seen in its perfection in
the starry heavens, in the beauty of flowers. It is in the soul of man.
For there will seeks its manifestation in will, and freedom turns to win
its final prize in the freedom of surrender.

Therefore, it is the self of man which the great King of the universe
has not shadowed with his throne--he has left it free. In his physical
and mental organism, where man is related with nature, he has to
acknowledge the rule of his King, but in his self he is free to disown
him. There our God must win his entrance. There he comes as a guest, not
as a king, and therefore he has to wait till he is invited. It is the
man's self from which God has withdrawn his commands, for there he comes
to court our love. His armed force, the laws of nature, stand outside
its gate, and only beauty, the messenger of his love, finds admission
within its precincts.

It is only in this region of will that anarchy is permitted; only in
man's self that the discord of untruth and unrighteousness hold its
reign; and things can come to such a pass that we may cry out in our
anguish, "Such utter lawlessness could never prevail if there were a
God!" Indeed, God has stood aside from our self, where his watchful
patience knows no bounds, and where he never forces open the doors if
shut against him. For this self of ours has to attain its ultimate
meaning, which is the soul, not through the compulsion of God's power
but through love, and thus become united with God in freedom.

He whose spirit has been made one with God stands before man as the
supreme flower of humanity. There man finds in truth what he is; for
there the *Āvih* is revealed to him in the soul of man as the most
perfect revelation for him of God; for there we see the union of the
supreme will with our will, our love with the love everlasting.

Therefore, in our country he who truly loves God receives such homage
from men as would be considered almost sacrilegious in the west. We see
in him God's wish fulfilled, the most difficult of all obstacles to his
revealment removed, and God's own perfect joy fully blossoming in
humanity. Through him we find the whole world of man overspread with a
divine homeliness. His life, burning with God's love, makes all our
earthly love resplendent. All the intimate associations of our life, all
its experience of pleasure and pain, group themselves around this
display of the divine love, and from the drama that we witness in him.
The touch of an infinite mystery passes over the trivial and the
familiar, making it break out into ineffable music. The trees and the
stars and the blue hills appear to us as symbols aching with a meaning
which can never be uttered in words. We seem to watch the Master in the
very act of creation of a new world when a man's soul draws her heavy
curtain of self aside, when her veil is lifted and she is face to face
with her eternal lover.

But what is this state? It is like a morning of spring, varied in its
life and beauty, yet one and entire. When a man's life rescued from
distractions finds its unity in the soul, then the consciousness of the
infinite becomes at once direct and natural to it as the light is to the
flame. All the conflicts and contradictions of life are reconciled;
knowledge, love and action harmonized; pleasure and pain become one in
beauty, enjoyment and renunciation equal in goodness; the breach between
the finite and the infinite fills with love and overflows; every moment
carries its message of the eternal; the formless appears to us in the
form of the flower, of the fruit; the boundless takes us up in his arms
as a father and walks by our side as a friend. It is only the soul, the
One in man which by its very nature can overcome all limits, and finds
its affinity with the Supreme One. While yet we have not attained the
internal harmony, and the wholeness of our being, our life remains a
life of habits. The world still appears to us as a machine, to be
mastered where it is useful, to be guarded against where it is
dangerous, and never to be known in its full fellowship with us, alike
in its physical nature and in its spiritual life and beauty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](sadh04.htm#fr_19.md) Na vā arē putrasya kāmāya
putrah priyō bhavati, ātmanastu kāmāya putrah priyō bhavati.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](sadh04.htm#fr_20.md) Tamēvaikam jānatha
ātmānam.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](sadh04.htm#fr_21.md) Amritasyaisha sētuh.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](sadh04.htm#fr_22.md) Ēkam rūpam bahudhā yah
karōti \* \* tam ātmastham yē anupaçyanti dīhrāh, tēshām sukham çāçvatam
nētarēshām.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](sadh04.htm#fr_23.md) Ēsha dēvō vishvakarmā
mahātmā sadā janānām hridayē sannivishtah. Hridā manīsha
manasābhiklriptō ya ētad viduramritāstē bhavanti.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](sadh04.htm#fr_24.md) Āvirāvīrmayēdhi.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](sadh04.htm#fr_25.md) Rudra yat tē dakshinam
mukham tēna mām pāhi nityam.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](sadh04.htm#fr_26.md) Asatōmā sadgamaya,
tamasōmā jyōtirgamaya, mrityōrma mritangamaya.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](sadh04.htm#fr_27.md) Vishvānidēva savitar
duratāni parāsuva.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](sadh04.htm#fr_28.md) Vishvāni dēva savitar
duritāni parāsuva.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](sadh04.htm#fr_29.md) Yad bhadram tanna āsuva.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](sadh04.htm#fr_30.md) Namah sambhavāya.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](sadh04.htm#fr_31.md) Namah çankarāyacha.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](sadh04.htm#fr_32.md) Namah çivāyacha,
çivatarāya cha.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](sadh04.htm#fr_33.md) Āvirāvīrmayēdhi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III: The Problem of Evil](sadh05.md)
