[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kyb01)  [Next](kyb03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NHRC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kybalion*, by Three Initiates, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# INTRODUCTION

We take great pleasure in presenting to the attention of students and
investigators of the Secret Doctrines this little work based upon the
world-old Hermetic Teachings. There has been so little written upon this
subject, not withstanding the countless references to the Teachings in
the many works upon occultism, that the many earnest searchers after the
Arcane Truths will doubtless welcome the appearance of this present
volume.

The purpose of this work is not the enunciation of any special
philosophy or doctrine, but rather is to give to the students a
statement of the Truth that will serve to reconcile the many bits of
occult knowledge that they may have acquired, but which are apparently
opposed to each other and which often serve to discourage and disgust
the beginner in the study. Our intent is not to erect a new Temple of
Knowledge, but rather to place in the hands of the student a Master-Key
with which he may open the many inner doors in the Temple of Mystery
through the main portals he has already entered.

There is no portion of the occult teachings possessed by the world which
have been so closely guarded as the fragments of the Hermetic Teachings
which have come down to us over the tens of centuries which have elapsed
since the lifetime of its great founder, Hermes Trismegistus, the
"scribe of the gods," who dwelt in old Egypt in the days when the
present race of men was in its infancy. Contemporary with Abraham, and,
if the legends be true, an instructor of that venerable sage, Hermes
was, and is, the Great Central Sun of Occultism, whose rays have served
to illumine the countless teachings which have been promulgated since
his time. All the fundamental and basic teachings embedded in the
esoteric teachings of every race may be traced back to Hermes. Even the
most ancient teachings of India undoubtedly have their roots in the
original Hermetic Teachings.

From the land of the Ganges many advanced occultists wandered to the
land of Egypt, and sat at the feet of the Master. From him they obtained
the Master-Key which explained and reconciled their divergent views, and
thus the Secret Doctrine was firmly established. From other lands also
came the learned ones, all of whom regarded Hermes as the Master of
Masters, and his influence was so great that in spite of the many
wanderings from the path on the part of the centuries of teachers in
these different lands, there may still be found a certain basic
resemblance and correspondence which underlies the many and often quite
divergent theories entertained and taught by the occultists of these
different lands today. The student of Comparative Religions will be able
to perceive the influence of the Hermetic Teachings in every religion
worthy of the name, now known to man, whether it be a dead religion or
one in full vigor in our own times. There is always certain
correspondence in spite of the contradictory features, and the Hermetic
Teachings act as the Great Reconciler.

The lifework of Hermes seems to have been in the direction of planting
the great Seed-Truth which has grown and blossomed in so many strange
forms, rather than to establish a school of philosophy which would
dominate, the world's thought. But, nevertheless, the original truths
taught by him have been kept intact in their original purity by a few
men each age, who, refusing great numbers of half-developed students and
followers, followed the Hermetic custom and reserved their truth for the
few who were ready to comprehend and master it. From lip to ear the
truth has been handed down among the few. There have always been a few
Initiates in each generation, in the various lands of the earth, who
kept alive the sacred flame of the Hermetic Teachings, and such have
always been willing to use their lamps to re-light the lesser lamps of
the outside world, when the light of truth grew dim, and clouded by
reason of neglect, and when the wicks became clogged with foreign
matter. There were always a few to tend faithfully the altar of the
Truth, upon which was kept alight the Perpetual Lamp of Wisdom. These
men devoted their lives to the labor of love which the poet has so well
stated in his lines:

     "O, let not the flame die out! Cherished age after age  
     in its dark cavern--in its holy temples cherished. Fed  
     by pure ministers of love--let not the flame die out!"

These men have never sought popular approval, nor numbers of followers.
They are indifferent to these things, for they know how few there are in
each generation who are ready for the truth, or who would recognize it
if it were presented to them. They reserve the "strong meat for men,"
while others furnish the "milk for babes." They reserve their pearls of
wisdom for the few elect, who recognize their value and who wear them in
their crowns, instead of casting them before the materialistic vulgar
swine, who would trample them in the mud and mix them with their
disgusting mental food. But still these men have never forgotten or
overlooked the original teachings of Hermes, regarding the passing on of
the words of truth to those ready to receive it, which teaching is
stated in The Kybalion as follows: "Where fall the footsteps of the
Master, the ears of those ready for his Teaching open wide." And again:
"When the ears of the student are ready to hear, then cometh the lips to
fill them with wisdom." But their customary attitude has always been
strictly in accordance with the other Hermetic aphorism, also in The
Kybalion: "The lips of Wisdom are closed, except to the ears of
Understanding."

There are those who have criticized this attitude of the Hermetists, and
who have claimed that they did not manifest the proper spirit in their
policy of seclusion and reticence. But a moment's glance back over the
pages of history will show the wisdom of the Masters, who knew the folly
of attempting to teach to the world that which it was neither ready or
willing to receive. The Hermetists have never sought to be martyrs, and
have, instead, sat silently aside with a pitying smile on their closed
lips, while the "heathen raged noisily about them" in their customary
amusement of putting to death and torture the honest but misguided
enthusiasts who imagined that they could force upon a race of barbarians
the truth capable of being understood only by the elect who had advanced
along The Path.

And the spirit of persecution has not as yet died out in the land. There
are certain Hermetic Teachings, which, if publicly promulgated, would
bring down upon the teachers a great cry of scorn and revilement from
the multitude, who would again raise the cry of "Crucify! Crucify."

In this little work we have endeavored to give you an idea of the
fundamental teachings of The Kybalion, striving to give you the working
Principles, leaving you to apply therm yourselves, rather than
attempting to work out the teaching in detail. If you are a true
student, you will be able to work out and apply these Principles--if
not, then you must develop yourself into one, for otherwise the Hermetic
Teachings will be as "words, words, words" to you.

THE THREE INITIATES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Hermetic Philosophy](kyb03)
