[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kyb02)  [Next](kyb04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NHRC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kybalion*, by Three Initiates, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER I

### THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY

    "The lips of wisdom are closed, except to the ears  
    of Understanding"--The Kybalion.

From old Egypt have come the fundamental esoteric and occult teachings
which have so strongly influenced the philosophies of all races, nations
and peoples, for several thousand years. Egypt, the home of the Pyramids
and the Sphinx, was the birthplace of the Hidden Wisdom and Mystic
Teachings. From her Secret Doctrine all nations have borrowed. India,
Persia, Chaldea, Medea, China, Japan, Assyria, ancient Greece and Rome,
and other ancient countries partook liberally at the feast of knowledge
which the Hierophants and Masters of the Land of Isis so freely provided
for those who came prepared to partake of the great store of Mystic and
Occult Lore which the masterminds of that ancient land had gathered
together.

In ancient Egypt dwelt the great Adepts and Masters who have never been
surpassed, and who seldom have been equaled, during the centuries that
have taken their processional flight since the days of the Great Hermes.
In Egypt was located the Great Lodge of Lodges of the Mystics. At the
doors of her Temples entered the Neophytes who afterward, as
Hierophants, Adepts, and Masters, traveled to the four corners of the
earth, carrying with them the precious knowledge which they were ready,
anxious, and willing to pass on to those who were ready to receive the
same. All students of the Occult recognize the debt that they owe to
these venerable Masters of that ancient land.

But among these great Masters of Ancient Egypt there once dwelt one of
whom Masters hailed as "The Master of Masters." This man, if "man"
indeed he was, dwelt in Egypt in the earliest days. He was known as
Hermes Trismegistus. He was the father of the Occult Wisdom; the founder
of Astrology; the discoverer of Alchemy. The details of his life story
are lost to history, owing to the lapse of the years, though several of
the ancient countries disputed with each other in their claims to the
honor of having furnished his birthplace--and this thousands of years
ago. The date of his sojourn in Egypt, in that his last incarnation on
this planet, is not now known, but it has been fixed at the early days
of the oldest dynasties of Egypt--long before the days of Moses. The
best authorities regard him as a contemporary of Abraham, and some of
the Jewish traditions go so far as to claim that Abraham acquired a
portion of his mystic knowledge from Hermes himself.

As the years rolled by after his passing from this plane of life
(tradition recording that he lived three hundred years in the flesh),
the Egyptians deified Hermes, and made him one of their gods, under the
name of Thoth. Years after, the people of Ancient Greece also made him
one of their many gods--calling him "Hermes, the god of Wisdom." The
Egyptians revered his memory for many centuries-yes, tens of centuries--
calling him "the Scribe of the Gods," and bestowing upon him,
distinctively, his ancient title, "Trismegistus," which means "the
thrice-great"; "the great-great"; "the greatest-great"; etc. In all the
ancient lands, the name of Hermes Trismegistus was revered, the name
being synonymous with the "Fount of Wisdom."

Even to this day, we use the term "hermetic" in the sense of "secret";
"sealed so that nothing can escape"; etc., and this by reason of the
fact that the followers of Hermes always observed the principle of
secrecy in their teachings. They did not believe in "casting pearls
before swine," but rather held to the teaching "milk for babes"; "meat
for strong men," both of which maxims are familiar to readers of the
Christian scriptures, but both of which had been used by the Egyptians
for centuries before the Christian era.

And this policy of careful dissemination of the truth has always
characterized the Hermetics, even unto the present day. The Hermetic
Teachings are to be found in all lands, among all religions, but never
identified with any particular country, nor with any particular
religious sect. This because of the warning of the ancient teachers
against allowing the Secret Doctrine to become crystallized into a
creed. The wisdom of this caution is apparent to all students of
history. The ancient occultism of India and Persia degenerated, and was
largely lost, owing to the fact that the teachers became priests, and so
mixed theology with the philosophy, the result being that the occultism
of India and Persia has been gradually lost amidst the mass of religious
superstition, cults, creeds and "gods." So it was with Ancient Greece
and Rome. So it was with the Hermetic Teachings of the Gnostics and
Early Christians, which were lost at the time of Constantine, whose iron
hand smothered philosophy with the blanket of theology, losing to the
Christian Church that which was its very essence and spirit, and causing
it to grope throughout several centuries before it found the way back to
its ancient faith, the indications apparent to all careful observers in
this Twentieth Century being that the Church is now struggling to get
back to its ancient mystic teachings.

But there were always a few faithful souls who kept alive the Flame,
tending it carefully, and not allowing its light to become extinguished.
And thanks to these staunch hearts, and fearless minds, we have the
truth still with us. But it is not found in books, to any great extent.
It has been passed along from Master to Student; from Initiate to
Hierophant; from lip to ear. When it was written down at all, its
meaning was veiled in terms of alchemy and astrology so that only those
possessing the key could read it aright. This was made necessary in
order to avoid the persecutions of the theologians of the Middle Ages,
who fought the Secret Doctrine with fire and sword; stake, gibbet and
cross. Even to this day there will be found but few reliable books on
the Hermetic Philosophy, although there are countless references to it
in many books written on various phases of Occultism. And yet, the
Hermetic Philosophy is the only Master Key which will open all the doors
of the Occult Teachings!

In the early days, there was a compilation of certain Basic Hermetic
Doctrines, passed on from teacher to student, which was known as "THE
KYBALION," the exact significance and meaning of the term having been
lost for several centuries. This teaching, however, is known to many to
whom it has descended, from mouth to ear, on and on throughout the
centuries. Its precepts have never been written down, or printed, so far
as we know. It was merely a collection of maxims, axioms, and precepts,
which were non-understandable to outsiders, but which were readily
understood by students, after the axioms, maxims, and precepts had been
explained and exemplified by the Hermetic Initiates to their Neophytes.
These teachings really constituted the basic principles of "The Art of
Hermetic Alchemy," which, contrary to the general belief, dealt in the
mastery of Mental Forces, rather than Material Elements-the
Transmutation of one kind of Mental Vibrations into others, instead of
the changing of one kind of metal into another. The legends of the
"Philosopher's Stone" which would turn base metal into Gold, was an
allegory relating to Hermetic Philosophy, readily understood by all
students of true Hermeticism.

In this little book, of which this is the First Lesson, we invite our
students to examine into the Hermetic Teachings, as set forth in THE
KYBALION, and as explained by ourselves, humble students of the
Teachings, who, while bearing the title of Initiates, are still students
at the feet of HERMES, the Master. We herein give you many of the
maxims, axioms and precepts of THE KYBALION, accompanied by explanations
and illustrations which we deem likely to render the teachings more
easily comprehended by the modern student, particularly as the original
text is purposely veiled in obscure terms.

The original maxims, axioms, and precepts of THE KYBALION are printed
herein, in italics, the proper credit being given. Our own work is
printed in the regular way, in the body of the work. We trust that the
many students to whom we now offer this little work will derive as much
benefit from the study of its pages as have the many who have gone on
before, treading the same Path to Mastery throughout the centuries that
have passed since the times of HERMES TRISMEGISTUS--the Master of
Masters--the Great-Great. In the words of "THE KYBALION":

    "Where fall the footsteps of the Master, the ears of those  
    ready for his Teaching open wide."--The Kybalion.

    "When the ears of the student are ready to hear, then cometh  
    the lips to fill them with Wisdom."--The Kybalion.

So that according to the Teachings, the passage of this book to those
ready for the instruction will attract the attention of such as are
prepared to receive the Teaching. And, likewise, when the pupil is ready
to receive the truth, then will this little book come to him, or her.
Such is The Law. The Hermetic Principle of Cause and Effect, in its
aspect of The Law of Attraction, will bring lips and ear together--pupil
and book in company. So mote it be!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Seven Hermetic Principles](kyb04)
