[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe46004)  [Next](sbe46006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983846/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part II (SBE46)*, by Hermann Oldenberg \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 13.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 1, VARGA 24–25.

#### ÂPRÎ HYMN.

1 [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:1:1). Being well lighted, O Agni, bring us
hither the gods to the man rich in sacrificial food, O Hot*ri*,
purifier, and perform the sacrifice.

2\. Tanûnapât [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:2:1)! make our sacrifice rich in
honey and convey it to-day to the gods, O sage, that they may feast.

3\. I invoke here at this sacrifice
Narâ*s*a*m*sa [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:3:1), the beloved one, the
honey-tongued preparer of the sacrificial food.

4\. O magnified [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:4:1) Agni! Conduct the gods
hither in an easy-moving chariot. Thou art the Hot*ri* instituted by
Manus [2](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:4:2).

5\. Strew, O thoughtful men, in due order [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:5:1)
the sacrificial grass, the back (or surface) of which is sprinkled with
butter, on which the appearance of
immortality [2](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:5:2) (is seen).

6\. May the divine gates open, the increasers of *Ri*ta, which do not
stick together, that to-day, that now the sacrifice may proceed.

7\. I invoke here at this sacrifice Night and Dawn, the beautifully
adorned goddesses, that they may sit down on this our sacrificial grass.

8\. I invoke these two divine Hot*ri*s [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:8:1),
the sages with beautiful tongues. May they perform this sacrifice for
us.

9\. I*l*â ('Nourishment'), Sarasvatî, and Mahî ('the great
one') [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:9:1), the three comfort-giving goddesses,
they who do not fail, shall sit down on the sacrificial grass.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

10\. I invoke hither the foremost, all-shaped Tvash*tri* to come hither;
may he be ours alone.

11\. O tree [1](sbe46005.htm#an_1:13:11:1), let the sacrificial food go,
O god, to the gods. May the giver's splendour be foremost.

12\. Offer ye the sacrifice with the word Svâhâ to Indra in the
sacrificer's house. Thereto I invoke the gods.

#### NOTES.

The hymn is ascribed, as the whole collection to which it belongs, to
Medhâtithi Kâ*n*va (see the note on the preceding hymn). Its metre is
Gâyatrî. Verses 1–4 = SV. II, 697–700. Verse 9 = RV. V, 5, 8. Verse 10 =
TS. III, 1, 11, 1; TB. III, 5, 12, 1; MS. IV, 13, 10.

The hymn belongs to the class of Âprî hymns, which were classed by the
ancient arrangers of the Sa*m*hitâ among the Agni hymns. The Âprî hymns,
consisting of eleven or twelve verses, were destined for the Prayâ*g*a
offerings of the animal sacrifice (comp. H. O., Zeitschrift der D. Morg.
Gesellschaft, XLII, 243 seq.). They were addressed, verse by verse in
regular order, partly to Agni, partly to different spirits or deified
objects connected with the sacrifice, such as the sacrificial grass, the
divine gates through which the gods had to pass on their way to the
sacrifice, &c. The second verse was addressed by some of the *Ri*shi
families to Tanûnapât by some to Narâ*s*a*m*sa; in some of the hymns we
find two verses instead of one (so that the total number of verses
becomes twelve instead of eleven) addressed the one to Tanûnapât, the
other to Narâ*s*a*m*sa. Bergaigne (Recherches sur l’histoire de la
Liturgie Védique, p. 14) conjectures that some of the *Ri*shi families
had only seven Prayâ*g*as. This opinion is based on the identical
appearance of four verses (8–11) in the Âprî hymns of the Vi*s*vâmitras
(III, 4) and of the Vasish*th*as (VII, 2), and on the diversity of
metres used in two other Âprî hymns, IX, 5 and II, 3. To me this
conjecture, though very ingenious, does not seem convincing.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

With the text of the Âprî hymns should be compared the corresponding
Praishas of the Maitrâvaru*n*a priest, i. e. the orders by which this
priest directed the Hot*ri* to pronounce the Prayâ*g*a invocations. The
text of these Praishas is given Taitt. Brâhm. III, 6, 2.

Comp. on the character and the historical and ritual position of the
Âprî hymns, Max Müller, Hist. Anc. Sansc. Literature, p. 403 seq.; Roth,
Nirukta, notes, p. 121 seq.; Weber, Indische Studien, X, 89 seq.; Ludwig
V, 315 seq.; Hillebrandt, Das Altindische Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, 94
seq.; Schwab, Das Altindische Thieropfer, 90 seq.; Bergaigne, Recherches
sur l’histoire de la Liturgie Védique, 13 seq.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:13:1:1">1</span>. Comp. Delbrück, Syntactische
Forschungen, I, 97.

##### Verses 2, 3.

Note <span id="an_1:13:2:1">1</span><span id="an_1:13:3:1"></span>. Does
Tanûnapât, lit. 'son of the body,' mean, as Roth and Grassmann believed,
'son of his own self' (comp. I, 12, 6. agnínâ agní*h* sám idhyate, 'by
Agni Agni is kindled'), or is the meaning 'le propre fils' (Bergaigne,
Rel. Védique II, 100)? Narâ*s*a*m*sa, which is nearly identical with the
Avestic Nairyôsaṅha, means 'the song of men,' or 'praised by men'
(Bergaigne, l. l. I, 305; M. M.’s note on VII, 46, 4). In III, 29, 11 it
is said of Agni: He is called Tanûnapât as the foetus of the Asura; he
becomes Narâ*s*a*m*sa when he is born.' Of course an expression like
this is by no means sufficient to prove that the sacrificial gods
Tanûnapât and Narâ*s*a*m*sa, as invoked in the Âprî hymns, are nothing
but forms of Agni. Expressions which are constantly repeated in the Âprî
verses show that the work of Tanûnapât, and likewise that of
Narâ*s*a*m*sa, consisted in spreading gh*ri*ta or 'honey' over the
sacrifice.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:13:4:1">1</span>. 'Magnified' is î*li*táh; comp. the
note on I, 1, 1. The third, or if both Tanûnapât and Narâ*s*a*m*sa are
invoked, the fourth verse of the Âprî hymns is regularly addressed to
Agni with this epithet î*li*ta.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Note <span id="an_1:13:4:2">2</span>. Manurhita, 'instituted by Manus,'
not 'by men.' See Bergaigne, Religion Védique, I, 6, 5 seq.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:13:5:1">1</span>. On ânushák, comp. Pischel,
Vedische Studien, II, 125.

Note <span id="an_1:13:5:2">2</span>. The last Pâda is translated by
Grassmann, 'wo der unsterbliche sich zeigt' (comp. Bergaigne, R.V. I,
194, note 1); by Ludwig, 'auf dem man das unsterbliche sieht.' To me it
seems impossible to decide, so as to leave no doubt, whether am*rí*tasya
is masculine or neuter. Comp. also Atharva-veda V, 4, 3; 28, 7; XIX, 39,
6–8, in which passages the phrase am*rí*tasya *k*áksha*n*am recurs.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_1:13:8:1">1</span>. The two divine Hot*ri*s are
mentioned in the Rig-veda only in the eighth (or seventh) verse of the
Âprîsûktas and besides in two passages, X, 65, 10; 66, 13, which do not
throw any light on the nature of these sacrificial gods. They are called
*g*âtavedasâ VII, 2, 7, purohitau X, 70, 7, bhisha*g*â Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h.
XXVIII, 7. As regards the duality of these divine counterparts of the
human Hot*ri* priest, possibly the 'two Hot*ri*s' should be understood
as the Hot*ri* and the Maitrâvaru*n*a; the latter was the constant
companion and assistant of the former in the Vedic animal sacrifice.
Comp. Schwab, Altindisches Thieropfer, 96, 114, 117, &c.; H. O.,
Religion des Veda, 391.

Comp. on the two divine Hot*ri*s also Bergaigne, R.V. I, 233 seq.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_1:13:9:1">1</span>. On I*l*â, see H. O., Religion des
Veda, pp. 72, 326.—With regard to Mahî Bergaigne (Rel. Védique, I, 322)
has pronounced the opinion that 'Bhâratî et Mahî, qui, tantôt se
remplacent, tantôt se juxtaposent tout en paraissant ne compter que pour
une, se confondent aux yeux des *ri*shis.' But Pischel (Ved. Studien,
II, 84 seq.) has shown that the eminent French scholar was wrong, and
that really Mahî ('the great one') is independent of Bhâratî. Pischel's

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

own opinion that Mahî is a name of the goddess Dhisha*n*â, does not seem
to me to be established by sufficient reasons.—On the meaning of these
three goddesses Prof. Max Müller writes: 'I should not fix on
Nourishment as the true meaning of I*l*â. Originally those three
goddesses seem to be local: I*l*â, the land or daughter of Manu, the
Sarasvatî, and another river here called Mahî.'

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_1:13:11:1">1</span>. To me it seems evident that the
tree, or, to translate more literally, the lord of the forest
(vanaspati) invoked in this Âprî verse can only be the sacrificial post
(yûpa) to which the victim was tied before it was killed. The yûpa is
called vanaspati in the Rig-veda (III, 8, t. 3. 6. ii) as well as in the
more modern Vedic texts (for inst., Taitt. Sa*m*h. I, 3, 6, 1).—In the
Âprî hymn, IX, 5 (verse 10), the vanaspati is called sahasraval*s*a:
with this should be compared III, 8, 11 (addressed to the yûpa):
vánaspate *s*atával*s*a*h* ví roha sahásraval*s*â*h* ví vayám ruhema, 'O
lord of the forest, rise with a hundred offshoots; may we rise with a
thousand offshoots!'—In the Âprî hymn, X, 70 (verse 10), the rope
(ra*s*anâ) is mentioned by which the vanaspati should tie the victim;
comp. with this expression the statements of the ritual texts as to the
ra*s*anâ with which the victim is tied to the yûpa; Schwab, Das
Altindische Thieropfer, 8r. Comp. also especially Taittirîya Brâhma*n*a
III, 6, 11, 3.—In the Âprî hymns the vanaspati is frequently invoked to
let loose the victim; in connection therewith mention is made of the
sacrificial butcher (*s*amit*ri*), see II, 3, 10; III, 4, 10; X, 110,
10, and comp. Vâ*g*. Sa*m*hitâ XXI, 21; XXVIII, 10. The meaning of these
expressions becomes clear at once, if we explain the vanaspati as the
sacrificial post. When they are going to kill the victim, they loosen it
from the post; the post, therefore, can be said to let it loose. Then
the butcher (*s*amit*ri*) leads the victim away. See the materials
collected by Schwab, Thieropfer, p. 100 seq., and comp. also H. O.,
Religion des Veda, 257.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 26](sbe46006)
