[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe46105)  [Next](sbe46107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983846/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part II (SBE46)*, by Hermann Oldenberg \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

### MA*ND*ALA V, HYMN 2.

#### ASH*T*AKA III, ADHYÂYA 8, VARGA 14–15.

1\. The young mother carries in secret the boy
confined [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:1:1); she does not yield him to the
father. People do not see before them his
fading [2](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:1:2) face laid down with the
Arâti [3](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:1:3).

2\. Who is that boy, O young woman, whom thou, the
Peshî [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:2:1), carriest? It is the queen who has
borne him. Through many autumns the fruit of the womb has increased. I
saw him born when his mother gave birth to him.

3\. I saw him the gold-toothed, brilliant-coloured preparing his weapons
far from his dwelling-place [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:3:1). After I have
offered to him the ambrosia cleared (from all impure
mixture) [2](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:3:2)—what may the Indra-less, the
hymnless do to me?

4\. I saw him, the highly shining (Agni), walking far from his
dwelling-place, like (a bull) together with the
herd [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:4:1). Those (women) have not held him, for
he has been born. The young women become
grey [2](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:4:2).

5\. Who have separated my young bull from the cows
that [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:5:1) had no cow-herd, not even a stranger?
May those who have held him, let him loose. May he, the knowing one,
lead the cattle towards us.

6\. Him, the king of dwellings (?) [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:6:1), the
dwelling-place of people, the Arâtis have laid
down [2](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:6:2) among men. May the spells of Atri
loose him. May the reproachers become reproachable (themselves).

7\. Thou hast loosed the bound *S*una*hs*epa from

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

the thousand sacrificial posts; for he toiled (worshipping thee). Thus,
O Agni, loose from us the fetters, O knowing Hot*ri*, sitting down here.

8 [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:8:1). For thou hast gone
away [2](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:8:2) from me, because thou wert angry;
(this) the protector of the laws of the
gods [3](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:8:3) has told me. (But) Indra, the knowing
one, has looked after thee. Instructed by him, O Agni, I have come
hither.

9\. Agni shines with mighty light; he makes all things visible by his
greatness. He conquers godless, wicked wiles. He sharpens his two horns
in order to pierce the Rakshas.

10\. And may the roarings of Agni mount up to the sky, with sharp
weapons in order to kill the Rakshas. In his rapture his flames break
down (everything); the godless hindrances do not hold him back.

11\. This song of praise, O strong-born (Agni), I, the priest, have
fashioned for thee, as a skilful workman (builds) a
chariot [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:11:1). If thou acceptest that (praise),
O god Agni, may we conquer thereby waters together with the sun.

12\. May the bull [1](sbe46106.htm#an_5:2:12:1) with mighty neck, grown
strong, with no foe to resist him, get together the niggard's wealth.
Thus the immortal (gods) have spoken to this Agni: may he grant
protection to the man who has spread the Barhis; may he grant protection
to the man who brings offerings.

#### NOTES.

The *Ri*shi of verses I, 3–8, 10–12, is Kumâra Âtreya, or V*ris*a
*G*âna; or both are the *Ri*shis of these verses. Of the verses 2 and 9
V*ris*a alone is the *Ri*shi. The metre is

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Trish*t*ubh (verse
12, *S*akvarî).—Verse 9 = AV. VIII, 3, 24. Verses 9, 10 = TS. I, 2, 14,
7. Verse 11 = TB. II, 4, 7, 4.

A part of this hymn is very obscure. I do not think, as does Prof.
Geldner (Festgruss an Roth, 192), that the story of the *S*â*t*yâyanakam
(see Sâya*n*a's commentary, and compare Pa*ñk*avi*ms*a Brâhma*n*a XIII
3, 12), of the Purohita V*ris*a, who drives with the king on the royal
chariot and kills a boy, throws any real light on the difficult points
of the hymn. Nor does it seem to me that, as is the opinion of Prof.
Hillebrandt (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,
XXXIII, 248 seq.), the first six verses, which Hillebrandt considers as
an independent hymn, contain a description of how the fire which they
try to produce by the attrition of the Ara*n*is, does not appear. In my
opinion the hymn—which is really one hymn as the tradition gives it—is a
prayer of a person who suffers, who feels himself bound by the fetters
of distress (verse 7) and persecuted by the power of Rakshas (verses 9,
10). Agni, formerly resplendent, has decayed and has forsaken him: may
Agni be restored to his former might (verse 6), and may we ourselves be
released from all distress (verse 7, &c.). Possibly the hymn is
connected with the rite of Punarâdheya, where the sacrificial fire which
has brought no luck to the sacrificer, is extinguished, and after an
interval a new fire is established (H. O., Religion des Veda, p. 353).
There may of course be other special points, beyond the reach of our
conjectures, which, if known, would elucidate several of the obscure
allusions so frequent in the first verses of the hymn.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_5:2:1:1">1</span>. The boy very probably is Agni.—With
the words sámubdham gúhâ bibharti, cf. I, 158, 5. súsamubdham
ava-ádhu*h*.

Note <span id="an_5:2:1:2">2</span>. Not without hesitation I translate
minát as if it were the middle minânám. Possibly the word means: 'which
violates (the ordinances),' i. e. which does not shine and bring luck to
men as it usually does. Ná seems, as it

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

usually does (cf. Delbrück, Altindische Syntax, p. 543), to belong to
the whole clause, and not to mina.

Note <span id="an_5:2:1:3">3</span>. Böhtlingk-Roth and Grassmann
conjecture aratnáu; Hillebrandt, arâtáu; Geldner (Festgruss an Roth,
192), árâtau. Geldner seems to be right (cf. verse 6), though it will
scarcely be possible to determine what concrete being was here thought
of. Geldner says, 'Gemeint ist die Pi*s*â*k*ikâ, welche die Gluth des
Feuers entführt hat;' but, as has already been observed, I do not think
that this traditional story on the meaning of our hymn is of any real
value.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_5:2:2:1">1</span>. The meaning of Peshî is unknown.
The word seems anyhow to describe the wrong mother as low or
contemptible. Agni is degraded by sojourning with her, while his proper
nature is glorious, for he is the queen's son.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_5:2:3:1">1</span>. Agni has forsaken his proper
dwelling.

Note <span id="an_5:2:3:2">2</span>. On vip*rí*kvat, cf. Taitt.
Sa*m*hitâ III, 1, 6, 2. yuná*g*mi tisrá*h* vip*rík*a*h* sû´ryasya te;
Vâ*g*. Sa*m*hitâ IX, 4. samp*rík*au stha*h* sám mâ bhadréna p*ri*ṅktam;
vip*rík*au stha*h* ví mâ pâpmánâ p*ri*ṅktam. Vi-p*rik* seems to mean,
consequently, 'to free something from an admixture,' and am*rí*tam
vip*rí*kvat seems to be ambrosia in which dwells the power of getting
free from bad admixtures. Thus in the passage quoted from the Taitt.
Sa*m*hitâ the Sun is referred to as thrice cleared from all impure
elements. It is quite uncertain whether the expression used here refers
or not to the myth of the churning of the ocean (Geldner, loc. cit.),
and I do not think that we should translate am*rí*tam vip*rí*kvat, as
Geldner does, 'das was sich als Nektar ausscheidet.'

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_5:2:4:1">1</span>. I read with Böhtlingk-Roth
sumádyûtham.

Note <span id="an_5:2:4:2">2</span>. The young women seem to be hostile
beings of

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

the same kind as the young woman mentioned in verse 2. They try to seize
Agni, but he has been born already; his fiery, unassailable nature has
been formed. I do not pretend to know what it means that then those
female foes become grey with age. 'I think they are the Dawns who hold
Agni in the dark; but when he escapes and is actually born, they, the
Dawns, become grey.' M. M.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_5:2:5:1">1</span>. The relative pronoun yéshâm seems
to refer both to the bull (maryakám) and to the cows (góbhi*h*). The
bull probably is Agni who has been separated from the cows, i. e. the
oblations, prayers, &c. (?) 'Possibly the bull Agni, the rising sun, has
been separated from the cows, the clouds or dawns.' M. M.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_5:2:6:1">1</span>. Vasâ´m râ´*g*ânam. I cannot follow
the interpretation of Pischel, Vedische Studien, I, 210.

Note <span id="an_5:2:6:2">2</span>. Or ní dadu*h*, 'they have bound
him'? Cf. áva s*rig*antu in the third Pâda, and níditam in verse 7.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_5:2:8:1">1</span>. The whole verse is nearly identical
with X, 32, 6.

Note <span id="an_5:2:8:2">2</span>. I consider aíye*h* (cf.
Bartholomae, Arische Forschungen, II, 72, 76; Studien zur
Indogermanischen Sprachgeschichte, I, 21) as 2nd sing. pluperfect of the
root i.

Note <span id="an_5:2:8:3">3</span>. Varu*n*a?

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_5:2:11:1">1</span>. With the second Pâda compare I,
130, 6; V, 29, 15.

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_5:2:12:1">1</span>. The bull of course is Agni.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 3](sbe46107)
