[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe46002)  [Next](sbe46004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983846/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part II (SBE46)*, by Hermann Oldenberg \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# VEDIC HYMNS.

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 1.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 1, VARGA 1–2.

1 [1](sbe46003.htm#an_1:1:1:1). I magnify [2](sbe46003.htm#an_1:1:1:2)
Agni, the Purohita, the divine ministrant of the sacrifice, the Hot*ri*
priest, the greatest bestower of treasures.

2\. Agni, worthy to be magnified by the ancient *Ri*shis and by the
present ones—may he conduct the gods hither.

3\. May one obtain through Agni wealth and welfare day by day, which may
bring glory and high bliss of valiant offspring.

4\. Agni, whatever sacrifice and worship [1](sbe46003.htm#an_1:1:4:1)
thou encompassest on every side, that indeed goes to the gods.

5\. May Agni the thoughtful Hot*ri*, he who is true and most splendidly
renowned, may the god come hither with the gods.

6\. Whatever good thou wilt do to thy worshipper, O Agni, that (work)
verily is thine, O Aṅgiras

7\. Thee, O Agni, we approach day by day, O (god) who shinest in the
darkness [1](sbe46003.htm#an_1:1:7:1); with our prayer, bringing
adoration to thee—

8\. Who art the king of all worship, the guardian of *Ri*ta, the shining
one, increasing in thy own house.

9\. Thus, O Agni, be easy of access to us, as a father is to his son.
Stay with us for our happiness.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

#### NOTES.

The hymn is ascribed to Madhu*kkh*andas Vai*s*vâmitra, and may possibly
belong to an author of the Vi*s*vâmitra family. See my Prolegomena, p.
261. Metre, Gâyatrî. The hymn has been translated and commented upon by
M. M., Physical Religion, pp. 170–173.

Verse 1 = TS. IV, 3, 13, 3; MS. IV, 10, 5. Verse 3 = TS. III, 1, 11, 1;
IV, 3, 13, 5; MS. IV, 10, 4 (IV, 14, 16). Verse 4 = TS. IV, 1, 11, 1;
MS. IV, 10, 3. Verse 7 = SV. I, 14. Verses 7–9 = VS. III, 22–24; TS. I,
5, 6, 2; MS. I, 5, 3.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:1:1:1">1</span>. This verse being the first verse of
the Rig-veda as we now possess it, seems already to have occupied the
same position in the time of the author of the hymns X, 20–26. For,
after a short benediction, the opening words of this collection of hymns
are also agním î*l*e, 'I magnify Agni.' Comp. my Prolegomena, p. 231.

Note <span id="an_1:1:1:2">2</span>. The verb which I translate by
'magnify'—being well aware that it is impossible to do full justice to
its meaning by such a translation—is î*d*. There seems to me no doubt
that this verb is etymologically connected with the substantives ísh,
'food,' í*d*, í*d*â, írâ (not with the root ya*g* of which Brugmann,
Indogermanische Forschungen I, 171, thinks). We need not ask here
whether the connection between î*d* and ísh is effected by a
'Wurzeldeterminativ' (root-determinative) d—in this case we should have
here î*d* for izhd, comp. nî*d*a for nizhda, pî*d* for pizhd, &c.; see
Brugmann's Grundriss, vol. i, 591—or whether î*d* is a reduplicated
present of i*d* (of the type described by Brugmann, Grundriss, vol. ii,
p. 854; comp. î´rte, &c.). The original meaning of î´*d*e at all events
seems to be 'I give sap or nourishment.' Now in the Vedic poetry and
ritual, the idea of sap or nourishment is especially connected with the
different products coming from the cow, milk and

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

butter. The footsteps of the goddess I*d*â drip with butter. The words
'agnim î*d*e' seem to me, consequently, originally to convey the idea of
celebrating Agni by pouring sacrificial butter into the fire. There is a
number of passages in the Rig-veda which, in my opinion, show clear
traces of this original meaning of the verb. Thus we read X, 53, 2.
yá*g*âmahai ya*gñ*íyân hánta devâ´n î´*l*àmahai î´*d*yân â´*g*yena, 'let
us sacrifice (ya*g*) to the gods to whom sacrifice is due; let us
magnify (î*d*) with butter those to whom magnifying is due.' V, 14, 3.
tám hí *s*á*s*vanta*h* î´*l*ate sru*k*â´ devám gh*ri*ta*sk*útâ agním
havyâ´ya vó*lh*ave, 'for all people magnify this god Agni with the
butter-dripping sacrificial spoon that he may carry the sacrificial
food.' V, 28, I. devâ´n î´*l*ânâ havíshâ gh*ri*tâ´*k*î, 'magnifying the
gods with sacrificial food, (the spoon) filled with butter.' Comp. also
I, 84, 18; VI, 70, 4; VIII, 74, 6; X, 118, 3. Then, by a gradual
development, we find the verb î*d* or the noun î*l*enya connected with
such instrumentals as girâ´ or gîrbhí*h*, 'to magnify by songs,' or
stómai*h* 'by praises,' námasâ by 'adoration,' and the like. The
Rig-vedic texts, however, show us very clearly that even in such phrases
the original meaning of î*d* was not quite forgotten. For the word is
not used indifferently of any praise offered to any god whatever. No god
of the Vedic Pantheon is praised so frequently and so highly by the
poets of the Rig-veda as Indra. Yet, with very few exceptions, the word
î*d* is avoided in connection with this god. The whole ninth Ma*nd*ala
contains nothing but praises of Soma Pavamâna. Yet the word I*d* occurs,
in the whole of this Ma*nd*ala, in two passages only (5, 3; 66, 1) of
which one is contained in an Âprî verse transferring artificially to
Soma such qualifications as belong originally to Agni. On the other
hand, in the invocations addressed to Agni, this verb and its
derivatives are most frequently used. We may conclude that the idea of
celebration, as conveyed by these words, had a connotation which
qualified them for the employment with regard to Agni, the god nourished
by offerings of butter, much better than for being addressed to Indra,
the drinker of the Soma juice, or to the god Soma himself.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Last comes, I believe, the meaning of î*d* as contained in a very small
number of passages such as VII, 91, 2. índravâyû sustutí*h* vâm iyânâ´
mâr*d*îkám î*tt*e suvitám *k*a návyam, 'Indra and Vâyu! Our beautiful
praise, approaching you, asks you for mercy and for new welfare.' Here
the construction of î*d* is such as if in English the phrase, 'men
magnify the gods for obtaining mercy,' could be expressed in the words
'men magnify the gods mercy.'

I conclude by quoting the more important recent literature referring to
î*d*: Prof. Max Müller's note on V, 60, 1 (S. B. E. vol. xxxii, p. 354);
Physical Religion, p. 170; Bezzenberger, Nachrichten von der Göttinger
Gesellsch. d. Wissensch. 1878, p. 264; Bechtel, Bezzenberger's Beiträge,
X, 286; Bartholomae, ibid. XII, 91; Arische Forschungen, II, 78;
Indogermanische Forschungen, III, 28, note 1; Brugmann, Indogermanische
Forschungen, I, 171; K. F. Johansson, Indogermanische Forschungen, II,
47. Comp. also Bartholomae, Arische Forschungen, I, 21; III, 52, and
Joh. Schmidt, Kuhn's Zeitschrift, XXXII, 389.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:1:4:1">1</span>. 'Worship' is a very inadequate
translation of adhvara, which is nearly a synonym of ya*gñ*a, by the
side of which it frequently stands. Possibly in the designation of the
sacrifice as ya*gñ*a the stress was laid on the element of prayer,
praises, and adoration; in the designation as adhvara on the actual work
which was chiefly done by the Adhvaryu.—Prof. Max Müller writes: 'I
accept the native explanation a-dhvara, without a flaw, perfect, whole,
holy. Adhvara is generally an opus operatum; hence adhvaryu, the
operating priest.' Comp. Physical Religion, p. 171. Bury's derivation of
adhvara from madhu (m̥dhu-ara, Bezzenberger's Beiträge, VII, 339) is much
more ingenious than convincing.

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_1:1:7:1">1</span>. I have translated dóshâvastar as a
vocative which, as is rendered very probable by the accent, was also the
opinion of the diaskeuasts of the Sa*m*hitâ text.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The author of the
sacrificial formula which is given in Â*s*val. *S*raut. III, 12, 4 and
Sâṅkh. G*ri*hy. V, 5, 4, evidently understood the word in the same way;
there Agni is invoked as doshâvastar and as prâtarvastar, as shining in
the darkness of evening and as shining in the morning. That this may
indeed be the true meaning of the word is shown by Rig-veda III, 49, 4,
where Indra is called kshapâ´m vastâ´ 'the illuminator of the nights'
(kshapâ´m is gen. plur., not as Bartholomae, Bezzenberger's Beiträge,
XV, 208, takes it, loc. sing.). The very frequent passages, however, in
which case-forms of doshâ´ stand in opposition to words meaning 'dawn'
or 'morning'—which words in most cases are derived from the root
vas—strongly favour the opinion of Gaedicke (Der Accusativ im Veda, 177,
note 3) and K. F. Johansson (Bezzenberger's Beiträge, XIV, 163), who
give to dóshâvastar the meaning 'in the darkness and in the morning.'
This translation very well suits all Rig-veda passages in which the word
occurs. If this opinion is accepted, doshâvastar very probably ought to
be written and accented as two independent words, doshâ´ vástar. See
M. M., Physical Religion, p. 173.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 12](sbe46004)
