[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](waws02)  [Next](waws04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766101258/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*What All the World's A-Seeking*, by Ralph Waldo Trine, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# PART I.

# THE PRINCIPLE

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# WHAT ALL THE WORLD'S

# A-SEEKING.

### THE PRINCIPLE.

Would you find that wonderful life supernal,  
  That life so abounding, so rich, and so free?  
Seek then the laws of the Spirit Eternal,  
  With them bring your life into harmony.

How can I make life yield its fullest and best? How can I know the true
secret of power? How can I attain to a true and lasting greatness? How
can I fill the whole of life with a happiness, a peace, a joy, a
satisfaction that is ever rich and abiding, that ever increases, never
diminishes, that imparts to it a sparkle that never loses its lustre,
that ever fascinates, never wearies?

No questions, perhaps, in this form or in that have been asked oftener
than these. Millions in the past have asked them. Millions are asking
them to-day. They will be asked by millions yet unborn. Is there an
answer, a true and safe one for the millions who are

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

eagerly and longingly seeking for it in all parts of the world to-day,
and for the millions yet unborn who will as eagerly strive to find it as
the years come and go? Are you interested, my dear reader, in the
answer? The fact that you have read even thus far in this little volume
whose title has led you to take it up, indicates that you are,—that you
are but one of the innumerable company already mentioned.

It is but another way of asking that great question that has come
through all the ages—What is the *summum bonum* in life? and there have
been countless numbers who gladly would have given all they possessed to
have had the true and satisfactory answer. Can we then find this answer,
true and satisfactory to ourselves, surely the brief time spent together
must be counted as the most precious and valuable of life itself. There
is an answer: follow closely, and that our findings may be the more
conclusive, take issue with me at every step if you choose, but tell me
finally if it is not true and satisfactory.

There is one great, one simple principle, which, if firmly laid hold of,
and if made the great central principle in one's life, around which all
others properly arrange and subordinate

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

themselves, will make that life a grand success, truly great and
genuinely happy, loved and blessed by all in just the degree in which it
is laid hold upon,—a principle which, if universally made thus, would
wonderfully change this old world in which we live,—ay, that would
transform it almost in a night, and it is for its coming that the world
has long been waiting; that in place of the gloom and despair in almost
countless numbers of lives would bring light and hope and contentment,
and no longer would it be said as so truly to-day, that "man's
inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn"; that would bring to
the life of the fashionable society woman, now spending her days and her
nights in seeking for nothing but her own pleasure, such a flood of true
and genuine pleasure and happiness and satisfaction as would make the
poor, weak something she calls by this name so pale before it, that she
would quickly see that she hasn't known who¢ true pleasure is, and that
what she has been mistaking for the real, the genuine, is but as a baser
metal compared to the purest of gold, as a bit of cut glass compared to
the rarest of diamonds, and that would make this same woman who scarcely
deigns to notice the poor woman

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

who washes her front steps, but who, were the facts known, may be living
a much grander life, and consequently of much more value to the world
than she herself, see that this poor woman is after all her sister,
because child of the same Father; and that would make the humble life of
this same poor woman beautiful and happy and sweet in its humility; that
would give us a nation of statesmen in place of, with now and then an
exception, a nation of politicians, each one bent upon his own personal
aggrandizement at the expense of the general good; that would go far,
ay, very far toward solving our great and hard-pressing social problems
with which we are already face to face; that, in short, would make each
man a prince among men, and each woman a queen among women.

I have seen the supreme happiness in lives where this principle has been
caught and laid hold of, some, lives that seemed not to have much in
them before, but which under its wonderful influences have been so
transformed and so beautified, that have been made so sweet and so
strong, so useful and so precious, that each day seems to them all too
short, the same time that before, when they could scarcely see what was
in life to make it worth the living,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

dragged wearily along. So there are countless numbers of people in the
world with lives that seem not to have much in them, among the wealthy
classes and among the poorer, who might under the influence of this
great, this simple principle, make them so precious, so rich, and so
happy that time would seem only . too short, and they would wonder why
they have been so long running on the wrong track, for it is true that
much the larger portion of the world to-day is on the wrong track in the
pursuit of happiness; but almost all are there, let it be said, not
through choice, but by reason of not knowing the right, the true one.

The fact that really great, true, and happy lives have been lived in the
past and are being lived to-day gives us our starting-point. Time and
again I have examined such lives in a most careful endeavor to find what
has made them so, and have found that in each and every individual case
this that we have now come to has been the great central principle upon
which they have been built. I have also found that in numbers of lives
where it has not been, but where almost every effort apart from it has
been made to make them great, true, and happy, they have not been so;
and also that no life built upon it in sufficient degree,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

other things being equal, has failed in being thus.

Let us then to the answer, examine it closely, see if it will stand
every test, if it is the true one, and if so, rejoice that we have found
it, lay hold of it, build upon it, tell others of it. The last four
words have already entered us at the open door. The idea has prevailed
in the past, and this idea has dominated the world, that *self* is the
great concern,—that if one would find success, greatness, happiness, he
must give all attention to self, and to self alone. This has been the
great mistake, this the fatal error, this the *direct* opposite of the
right, the true as set forth in the great immutable law that—*we find
our own lives in losing them in the service of others*, in longer
form—the more of our lives we give to others, the fuller and the richer,
the greater and the grander, the more beautiful and the more happy our
own lives become. It is as that great and sweet soul who when with us
lived at Concord said,—that generous giving or losing of your life which
saves it.

This is an expression of one of the greatest truths, of one of the
greatest principles of practical ethics the world has thus far seen. In
a single word, it is *service*,—not self, but

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the other self. We shall soon see, however, that our love, our service,
our helpfulness to others, invariably comes back to us, intensified
sometimes a hundred or a thousand or a thousand thousand fold, and this
by a great, immutable law.

The Master Teacher, he who so many years ago in that far-away Eastern
land, now in the hill country, now in the lake country, as the people
gathered round him, taught them those great, high-born, and tender
truths of human life and destiny, the Christ Jesus, said identically
this when he said and so continually repeated,—"He that is greatest
among you shall be your servant"; and his whole life was but an
embodiment of this principle or truth, with the result that the greatest
name in the world to-day is his,—the name of him who as his life-work,
healed the sick; clothed the naked; bound up the broken-hearted;
sustained the weak, the faltering; befriended and aided the poor, the
needy; condemned the proud, the vain, the selfish; and through it all
taught the people to love justice and mercy and service, to live in
their higher, their diviner selves,—in brief, to live his life, the
Christ-life, and who has helped in making it possible for this greatest
principle of practical ethics the world

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

has thus far seen to be enunciated, to be laid hold of, to be lived by
to-day. "He that is greatest among you shall be your servant," or, he
who would be truly great and recognized as such must find it in the
capacity of a servant.

And what, let us ask, is a servant? One who renders service. To himself?
Never. To others? Alway. Freed of its associations and looked at in the
light of its right and true meaning, than the word "servant" there is no
greater in the language; and in this right use of the term, as we shall
soon see, every life that has been really true, great, and happy has
been that of a servant, and apart from this no such life *ever has been
or ever can be lived*.

O you who are seeking for power, for place, for happiness, for
contentment in the ordinary way, tarry for a moment, see that you are on
the wrong track, grasp this great eternal truth, lay hold of it, and you
will see that your advance along this very line will be manifold times
more rapid. Are you seeking, then, to make for yourself a name? Unless
you grasp this mighty truth and make your life accordingly, as the great
clock of time ticks on and all things come to their proper level
according to their merits, as all invariably, inevitably do, you will
indeed be somewhat

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

surprised to find how low, how very low your level is. Your name and
your memory will be forgotten long ere the minute-hand has passed even a
single time across the great dial; while your fellow-man who has grasped
this simple but this great and all-necessary truth, and who accordingly
is forgetting himself in the service of others, who is making his life a
part of a hundred or a thousand or a million lives, thus illimitably
intensifying or multiplying his own, instead of living as you in what
otherwise would be his own little, diminutive self, will find himself
ascending higher and higher until he stands as one among the few, and
will find a peace, a happiness, a satisfaction so rich and so beautiful,
compared to which yours will be but a poor miserable something, and
whose name and memory when his life here is finished, will live in the
minds and hearts of his fellow-men and of mankind fixed and eternal as
the stars.

A corollary of the great principle already enunciated might be
formulated thus: *there is no such thing as finding true happiness by
searching for it directly*. It must come, if it come at all, indirectly,
or by the service, the love, and the happiness we give to others. So,
*there is no such thing as finding true greatness* 

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

*by searching for it directly*. It always, without a single exception
has come indirectly in this same way, and it is not at all probable that
this great eternal law is going to be changed to suit any particular
case or cases. Then recognize it, put your life into harmony with it,
and reap the rewards of its observance, or fail to recognize it and pay
the penalty accordingly; for the law itself will remain unchanged.

The men and women whose names we honor and celebrate are invariably
those with lives founded primarily upon this great law. Note if you
will, every *truly* great life in the world's history, among those
living and among the so-called dead, and tell me if in *every* case that
life is not a life spent in the service of others, either directly, or
indirectly as when we say—he served his country. Whenever one seeks for
reputation, for fame, for honor, for happiness directly and for his own
sake, then that which is true and genuine never comes, at least to any
degree worthy the name. It may seem to for a time, but a great law says
that such an one gets so far and no farther. Sooner or later, generally
sooner, there comes an end.

Human nature seems to run in this way,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

seems to be governed by a great paradoxical law which says, that
whenever a man self-centred, thinking of, living for and in himself, is
very desirous for place, for preferment, for honor, the very fact of his
being thus is of itself a sufficient indicator that he is too small to
have them, and mankind refuses to accord them. While the one who forgets
self, and who, losing sight of these things, makes it his chief aim in
life to help, to aid, and to serve others, by this very fact makes it
known that he is large enough, is great enough to have them, and his
fellow-men instinctively bestow them upon him. This is a great law which
many would profit by to recognize. That it is true is attested by the
fact that the praise of mankind instinctively and universally goes out
to a hero; but who ever heard of a hero who became such by doing
something for himself? Always something he has done for others. By the
fact that monuments and statues are gratefully erected to the memory of
those who have helped and served their fellow-men, not to those who have
lived to themselves alone.

I have seen many monuments and statues i erected to the memories of
philanthropists, but I never yet have seen one erected to a miser;

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

many to generous-hearted, noble-hearted men, but never yet to one whose
whole life was that of a sharp bargain-driver, and who clung with a sort
of semi-idiotic grasp to all that came thus into his temporary
possession. I have seen many erected to statesmen,—statesmen,—but never
one to mere politicians; many to true orators, but never to mere
demagogues; many to soldiers and leaders, but never to men who were not
willing, when necessary, to risk all in the service of their country.
No, you will find that the world's monuments and statues have been
erected and its praises and honors have gone out to those who were large
and great enough to forget themselves in the service of others, who have
been servants, true servants of mankind, who have been true to the great
law that we find our own lives in losing them in the service of others.
Not honor for themselves, but service for others. But notice the
strange, wonderful, beautiful transformation as it returns upon
itself,—*honor for themselves, because of service to others*.

It would be a matter of exceeding great interest to verify the truth of
what has just been said by looking at a number of those who are regarded
as the world's great sons and

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

daughters,—those to whom its honors, its praises, its homage go out,—to
see why it is, upon what their lives have been founded that they have
become so great and are so honored. Of all this glorious company that
would come up, we must be contented to look at but one or two.

There comes to my mind the name and figure of him the celebration of
whose birthday I predict will soon be made a national holiday,—he than
whom there is no greater, whose praises are sung and whose name and
memory are honored and blessed by millions in all parts of the world
to-clay, and will be by millions yet unborn, our beloved and sainted
Lincoln. And then I ask, Why is this? Why is this? One sentence of his
tells us what to look to for the answer. During that famous series of
public debates in Illinois with Stephen A. Douglas in 1858, speaking at
Freeport, Mr. Douglas at one place said, "I care not whether slavery in
the Territories be voted up or whether, it be voted down, it makes not a
particle of difference with me." Mr. Lincoln, speaking from the fulness
of his great and royal heart, in reply said, with emotion, "I am sorry
to perceive that my friend Judge Douglas is so constituted

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

that he does not feel the lash the least bit when it is laid upon
another man's back." Thoughts upon self? Not for a moment. Upon others?
Always. He at once recognized in those black men four million brothers
for whom he had a service to perform.

It would seem almost grotesque to use the word *self-ish* in connection
with this great name. He very early, and when still in a very humble and
lowly station in life, either consciously or unconsciously grasped this
great truth, and in making the great underlying principle of his life to
serve, to help his fellow-men, he adopted just that course that has made
him one of the greatest of the sons of men, our royal-hearted elder
brother. He never spent time in asking what he could do to attain to
greatness, to popularity, to power, what to perpetuate his name and
memory. He simply asked how he could help, how he could be of service to
his fellow-men, and continually did all his hands found to do.

He simply put his life into harmony with this great principle; and in so
doing he adopted the best means,—the only means to secure that which
countless numbers seek and strive for directly, and every time so
woefully fail in finding.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

There comes to my mind in this same connection another princely soul,
one who loved all the world, one whom all the world loves and delights
to honor. There comes to mind also a little incident that will furnish
an insight into the reason of it all. On an afternoon not long ago, Mrs.
Henry Ward Beecher was telling me of some of the characteristics of
Brooklyn's great preacher. While she was yet speaking of some of those
along the very lines we are considering, an old gentleman, a neighbor,
came into the room bearing in his hands something he had brought from
Mr. Beecher's grave. It was the day next following Decoration Day. His
story was this: As the great procession was moving into the cemetery
with its bands of rich music, with its carriages laden with sweet and
fragrant flowers, with its. waving flags, beautiful in the sunlight, a
poor and humble-looking woman with two companions, by her apparent
nervousness attracted the attention of the gate-keeper. He kept her in
view for a little while, and presently saw her as she gave something she
had partially concealed to one of her companions, who, leaving the
procession, went over to the grave of Mr. Beecher, and tenderly laid it
there. Reverently she stood for a moment

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

or two, and then, retracing her steps, joined her two companions, who
with bowed heads were waiting by the wayside.

It was this that the old gentleman had brought,—a gold frame, and in it
a poem cut from a volume, a singularly beautiful poem through which was
breathed the spirit of love and service and self-devotion to the good
and the needs of others. At one or two places where it fitted, the pen
had been drawn across a word and Mr. Beecher's name inserted, which
served to give it a still more real, vivid, and tender meaning. At the
bottom this only was written, "From a poor Hebrew woman to the immortal
friend of the Hebrews." There was no name, but this was sufficient to
tell the whole story. Some poor, humble woman, but one out of a mighty
number whom he had at some time befriended or helped or cheered, whose
burden he had helped to carry, and soon perhaps had forgotten all about
it. When we remember that this was his life, is it at all necessary to
seek farther why all the world delights to honor this, another
royal-hearted elder brother? and, as we think of this simple, beautiful,
and touching incident, how true and living becomes the thought in the
old, old lines!—

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

"Cast thy bread upon the waters, waft it on with praying breath,  
   In some distant, doubtful moment it may save a soul from death.  
 When you sleep in solemn silence, ’neath the morn and evening dew,  
   Stranger hands which you have strengthened may strew lilies over
you."

Our good friend, Henry Drummond, in one of his most beautiful and
valuable little works says—and how admirably and how truly!—that "love
is the greatest thing in the world." Have you this greatest thing? Yes.
How, then, does it manifest itself? In kindliness, in helpfulness, in
service, to those around you? If so, well and good, you have it. If not,
then I suspect that what you have been calling love is something else;
and you have indeed been greatly fooled. In fact, I am sure it is; for
if it does not manifest itself in this way, it cannot be true love, for
this is the one grand and never-failing test. Love is the statics,
helpfulness and service the dynamics, the former necessary to the
latter, but the latter the more powerful, as action is always more
powerful than potentiality; and, were it not for the dynamics, the
statics might as well not be. Helpfulness, kindliness, service, is but
the expression of love. It is love

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

in action; and unless love thus manifests itself in action, it is an
indication that it is of that weak and sickly nature that needs
exercise, growth, and development, that it may grow and become strong,
healthy, vigorous, and true, instead of remaining a little, weak,
indefinite, sentimental something or nothing.

It was but yesterday that I heard one of the world's greatest thinkers
and speakers, one of our keenest observers of human affairs, state as
his opinion that selfishness is the root of all evil. Now, if it is
possible for any one thing to be the root of all evil, then I think
there is a world of truth in the statement. But, leaving out of account
for the present purpose whether it is true or not, it certainly is true
that he who can't get beyond self robs his life of its chief charms, and
more, defeats the very ends he has in view. It is a well-known law in
the natural world about us that whatever hasn't use, that whatever
serves no purpose, shrivels up. So it is a law of our own being that he
who makes himself of no use, of no service to the great body of mankind,
who is concerned only with his own small self, finds that self, small as
it is, growing smaller and smaller, and those finer and better and
grander qualities of his nature, those that give

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the chief charm and happiness to life, shrivelling up. Such an one
lives, keeps constant company with his own diminutive and stunted self;
while he who, forgetting self, makes the object of his life service,
helpfulness, and kindliness to others, finds his whole nature growing
and expanding, himself becoming large-hearted, magnanimous, kind,
loving, sympathetic, joyous, and happy, his life becoming rich and
beautiful. For instead of his own little life alone he has entered into
and has part in a hundred, a thousand, ay, in countless numbers of other
lives; and every success, every joy, every happiness coming to each of
these comes as such to him, for he has a part in each and all. And thus
it is that one becomes a prince among men, a queen among women.

Why, one of the very fundamental principles of life is, so much love, so
much love in return; so much love, so much growth; so much love, so much
power; so much love, so much life,—strong, healthy, rich, exulting, and
abounding life. The world is beginning to realize the fact that love,
instead of being a mere indefinite something, is a vital and living
force, the same as electricity is a force, though perhaps of a different
nature. The

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

same great fact we are learning in regard to thought,—that thoughts are
things, that *thoughts are forces, the most vital and powerful in the
universe*, that they have form and substance and power, the quality of
the power determined as it is by the quality of the life in whose
organism the thoughts are engendered; and so, when a thought is given
birth, it does not end there, but takes form, and as a force it goes out
and has its effect upon other minds and lives, the effect being
determined by its intensity and the quality of the prevailing emotions,
and also by the emotions dominating the person at the time the thoughts
are engendered and given form.

Science, while demonstrating the great facts it is to-day demonstrating
in connection with the mind in its relations to and effects upon the
body, is also finding from its very laboratory experiments that each
particular kind of thought and emotion has its own peculiar qualities,
and hence its own peculiar effects or influences; and these it is
classifying with scientific accuracy. A very general classification in
just a word would be—those of a higher and those of a lower nature.

Some of the chief ones among those of the lower nature are anger,
hatred, jealousy,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

malice, rage. Their effect, especially when violent, is to emit a
poisonous substance into the system, or rather, to set up a corroding
influence which transforms the healthy and life-giving secretions of the
body into the poisonous and the destructive. When one, for example, is
dominated, even if for but a moment by a passion of anger or rage, there
is set up in the system what might be justly termed a bodily
thunder-storm, which has the effect of souring or corroding the normal
and healthy secretions of the body and making them so that instead of
life-giving they become poisonous. This, if indulged in to any extent,
sooner or later induces the form of disease that this particular state
of mind and emotion or passion gives birth to; and it in turn becomes
chronic.

We shall ultimately find, as we are beginning to so rapidly to-day, that
practically all disease has its origin in perverted mental states or
emotions; that anger, hatred, fear, worry, jealousy, lust, as well as
all milder forms of perverted mental states and emotions, has each its
own peculiar poisoning effects and induces each its own peculiar form of
disease, for all life is from within out.

Then some of the chief ones belonging to

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

the other class—mental states and emotions of the higher nature—are
love, sympathy, benevolence, kindliness, and good cheer. These are the
natural and the normal; and their effect, when habitually entertained,
is to stimulate a vital, healthy, bounding, purifying, and life-giving
action, the exact opposite of the others; and these very forces, set
into a bounding activity, will in time counteract and heal the
disease-giving effects of their opposites. Their effects upon the
countenance and features in inducing the highest beauty that can dwell
there are also marked and all-powerful. So much, then, in regard to the
effects of one's thought forces upon the self. A word more in regard to
their effects upon others.

Our prevailing thought forces determine the mental atmosphere we create
around us, and all who come within its influence are affected in one way
or another, according to the quality of that atmosphere; and, though
they may not always get the exact thoughts, they nevertheless get the
effects of the emotions dominating the originator of the thoughts, and
hence the creator of this particular mental atmosphere, and the more
sensitively organized the person the more sensitive he or she is to

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

this atmosphere, even at times to getting the exact and very thoughts.
So even in this the prophecy is beginning to be fulfilled,—there is
nothing hid that shall not be revealed.

If the thought forces sent out by any particular life are those of
hatred or jealousy or malice or fault-finding or criticism or scorn,.
these same thought forces are aroused and sent back from others, so that
one is affected not only by reason of the unpleasantness of having such
thoughts from others, but they also in turn affect one's own mental
states, and through these his own bodily conditions, so that, so far as
even the welfare of self is concerned, the indulgence in thoughts and
emotions of this nature are most expensive, most detrimental, most
destructive.

If, on the other hand, the thought forces sent out be those of love, of
sympathy, of kindliness, of cheer and good will, these same forces are
aroused and sent back, so that their pleasant, ennobling, warming, and
life-giving effects one feels and is influenced by; and so again, so far
even as the welfare of self is concerned, there is nothing more
desirable, more valuable and life-giving. There comes from others, then,
exactly what one sends to and hence calls forth from them.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

*And would we have all the world love us, we must first then love all
the world*,—merely a great scientific fact. Why is it that all people
instinctively dislike and shun the little, the mean, the self-centred,
the selfish, while all the world instinctively, irresistibly, loves and
longs for the company of the great-hearted, the tender-hearted, the
loving, the magnanimous, the sympathetic, the brave? The mere
answer—because—will not satisfy. There is a deep, scientific reason for
it, either this or it is not true.

Much has been said, much written, in regard to what some have been
pleased to call personal magnetism, but which, as is so commonly true in
cases of this kind, is even to-day but little understood. But to my mind
personal magnetism in its true sense, and as distinguished from what may
be termed a purely animal magnetism, is nothing more nor less than the
thought forces sent out by a great-hearted, tender-hearted, magnanimous,
loving, sympathetic man or woman; for, let me ask, have you ever known
of any great personal magnetism in the case of the little, the mean, the
vindictive, the self-centred? Never, I venture to say, but always in the
case of the other.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Why, there is nothing that can stand before this wonderful transmuting
power of love. So. far even as the enemy is concerned, I may not be to
blame if I have an enemy; but I am to blame if I keep him as such,
especially after I know of this wonderful transmuting power. Have I then
an enemy, I will refuse, absolutely refuse, to recognize him as such;
and instead of entertaining the thoughts of him that he entertains of
me, instead of sending him like thought forces, I will send him only
thoughts of love, of sympathy, of brotherly kindness, and magnanimity.
But a short time it will be until he feels these, and is influenced by
them. Then in addition I will watch my opportunity, and whenever I can,
I will even go out of my way to do him some little kindnesses. Before
these forces he cannot stand, and by and by I shall find that he who
to-day is my bitterest enemy is my warmest friend and it may be my
staunchest supporter. No, the wise man is he who by that wonderful
alchemy of love transmutes the enemy into the friend,—transmutes the
bitterest enemy into the warmest friend and supporter. Certainly this is
what the Master meant when he said: "Love your enemies, do good to them
that hate you and despitefully

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

use you: thou shalt thereby be heaping coals of fire upon their heads."
Ay, thou shalt melt them: before this force they cannot stand. Thou
shalt melt them, and transmute them into friends.

"You never can tell what your thoughts will do  
   In bringing you hate or love;  
 For thoughts are things, and their airy wings  
   Are swifter than carrier doves.  
 They follow the law of the universe,  
   Each thing must create its kind;  
 And they speed o’er the track to bring you back  
   Whatever went out from your mind."

Yes, science to-day, at the close of this nineteenth century, in the
laboratory is discovering and scientifically demonstrating the great,
immutable laws upon which the inspired and illuminated ones of all ages
have based all their teachings, those who by ordering their lives
according to the higher laws of their being get in a moment of time,
through the direct touch of inspiration, what it takes the physical
investigator a whole lifetime or a series of investigators a series of
lifetimes to discover and demonstrate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II. The Application](waws04)
