[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft07)  [Next](geft09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI

### Ghvthisavari (I am of God)

THERE was once a king, who had a daughter so beautiful, that he was in
constant fear lest some one should carry her away by force and marry
her. So he had a huge tower built in the sea. He shut his daughter up in
this tower, with an attendant, and felt relieved.

Some time passed, when one day the attendant noticed something floating
on the water. She was surprised when she saw that it was a large apple.
She stretched out her dress, and the sea waves rolled in and left the
apple in her skirt; she took it in her hand, and ran to her mistress.
The beautiful maiden had never in her life seen such a big apple, and
was very much astonished. After dinner she peeled it, gave the skin to
her companion, who quickly finished it, and ate the inside herself.

In a short time they both became pregnant. The king was informed of
this. On hearing the news, he pressed his head between his hands, and
could not contain his wrath.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He commanded one
of his huntsmen, saying: 'Go to the tower in the sea, take thence my
daughter and her companion, and carry them to the wildest and most
desert spot in my kingdom. Kill them, and bring me their hearts and
livers to show me that they are dead. No one must know this story, save
thee and me; if it becomes known it shall cost thee thy life.'

The huntsman went to the tower, and declared the king's orders to the
princess and her companion. The beautiful maiden said: 'What will it
avail thee to kill us? Take us to a lonely place, and no one will know
whether we are dead or alive.'

The huntsman was not moved by these entreaties; he took them to a desert
place, drew his dagger and was about to strike the fatal blow, but at
the last moment he felt sorry for them, and gave up his intention. He
caught two hares, killed them instead of the women, took out their
hearts and livers, and returned with them to the king. The king believed
them to be the hearts and livers of the princess and her attendant; he
gave the huntsman gifts, and sent him away.

The princess and her companion were left alone in the wild wood, and
they had nothing to eat and drink.

In a short time the princess brought forth a beautiful boy, and the
attendant, eight tiny little dogs. The princess called her son
Ghvthisavari (I am of God). He grew as much in a day as other children
grow in a year; he became so handsome, brave, and strong, that everybody
loved him.

Ghvthisavari used to go out hunting; he took his dogs with him, and
provided game for his mother and her companion.

Once he went into a town to a smith, and asked him to

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

make a bow and arrows. The smith made from nine *litras* of iron (a
*litra* = 9 lbs.) a bow and arrows. Ghvthisavari bent it. Then the smith
added more iron, and made the bow again. Ghvthisavari slung his arrows
over his shoulders, his dogs followed him, and he went away. On the way
he hunted, and took food home to his mother.

The next day he went to hunt again. He shot an arrow and killed a goat,
he shot another, and killed a stag; he drew his bow a third time, and
his arrow stuck in a *devis*' house. In this house there were five
brothers, *devis*--one two-headed, one three-headed, one five-headed,
one nine-headed, and one ten-headed----and their mother, who had only
one head. They saw an arrow suddenly fall down and stick in the fire.
They all jumped up and pulled the arrow to draw it out, but they were
not able to move it. The mother helped them, but it was of no use. Then
all the brothers rose up, they left their mother to watch, and set out
to seek him who had shot the arrow. Ghvthisavari bethought himself, and
set out he followed the flight of the arrow to see where it had fallen.

He went on and on until he came to the *devis*' house. He looked in and
saw in the middle a fire burning, in which stuck his arrow. He went in,
and was about to draw the arrow out when the *devis*' mother cried: 'Who
art thou, wretch, who darest to venture here? Art thou not afraid that I
shall eat thee?' 'Thou shalt not eat me,' said Ghvthisavari, drawing out
his arrow and hurling it at the old woman. He cut her into a hundred
pieces, gave her to the dogs, and told them to throw her into the sea.
He lay down in the *devis*' house and rested.

The *devis* wandered far and wide in their search, but nowhere could
they learn any tidings of him they sought.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then they said:
'Perhaps some one will enter our house and steal, while we are here. Let
one of us go home, and the rest watch here.' Each wished to go, and
promised to run back again as quickly as possible. But the *devis* chose
the two-headed brother, and sent him.

The two-headed brother came, and saw that his mother was no longer
there, but in her place was a strange youth. He clapped him on the
shoulder, and cried out: 'Who art thou, wretch, who darest to venture
here? For fear of me, bird cannot fly under heaven, nor can ant crawl on
earth. Art thou not afraid that I shall eat thee?' 'Thou shalt not eat
me,' said Ghvthisavari, throwing an arrow. He cut him into a hundred
pieces, gave him to the dogs, and made them throw him into the sea.

The four remaining *devis* waited for their two-headed brother, but he
did not come. They thought that perhaps he was staying eating him who
had shot the arrow, so they sent the three-headed brother.

The three-headed *devi* came home, and found neither his mother nor
brother, and called out: 'For fear of me bird cannot fly in air, nor can
ant creep on earth. Who art thou who darest to venture here? Art thou
not afraid that I shall eat thee?' 'Thou [shalt](errata.htm#0) not eat
me,' said Ghvthisavari, casting an arrow. He cut him into a hundred
pieces, gave him to the dogs, and made them throw him into the sea.

The remaining brothers waited and waited, and then sent the five-headed
*devi*. He too boasted, but Ghvthisavari did unto him that day even as
he had done unto the others. Then the nine-headed *devi* went. The same
thing befell him as his brothers.

The ten-headed *devi* was now the only one left. He

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

thought to himself: 'My brothers are probably eating, and will not leave
anything for me.' He rose and went too.

He went in and saw that his mother and brothers were not there. Instead,
there was a strange youth, lying down resting. The *devi* called out:
'From fear of me the bird in heaven dare not fly, on earth the ant dare
not crawl. Who art thou who darest to venture here? Art thou not afraid
that I shall eat thee?' Thou shalt not eat me,' said Ghvthisavari,
throwing an arrow and killing him. He drew out his sword, cut off his
heads, and gave him to the dogs to throw into the sea.

Ghvthisavari was left master of the field. Then he said to himself: 'I
will go and bring my mother and her companion here, and I shall live as
I like.' He went forth and brought them, settled them in the house, and
prepared for the chase.

From the sea there staggered forth the last ten-headed *devi*, and hid
under a tree. When Ghvthisavari had cut off his heads, in his haste he
had left the tenth on. Now, it was in this head that the soul was
placed, so the *devi* came out on to the shore, full of wrath.

The next day Ghvthisavari again went out hunting. His mother, wishing to
see the surroundings, went out of the house into the garden. As she
walked about, the *devi* suddenly appeared at the foot of a tree. The
*devi* pleaded, saying: 'Do not give me up! Do not tell thy son that I
am hidden here!' Ghvthisavari's mother promised, and when Ghvthisavari
went out to the chase, his mother always took food and drink to the
*devi*. And at last she loved him.

Once the *devi* said to her: 'Why should we live thus?

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We see each other
only in secret, I am continually in terror of thy son. Go home now, lie
down in bed and pretend to be ill. When thy son comes home and asks thee
what is the matter, say to him: "Go to such and such a place and bring
me some pieces of stag's horns as a remedy." When thy son goes to the
stag, it will butt him with its horns, and then thou and I shall remain
here alone.'

The woman agreed to this plan, went in and lay down in her bed.
Ghvthisavari came home, and seeing his mother sick, he said to her:
'What is the matter? Tell me what will cure thee, and I will find it,
even if it be bird's milk.' <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) His mother
said: 'If thou canst bring to me a piece of such and such a stag's horn,
from a certain place, I shall be well; if not, I shall die.'
Ghvthisavari slung his bow and arrows over his shoulders, took his dogs
and set out.

When he had gone some way, he came to an immense wide plain, where he
saw a stag feeding. It had such large horns that they reached to heaven.

He sat down and took an arrow. Just as he was about to let it fly, the
stag made a sign, and cried out: 'Ghvthisavari! Ghvthisavari! why shoot
me? What have I done to deserve this of thee? Dost thou not know that
thy mother has deceived thee. She seeks thy ruin, therefore has she sent
thee hither. Behold, here is a piece of my horn, take it, and here is
one of my hairs, take it with thee also, and when thou art in trouble,
think of me, and I shall be there.' Ghvthisavari thanked the stag
joyfully, and went away.

He went home with the stag's horn to his mother. She took it, and
thanked him.

The next day Ghvthisavari again went to the chase.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His mother
immediately hastened to the *devi* and said: 'Ghvthisavari has returned
unharmed, and has brought the stag's horn.' 'Well,' said the *devi*,
pretend to be ill as before, and tell him that he must bring a wild
boar's bristle from such and such a place, else there is no cure for
thee.'

The woman ran in, lay down in bed, and began to moan. Ghvthisavari
returned, and seeing his mother ill, he asked her: 'What is this,
mother? What aileth thee? Tell me what will cure thee, and even bird's
milk I will not leave unfound.' 'If thou wilt seek in such and such a
place, and bring me a bristle from a certain wild boar, then all will be
well, but if not, I shall die.' 'May thy Ghvthisavari die if he find not
this!' said Ghvthisavari, slinging his bow and arrows on his shoulders,
and taking his dogs, he set forth on the quest.

He went a long way, and came into a wood. There he found a boar's lair,
but boar was there none. He went on a little, and saw another lair, but
again there was no boar in it. He went away once more, and saw the boar
itself. It had changed its lair twice, and now lay in a third.
Ghvthisavari approached it, took aim with an arrow, but, as he was about
to let it fly, the boar cried out: 'Ghvthisavari! Ghvthisavari! what
have I done to harm thee? Why kill me? Dost thou not know that thy
mother has deceived thee? She wishes for thy death, therefore has she
sent thee hither. But since thou wouldst like a bristle, pull out as
many as thou wishest, and take them with thee.' Ghvthisavari came up,
took a bristle, and was going away, when the boar took out a hair, gave
it to him, and said: 'Here is also a hair for thee; when thou art in
trouble remember me, and I shall come to thee.' Ghvthisavari took the
hair, thanked the boar, and went away.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

He came home, gave his mother the bristle, and again hastened out to the
chase. His mother ran immediately to the *devi*, and said complainingly:
'Ghvthisavari has returned unharmed, and has brought me the boar's
bristle.' The *devi* replied: 'Then go, again, pretend to be ill, and
say to Ghvthisavari: "If thou wilt go to a certain place, where a
certain griffin (*phascundzi*) lives, and bring me the flesh of its
young, I shall be well; if not, I shall die." Thou knowest he cannot do
that, and thou and I shall stay here together.'

The woman rejoiced, ran quickly back to bed, and began to moan.
Ghvthisavari came in, saw his mother in bed, and asked the cause. His
mother replied as the *devi* had commanded. Ghvthisavari answered: 'Then
may Ghvthisavari die if he find not what thou wishest.' He went away.

He went on and on, and at last came to a plain, where stood a very big
tree, whose top stretched to heaven. On a branch there was a nest, from
which fledglings peeped out. Then, from far away in the sky, there
appeared a huge, strange bird, something like an eagle. It swooped down,
and just as it was about to seize the young birds, Ghvthisavari drew his
bow, and killed it. Just then appeared the griffin, mother of the young
ones. She thought Ghvthisavari her enemy, and was about to seize him,
but her fledglings cried out that he had killed the bird that would have
drunk their blood, and had saved them.

Although the griffin did not bring up more than three birds in a year,
yet she was in constant terror until they had learnt to fly, because
this same bird used to seize and eat them.

When she learnt that Ghvthisavari had killed their cruel enemy, she came
to him, and said: 'Tell me what thou

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

wishest? why art thou come hither? and I will immediately satisfy thy
desire.' Ghvthisavari said: 'I have a mother who is ill; unless I take
her young griffin's flesh she will die.' The griffin said in reply 'Thy
mother deceives thee, and is not ill at all; she seeks thy death. Here
are my fledglings, if thou wantest them, but do not kill them, take them
with thee alive.' She pulled out a feather, and gave it to him, saying:
'Take this with thee, and when thou art in trouble think of me, and I
shall be there.' Ghvthisavari thanked her heartily, took away a
fledgling, and went home.

He came in, gave the young griffin to his mother, who said: 'Now, my
child, I am quite well, and shall want nothing else,' and she sent him
away. Ghvthisavari went out hunting. The woman went out hastily to the
*devi*, and complained, saying: 'Ghvthisavari has brought the fledgling,
and he himself has returned alive.' The *devi* was very angry, but
calmed down and said: 'When Ghvthisavari comes in, tell him he must be
bathed, and when he sits down in the tub, put a cover over him and call
for me. I will come and hammer down the lid, and throw him into the
sea.' The woman rejoiced at this plan, went in and heated water. When
Ghvthisavari came in, his mother said: 'Come, child, I will bathe thee,
it is some time since thou wert bathed.' Ghvthisavari did not like this,
but at last he consented. He sat down in the tub, his mother shut the
lid, and called the *devi*. The *devi* ran in and hammered down the lid.
Then he lifted the tub up and rolled it into the sea.

Ghvthisavari's dogs saw this; they went to the edge of the water and
barked. They barked until the very stones might have been moved with
pity. Then they said: 'Let

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

us go and seek his friends, they may perchance help us.' Four remained
and four went to seek his friends. They came to the stag, then to the
boar, and then to the griffin. These all arose and immediately went to
the water's edge.

They thought and planned, and at last decided what to do. They said to
the griffin: 'Fly up high, strike and cleave the water with thy wings,
the tub will appear, the stag will throw it on to the shore with its
horns; then the boar will strike with his tusk, the tub will break, and
Ghvthisavari will come forth.' They all did as they were told.

The griffin flew up high in the air, beat with its wings as hard as it
could; it cleft the sea into three. The tub was seen, and the stag did
not let it fall, but threw it with its horns, and let it down on the
shore. Then the boar struck it, crying out: 'Ghvthisavari, lie down in
the bottom!' He struck with his tusk, broke the tub, and Ghvthisavari
came forth unharmed.

After this the friends went away, each to his own home. Ghvthisavari
remained thinking. Just then a ragged swineherd came along. Ghvthisavari
said to this swineherd: 'Come, give me thy clothes, and I will put them
on.' The swineherd was afraid, and thought: 'This stranger will take my
coat and not give me his,' and he ran away. Ghvthisavari pursued him,
took off his clothes, and put them on himself; he gave the man his coat,
left with him his dogs, and went away.

He came home as if he were a beggar, and asked alms of his mother. When
the *devi* saw him, he looked ferociously at him, and said: 'Go back to
the place whence thou camest, lest I do to thee as thou deservest.'

Just then Ghvthisavari saw his bow and arrow in the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

corner, and cried out: 'We shall see who goes hence! I am Ghvthisavari!'
Saying this he drew his bow, shot first the *devi* and then his mother,
killing them both. Then he went to the companion, scolded her well for
not warning him, and killed her too. He went away, brought his dogs, and
returned to the house to rest.

There came then, no one knows whence, a certain youth; he saw his
father, mother, and their servant were all killed, and asked
Ghvthisavari to fight. He was Ghvthisavari's mother's son by the *devi*;
Ghvthisavari did not know this, and came to the combat. A long time they
struggled, a long time they strove, but neither could strike the other.
Then Ghvthisavari said: 'Come, friend, let us each tell the other his
story, and afterwards we can fight.' 'Good!' 'Very well,' they said, and
each told his tale.

When Ghvthisavari learnt that this was his own brother, he said: 'It is
indeed fortunate that we told our tales first. for if we had killed each
other there would have been no help for it.' After this the two brothers
went into the house, and they lived happily together.

Once Ghvthisavari said to his younger brother: 'Let us go, brother, and
seek our fortunes, we shall become like old women if we live thus.' 'I
am willing,' replied the younger; so they set out.

They wandered on until they came to a place where two roads met. One led
to the right and one to the left. In the middle of the roads stood a
stone pillar, on which was written: 'Whoever goes to the left will come
back, but he who goes to the right will never return.' Ghvthisavari took
the road to the right and his brother went to the left. Ghvthisavari
said: 'Know that if the water on the roof changes into blood I shall be
in trouble. Come then to

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

my aid. If the water on my roof turns into blood, I shall come and help
thee in thy trouble.' Then they divided the dogs: each took four, said
farewell, and set out.

Ghvthisavari went on until he came to the shore of a sea, so vast that
the eye could not measure it. Twelve men were on this side, twelve on
that. Whoever comes to this sea must jump over; if he leaps over without
wetting his feet he may marry the king's daughter, who is very
beautiful; if not, he is drowned in the sea; and whoever dares not jump
at all is seized by the sentinels, and taken before the king.

Ghvthisavari came, and the sentinels told him the conditions.
Ghvthisavari took a spring with all his might and main, and leaped over
so that not a drop of water touched him. He saw the other sentinels, and
they told him that they must take him before the king. When the king saw
him he rejoiced, and gave him his fair daughter to wife.

That night Ghvthisavari asked his wife: 'Where is the best hunting to be
had in the kingdom?' She replied: 'If thou goest to the left thou wilt
return; if thou goest to the right thou wilt never return.' The next
morning Ghvthisavari arose at daybreak, took his bow and arrow, and went
to the right hand.

He shot an arrow and killed a hare, he tied its feet and left it; he
shot another arrow and killed a stag, he bound its feet together and
left it too. He shot a third arrow, and it stuck in a burning fire.

He went on and on until he reached this fire. Then he killed a stag, put
it on the fire, and sat down at the side. He roasted meat, ate some, and
gave some to his dogs. Behold, no one knows whence, a toothless old
woman appeared. She begged Ghvthisavari to give her something

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

to eat. He did so; he ate, but the old woman ate ten times more. For
every mouthful Ghvthisavari took she took a basketful. Ghvthisavari
looked on in amazement. The old woman finished all the food. Then she
took a little stone and threw it at Ghvthisavari's bow and arrow. They
turned into stone, and fell on the ground. Then she took the little
stone and threw it at the dogs, who also became petrified. She took them
one by one in her hand and swallowed them. Ghvthisavari was stupefied;
he seized his bow and arrow to kill the old woman, but he could not move
it; it fell to earth. Then the old woman turned her stone towards
Ghvthisavari, who lost his strength, and became as a corpse. The old
woman lifted him up in her hand and swallowed him. At that moment the
water changed to blood, and the younger brother knew that Ghvthisavari
had fallen into misfortune, and set out to help him.

When he had gone some way he came to the water's edge, on each side of
which stood the twelve sentinels. He leaped across. The sentinels were
surprised, they thought it was Ghvthisavari, and asked him whence he
came and whither he was going. The youth told them nothing, and did not
let them know who he was. He came to the king. That night he was given
his brother's wife, but when he lay down he put a sword between them,
and did not touch her. Then he asked her: 'Where is the best hunting?'
She replied: 'If thou goest to the left thou wilt return, if to the
right thou wilt never return. Do not go; did I not tell thee the same
thing yesterday?' 'I asked thee, and I went one way, but did not like
it; now I ask thee again,' said the youth. He rose the next morning, and
went to the right hand.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

When he had gone a little way he saw the dead hare with its feet bound;
he went on further and saw the dead stag with its feet bound. He said to
himself: 'My brother must have come this way; this is some of the game
he has killed.' He again went on, and saw the fire burning. Beside it
lay Ghvthisavari's bow and arrow, and he said to himself: 'Here my
brother has met his fate.' Then he killed some game and roasted it on
the fire.

There appeared, no one knows whence, the same old woman. She sat down
and waited for her share of roast meat. In eating, the old woman's
behaviour was the same as before. When she had finished the food she was
still hungry. She took a little stone, and lifted it to throw at the
dogs. The youth thought to himself: 'It must have been in this way that
this old woman swallowed my brother Ghvthisavari.' He seized the old
woman by the throat, cleft her breast open, and took out Ghvthisavari
and his dogs. Then he killed the old woman, and poured her blood over
Ghvthisavari, the dogs, and the bow and arrow. Ghvthisavari and his dogs
came back to life, and the bow and arrow were raised from the earth.
When Ghvthisavari woke to consciousness he said: 'Ugh! I have had such a
dream.' Then his brother said: 'Thou hast not dreamt'; and he told him
what had happened.

Ghvthisavari rejoiced, and they both went to their new kinsman, the
king. On the way, Ghvthisavari was very melancholy, for he thought that
his brother must have married his wife. His brother looked at him and
said: 'May this arrow strike me on the part of my body that has touched
thy wife, and kill me.' Thus spoke Ghvthisavari's brother, and threw up
an arrow. It fell, struck him in the little finger, and he died.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Ghvthisavari left his brother, went in, and, when he had learnt all, was
deeply grieved. He went, no one knows where, found immortal water, and
brought his brother back to life. Then he found him a fair wife, and
they dwelt together, happy in fraternal affection and in love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[30:1](geft08.htm#fr_5) The expression 'bird's
milk' is often used in Georgian to signify a great rarity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Serpent and the Peasant](geft09)
