[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft27)  [Next](geft29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# III

# GURIAN FOLK TALES

### I

### The Strong Man and the Dwarf

THERE came from far-off lands a strong man who had nowhere met his
match, and challenged any one in the whole kingdom to wrestle with him.
The king gathered his folk together, but, to his wonder, could not for a
long time find anybody ready to face the strong man, till, at last,
there stood forth a weak insignificant-looking dwarf, who offered to
wrestle with the giant.

Haughtily looking down on his adversary, the giant carelessly turned
away, thinking that he was befooled. But the dwarf asked that his
strength should be put to the proof before the struggle began.

The giant angrily seized a stone, and, clasping it in his fingers,
squeezed moisture out of it.

The dwarf cunningly replaced the stone by a sponge of the same
appearance, and squeezed still more moisture out of it.

The giant then took another stone, and threw it so violently on the
ground that it became dust.

The dwarf took a stone, hid it under the ground, and threw on the ground
a handful of flour, to the great astonishment of the giant.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

Stretching forth his hand to the dwarf, the giant said: 'I never
expected to find so much strength in such a small man, I will not
wrestle with you; but give me your hand in token of friendship and
brotherhood.'

After this, the giant asked the dwarf to go home with him. But first he
asked the dwarf why he had not pressed his hand in a brotherly manner.
The dwarf replied that he was unable to moderate the force of his
pressure, and that more than one man had already died from the fearful
force of his hand. The new brothers then set out together. On their way
to the giant's house, they came to a stream which had to be forded.

The dwarf, fearing to be carried away by the current, told the strong
man that he was suffering from belly-ache, and did not therefore wish to
go into the cold water, so he asked to be carried over.

In the midst of the stream, the strong man, with the dwarf on his
shoulders, suddenly stopped and said: 'I have heard that strong people
are heavy, but I do not feel you on my shoulders. Tell me how this is,
for God's sake.'

'Since we have become brothers,' replied the dwarf, 'I have no right to
press with all my weight upon you, and did I not support myself by
holding on to the sky with one hand, you could never carry me.'

But the strong man, wishing to test his strength, asked the dwarf to
drop his hand for a moment, whereupon the dwarf took from his pocket two
nails, and stuck the sharp points of them in the shoulders of the strong
man.

The giant could not endure the pain, and begged the dwarf to lighten his
burden at once, *i.e.* to lay hold of heaven with one hand again.

When they had reached the other side, the two new,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

friends soon came to the strong man's house. The giant, wishing to give
a dinner to the dwarf, proposed that they should share the work of
getting it ready, that one of them should take the bread out of the
oven, while the other went to the cellar for wine.

The dwarf saw in the oven an immense loaf which he could never have
lifted, so he chose to go to the cellar for wine. But when he had
descended, he was unable even to lift the weights on the top of the
jars, so, thinking that by this time the giant would have taken the loaf
out of the oven, he cried: 'Shall I bring up all the jars?'

The giant, alarmed lest the dwarf should spoil his whole year's stock of
wine, by digging the jars out of the ground, where they were buried,
rushed down into the cellar, and the dwarf went upstairs.

But great was the astonishment of the dwarf when he found that the bread
was still in the oven, and that he must take it out, willy-nilly. He
succeeded with difficulty in dragging a loaf to the edge of the oven,
but then he fell with the hot bread on top of him, and, being unable to
free himself, was almost smothered.

Just then the giant came in, and asked what had happened. The dwarf
replied: 'As I told you this morning, I am suffering from a
stomach-ache, and, in order to soothe the pain, I applied the hot loaf
as a plaster.' . . . Then the giant came up, and said: 'Poor fellow! How
do you feel now, after your plaster?' 'Better, thank God,' replied the
dwarf, 'I feel so much better that you can take off the loaf.' . . . The
giant lifted the loaf, and the two then sat down to dinner. Suddenly the
giant sneezed so hard that the dwarf was blown up to the roof, and
seized a beam, so that he should not fall down again. The giant looked
up with

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

astonishment, and asked: 'What does this mean?' The dwarf angrily
replied: 'If you do such a vulgar thing again I shall pull this beam out
and break it over your stupid head.' The giant made humble excuses, and
promised that he would never sneeze again during dinner time; he then
brought a ladder by which the dwarf came down. . . . <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[150:1](geft28.htm#fr_50) Cf. Malcolm: *Sketches
of Persia*, ch. xvi. 'Ameen and the Ghool. Jacobs: *More English Fairy
Tales*, p. 173, and note on p. 239.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Grasshopper and the Ant](geft29)
