[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft19)  [Next](geft21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

### Kazha-ndii

THERE was once a king who had three sons and three daughters. When the
day of his death was come, he called all his children, and said to his
sons: 'Hearken to my will, and see that ye fulfil it. When I die, let
each of you watch my tomb for one week, give these maidens to the
suitors who ask for their hands.' After he had said farewell, the king
died.

He was buried, and on the first night the eldest brother went to guard
the grave. But in a short time something

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

began to approach with a mighty noise, and when it came near, it was so
strong that it drove the prince out of the enclosure. From a distance,
the prince saw how the being that had come with noise went to the king's
grave, dug up the corpse, and wept over it till morning; when morning
came, it buried the corpse in the earth again, and went away. When the
prince reached home, he was ashamed to say anything about what had
happened.

At that time, both the elder brothers set out for the chase; the
youngest brother was left at home, he heard a voice and looked round. It
turned out to be a suitor for the hand of his sister. He took and gave
him the eldest sister. Soon after, he again heard a voice. The prince
looked round--another suitor had come. The absence of his brothers
somewhat disturbed him, but, according to his father's will, he married
his second sister also. A little later, a third voice was heard, and to
him he gave his third sister.

In the evening, when the two elder brothers came home, they did not see
their sisters; they asked the youngest, and he told them what had
happened. They were not pleased, and sent him out to feed the sheep.
That night the middle brother went to guard the king's grave; the same
thing happened to him as to his elder brother, but he too was silent on
the subject. When he reached home, the youngest brother began to entreat
his elder brothers, saying: 'Be just, let me also watch my father's
grave.' But they were angry, and answered: 'Get thee gone, how couldst
thou guard the grave when we are not able to do it!' But afterwards they
said one to the other: 'Let us allow him to go.'

So the youth went, came to the tomb of his father, lighted a candle,
and, as soon as he sat down, an uproar

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

began, but he was not affrighted. At the approach of the monster an
earthquake began, but the youth was not afraid, he swung his sword round
his head, and cleft the monster in twain, but the monster's blood put
out the candle. Looking round, the youth saw, some way off; the blaze of
a fire. He arose and went thither. On his way he said to the cock: 'Crow
not, so that dawn break not till I come back again, or I shall slay
thee.' When he came near, he met with a vast river like a sea. When he
had swum over and reached the other side, the youth saw that the fire
was burning among the *demis*, <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_30) who
were sitting round it--so he stopped and bethought himself seriously;
but, at last, he took a leap, jumped into the middle of them, seized a
burning brand, and ran away.

The burning cinders and ashes were showered over the *demis*, but they
did not see the youth. The youth went back, but as he crossed the river
the burning log went out. He was angry at this, but what could he do? He
went back again, and when he threw himself upon the fire the *demis*
caught him, and asked what he wanted. He told them. The *demis* said to
him: 'In yonder castle there dwell three maidens unseen by the
sun, <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_31) thou must bring them to us or
we will not let thee go.' The youth asked

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

them: 'Is there a ladder up to the castle?' They answered: 'Yes.' 'Then
let us go,' said he.

He took all the *demis* with him, and said: 'I shall climb up first,
then you must come one by one.' They agreed. The youth went up, one
*demi* came after him. As soon as the first *demi* reached the top, the
youth brandished his sword, slew him, and laid down his body. When the
second came up, he did likewise unto him. Thus he slew them all, one by
one, and left their bodies there.

Then he went in, saluted the maidens, and gave each of them a ring--to
the youngest for himself, to the others for his brothers. The youth went
out, thrust his sword into a stone, and left it there, took fire with
him, and went back. When he had crossed the river, he cried to the cock:
'Now crow!' Then he went to his father's grave. Till dawn he stayed
there, and then he went home.

The beautiful maidens told the king what had happened. The king ordered
all his subjects to be summoned, and asked: 'Who is able to draw this
sword out of the stone?' But nobody could draw it out. Then the king
made a proclamation: 'To him that can draw out this sword I will give my
daughter.' The princes, as soon as they heard of this, decided to go
thither. When they were making ready for the journey, the youngest asked
his brothers to take him too. At last they consented to take him. When
they arrived, they found a great uproar: people from all parts of the
world were, in turn, laying hold of the sword, but could not draw it
out. Last of all, the youngest brother came up, pulled out his sword,
put it in the scabbard, and said to the king: 'All three daughters are
ours now, for I have two brothers.' He called his brothers, and they
took the three maidens to wife. Great merry-making began.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

The king gave to the wife of the youngest prince a flying carpet, which
carried away any one who sat on it. The princess sat on it, and followed
her suite. The groomsmen and youths set out with them. When they had
gone half way, a monster swooped down on the princess and carried her
off. A sad uproar began, but what was to be done? The young prince said
to his brothers: 'Farewell! I must perish with her,' and went away.

He went, he went, he went, he went as far as he could, and in a field he
found a spring, beside which he lay down. There came a boy with a water
jug. The prince asked: 'Whose village is this?' The boy replied: 'Here
dwell three brother *demis*, all married to daughters of one king.'

When the youth heard this he was glad, for it turned out that his
sisters dwelt here. When he came near, the sisters went out to meet him.
It is easy to imagine how glad they were to see him. When it was dark,
the three *demis* returned. One of the sisters went out to meet them,
and said: 'My brother is come.' The *demis* answered: 'If the elder
brothers are come, we can make roast meat of them, if it be the
youngest, we shall know how to do him honour.' The *demis* went in, and
kissed the youth for joy at meeting him.

As they were all sitting round the hearth, the *demis* began to sigh
deeply. The youth asked them: 'Why do you sigh?' 'Why?--we are sorry for
that poor damsel! Kazha-Ndii-Kerkun (*i.e.* the swift, flint-like
*demi*) was carrying through the air a golden-haired woman; we pursued,
but only succeeded in pulling off a lock of the woman's hair.' They
showed the hair to the youth. As soon as he saw it he fainted, crying:
'Ah! woe is me! woe is me!' The *demis* asked him what was wrong. He
told them all.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As soon as day
dawned, the youth arose, and made ready to depart. The *demis* were very
sorry at this, but what could they do? They gave him a horse and a
little dog.

The youth set out, and came to the house of Kazha-Ndii; but Kazha-Ndii
was not at home. He dismounted, and went in to the princess; when they
saw each other, their joy was so great that they fell to the ground. The
princess said to him: 'O youth, why hast thou sought thy doom? Against
Kazha-Ndii thou canst do nothing.' But the young man would not hearken,
and lifted her on to his horse.

As soon as they reached the gate, it creaked so loudly that a star fell
from heaven. The door cried: 'Kazha-Ndii-Kerkun, where art thou? they
have carried off thy wife.' Kazha-Ndii heard this, and pursued them.
When he was overtaking them, Kazha-Ndii's horse neighed so loudly that
it stopped the princess's horse. The princess said to him: 'O youth, did
I not tell thee how it would be? Save thyself at least.' Then Kazha-Ndii
rode up, cut the youth into pieces, and carried his wife back. The
little dog came up, gathered the scattered fragments of the young man's
body, put them in a bag, tied it to the saddle, mounted the horse, and
took the body to the *demis*.

When the *demis* saw it they wept greatly, but their youngest brother
blew the soul back into the pieces, and raised the youth to life. The
prince arose, and again made ready to depart; the youngest *demi* said
to him: 'Here is my three-legged horse, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_32) take him with thee; if he do not help thee
there is no help to hope for.' The youth mounted the horse, came again
to his princess, took her and put her on the horse. When he was riding
out of the gate it creaked more loudly than before. Kazha-Ndii heard it
and pursued

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

them. As he was overtaking them, Kazha-Ndii's horse neighed, and the
youth's horse slackened its speed. The young prince said to his horse:
'Why doest thou this?' 'What can I do? If I had a fourth leg I might be
victorious.' When Kazha-Ndii came near, the three-legged horse neighed
so loudly that it stopped Kazha-Ndii's horse. Then the youth came up to
him, brandished his sword, cut Kazha- Ndii into halves, put the princess
on his horse, and they rode merrily away. They visited the Bemis and
then went home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[114:1](geft20.htm#fr_31) *demi*, *dii*, *ndii*
in Mingrelian, *devi*, *mdevi* in Georgian (connected with Pers. *div*),
a representative of the principle of evil, but with certain limitations,
neither incorporeal nor immortal, but half demon half man, *i.e.* an
unclean spirit in the form of a giant. He is subject to death, even a
man can kill, cheat, terrify him; he can marry a woman, etc.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[114:2](geft20.htm#fr_32) This phrase is
continually applied to beautiful girls in Georgian poetry. It has three
meanings: (1) A girl strictly kept, and not seen out of doors; (2) One
who is not sunburnt, fair complexioned; (3) A maiden such as the sun has
never seen the like of for beauty. The last meaning is the most
frequent.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[117:1](geft20.htm#fr_33) Cf. No. III. 'Geria's
faithful dog and three-legged horse.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Story of Geria, the Poor Man's Son](geft21)
