[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft05)  [Next](geft07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IV

#### The Frog's Skin

THERE were once three brothers who wished to marry. They said: 'Let us
each shoot an arrow, and each shall take his wife from the place where
the arrow falls.'

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They shot their
arrows; those of the two elder brothers fell on noblemen's houses, while
the youngest brother's arrow fell in a lake. The two elder brothers led
home their noble wives, and the youngest went to the shore of the lake.
He saw a frog creep out of the lake and sit down upon a stone. He took
it up and carried it back to the house. All the brothers came home with
what fate had given them; the elder brothers with the noble maidens, and
the youngest with a frog.

The brothers went out to work, the wives prepared the dinner, and
attended to all their household duties; the frog sat by the fire
croaking, and its eyes glittered. Thus they lived together a long time
in love and harmony.

At last the sisters-in-law wearied of the sight of the frog; when they
swept the house, they threw out the frog with the dust. If the youngest
brother found it, he took it up in his hand; if not, the frog would leap
back to its place by the fire and begin to croak. The noble sisters did
not like this, and said to their husbands: 'Drive this frog out, and get
a real wife for your brother.' Every day the brothers bothered the
youngest. He replied, saying: 'This frog is certainly my fate, I am
worthy of no better, I must be faithful to it.' His sisters-in-law
persisted in telling their husbands that the brother and his frog must
be sent away, and at last they agreed.

The young brother was now left quite desolate: there was no one to make
his food, no one to stand watching at the door. For a short time a
neighbouring woman came to wait upon him, but she had no time, so he was
left alone. The man became very melancholy.

Once when he was thinking sadly of his loneliness, he went to work. When
he had finished his day's labour, he

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

went home. He looked into his house and was struck with amazement. The
sideboard was well replenished; in one place was spread a cloth, and on
the cloth were many different kinds of tempting viands. He looked and
saw the frog in its place croaking. He said to himself that his
sisters-in-law must have done this for him, and went to his work again.
He was out all day working, and when he came home he always found
everything prepared for him.

Once he said to himself: 'I will see for once who is this unseen
benefactor, who comes to do good to me and look after me.' That day he
stayed at home; he seated himself on the roof of the house and watched.
In a short time the frog leaped out of the fireplace, jumped over to the
doors, and all round the room; seeing no one there, it went back and
took off the frog's skin, put it near the fire, and came forth a
beautiful maiden, fair as the sun; so lovely was she that man could not
imagine anything prettier. In the twinkling of an eye she had tidied
everything, prepared the food and cooked it. When everything was ready,
she went to the fire, put on the skin again, and began to croak. When
the man saw this he was very much astonished; he rejoiced exceedingly
that God had granted him such happiness. He descended from the roof,
went in, caressed his frog tenderly, and then sat down to his tasty
supper.

The next day the man hid himself in the place where he had been the day
before. The frog, having satisfied itself that nobody was there,
stripped off its skin and began its good work. This time the man stole
silently into the house, seized the frog's skin in his hand and threw it
into the fire. When the maiden saw this she entreated him, she wept--she
said: 'Do not burn it, or thou shalt surely be destroyed'

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --but the man had
burnt it in a moment. 'Now, if thy happiness be turned to misery, it is
not my fault,' said the sorrow-stricken woman.

In a very short time the whole country-side knew that the man who had a
frog now possessed in its place a lovely woman, who had come to him from
heaven.

The lord of the country heard of this, and wished to take her from him.
He called the beautiful woman's husband to him and said: 'Sow a barnful
of wheat in a day, or give me thy wife.' When he had spoken thus, the
man was obliged to consent, and he went home melancholy.

When he went in he told his wife what had taken place. She reproached
him, saying: 'I told thee what would happen if thou didst burn the skin,
and thou didst not heed me; but I will not blame thee. Be not sad; go in
the morning to the edge of the lake from which I came, and call out:
"Mother and Father! I pray you, lend me your swift bullocks"--lead them
away with thee, and the bullocks will in one day plough the fields and
sow the grain.' The husband did this.

He went to the edge of the lake and called out: 'Mother and Father! I
entreat you, lend me your swift bullocks today.' There came forth from
the lake such a team of oxen as was never seen on sea or land.

The youth drove the bullocks away, came to his lord's fields, and
ploughed and sowed them in one day.

His lord was very much surprised. He did not know if there was anything
impossible to this man, whose wife he wanted. He called him a second
time, and said: 'Go and gather up the wheat thou hast sown, that not a
grain may be wanting, and that the barn may be full. If thou dost not
this, thy wife is mine.'

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

'This is impossible,' said the man to himself. He went home to his wife,
who again reproached him, and then said: 'Go to the lake's edge and ask
for the jackdaws.'

The husband went to the edge of the lake and called out: 'Mother and
Father! I beg you to lend me your jackdaws to-day.' From the lake came
forth flocks of jackdaws; they flew to the ploughed ground, each
gathered up a seed and put it into the barn.

The lord came and cried out: 'There is one seed short; I know each one,
and one is missing.' At that moment a jackdaw's caw was heard; it came
with the missing seed, but owing to a lame foot it was a little late.

The lord was very angry that even the impossible was possible to this
man, and could not think what to give him to do.

He puzzled his brain until he thought of the following plan. He called
the man and said to him: 'My mother, who died in this village, took with
her a ring. If thou goest to the other world and bringest that ring
hither to me, it is well; if not, I shall take away thy wife.'

The man said to himself: 'This is quite impossible.' He went home and
complained to his wife. She reproached him, and then said: 'Go to the
lake and ask for the ram.' The husband went to the lake and called out:
'Mother and Father! give me your ram to-day, I pray you.' From the lake
there came forth a ram with twisted horns; from its mouth issued a flame
of fire. It said to the man: 'Mount on my back!'

The man sat down, and, quick as lightning, the ram descended towards the
lower regions. It went on and shot like an arrow through the earth.

They travelled on, and saw in one place a man and

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

woman sitting on a bullock's skin, which was not big enough for them,
and they were like to fall off. The man called out to them: 'What can be
the meaning of this, that this bullock skin is not big enough for two
people?' They said: 'We have seen many pass by like thee, but none has
returned. When thou comest back we shall answer thy question.'

They went on their way and saw a man and woman sitting on an axe-handle,
and they were not afraid of falling. The man called out to them: 'Are
you not afraid of falling from the handle of an axe?' They said to him:
'We have seen many pass by like thee, but none has returned. When thou
comest back we shall answer thy question.'

They went on their way again, until they came to a place where they saw
a priest feeding cattle. This priest had such a long beard that it
spread over the ground, and the cattle, instead of eating grass, fed on
the priest's beard, and he could not prevent it. The man called out:
'Priest, what is the meaning of this? why is thy beard pasture for these
cattle?' The priest replied: 'I have seen many pass by like thee, but
none has returned. When thou comest back I shall answer thy question.'

They journeyed on again until they came to a place where they saw
nothing but boiling pitch, and a flame came forth from it--and this was
hell. The ram said: 'Sit firmly on my back, for we must pass through
this fire.' The man held fast, the ram gave a leap, and they escaped
through the fire unhurt.

There they saw a melancholy woman seated on a golden throne. She said:
'What is it, my child? what troubles thee? what has brought thee here?'
He told her everything that had happened to him. She said: 'I must
punish this

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

very wicked child of mine, and thou must take him a casket from me.' She
gave him a casket, and said: 'Whatever thou dost, do not open this
casket thyself, take it with thee, give it to thy lord, and run quickly
away from him.'

The man took the casket and went away. He came to the place where the
priest was feeding the cattle. The priest said: 'I promised thee an
answer; hearken unto my words. In life I loved nothing but myself, I
cared for nought else. My flocks I fed on other pastures than my own,
and the neighbouring cattle died of starvation; now I am paying the
penalty.'

Then he went on to the place where the man and woman were sitting on the
handle of the axe. They said: 'We promised thee an answer; hearken unto
our words. We loved each other too well on earth, and it is the same
with us here.' <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

Then he came to the two seated on the bullock skin, which was not big
enough for them. They said: 'We promised thee an answer; hearken unto
our words. We despised each other in life, and we equally despise each
other here.'

At last the man came up on earth, descended from the ram, and went to
his lord. He gave him the casket and quickly ran away. The lord opened
the casket, and there came forth fire, which swallowed him up. Our
brother was thus victorious over his enemy, and no one took his wife
from him. They lived lovingly together, and blessed God as their
deliverer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[21:1](geft06.htm#fr_4) Cf. *Talmud* (Polano's
translation), p. 290.--'While our love was strong we lay on the edge of
a sword, now a couch sixty yards wide is too narrow for us.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Fate](geft07)
