[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft23)  [Next](geft25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI

### Sanartia

THERE was once a king who reached old age without having a son. When he
was very old, his wife at last bore him a son. The child was called
Sanartia (*i.e.* desired, longed for); he grew up, and became very good
and very clever, so that he understood everything that took place among
earthly beings, wherever they were; but he did not obey his mother. She
therefore hated him, and said to the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

king, her husband: 'Since this boy will not obey his mother in anything,
take him and throw him into the great deep sea.'

The king was much distressed, but he did as his wife asked. The youth
guessed what his parents were talking about, but he showed no
resistance. After this, his father said: 'Let us go and look at the
town.' Then the youth said: 'Papa, give me a little money.' His father
gave him money, and they went to see the town. When they arrived, the
boy bought a little axe, knives, needle, thread, flint and tinder.

When they were on their way home, they came near the sea; the boy pulled
up an oak tree, and carried it on his shoulder. The father was the,
first to see the sea, and when they were on the shore he said to his
son: 'Come hither, and see what a big fish I shall show thee.' When the
son came up to look, his father cast him into the great sea, together
with the tree he carried. A fish swallowed the youth; his father turned
and went home.

In the sea, the youth kindled a fire in the fish's belly, cut caviar out
of it, roasted and ate it. On the caviar from this fish the youth lived
thirty years, in the belly of that fish. Then, his firewood, flint and
tinder being well-nigh exhausted, he made a very big fire. When the fish
felt the heat, it leaped up and fell on the dry land. The youth said: 'I
will cut open the fish's belly, and see--if it is in the water, I shall
sew it up again, if it is ashore, I shall make a hole and get out.' He
cut a little, and saw that it was on land. Then he cut a large opening,
came out of the fish, made a fire, cut flesh from the fish, roasted it,
and ate it.

Just then, there passed a prince, on his way to marry a maiden, and he
saw the other prince coming out of the fish. The prince who was going to
seek his bride, sent a man to

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the youth to ask him to make way, for he was sitting in the road, and
there was no other road for horsemen. But Sanartia would not move. Then
the prince himself rode up, and asked: 'Who art thou?' Sanartia told him
the name of the king, his father. Then the prince invited him, saying:
'I go to marry a wife; ride with me.' Sanartia agreed, and they went
together to the appointed place.

When they came near, they sent on a man to the king, who was master of
the country, asking him to give his daughter in marriage to the prince.
The king agreed, and sent to say: 'If the prince succeeds in performing
two exploits, I shall fulfil his wish; but to do these deeds is both
hard and perilous: the princess throws a great lump of lead as far as a
gun will carry a bullet, the suitor must throw it back again to the
place where the princess is standing.' The suitor for the maiden's hand
sent and said: 'I will do this.'

He went and stood in the place the maiden pointed out to him. She threw
a piece of lead which fell at the place where the prince stood; he was
not only unable to threw the lead, but could not even lift it from the
ground; then his comrade, the other prince, Sanartia, took up the lead
and threw it for him. The piece of lead went much farther than the
maiden had thrown it.

This exploit having been performed, the prince had another to do:
mistaking Sanartia for the suitor, they took him to a wilderness where
there was a castle, and in it dwelt Ocho-Kochi. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_45) They opened the door of the castle, and
let

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

in the prince, saying: 'This Ocho-Kochi will kill the young man.' He
spent that night in the castle.

When he was preparing to sleep, Ocho-Kochi came to him and wished to
kill him, but Sanartia was very strong, he seized Ocho-Kochi, threw him
on the ground, and beat him with all his might. When he had thrashed him
soundly, he said to him: 'Go and stand at the gate as watchman.' So he
went and watched till dawn.

In the morning, the king, the maiden's father, sent his vizier, saying:
'Find out what the prince and Ocho-Kochi are doing.' When the vizier
came to the door, Ocho-Kochi called out from the inside: 'Master sleeps,
wake him not, or he will beat me.' The vizier made no reply to
Ocho-Kochi, but went back and told the king what he had heard.

The king was amazed, he set out for the castle, and said to Ocho-Kochi:
'Open the door to me.' But Ocho-Kochi replied: 'Master will kill me.'
Just then, Sanartia awoke, and said to Ocho-Kochi: 'Open the door for
him.' He immediately opened the door, and let in the king. Then the king
and Sanartia went away together. The king wished to marry him to his
daughter, but Sanartia went away secretly; he dressed the prince, his
companion, in his clothes, and sent him in his place to the king; as
soon as he arrived he was wedded to the princess. Afterwards Sanartia
visited him as a friend.

If they had known that Sanartia had performed these exploits they would
not have given the princess to the other prince. But a handmaiden at the
court found out the secret somehow, that Sanartia had done the deeds,
and the princess's husband had done nothing. One evening the handmaiden
told the princess how Sanartia had cheated

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

her and married her to another man; she was angry, and that same night,
after Sanartia had lain down to sleep, she went and cut off his leg at
the knee.

Sanartia did not die of the wound, but went away to another land, and
became friendly with a one-handed man, and they lived together in the
house of the latter. Afterwards they built a house in common, and moved
into it. Sanartia took a maiden, and kept her with him as nurse. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_46) The two friends went out to hunt, and
stayed in the forest all night. At home there was nobody but the maiden.

Meantime there came a *demi*, who sucked the maiden's breast and then
went away. When Sanartia and his friend came home, the girl told them
what had happened. Sanartia left his friend and the girl at home, and
said to them: 'If the *demi* comes, take him and keep him till I come
back.' The *demi* came, but the man was afraid to lay hold of him; and
the *demi* went away again. As soon as Sanartia came in, he asked his
friend and his nurse: 'What did you do?' They answered: 'The *demi*
came, but we could not take him, and he went away again.'

Next day Sanartia stayed at home, and sent his friend to hunt. The
*demi* came that night also, but as soon as Sanartia saw him he met him
at the door, and when the *demi* came in, Sanartia seized him and threw
him to the ground, then he told the nurse to bring a rope, with which he
bound him tightly. He took out his dagger, and was about to cut him in
pieces, but the *demi* entreated him,

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

saying: 'Slay me not, and I will heal thee of all infirmities.' Sanartia
hearkened to the *demi's* prayers, and said: 'If thou wilt restore my
leg which was cut off I will let thee go, otherwise I slay thee.'

The *demi* pledged his word to heal him, and led him to a great river,
saying: 'Put thy leg therein and it will be sound.' But Sanartia did not
yet believe the *demi*, so he ordered him to bring a dry stick, and
said: 'Put this stick in the water, and if it becomes green and bears
leaves then will I put in my leg, otherwise I will not.' The stick was
put in the water, but it came out as dry as before.

Then Sanartia was angry, and wished to kill the *demi*, but again he
entreated, saying: 'There is still another healing stream.' So he took
him to the other stream, and as soon as Sanartia put in his leg it was
made whole and sound like the other leg. After this, he did not kill the
*demi*, but let him go free; he made the *demi* heal his one-handed
friend, whom he wedded to his nurse. He left them there, and set out for
his father's house.

But when he reached it, nobody knew him. Next day he secretly mounted
his father's horse, and went to the place where he had married the
prince to the princess. On the road he saw a swineherd; when he
approached, he recognised in him his old friend the prince. When he
questioned him, the swineherd replied: 'As soon as thou hadst gone hence
they made me a swineherd.' Sanartia drew out his sword, gave it to him,
and said: 'Kill all the swine but three, and wound those three; then
drive the three home, I shall be there, ready to punish anybody who is
angry with thee.' The swineherd did as Sanartia told him, and in the
evening drove the three swine into the king's courtyard.

Sanartia came to the palace earlier, but they did not

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

recognise him. When the swineherd drove in his swine, his wife was about
to beat him, saying: 'Why hast thou lost the swine.' But at that moment
Sanartia appeared before the princess, was angry with her, and said: 'If
thou wert a good woman thou wouldst not make thy husband feed swine.' .
. . They knew at once that it was Sanartia, and were much amazed,
saying: 'His leg was cut off at the knee, how has he replaced his leg?'
Sanartia ordered them to bring the princess's husband: he made her wash
him well with her own hands, bring clothes, and dress him in noble
apparel. When Sanartia was leaving for home, he called the princess and
her parents, and said to them: 'If you do not treat the prince as
becomes his rank, I shall come at once, and it will fare ill with you.'
He took leave of them all and went home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[134:1](geft24.htm#fr_46) Ocho-Kochi, literally,
'the goat-man,' occupies an important place in Mingrelian mythology. He
is a satyr, a wild man of the woods, represented as an old man with a
long beard, his body covered with hair.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[136:1](geft24.htm#fr_47) The word translated
'nurse' is *dzidze*, which means not only a nurse but any woman, married
or single, who has been adopted into relationship by the ceremony of a
man taking her breast between his teeth. This creates a degree of
kinship inferior only to that between mother and son. The custom still
exists in Mingrelia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Shepherd Judge](geft25)
