[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma116)  [Next](ma118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

EPISTLE TO MUSEUS.

"Thou, O, Museus! whose mind is high,  
"Observe my words, and read them with thine eye  
"These secrets in thy sacred breast repone,  
"And in thy journey think of God alone;  
"The Author of all things, that cannot die  
"Of whom we now shall speak----------"

I TELL thee here, Museus, to observe our words, and read them with thine
eye, that is, the eye of thine understanding; for, know, there are many
that hear us speak, that read not the meaning of our words. Wherefore
shouldst thou contemplate these mysteries with so much constancy of
mind, if thou didst not perceive in them some great good most
desirable?--Listen, then, O, young man, and hear our words! We will shew
thee the dangerous precipice of vanity and head-long desire--we will
describe to thee the stubborn and fatal will of our passions, even with
tears of contrition, and heartfelt compassion for thy inexperience--we
will lead thee, as it were, by the hand, through those labyrinths of
vice, wherewith thou art daily surrounded; and, however prejudiced thou
mightest be against the receiving of our doctrine, yet, be assured, we
have in our possession the magical virtue and power of binding thee to
our principles, and making thee happy, in spite of thyself. Here is a
great secret! thou shalt say--every man wishes to be happy--which I
grant; but my answer is--most men prevent their own happiness; they
destroy it, by suffering themselves to be governed by the outward
principle of the flesh, thinking the *greatest good* to be in the
satisfying of their carnal appetites, or in the amassing together heaps
of wealth, whereby they thrust down the meek and poor, raising up the
standards of Pride, Envy, and Oppression. These things every day's
experience confirms; nay, there are some so blind, that, in the
possession of much wealth, they think there is nothing

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

beyond it; insomuch, that they triumph in *lust, oppression, revenge*,
and *contumely*. But how is it, thou wilt say, that, seeing man is a
reasonable being, he can possibly give up his government so easily?--I
say, when man suffers the unreasonable and bestial part to deprave him,
then he immediately becomes a slave, (and the vilest of slavery is that
which deprives man of his social virtues;) for then, although in the
possession of great worldy things, such as houses, estates, and all
other temporal gifts, yet he becomes an immediate instrument to the
Prince of this World and the Powers of Darkness, seeing that those
riches he inherits are merely given him in this life, to bestow upon
others those necessaries and comforts which he himself does not feel the
want of, and by which he might, if not blinded by his passions and
lusts, secure himself an eternal and incorruptible treasure. But he who
possesses treasures without mercy, liberality, bounty, charity, &c.,
robs the Eternal Author of all good, of the honour due unto him, and, in
short, is working destruction to his own soul; his riches, instead of
benefitting himself and others, eventually and finally terminates as a
curse: while he lives here he is a scourge to society; and, after he
leaves this, it is plain enough pointed out in the New Testament what
will he his situation and condition.

Therefore, thou young man, that hast but a few years to live, study how
to attain the stone we teach of: it will protract the beauty of thy
youth, though thou shouldst live for centuries--it will ever supply thee
with the means of comforting the afflicted; insomuch, that when thou
hast attained this truly desirable and most perfect talisman, thy life
will become soft and pleasant; no cares, nor corroding pangs--no
self-torment will ever invade thy mind; neither shalt thou want the
means to be happy, in respect of the possession of the goods of this
life, but shalt have abundantly. But how, and from what source, all this
is to proceed--out of what *thing*, or *matter* thou shalt attain thy
wished-for end--the studying of the ensuing Treatise will sufficiently
shew.

Thy Friend,                         

F. B.           

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To The Reader](ma118)
