[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma112)  [Next](ma114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

CHAP. VIII.

OF THE WONDERFUL VIRTUES OF SOME KIND OF PRECIOUS STONES.

IT is a common opinion of magicians, that stones inherit great virtues,
which they receive through the spheres and activity of the celestial
influences, by the medium of the soul or spirit of the world. Authors
very much disagree in respect of the probability of their actually
having such virtues in potentia, some debating warmly against any occult
or secret virtue lying hid in them; others, as warmly, shewing the
causes and effects of these sympathetic properties. However, to leave
these trifling arguments to those who love cavil and contentions better
than I do, and, as I have neither leisure nor inclination to enter the
lists with sophists, and tongue-philosophers; I say, that these occult
virtues are disposed throughout the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms, by seeds, or ideas originally emanating from the Divine mind,
and through supercelestial spirits and intelligence always operating,
according to their proper offices and governments allotted them; which
virtues are infused, as we before said, through the medium of the
Universal Spirit, as by a general and manifest sympathy and antipathy
established in the law of Nature. Amongst a variety of examples, the
loadstone is one most remarkable proof of the sympathy and antipathy we
speak of. However to hasten to the point. Amongst stones, those which
resemble the rays of the sun by their golden sparklings, (as does the
glittering stone ætites) prevent the failing-sickness and poisons, if
worn on the finger; so the stone which is called *oculis solis*, or eye
of the sun, being in figure like to the apple of the eye, from which
shines forth a ray, comforts the brain, and strengthens sight; the
carbuncle, which shines by night, hath a virtue against all airy and
vaporous poisons; the chrysolite stone, of a light green colour, when
held against the sun, there shines in it a ray like a star of gold; this
is singularly good for the lungs, and cures asthmatical complaints; and
if it be bored through, and the hollow filled with the mane of an ass,
and bound to the left arm, it chases away all foolish and idle
imaginations and melancholy fears, and drives away folly.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The stone called iris, which is like crystal in
colour, being found with six corners, when held in the shade, and the
sun suffered to shine through it, represents a natural rainbow in the
air. The stone heliotropium, green, like a jasper or emerald, beset with
red specks, makes the wearer constant, renowned, and famous, and
conduces to long life; there is, likewise, another wonderful property in
this stone, and that is, that it so dazzles the eyes of men, that it
causes the bearer to be invisible; but then there must be applied to it
the herb bearing the same name, *viz.* heliotropium, or the sun-flower;
and these kind of virtues Albertus Magnus, and William of Paris, mention
in their writings. The jacinth also possesses virtue from the sun
against poisons, pestilences, and pestiferous vapours; likewise it
renders the bearer pleasant and acceptable; conduces, also, to gain
money; being simply held in the mouth, it wonderfully cheers the heart,
and strengthens the mind. Then there is the pyrophilus, of a red
mixture, which Albertus Magnus reports that Æsculapius makes mention of
in one of his epistles to Octavius Cæsar, saying, "There is a certain
poison, so intensely cold, which preserves the heart of man, being taken
out, from burning; so that if it be put into the fire for any time, it
is turned into a stone, which stone is called *pyrophilus*:" it
possesses a wonderful virtue against poison; and it infallibly renders
the wearer thereof renowned and dreadful to his enemies. Apollonius is
reported to have found a stone called pantaura, (which will attract
other stones, as the loadstone does iron) most powerful against all
poisons: it is spotted like the panther, and therefore some naturalists
have given this stone the name of pantherus: Aaron calls it evanthum;
and some, on account of its variety, call it pantochras.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Of The Mixtures Of Natural Things One With Another,
And The Producing Of Monstrous Animals...](ma114)
