[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma127)  [Next](ma129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. VI.

THAT THE WISDOM OF GOD WORKS BY THE MEDIUM OF SECOND CAUSES (I. E. BY
THE INTELLIGENCES, BY THE HEAVENS, ELEMENTS, AND CELESTIAL BODIES) IS
PROVED BEYOND DISPUTE IN THIS CHAPTER.

IT is to be noted, that God, in the first place, is the end and
beginning of all virtue: he gives the *seal* of the *ideas* to his
servants, *the intelligences*, who, as faithful officers, *sign* all
things entrusted to them with an *ideal virtue*; the heavens and stars,
as instruments, disposing the matter, in the mean while, for the
receiving of those forms which reside in Divine Majesty, and to be
conveyed by stars. And the Giver of forms distributes them by the
ministry of his intelligences, which he has ordained as rulers and
comptrollers over his works; to whom such a power is entrusted, in
things committed to them, that so all virtue in stones, herbs, metals,
and all other things, may come from the intelligences, the governors.
Therefore the form and virtue of things come first from the
*ideas*--then from the ruling and governing intelligences--then from the
aspects of the heavens disposing--and, lastly, from the tempers of

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the elements disposed, answering the influences of the heavens, by which
the elements themselves are ordered or disposed. These kinds of
operations, therefore, are performed in these inferior things by express
forms; and in the heavens, by disposing virtues; in intelligences, by
mediating rules; in the original cause, by *ideas* and exemplary forms;
all which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect and
virtue of every thing.

There is, therefore, a wonderful virtue and operation in every herb and
stone, but greater in a star; beyond which, even from the governing
intelligences, every thing, receives and obtains many things for itself,
especially from the Supreme Cause, with whom all things mutually and
exactly correspond, agreeing in an harmonious consent.

Therefore there is *no other cause* of the necessity of effects, than
the connection of all things with the First Cause, and their
correspondency with those divine patterns and eternal ideas, whence
every thing hath its determinate and particular place in the exemplary
world, from whence it lives and receives its original being; and every
virtue of herbs, stones, metals, animals, words, speeches, and all
things that are of God, are placed there.

Now the First Cause (which is God), although he doth, by intelligences
and the heavens, work upon these inferior things, does sometimes (these
mediums being laid aside, or their officiating being suspended) work
those things immediately by himself--which works are then called
miracles. But whereas secondary causes do, by the command and
appointment of the First Cause, necessarily act, and are necessitated to
produce their effects; if God shall, notwithstanding, according to his
pleasure, so discharge and suspend them that they shall wholly desist
from the necessity of that command, then they are called the greatest
miracles of God. For instance: the fire of the Chaldean furnace did not
burn the children; the sun stood still at the command of Joshua, and
became retrograde one whole day; also, at the prayer of Hezekiah, it
went back ten degrees; and when our Saviour Christ was crucified, it
became darkened, though at full moon.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

And the reason of these operations can by no rational discourse, no
magic or science, occult or profound soever, be found out or understood;
but are to be learned by Divine oracles only. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[87:1](ma128.htm#fr_6) The foregoing Chapter, if
well considered, will open the intellect to a more easy comprehension of
the Magical Science of Nature, &c.; and will facilitate, in a wonderful
degree, our studies in these sublime mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Of The Spirit Of The World](ma129)
