[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma125)  [Next](ma127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. IV.

OF COMPOUND, OR MIXED BODIES--IN WHAT MANNER THEY RELATE TO THE
ELEMENTS--AND HOW THE ELEMENTS RELATE TO THE SOULS, SENSES, AND
DISPOSITIONS OF MEN.

THE next in order, after the four simple elements, are the four kinds of
perfect bodies compounded of them, *viz.* metals, stones, plants, and
animals; and although in the generation of each of these, all the
elements combine together

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

in the composition, yet every one of them follows and resembles one of
the elements which is most predominant: for all stones, being earthy,
are naturally heavy, and are so hardened with dryness that they cannot
be melted;--but metals are watery, and may be melted, which naturalists
and chemists find to be true, *viz.* that they are composed or generated
of a viscous water, or watery *argent vive*. Plants have such an
affinity with the air, that unless they are out in it, and receive its
benefit, they neither flourish nor increase. So also animals, as the
Poet finely expresses it--

"Have, in their natures, a most fiery force,  
"And also spring from a celestial source:"

and fire is so natural to them that, being extinguished, they soon die.

Now, amongst stones, those that are dark and heavy, are called
earthy--those which are transparent, of the *watery element*, as
crystal, beryl, and pearls--those which swim upon the water and are
spongious, as the pumice-stone, sponge, and sophus, are called airy--and
those are attributed to the element of fire, out of which fire is
extracted, or which are resolved into fire; as thunder-stones,
fire-stones, asbestos. Also, amongst metals;--lead and silver are
earthy; quicksilver is watery; copper and tin, airy; gold and iron,
fiery. In plants, also, the roots resemble earth--the leaves,
water--flowers, the air--and seed, the fire, by reason of their
multiplying spirit. Besides, some are hot, some cold, some moist, others
dry, borrowing their names from the qualities of the elements. Amongst
animals, also, some are, in comparison of others, earthy, because they
live in the very bowels of the earth, as worms, moles, and many other
reptiles; others watery, as fish; others which always abide in the air,
therefore airy; others, again, fiery, as salamanders, crickets; and such
as are of a fiery heat, as pigeons, ostriches, eagles, lions, panthers,
&c. &c.

Now, in animals, the bones resemble earth--vital spirit, the
fire--flesh, the air--and humours, the water; and these humours also
resemble the elements, *viz.* yellow choler, the fire--the blood, the
air--phlegm, the water--and

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

black choler, or melancholy, the earth. And, lastly, in the soul itself,
the understanding resembles the fire--reason, the air--imagination, the
water-- and the senses the earth. And these senses again are divided
amongst themselves, according to the elements: for the sight is fiery,
because it cannot perceive without the help of fire and light--the
hearing is airy, for a sound is made by the striking of the air--the
smell and taste resemble water, without the moisture of which there is
neither smell nor taste-and, lastly, the feeling is wholly earthly,
because it takes gross bodies for its object. The actions, also, and
operations of man are governed by the elements: for the earth signifies
a slow and firm motion; the water, fearfulness, sluggishness, and remiss
ness in working; air signifies cheerfulness, and an amiable disposition;
but fire, a fierce, working, quick, susceptible disposition. The
elements are, therefore, the first and original matter of all things;
and all things are of and according to them and they in and through all
things diffuse their virtues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: That The Elements Are In The Heavens, In The Stars, In
Devils, Angels, Intelligences, And, Lastly, In God Himself](ma127)
