[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma136)  [Next](ma138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

CHAP. XV.

THE GREAT VIRTUES OF NUMBERS, AS WELL IN NATURAL THINGS AS IN
SUPERNATURAL.

THAT there lies wonderful efficacy and virtue in numbers, as well to
good as to bad, the most eminent philosophers unanimously teach;
especially Hierom, Austin, Origen, Ambrose, Gregory of Nazianzen,
Athanasius, Basilius, Hilarius, Rubanas, Bede, and many more conform.
Hence Hilarius, in his commentaries upon the Psalms, testifies that the
seventy elders, according to the efficacy of numbers, brought the Psalms
into order. The *natural number* is not here considered; but the
*formal* consideration that is in the number;--and let that which we
spoke before always be kept in mind, *viz.* that these powers are not in
vocal numbers of merchants buying and selling; but in rational, formal,
and natural;--these are the distinct mysteries of God and Nature. But he
who knows how to join together the vocal numbers and natural with
divine, and order them into the same harmony, shall be able to work and
know wonderful things by numbers; in which, unless there was a great
mystery, John had not said, in the Revelation--"He that hath
understanding, let him compute the number of the name of the beast,
which is the number of a man;"--and this is the most famous manner of
computing amongst the Hebrews and Cabalists, as we shall shew
afterwards. But this you must know, that simple numbers signify divine
things, numbers of ten; celestial numbers of an hundred; terrestrial
numbers of a thousand--those things that shall be in a future age.
Besides, seeing the parts of the mind are according to an arithmetical
mediocrity, by reason of the identity, or equality of excess, coupled
together; but the body, whose parts differ in their greatness, is,
according to a geometrical mediocrity, compounded; but an animal
consists of both, *viz.* soul and body, according to that mediocrity
which is. suitable to harmony. Hence it is that *numbers* work very much
upon the *soul*, *figures* upon the *body*, and *harmony* upon the
*whole animal*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Of The Scale Of Unity](ma138)
