[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma150)  [Next](ma152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

CHAP. XXIX.

OF THE OBSERVATION OF THE CELESTIALS NECESSARY IN EVERY MAGICAL WORK.

EVERY natural virtue works things far more wonderful when it is not only
compounded of a natural proportion, but also is informed by a choice
observation of the celestials opportune to this (*viz.* when the
celestial power is most strong to that effect which we desire, and also
helped by many celestials), by subjecting inferiors to the celestials,
as proper females, to be made fruitful by their males. Also, in every
work there are to be observed the situation, motion, and aspect of the
stars and planets, in signs and degrees, and how all these stand in
reference to the length and latitude of the climate; for by this are
varied the qualities of the angles, which the rays of the celestial
bodies upon the figure of the thing describe, according to which
celestial virtues are infused. So when you are working any thing which
belongs to any planet, you must place it in its dignities fortunate, and
powerful, and ruling in the day hour, and in the figure of the heavens.
Neither must you expect the signification of the work to be powerful,
but you must observe the Moon opportunely directed to this; for you
shall do nothing without the assistance of the Moon. And if you have
more patterns of your work, observe them all, being most powerful, and
looking upon one another with a friendly aspect; and if you cannot have
such aspects, it will be convenient at least that you take them angular.
But you shall take the Moon either when she looks upon both, or is
joined to one, and looks upon the other, or when she passes from the
conjunction or aspect of one, to the conjunction or aspect of the other;
for that, I conceive, must in no wise be omitted. Also, you shall in
every work observe Mercury, for he is a messenger between the higher
gods and the infernal gods: when he goes to the good, he increases their
goodness--when to the bad, he hath influence on their wickedness. We
call it an unfortunate sign or planet, when it is, by the aspect of
Saturn or Mars especially, opposite or quadrant, for these are the
aspects of enmity; but a conjunction, a trine, and a sextile aspect, are
of friendship; between these there is a greater conjunction; but vet if
you do already

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

behold it through a trine, and the planet be received, it is accounted
as already conjoined. Now all planets are afraid of the conjunction of
the Sun, rejoicing in the trine, and sextile aspect thereof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: When The Planets Are Of Most Powerful
Influence](ma152)
