[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma155)  [Next](ma157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

CHAP. XXXIV.

HOW SOME ARTIFICIAL THINGS (AS IMAGES, SEALS, AND SUCH LIKE) MAY OBTAIN
SOME VIRTUE FROM THE CELESTIAL BODIES.

SO great is the extent, power, and efficacy of the celestial bodies,
that not only natural things, but also artificial, when they are rightly
exposed to those above, do presently suffer by that most potent agent,
and obtain a wonderful life. The magicians affirm, that not only by the
mixture and application of natural things, but also in images, seals,
rings, glasses, and some other instruments, being opportunely framed
under a certain constellation) some celestial illustrations may be
taken, and some wonderful thing may be received; for the beams of the
celestial bodies being animated, living, sensual, and bringing along
with them admirable gifts, and a most violent power, do, even in a
moment, and at the first touch, imprint wonderful powers in the images,
though their matter be less capable. Yet they bestow more powerful
virtues on the images if they be framed not of any, but of a certain
matter, namely, whose natural, but also specifical virtue is agreeable
with the work, and the figure of the image is like to the celestial; for
such an image, both in regard to the matter naturally congruous to the
operation and celestial influence, and also for its figure being like to
the heavenly one, is best prepared to receive the operations and powers
of the celestial bodies and figures, and instantly receives the heavenly
gift into itself; though it constantly worketh on another thing, and
other things yield obedience to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV: Of The Images Of The Zodiac...](ma157)
