[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma157)  [Next](ma159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XXXVI.

OF THE IMAGES OF SATURN.

BUT now what images they did attribute to the planets. Although of these
things very large volumes have been written by the antient wise men, so
that there is no need to declare them here, notwithstanding I will
recite a few of them; for they made, from the operations of Saturn,
*Saturn* ascending in a stone, which is called the load-stone, the image
of a man, having the countenance of a hart, and camel's feet, and
sitting upon a chair or else a dragon, holding in his right hand a
scythe, in his left a dart, which image they hoped would be profitable
for prolongation of life; for Albumasar, in his book *Sadar*, proves
that Saturn conduces to the prolongation of life; where, also, he says
that certain regions of India being subject to Saturn, there men are of
a very long life, and die not unless by extreme old age. They made,
also, an image of Saturn, for length of days, in a sapphire, at the hour
of Saturn, *Saturn* ascending or fortunately constituted; whose figure
was an old man sitting upon a high chair, having his hands lifted up
above his head,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

and in them holding a fish or sickle, and under his feet a bunch of
grapes, his head covered with a black or dusky coloured cloth, and all
his garments black or dark. They also make this same image against the
stone, and disease of the kidnies, *viz.* in the hour of Saturn,
*Saturn* ascending with the third face of Aquarius. They made also, from
the operations of Saturn, an image for the increasing of power Saturn
ascending in Capricorn; the form of which was an old man leaning on a
staff, having in his hand a crooked sickle, and clothed in black. They
also made an image of melted copper, Saturn ascending in his rising,
*viz.* in the first degree of Aries, or the first degree of Capricorn;
which image they affirm to speak with a man's voice. They made also,
from the operations of Saturn, and also Mercury, an image of cast metal,
like a beautiful man, which, they said, would foretel things to come;
and made it on the day of Mercury, on the third hour of Saturn, the sign
of Gemini ascending, being the house of Mercury, signifying prophets;
Saturn and Mercury being in conjunction in Aquarius, in the ninth house
of heaven, which is also called God. Moreover, let Saturn have a trine
aspect on the ascendant, and the Moon in like manner, and the Sun have
an aspect on the place of conjunction; Venus, obtaining some angle, may
be powerful and occidental; let Mars be combust by the Sun, but let it
not have an aspect on Saturn and Mercury; for they said that the
splendour of the powers of these stars was diffused upon this image, and
it did speak with men, and declare those things which are profitable for
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII: Of The Images Of Jupiter.](ma159)
