[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma151)  [Next](ma153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XXX.

WHEN THE PLANETS ARE OF MOST POWERFUL INFLUENCE.

NOW we shall have the planets powerful when they are ruling in a house,
or in exaltation, or triplicity, or term, or face, without combustion of
what is direct in the figure of the heavens, *viz.* when they are in
angles, especially of the rising, or tenth, or in houses presently
succeeding, or in their delights; but we must take heed that they are
not in the bounds or under the dominion of Saturn or Mars, lest they be
in dark degrees, in pits, or vacuities. You shall observe that the
angles of the ascendant, and tenth, and seventh be fortunate; as also
the lord of the ascendant, and place of the Sun and Moon, and place of
the part of fortune, and the lord thereof, the lord of the foregoing
conjunction and prevention. But that they of the malignant planet fall
unfortunate; unless happily they be significators of thy work, or can be
of any advantage to thee, or in thy revolution or birth they had the
predominance, for then they are not at all to be depressed. Now we shall
have the Moon powerful if she be in her house, or exaltation, or
triplicity, or face, or in degree convenient for the desired work; and
if it hath a mansion of these twenty-eight, suitable to itself and the
work, let her not in the way be burnt up, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) nor slow in course--let her not be in the
eclipse, or burnt by the Sun, unless she be in unity with the Sun--let
her not descend in the southern latitude, when she goeth out of the
burning--neither let her be opposite to the Sun, nor deprived of
light--let her not be hindered by Mars or Saturn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[149:1](ma152.htm#fr_15) Via Combusta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Observations On The Fixed Stars, And Their Names
And Natures](ma153)
