[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma162)  [Next](ma164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XLI.

OF THE IMAGES OF MERCURY.

FROM the operations of Mercury they made an image of Mercury, Mercury
ascending in Gemini; the form of which was a handsome young man,
bearded, having in his left hand a rod, round which a serpent was
entwined--in the right he carried a dart; having his feet winged. They
say that this image confers knowledge, eloquence, diligence in
merchandise, and gain; moreover, to obtain peace and concord, and cure
fevers. They made another image of Mercury, ascending in Virgo, for good
will, wit, and memory; the form of which was a man sitting upon a chair,
or riding on a peacock, having eagle's feet, and on his head a crest,
and in his left hand holding a cock of fire.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

CHAP. XLII.

OF THE IMAGES OF THE MOON.

FROM the operations of the Moon they made an image for travellers
against weariness, at the hour of the Moon, the Moon ascending in its
exaltation; the figure of which was a man leaning on a staff, having a
bird on his head, and a flourishing tree before him. They made another
image of the Moon for the increase of the fruits of the earth, and
against poisons, and infirmities of children, at the hour of the Moon,
it ascending in the first face of Cancer; the figure of which was a
woman cornuted, riding on a bull, or a dragon with seven heads or a
crab, and she hath in her right hand a dart, in her left a looking
glass, clothed with white or green, and having on her head two serpents
with horns twined together, and to each arm a serpent twined about, and
to each foot one in like manner. And thus much spoken concerning the
figures of the planets, may suffice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII: Of The Images Of The Head And Tail Of The Dragon
Of The Moon](ma164)
