[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma215)  [Next](ma217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. IV.

OF DIVINE EMANATIONS, AND TEN SEPHIROTHS, AND TEN MOST SACRED NAMES OF
GOD WHICH RULE THEM, AND THE INTERPRETATION OF THEM.

GOD himself, although he is trinity in persons, yet he is but one only
simple essence; yet we doubt not but that there are in him many divine
powers, which emanate or flow from him.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

The Cabalists most learned in divine things have received the ten
principal names of God, as certain divine powers, Or, as it were,
members of God; which, by ten numerations, which we call Sephiroth, as
it were vestiments, instruments, or exemplars of the Archetype, have an
influence upon all created things, from the highest to the lowest; yet
by a certain order: for first and immediately they have influence upon
the nine orders of angels and quire of blessed souls, and by them into
the celestial spheres, planets and men; by the which Sephiroth every
thing receiveth power and virtue.

The first of these is the name *Eheia*, the name of the divine essence;
his numeration is called Cether, which is interpreted a crown or diadem,
and signifies the most simple essence of the divinity; and it is called
that which the eye seeth not; and is attributed to God the Father, and
hath its influence by the order of seraphims, or Hajoth Hakados, that
is, creatures of holiness; and then by the *primum mobile*, it bestows
the gift of being upon all things, and filleth the whole universe, both
through the circumference and center; whose particular intelligence is
called Merattron, that is the prince of faces, whose duty it is to bring
others to the face of the Prince; and by him the Lord spake to Moses.

The second name is Jod, or Tetragrammaton joined with Jod; his
numeration is Hochma, that is, wisdom, and signifies the divinity full
of ideas, and the First Begotten; and is attributed to the Son, and has
its influence by the order of cherubins, or that the Hebrews call
Orphanim, *i. e.* forms or wheels; and from thence into the starry
heavens, where he frames so many figures as he hath ideas in himself,
and distinguishes the very chaos of the creatures, by a particular
intelligence called Raziel, who was the ruler of *Adam*.

The third name is called Tetragrammaton Elohim; his numeration is named
*Prina*, *viz.* providence and understanding; and signifies remissness,
quietness, the jubilee, penitential conversion, a great trumpet,
redemption of the world, and the life of the world to come: it is
attributed to the Holy Spirit, and hath his influence by the order of
thrones, or which the Hebrews call *Abalim*, that is great angels,
mighty and strong; and from thence, by the sphere of *Saturn*,
administers form to the unsettled matter, whose particular

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

intelligence is Zaphkiel, the ruler of Noah, and another intelligence
named Jophiel, the ruler of Sem; and these are the three supreme and
highest numerations, as it were, seats of the divine persons, by whose
command all things are made; but are executed by the other seven, which
are therefore called numerations framing.

The fourth name is El, whose numeration is *Hesed*, which signifies
clemency or goodness; likewise grace, mercy, piety, magnificence, the
scepter, and right-hand; and hath its influx by the order of
dominations, which the Hebrews called *Hasmalim*; and so through the
sphere of Jupiter fashions the images of bodies, bestowing clemency and
pacifying justice on all: his particular intelligence is *Zadkiel*, the
ruler of Abraham.

The fifth name is Elohim Gibor, that is, the mighty God, punishing the
sins of the wicked; and his numeration is called Gebusach, which is to
say, power, gravity, fortitude, security, judgment, punishing by
slaughter and war; and it is applied to the tribunal of God, the girdle,
the sword, the left hand of God: it is also called Pachad, which is
fear; and hath his influence through the order of powers, which the
Hebrews call Seraphim, and from thence through the sphere of Mars, to
whom belongs fortitude, war, and affliction. It draweth forth the
elements; and his particular intelligence is *Camael*, the ruler of
Samson.

The sixth name is *Eloha*, or a name of four letters joined with
*Vaudahat*; his numeration is Tiphereth, that is, apparel, beauty,
glory, pleasure, and signifies the tree of life, and hath his influence
through the order of virtues, which the Hebrews call *Malachim*, that
is, angels, into the sphere of the sun, giving brightness and life to
it, and from thence producing metals; his particular intelligence is
*Raphael*, who was the ruler of *Isaac* and *Toby* the younger, and the
angel *Peliel*, the Ruler of Jacob.

The seventh name is *Tetragrammaton Sabaoth*, or *Adonai Sabaoth*, that
is, the God of Hosts; and his numeration is *Nezah*, that is, triumph
and victory: the right column is applied to it, and it signifies the
justice and eternity of a revenging God; it hath its influence through
the orders of principalities, whom the Hebrews call *Elohim*, *i. e.*
Gods, into the sphere of *Venus*, gives zeal and

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

love of righteousness, and produces vegetables; his intelligence is
*Haniel*, and the angel *Cerviel*, the ruler of David.

The eighth is called also Elohim Sabaoth, which is likewise the God of
Hosts, not of war and justice, but of piety and agreement, for this name
signifies both, and precedeth his army; the numeration of this is called
*Hod*, which is, praise, confession, honour and fame; the left column is
attributed to it; it hath his influence through the order of the
archangels, which the Hebrews call Ben Elohim, that is, the sons of God,
into the sphere of Mercury, and gives elegancy, and consonancy of
speech, and produces living creatures; his intelligence is Michael, who
was the ruler of Solomon.

The ninth name is called *Sadai*, that is, Omnipotent, satisfying all,
and *Elhai*, which is the Living God; his numeration is Jesod, that is,
foundation, and signifies a good understanding, a covenant, redemption
and rest; and hath his influence through the order of angels, whom the
Hebrews name Cherubim, into the sphere of the moon causing the increase
and decrease of all things, and provideth for the genii and keepers of
men, and distributeth them; his intelligence is *Gabriel*, who was the
keeper of *Joseph*, *Joshua*, and *Daniel*.

The tenth name is *Adonai Melech*, that is, lord and king; his
numeration is *Malchuth*, that is, kingdom and empire, and signifies a
church, the temple of God, and a gate; and hath his influence through
the order of Animastic, *viz*. of *blessed souls*, which, by the
Hebrews, is called Issim, that is, nobles, lords, and princes; they are
inferior to the *hierarchies*, and have their influences on the sons of
men, and give knowledge and the wonderful under standing of things, also
industry and prophecy; and the soul of the Messiah is president amongst
them, or the intelligence Merattron, which is called the first creature,
or the soul of the world, who was the ruler of Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Of The Power And Virtue Of The Divine Names](ma217)
