[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma227)  [Next](ma229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XVI.

ANOTHER WAY OF MAKING CHARACTERS, ACCORDING TO THE CABALISTS.

AMONG the Hebrews I find more fashions of characters, whereof one is
most ancient, *viz*. an ancient writing which Moses and the prophets
used, the form of which is not rashly to be discovered to any; for those
letters which they use at this day were instituted by Esdras. There is
among them a writing which they call celestial, because they shew it
placed and figured among the

 

<span id="img_pl16"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl16.jpg)

<span id="img_pl17"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl17.jpg)

 

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

stars. There is also a writing which they call *Malachim*, or
*Melachim*, *i. e.* of angels, or regal; there is also another, which
they call the passing through the river, and the characters and figures
of all which you may see in the following Plates.

There is another manner among the Cabalists, formerly held in great
esteem, but now it is so common that it is placed among prophane things,
*viz.* the twenty-seven characters of the Hebrews may be divided into
three classes, whereof every one contains nine letters. The first,
*viz.* אבגדהוזחת which are the seals or marks of simple numbers and of
intellectual things distributed into nine orders of angels. The second
hath יכלמנסעפצ, the marks of tens and celestial things in the nine orbs
of the heavens. The third hath the other four letters, with the five
final, *viz*. קרשתףםןץ which are marks of hundreds, and inferior things,
*viz.* four simple elements, and five kinds of perfect com pounds. They
do now and then distribute these three classes into nine chambers, the
first is of units, vi-,. intellectual, celestial and elemental. The
second is of two's, the third of three's, and so of the rest; these
chambers are framed by the intersection of four parallel lines
intersecting themselves into right angles, as is expressed in the
following Plate, fig. A.

Out of which, being dissected into parts, proceed nine particular
figures (See Plate, fig. B.) which are of the nine chambers,
characterizing their letters by that Notariacon, which, if it be of one
point, shews the first letter of that chamber; if of two, the second; if
of three, the third letter; as if you would frame the character,
Michael, מיכאל, that comes forth extended with five figures (for which
see the Plate C.) which are contracted to three figures, which then are
contracted into one, yet the points Notariacon are usually omitted, and
then there comes forth such a character of Michael. See fig. D.

There is yet another fashion of characters common to almost all letters
and tongues, and very easy, which is by gathering together of letters;
as if the name of the angel Michael be given, the characters thereof
shall be framed according to the fig. E.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

And this fashion among the Arabians is most received; neither is there
any writing which is so readily and elegantly joined to itself as the
Arabick. You must know that angelical spirits, seeing they are of a pure
intellect, and altogether incorporeal, are not marked with any marks or
characters, or any other human signs; but we, not otherwise knowing
their essence or quality, do, from their *names*, or *works*, or
otherwise, devote and consecrate to them figures and marks, by which we
cannot any way compel them to us, but by which we rise up to them, as
not to be known by such characters and figures, and, first of all, we do
set our senses, both inward and outward, upon them; then, by a certain
admiration of our reason, we are induced to a religious veneration of
them; and then are wrapt with our whole mind into an ecstatical
adoration; and then with a wonderful belief, an undoubted hope, and
quickening love, calling upon them in spirit and truth by true names and
characters, do obtain from them that virtue or power which we desire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: There Is Another Kind Of Characters, Or Marks Of
Spirits, Which Are Received Only By Revelation.](ma229)
