[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma249)  [Next](ma251) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A CAUTION *to the inexperienced in this* ART, *and a Word of Advice to
those who would be Adepts*.

    BROTHER,

IT is necessary for me to inform thee, that whatever thy desires are in
the pursuit of this art, which we call Magic, so wilt thy connexion and
answer be. If in the pursuit of revenge, it is but proper thou shouldest
know that thou wilt, in any of these experiments here laid down, draw to
thyself a revengeful demon, or an infernal furious spirit, serving in
the principle of the wrath of God; if worldly riches and aggrandizement,
then shalt thou have an earthial or fiery spirit, which will delude thee
with the riches of the central world; if fame, or the blaze of glory,
then the *spirits of pride* will be allotted thee, who will gratify thy
inordinate desire of vain glory; for all these offices are there spirits
allotted and will be eager to mix with thy spirit: it will attract thee
to his own nature, and serve all thy purposes according to the extent of
God's permission; and as thy desires are and from what principle they
proceed, so shalt thou be answered: but if thou desirest to know nothing
but for the honour and glory of God, and the help of thy neighbour, and,
in great humility, fill thy heart with the love of God, thou shalt then
have a pure spirit which

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

will grant (by the Lord's permission) they desires. Therefore seek for
that which is good; avoid all evil either in thought, word, or action;
pray to God to fill thee with wisdom, and then thou shalt reap an
abundant harvest. There are two ways magically set before thee; chuse
which thou wilt, thou shalt be sure of thy reward. Farewel.

F. B.

London, 1800.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the making of the CRYSTAL and the Form of Preparation for a
VISION](ma251)
