[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma257)  [Next](ma259) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

APULEIUS,

THE PLATONIC PHILOSOPHER,

LUCIUS APULEIUS, a Platonic philosopher, publicly known by the famous
work of the *Golden Ass*, lived in the second century under the
Antonines. He was a native of *Madaura*, a Roman colony in *Africa*; his
family was considerable; he had been well educated, and possessed a
graceful exterior; he had wit and learning; but was suspected of magic.
He studied first at *Carthage*, then at *Athens*, and afterwards at
*Rome*, where he acquired the Latin tongue without any assistance. An
insatiable curiosity to know every thing induced him to make several
voyages, and enter himself into several religious fraternities. He would
see the bottom of their mysteries. He spent almost all his estate in
travelling; insomuch, that being returned to *Rome*, and having a desire
to dedicate himself to the service of *Osiris*, he lacked money to
defray the expence of the ceremonies of his reception, he was obliged to
make money of his clothes to complete the necessary sum: after this, he
gained his living by pleading; and, as he was eloquent and subtle, he
did not want causes, some of which were very considerable. But he
improved his fortunes much more by a lucky marriage than by pleading. A
widow, whose name was Pudentilla, neither young nor fair, but who had a
good estate, thought him worth her notice. He was not coy, nor was he
solicitous to keep his fine person, his wit, his neatness, and his
eloquence, for some young girl he married this rich widow chearfully
(and with the most becoming philosophy overcame all turbulent passions,
which might draw him into the snares of beauty,) at a country house near
Oëa, a maritime town of Africa. This marriage. drew upon him a
troublesome law-suit. The relations of this lady's two sons urged that
he had made use of art magic to possess himself of her

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

person and money; they accused him of being worse than a magician,
*viz*. a wizard, before *Claudius Maximus*, Proconsul of Africa. He
defended himself with great vigour <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19).
His apology, which he delivered before the judges,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

furnishes us with examples of the most shameful artifices that the
villainy of an impudent calumniator is capable of putting in
practice <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20). Apuleius was extremely
laborious, and composed several books, some in verse and others in
prose, of which but a small part has resisted the injuries of time. He
delighted in making public speeches, in which he gained the applause of
all his hearers. When they heard him at Oëa, the audience cried out with
one voice, that he

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

ought to be honoured with the freedom of the city. Those of Carthage
heard him favourably, and erected a statue in honour of him. Several
other cities did him the same honour. It is said that his wife held the
candle to him whilst he studied; but this is not to be taken literally;
it is rather a figure of Gallic eloquence in Sidonis Apollinaris,
*Legentibus meditantibusque candelas & candelabra tenuerunt*. Several
critics have published notes on Apuleius: witness *Phillipus Beraldus*,
who published very large notes on the *Golden Ass*, at *Venice*, in
folio, ann. 1504, which were reprinted in 8vo, at Paris and at several
other places. *Godescalk Stewichius, Peter Colvius, John Wiewer*, &c.
have written on all the works of *Apuleius*. *Precius* published the
Golden Ass, and the Apology, separately, with a great many observations.
The annotations of *Casaubon*, and those of *Scipio Gentilis*, on the
Apology, are very scarce, and much valued: the first appeared in the
year 1594, and the latter in 1607. The *Golden Ass* may be considered
(as Bayle says) as a continued satire on the disorders which the
pseudo-magicians, priests, pandars, and thieves filled the world with at
that time. This observation occurs in Fleuri's annotations. A person who
would take the pains, and had the requisite qualifications, might draw
up a very curious and instructive commentary on this romance, and might
inform the world of several things which the preceding commentaries have
never touched upon. There are some very obscene passages in this book of
Apuleius. It is generally believed that this author has inserted some
curious episodes in it of his own invention; and amongst others, that of
Psyche. *Horum certe noster itæ imitator fuit, ut è suo penu
enumerabilia protulerit, atque inter cætera venustissimum illud
Psyches*, Ἐπεισόδιον. This episode furnished *Moliere* with matter for
an excellent Dramatic Piece, and *M. de la Fontaine* for a fine Romance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[159:1](ma258.htm#fr_19) Besides the accusation
of magic, they reproached him with his beauty, his fine hair, his teeth,
and his looking-glass. To the two first particulars he answered he was
sorry their accusation was false.--"How do I wish," replied he, "that
these heavy accusations of beauty, fine hair, &c. were just! I should,
without difficulty, reply, as *Paris* in *Homer* does to Hector,

---------------- *nor thou despise the charms  
With which a lover golden Venus arms.  
Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show,  
No wish can gain them, but the Gods bestow*.

                                                 POPE

"Thus would I reply to the charge of beauty. Besides that, even
philosophers are allowed to be of a liberal aspect; that *Pythagoras*,
the first of philosophers, was the handsomest man of his time; and
Zeno--but, as I observed, I am far from pretending to this apology;
since, besides that nature has bestowed but a very moderate degree of
beauty on me, my continual application to study wears off every bodily
grace, and impairs my constitution. My hair, which I am falsely accused
of curling and dressing by way of ornament, is, as you see, far from
being beautiful and delicate: on the contrary, it is perplexed and
entangled like a bundle of flocks or tow, and so knotty through long
neglect of combing, and even of disentangling, as never to be reduced to
order." As to the third particular, he did not deny his having sent a
very exquisite powder for the teeth to a friend, together with some
verses, containing an exact description of the effects of the powder. He
alleged that all, but especially those who spake in public, ought to be
particularly careful to keep their mouths clean. This was a fine field
for defence and for turning his adversary into ridicule; though, in all
probability, he had given occasion enough for censure by too great an
affectation of distinguishing himself from other learned men. Observe
with how much ease some causes are defended, although the defendant be a
little in the wrong. "I observed that some could scarce forbear laughing
when our orator angrily accused me of keeping my mouth clean, and
pronounced the word tooth-powder with as much indignation as any one
ever pronounced the word poison. But, surely, it is not beneath a
philosopher to study cleanliness, and to let no part of the body be
foul, or of an ill savour, especially the mouth, the use of which is the
most frequent and conspicuous, whether a man converses with another, or
speaks in public, or says his prayers in a temple. For speech is
previous to every action of a man, and, as an excellent poet says,
proceeds from the Wall of the Teeth."

We may make the same observation upon the last head of his accusation.
It is no crime in a doctor of what faculty soever, to have a
looking-glass; but if he consults it too often in dressing himself, he
is justly liable to censure. Morality in *Apuleius's* time was much
stricter than at present as to external behaviour, for he durst not avow
his making use of his looking-glass. He maintains that he might do <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> it, and proves it by several philosophical
reasons, which, to say the truth, are much more ingenious than
judiciously applied; but he denies that he ever consulted his
looking-glass; for he says, alluding to this ludicrous accusation, "Next
follows the long and bitter harangue about the looking-glass; in which,
so heinous is the crime, that *Pudens* almost burst himself with bawling
out--'A philosopher to have a looking-glass!'--Suppose I should confess
that I have, that you may not believe there is really something in your
objection, if I should deny it; it does not follow from hence that I
must necessarily make a practice of dressing myself at it. In many
things I want the possession but enjoy the use of them. Now, if neither
to have a thing be a proof that it is made use of, nor the want of it of
the contrary, and as I am not blamed for possessing, but for making use
of, a looking-glass, it is incumbent upon him to prove farther at what
time, and in what place, and in the presence of whom, I made cc use of
it; since you determine it to be a greater crime in a *philosopher* to
see a looking-glass, than for the *profane* to behold the attire of
*Ceres*."

<span id="fn_20"></span>[160:1](ma258.htm#fr_20) I shall instance one to
shew that in all ages the spirit of calumny has put men upon forging
proofs by . false extracts from what a person has said or written. To
convict Apuleius of practising magic, his accusers alledge a letter
which his wife had wrote during the time he paid his *devoirs* to her,
and affirmed that she had confessed, in *this letter*, that Apuleius was
a *wizard*, and had actually bewitched her. It was no hard matter to
make the court believe that she had written so, for they only read a few
words of her letter, detached from what preceded or followed, and no one
pressed them to read the whole. At last Apuleius covered them with
confusion by reciting the whole passage from his wife's letter. It
appeared, that far from complaining of Apuleius, she justified him, and
artfully ridiculed his accusers. These are his words: you will find that
precisely the same terms may either condemn or justify *Apuleius*,
according as they are taken with or without what precedes them. "Being
inclined to marry, for the reasons which I have mentioned, you yourself
persuaded me to make choice of this man, being fond of him, and being
desirous, by my means, to make him one of the family. But now, at the
instigation of wicked men, *Apuleius* must be informed against as a
magician (or wizard), and I, forsooth, am enchanted by him. I certainly
love him: come to me before my reason fails me." He aggravates this kind
of fraud as it deserves; his words deserve to be engraved in letters of
gold, to deter (if possible) all calumniators from practising the like
cheats. He says, "There are many things which, produced alone, may seem
liable to calumny. Any *discourse* may furnish matter of accusation, if
what is connected with foregoing words be robbed of its introduction; if
some things be suppressed at pleasure, and if what is spoken by way of
reproach to others, for inventing a calumny, be pronounced by the reader
as an assertion of the truth of it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Aristotle](ma259)
