[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma267)  [Next](ma269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

PHILIPPUS AUREOLUS THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS BOMBAST DE HOENHEYM,

THE PRINCE OF PHYSICIANS AND PHILOSOPHERS BY FIRE;  
GRAND PARADOXICAL PHYSICIAN;  
THE TRISMEGISTUS OF SWITZERLAND;  
FIRST REFORMER OF CHYMICAL PHILOSOPHY;  
ADEPT IN ALCHYMY, CABALA, AND MAGIC;  
NATURE'S FAITHFUL SECRETARY;  
MASTER OF THE ELIXIR OF LIFE AND THE PHILOSOPHER'S STONE;

AND THE

GREAT MONARCH OF CHYMICAL SECRETS;

Now living in his Tomb, whither he retired disgusted with the Vices and
Follies of Mankind, supporting himself with his own

QUINTESSENTIA VITÆ.

PARACELSUS was born, as he himself writes, in the year 1494, in a
village in *Switzerland* called Hoenheym (q. d. *ab alto nido*) two
miles distant from *Zurich*. His father was a natural son of a great
master of the *Teutonic* order, and had been brought up to medicine,
which he practised accordingly in that obscure corner. He was master of
an excellent and copious library, and is said to have become eminent in
his art, so that *Paracelsus* always speaks of him with the highest
deference, and calls him *laudatissimus medicus in eo vico*. Of such a
father did *Paracelsus* receive his first discipline. After a little
course of study at home he was committed to the care of *Trithemius*,
the celebrated abbot of *Spanheim*, who had the character of an adept
himself, and wrote of the *Cabala*, being at that time a reputed
*magician*. Here he chiefly learnt languages and letters; after which he
was removed to *Sigismund Fugger* to learn medicine, surgery, and
chymistry; all these masters, especially

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

the last, *Paracelsus* ever speaks of with great veneration; so that he
was not altogether so rude and unpolished as is generally imagined. Thus
much we learn from his own writings, and especially the preface to his
*Lesser Surgery*, where he defends himself against his accusers. At
twenty years of age he undertook a journey through *Germany* and
*Hungary*, visiting all the mines of principal note, and contracting an
acquaintance with the miners and workmen, by which means he learnt every
thing, relative to metals, and the art thereof: in this enquiry he
shewed an uncommon assiduity and resolution. He gives us an account of
the many dangers he had run from earthquakes, falls of stones, floods of
water, cataracts, exhalations, damps, heat, hunger, and thirst; and
every where takes occasion to insist on the value of an art acquired on
such hard terms. The same inclination carried him as far as *Muscovy*,
where as he was in quest of mines near the frontiers of *Tartary* he was
taken prisoner by that people, and carried before the great *Cham*;
during his captivity there he learnt various secrets, till, upon the
Cham's sending an embassy to the Grand Signior, with his own son at the
head of it, *Paracelsus* was sent along with him in quality of
companion. On this occasion he came to *Constantinople* in the
twenty-eighth year of his age, and was there taught the secret of the
*philosopher's stone* by a generous *Arabian*, who made him this noble
present, as he calls it, *Azoth*. This incident we have from *Helmont*
only; for *Paracelsus* himself, who is ample enough on his other
travels, says nothing of his captivity. At his return from *Turkey* he
practised as a surgeon in the Imperial army, and performed many
excellent cures therein; indeed, it cannot be denied but that he was
excellent in that art, of which his *great surgery*, printed in folio,
will ever be a standing monument. At his return to his native country he
assumed the title of *utriusque medicinæ doctor*, or doctor both of
external and internal medicine or surgery; and grew famous in both,
performing far beyond what the practice of that time could pretend to;
and no wonder, for medicine was then in a poor condition; the practice
and the very language was all *Galenical* and *Arabic*; nothing was
inculcated but *Aristotle*, *Galen*, and the *Arabs*; Hippocrates was
not read; nay, there was no edition of his writings, and scarce was he
ever mentioned. Their theory

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

consisted in the knowledge of the four degrees, the temperaments, &c.
and their whole practice was confined to venesection, purgation,
vomiting, clysmata, &c. Now, in this age a new disease had broke out,
and spread itself over *Europe*, *viz*. the *venereal disorder*; the
common *Galenic* medicines had here proved altogether ineffectual;
bleeding, purging, and cleansing medicines were vain; and the physicians
were at their wit's end. *Jac Carpus*, a celebrated anatomist and
surgeon at *Bolonge*, had alone been master of the cure, which was by
mercury administered to raise a salivation; he had attained this secret
in his travels through *Spain* and *Italy*, and practised it for some
years, and with such success and applause, that it is incredible what
immense riches this one *nostrum* brought him (it is said upon good
authority, that in one year he cleared six thousand pistoles) he
acknowledged himself, that he did not know the end of his own wealth;
for the captains, merchants, governors, commanders, &c. who had brought
that filthy disease from *America*, were very well content to give him
what sums he pleased to ask to free them from it.--*Paracelsus* about
this time having likewise learnt the properties of mercury, and most
likely from *Carpus*, who undertook the same cure but in a very
different manner; for whereas *Carpus* did all by salivation--Paracelsus
making up his preparation in pills attained his ends in a gentler
manner. By this he informs us he cured the itch, leprosy, ulcers,
*Naples* disease, and even gout, all which disorders were incurable on
the foot of popular practice, and thus was the great basis laid for all
his future fame and fortune.

Paracelsus, thus furnished with arts, and arrived at a degree of
eminence beyond any of his brothers in the profession, was invited by
the curators of the university of *Bazil* to the chair of professor of
medicine and philosophy in that university. The art of printing was now
a new thing, the taste for learning and art was warm <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34), and the magistracy of *Bazil* were very
industrious

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

in procuring professors of reputation from all parts of the world. They
had already got *Desid. Erasmus*, professor of *theology*, and *J.
Oporinus* professor of the Greek tongue; and now in 1527 *Paracelsus*
was associated in the 33d year of his age. Upon his first entrance into
that province, having to make a public speech before the university, he
posted up a very elegant advertisement over the doors inviting every
body to his doctrine. At his first lecture he ordered a brass vessel to
be brought into the middle of the school, where after he had cast in
sulphur and nitre, in a very solemn manner he burnt the books of *Galen*
and *Avicenna*, alledging that he had held a dispute with them in the
gates of hell, and had fairly routed and overcome them. And hence he
proclaimed, that the physicians should all follow him; and no longer
style themselves *Galenists*, but *Paracelsists*.--"Know," says he,
"physicians, my cap has more learning in it than all your heads, my
beard has more experience than your whole academies: Greeks, Latins,
French, Germans, Italians, I will be your king."

While he was here professor he read his book *De Tartaro*, *de
Gradibus*, and *De compsitionibus*, in public lectures, to which he
added a commentary on the book *De Gradibus*; all these he afterwards
printed at *Bazil* for the use of his disciples; so that these must be
allowed for genuine writings; about the same time he wrote *De Calculo*,
which performance *Helmont* speaks of with high approbation.

Notwithstanding his being professor in so learned an university he
understood but a very little *Latin*; his long travels, and application
to business, and disuse of the language, had very much disqualified him
for writing or speaking therein; and his natural warmth rendered him
very unfit for teaching at all. Hence, though his auditors and disciples
were at first very numerous, yet they very much fell off, and left him
preaching to the walls. In the mean time he abandoned himself to
drinking at certain seasons; *Oporinus*, who was always near him, has
the good nature to say, he was never sober; but that he tippled on from
morning to night, and from night to morning, in a continual round. At
length he soon became weary of his professorship, and after three years
continuance therein relinquished it, saying, that

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

no language besides the *German* was proper to reveal the secrets of
chymistry in.

After this he again betook himself to an itinerant life, travelling and
drinking, and living altogether at inns and taverns, continually flushed
with liquor, and yet working many admirable cures in his way. In this
manner he passed four years from the 43d to the 47th year of his life,
when he died at an inn at *Saltzburg*, at the sign of the White Horse,
on a bench in the chimney-corner. *Oporinus* relates, that after he had
put on any new thing, it never came off his back till he had worn it
into rags; he adds, that notwithstanding his excess in point of
drinking, he was never addicted to venery.--But there is this reason for
it: when he was a child, being neglected by his nurse, a *hag* gelded
him in a place where three ways met, and so made a eunuch of him;
accordingly in his writings he omits no opportunity of railing against
women.--Such is the life of Paracelsus; such is the immortal man, who
sick of life retired into a corner of the world, and there supports
himself with his own *Quintessence of Life*.

In his life time he only published three or four books, but after his
death he grew prodigiously voluminous, scarce a year passing but one
book or other was published under his name, said to be found in some old
wall, ceiling, or the like. All the works published under his name were
printed together at *Strasburg* in the year 1603, in three volumes
*folio*, and again in 1616. *J. Oporinus*, that excellent professor and
printer, before named, who constantly attended *Paracelsus* for three
years as his menial servant, in hopes of learning some of his secrets,
who published the works of *Vesalius*, and is supposed to have put them
in that elegant language wherein they now appear: this *Oporinus*, in an
epistle to *Monavius*, concerning the life of *Paracelsus*, professes
himself surprized to find so many works of his master; for, that in all
the time he was with him never wrote a word himself, nor ever took pen
in hand, but forced *Oporinus* to write what he dictated; and *Oporinus*
wondered much how such coherent words and discourse which might even
become the wisest persons, should come from the mouth of a drunken man.
His work

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

called *Archidoxa Medicinæ*, as containing the principles and maxims of
the art, nine books of which were published at first; and the author in
the prolegomena to them, speaks thus:--"*I intended to have published my
ten books of* Archidoxa*; but finding mankind unworthy of such a
treasure as the tenth, I keep it close, and have firmly resolved never
to bring it thence, till you have all abjured* ARISTOTLE*,* AVICEN*,
and* GALEN*, and have sworn allegiance to* PARACELSUS *alone*."

However, the book did at length get abroad, though by what means is not
known; it is undoubtedly an excellent piece, and may be ranked among the
principal productions in the way, of chymistry, that have ever appeared;
whether or no it be *Paracelsus's* we cannot affirm, but there is one
thing speaks in its behalf, *viz.* it contains a great many things which
have since been trumped up for great *nostrums*; and *Van Helmont's*
Lithonthriptic and Alcahest are apparently taken from hence; among the
genuine writings of *Paracelsus* are likewise reckoned, that *De Ortu
Rerum Naturalium*, *De Transformatione Rerum Naturalium*, and *De Vita
Rerunt Naturalium*. The rest are spurious or very doubtful, particularly
his theological works.

The great fame and success of this man, which many attribute to his
possessing an *universal medicine* may be accounted for from other
principles. It is certain he was well acquainted with the use and virtue
of *opium*, which the *Galenists* of those times all rejected as cold in
the fourth degree. *Oporinus* relates that he made up certain little
pills of the colour, figure, and size of mouse-turds, which were nothing
but *opium*. These he called by a barbarous sort of name, his
*laudanum*; *q. d.* laudable medicine; he always carried them with him,
and prescribed them in dyssenteries, and all cases attended with intense
pains, anxieties, deliriums, and obstinate wakings; but to be alone
possessed of the use of so extraordinary and noble a medicament as
*opium*, was sufficient to make him famous.

Another grand remedy with Paracelsus was *turbith mineral*; this is
first mentioned in his *Clein Spital Boeck*, or *Chirurgia Minor*, where
he gives the preparation. In respect of the philosopher's
stone.--*Oporinus* says, he often wondered to see him one day without a
farthing in his pocket, and the next

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

day, full of money; that he took nothing with him when he went abroad.
He adds, that he would often borrow money of his companions, the carmen
and porters, and pay it again in twenty-four hours with extravagant
interest, and yet from what fund nobody but himself knew. In the
*Theatrum Alchemiæ* he mentions a treasure, hid under a certain tree;
and from such like grounds they supposed him to possess the art of
making gold; but it was hard if such noble nostrums as he possessed
would not subsist him without the *lapis philosophorum*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[190:1](ma268.htm#fr_34) We feel ourselves happy
in being able to say, that the taste for learning and arts
(notwithstanding the follies of the age) was never more prevalent than
in the present time; the year 1801 commences an age of flourishing
science, in which even our females seem to wish to bear a part-instance,
a lady of quality, who went in her carriage the other day to
Foster-lane, Cheapside, and bought a portable blacksmith's forge for her
private amusement; her person was strong and athletic, and very fit for
the manual practice of handling iron, and working other metallic
experiments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Rudolph Glauber](ma269)
