[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE CONCLUSION.

HAVING collected the most interesting and curious accounts of the lives
of those great men, so famous for their speculations in philosophic
learning, we draw to a conclusion; having only to add, that we have
sufficiently discovered in this biographical sketch whatsoever was
necessary to prove the authenticity of *Our Art*, which we have
delivered faithfully and impartially, noting, at the same time, the
various opinions of different men at different ages; likewise, we have
taken sufficient trouble to explain what is meant by the word *Magic*,
and to clear up the term from the imputation of any diabolical
association with evil spirits, &c. Also, how nearly it is allied to our
religious duties, we refer the reader to the annotations under the,
article *Zoroaster*, where we have spoke of the *Magi*, or wise men,
proving the first who adored Christ were actually magicians. It is
enough that we have spoke of the principal characters renowned in past
ages for their laborious inquisition into the labyrinth of occult and
natural philosophy; there are many other philosophers standing upon
ancient and modern record. A copious and general biography falls not
within the limits of our work. We have introduced some characters
(applicable to the subject before us) most distinguished for occult
learning; of which kind of science, whether by a particular influence of
planetary configuration, which may have directed and impelled my mind
and intellects to the observation and study of nature, and her simple
operations, as well as to the more occult, I leave to the judgment of
the astrologers, to whose inspection I submit a figure

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

of my nativity, which I shall annex to a sketch of my own history, which
I mean to make the subject of a future publication, including a vast
number of curious experiments in occult and chymical operations, which
have fell either under my own observation, or have been transmitted to
me from others. In respect of the astrologic art, (as we have already
observed) it has such an affinity with talismanic experiments, &c. that
no one can bring any work to a complete effect without a due knowledge
and observation of the qualities and effects of the constellations
(which occasioned us to give it the title of the Constellatory Art;)
likewise, a man must be well acquainted with the nature, qualities, and
effects, of the four elements, and of the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms; which knowledge cannot better be obtained than by chymical
experience, for it does, as I may say, unlock the secret chambers of
nature, and introduces the student into a world of knowledge, which
could not be attained but by chymical analyzation, whereby we decompound
mixt bodies, and reduce them to their simple natures, and come to a
thorough acquaintance with those powerful and active principles, causing
the wonderful transmutations of one compound body into another of a
different species, as is to be seen in the course of our operations upon
salts and metals, giving us clear and comprehensive ideas of the
principles of life or generation, and putrefaction or death.

Finally, to conclude, we are chiefly to consider one thing to be
attained as the ground of perfection in the rest: *i. e.* The great
*First Cause*, the *Eternal Wisdom*, to know the Creator by the
contemplation of the creature. This is the grand secret of the
philosophers, and the master-key to all sciences both human and divine,
for without this we are still wandering in a labyrinth of perplexity and
errors, of darkness and obscurity: for this is the sum and perfection of
all learning, to live in the fear of God, and in love and charity with
all men.

FINIS.
