[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dcj01)  [Next](dcj03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877850542/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*De Conjugio*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1788\], tr. by John Whitehead
\[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### De Conjugio

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

They who have lived in celibacy, live also in celibacy for a long time;
but, if they have desired marriage in the world, they also at length
enter into marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

Those who cannot await the other consort, whether male or female, are
conjoined in the meanwhile to another similar one; but then there is
given them a perception that it is the same consort they had in the
world, but this is dissolved, because there were no betrothing and
nuptials, when the true consort arrives, for then from cohabitation in
the world they know each other well, and they who wish remain with their
own, as was said before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

The marriages of the angels of heaven are all provided by the Lord, who
alone knows the similitude of souls which is to endure to eternity and
then a consort from the first glance recognizes his consort, which is
because the similitude of souls conjoins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

But in hell there are not marriages, but there are adulteries; in
infernal societies there the men are separated from the women, and when
they think that they are to speak with a wife, from a habit acquired in
the world, he goes to the women and a persuasion is given him then that
this or that one is his woman, with whom he then consociates himself;
but that persuasion is varied, because it makes no difference, since in
hell there is no marriage but adultery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

THOSE WHO LIVE MODESTLY AND CHASTELY IN OUTWARD FORM, BUT THINK
LASCIVIOUSLY. Afar off were seen women concerning whom it was said that
they had lived in the world as virgins, and had avoided matrimony for
the sake of chastity, saying that matrimonies were in themselves
unchaste, comparing them to allowed whoredoms; it was said also that
many of them were from convents, professing chastity for the sake of
heaven or eternal salvation. They appeared from afar as naked, because
chastity and innocence is represented in the spiritual world by
nakedness, which also signifies a life blameless and free from whoredom;
but it was perceived that from afar off, in a secret place, they dealt,
after death, with men, adulterers, taking care sagaciously not to be
seen; but when they were manifestly infested, then they escaped with
mocking and fled away. Then was felt the ardor of the men who desired
them for wives, because they thought them more chaste and innocent than
others. It was said that they were more obscene than others, having
delighted in heinous lasciviousness; they were such women as had thought
lasciviously within themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

It was said of them that after a space of time they acquire such an
aversion for matrimony that nothing can exceed it, and conjugial love
perishes, and they become disgusting, and this after they have been for
some time foul prostitutes, having cast aside all shame, because the
external being removed, the internal acts, and their internal without
the external is then without any bond from shame.

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

Those who have affected external sanctity, and also have been given to
devotion, and thus are religious, because they become profane and have
mingled adulteries with the delight of sanctity, whence comes
profanation, appear at length like bony skeletons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

TO COMMAND IN MARRIAGES TAKES AWAY CONJUGIAL LOVE, AND CONCERNING THE
DUTCH WOMEN. Concerning the love of commanding in marriages, that it
takes away all love truly conjugial, since conjugial love is such that
the one wills to think and will as the other, and thus mutually and
reciprocally, so neither one commands, but the Lord; thence is the
delight of conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

That wives may not command over husbands is taken care of there in
societies; there the men dwell on one side and the women or wives on the
other, and when the men desire they send to them and summon them, and
then they are separated, or live separately; if the wives are indignant
and become angry on account of it, and infest the men because of serving
and obeying when they are called; then they are sent forth from the
society and wander over various places, and a desire is given to them of
going away and deserting the husband; then when they wander, everywhere
they encounter an enclosure or obstacle, as it were a marsh, water, or a
wall, and so forth; and while this lasts the desire of going away
diminishes, and they do this until they are tired out, and then they
return to the society and to the mansion there where they had been
before; thus the Dutch women are amended.

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

THE TORMENT OF THOSE WHO ARE OF HELL, FROM THE INFLUX OF CONJUGIAL LOVE.
All influx from heaven torments the infernals, wherefore hell is removed
from heaven and is also everywhere shut up, so that influx may not at
all be felt; the reason is, that they are in contrary love, and just as
infernal love torments the celestials, so celestial love torments the
infernals; but the celestial prevails, wherefore hell is removed as far
as possible; this is meant in the Evangelist, in Abraham's saying that
there is a gulf, so that there is no passing over.

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

But the influx of conjugial love from heaven especially torments the
infernals; I have seen spirits in hell brought even into the world of
spirits, which is the middle, when these perceive the influx of
conjugial love, they come into fury so as to act like furies and also as
if they were tormented like serpents in tamarisks \[myrica\], twisting
hither and thither their bodies and intestines like one who is twisted
miserably by torment within; they compared their suffering with the
greatest sufferings; the reason is that the love of marriage and the
love of adultery are altogether opposite, and conjugial love itself is
heaven, and the love of adultery is hell. The love flows into their
externals and torments their internals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

THE INFERNAL MARRIAGE. The infernal marriage is when one wills to
command and the other wills not to serve; thence is deadly hatred
interiorly. This was represented by the most direful things, which on
account of direfulness cannot be described. They breathe nothing else
than slaughter, and also torment of each other; wherefore they are
separated and live separated in hell and adultery, concerning which
above, concerning Charles XII.

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

THOSE WHO PLOT AGAINST CONJUGIAL LOVE. I have heard from such, many
plots and secret arts of alluring chaste wives to adultery. I have seen
more arts than in the world, gaining the favor of them as well as of the
husband, by flattering both, and especially the husband; putting on the
appearance of interior friendship, exploring the desires and cupidities
of the wife, whether she wishes openly or unwillingly, besides a
thousand other things. But such are sent not long after death into a
hell, situated under the hinder part of the province of the knee, and
are there very deep and altogether shut up, that there may be no
aperture whatever to look out of that prison, for they are dangerous
against conjugial love, which is most holy, and there they are compelled
to labor, and have a harlot in place of a wife.

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

But they who have the rage of violation, and perceive a delight in
violation, are let down into a cadaverous hell whence exhales a smell as
from corpses, which excites vomiting; it excites it with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

They plot by means of love towards infants; they were seen to rise from
the earth over in front of Gehenna, almost invisible, continually
removing obstacles, so that they might come into chaste homes; these
they love, but not unchaste ones. They can put on various countenances,
and also by arts send themselves forth through thoughts as if they were
elsewhere, and thus enter. They put on also a countenance of innocence,
and preach chastity; they extol it with praises; they enter into
friendships in various ways, even so that they are praised and loved,
and if the wife is conscious and desirous, she is praised. They spoke
with me, saying, that they wondered that there could be any so
conscientious as to say that this is against conscience, charity, and
religion; they were in such persuasion, that they saw no evil in it,
much less anything filthy. They also spoke sanely concerning marriage;
their hell also is under the buttocks, in front, in the foul
excrementitious smell there; and because they are crafty, feigning
chastity, innocence, and friendships, and many other things, therefore
when they come to their internals, which are adulteries, they are
vastated until they appear deformed devils; as to internals little of
the human remains. They become stupid because they are against the
holiness of heaven. They mock and laugh at those who call marriages
holy, and adulteries profane or even unlawful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL IS NAKED. The angels of the third heaven are those
who are in celestial marriage more than others, for they are in love to
the Lord, and thence in the marriage of good and truth; whence also they
are in conjugial love more than other angels, and in innocence and
chastity. These walk with a cincture around the loins when abroad, and
without the cincture when at home; and yet in their nakedness, they look
upon the consort as a consort, nor is there anything lascivious therein.
They say that to look at a consort clothed detracts from the idea of
marriage, and what is wonderful, nakedness does not excite or stimulate;
it is, however, as an internal bond of conjugial love. In bed they lie
conjoined as they were created, and sleep so. They say that they cannot
do otherwise, because conjugial love itself, which is perpetual,
conjoins; thus also the life of the one is communicated with the life of
the other, and the life of the husband becomes appropriated to the wife;
that it may be as we read of Adam when he saw Eve his wife: "Behold my
bone and my flesh," and also that "they were naked and not ashamed,"
that is not lascivious; but as soon as Adam through his wife receded
from love to the Lord, which is meant by "the tree of life" in Paradise
(of which there, and Rev. 2:7), which happened because they acted from
themselves and their own proprium, namely, from the science and delight
of the natural man, then the marriage of good and truth perished, then
nakedness became lascivious, and the chastity of marriage failing, they
were ashamed of nakedness, and were clothed with fig-leaves, and
afterwards with woollen garments; thence by nakedness in the Word is
meant lasciviousness, like that of adultery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

In the other heavens under the third, all appear clothed, and also blush
at nakedness before the eyes of others, because it excites
lasciviousness; to them marriage is not such a delight as in the third
heaven; in the lowest heaven there is also something of cold but not
indeed as in the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

I was carried by the Lord through changes of state towards the left to a
certain mountain, where all were naked, wives and husbands, at a
distance I spoke with them, and they said that all are naked there, and
nevertheless no lascivious appetite or desire was caused to anyone from
seeing nakedness, and that each consort loved the consort tenderly; also
that they could not be united with them clothed; they told the reason,
that all were chaste in mind, because they were such in the world. When
any newcomer of such a nature arrives from the world, they explore him,
which is done by his putting old his garments and stripping himself;
then they perceive immediately whether he has a genuine conjugial; if
not, he is driven away with punishment; they drive him with blows until
he appears no more, and this to the depth. There was a certain one who
thought he was in like conjugial love, because in the world he had lived
chastely with his wife, nor had he ever had anything in common with
harlots; he at first could look upon naked women without any emotion of
mind, but when his sight had been fixed for some time he was deprived of
his senses at the sight, and finally at the touch of nakedness, and
stood without speech as if half dead, wherefore, he was driven away; the
reason was that he was not in love to the Lord nor in the marriage of
good and truth. They said that few could approach, because the sphere of
conjugial love is such, that others cannot bear it; - they said that
they live in houses with menservants and maidservants who are all in
marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

The angels of the third heaven dwell upon mountains, not rocky but of
earth, upon which are paradises and gardens with trees; the mountains
appear elevated to a point, in the highest part of the mountains are the
best and most chaste; below, according to degree in marriage, are the
spiritual and the spiritual natural; also their distinctions are
according to the quarters, the eastern quarter where they are in love,
the south where they are in wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE DESCENDS FROM THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH. From much
experience it has become known to me that no one has conjugial love
unless he be in the love of truth from good, and in the love of good
through truth, that is, in celestial marriage; and that no one can be in
any mutual love of good and truth except they who shun adultery and are
averse to it as infernal; and this although they may have lived in
marriage in the world, and loved their consort on account of
cohabitation and the delight of earthly life, and for the sake of
children. For celestial things ought to flow into conjugial love, and
man after death comes into his celestial or spiritual things, and then
becomes such altogether as he was with regard to them, nor can it be
otherwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE CAUSES A MAN TO BE LOVE. Man was created to be love and
thence wisdom, since the Lord is Divine love and Divine wisdom, and it
is from creation that a man is the image and likeness of the Lord (Gen.
1:26, 27). And this cannot be without genuine conjugial love. From that
everything of man can be turned into love, for in marriage it is lawful
for each to love even the body from the heart, and thus to dispose the
soul and all things thence to the form of love, which otherwise is not
possible. The inmost and outermost there make one, and induce that form,
and that form is a form of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

THE EXPLORATION OF SPIRITS BY CONJUGIAL LOVE. Spirits who have recently
come into the spiritual world are explored, first of all, as to whether
they are against conjugial love; they are led to places where the sphere
of conjugial love passes by, or to chaste consorts; if then they change
countenance and indignation appears, and more, if they then think
lasciviously, and still more if they speak so, it is a sign that they
are of infernal mind; but if they then rejoice and are exhilarated, that
they are of a celestial mind; it is a test whether they are of heaven or
of hell; those who are against conjugial love are of hell; they who are
with it are of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

ADULTERIES FROM FAITH SEPARATED FROM CHARITY. I was with those who had
confirmed themselves in faith separated from charity, not only in
doctrine but also in life, believing that they were to be saved by faith
alone even in the hour of death, howsoever they had lived; and thus that
all evils were either not regarded by God the Father, or excused on
account of the infirmity of man, or remitted, and that when remitted,
they were also washed away; they looking to the merit of the Lord from
the fulfillment of the law, and that by the passion of the cross He had
taken away the sins of the world, and the condemnation of the law, and
various things which their doctrine teaches. I perceived when they were
in the company of those, or among those with whom they communicated,
when we were speaking of that faith, there existed the most obscene
representations of heinous adultery, such as that of a son with a
mother. The sphere itself was such that it could he perceived by
spiritual communication. They act into the occiput, and thus enter into
the thought. From their presence also comes pain in the left knee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

The reason that such adultery is perceived from them is that they think
of God, of the Lord, of salvation and of eternal life, and they confirm
those things from the Word, which thence are spiritual, and because
there can be nothing of faith unless it be conjoined with some love, and
with them this is conjoined with love merely natural and with its
cupidities, and the conjunction of faith with evil love makes that
adultery. They think concerning faith from an evil life, and when they
are in the delights of terrestrial and corporeal love, thence is the
conjunction of faith or truth with evil. The spiritual which is of faith
is as a mother, and the son is evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

I have seen cohorts of them cast out into the hells, and many of them
into deserts, where everything of faith is taken away from them, and
there they live like wild beasts, and when everything of faith is taken
away from them, they are almost deprived of rationality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

WHY IN THE CHRISTIAN WORLD, MORE THAN ELSEWHERE, ADULTERIES ARE NOT
ABHORRED. The Gentiles wonder why in the Christian world adulteries and
whoredoms are accounted allowable by many and even by most, when yet
their religion from the Word of both Testaments condemns them to hell;
but the reason was told, that few live according to their religion, but
have embraced the doctrine that faith saves; that is, that thinking and
not living \[saves\]; and because thus truth is conjoined with evil,
thence from the influx from hell adulteries are loved and received, and
also they excuse them. For the influx of hell prevails with them over
the influx of heaven. The sphere of adultery also closes heaven, and
when heaven is closed, hell is opened: hence its origin comes from the
falsity of religions. It is otherwise with those who place religion in
life and doctrine at the same time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

THE SPHERE OF ADULTERY. When they speak against the truths and goods of
faith and charity, a sphere of whoredom and adultery is produced, and
then adulterers rush thither as crows to a carcass, and delight in that
stench; thence the sphere is filled with such and other obscene things,
that a good person would be horrified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

ADULTERERS AND THEIR HELLS. Their hells are under the buttocks, which
are excrementitious; they desire to emerge thence and come into the
world, but in vain, because they had loved terrestrial and corporeal
things. Thence appeared, as it were, a vomiting and heaving, in such an
effort are they.

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

ADULTERIES IN THE CHRISTIAN WORLD. There are many there of family and of
illustrious condition, and thus not of the common people, because they
adopted the principle that marriages are for the sake of offspring, and
it matters not whether they are violated by others; and they laugh at
the sanctity of marriage, calling them silly. Such were brought up out
of the hells in great numbers, and being let into the state in which
they were in the world, they inquired where there were beautiful wives,
and when it was pointed out, they rushed like insane persons and like
furies, wishing to enter into houses; but in their blind heat they were
carried away to a place where the earth opened, and the crowd was cast
into a hell which was behind the back.

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

THE INFLUX OF ADULTERY FROM GENII. I have passed through the hell where
were crafty and interiorly vastated adulterers, and then it was
permitted them to flow into the affections of my will, and with such
subtlety and art and skill to invert, pervert, and extinguish my
thoughts in favor of chastity, and to induce the enjoyment and lust of
adultery. They turned themselves to every particle of thought from
affection, persuading silently: this was done with me, that I might know
that man of himself could in no way resist the delight of adultery
except from the Lord; for they act into the hereditary life within the
thought, insomuch that man can in no wise observe it; but there was then
given me by the Lord an interior perception of their effort.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

PRIESTLY WHOREDOM. This is especially committed by those who have
confirmed the falsities of doctrine from the Word, and thus have
falsified and adulterated it; the reason is that the Word is marriage,
corresponds to marriage, and in itself is spiritual; and the delight of
natural love falsifies it, especially in preachers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

They who read the Word without doctrine cannot but fall into many
fallacies from the sense of the letter which is according to appearances
with man, and at the same time they have acquired many falsities and
confirmed themselves in them, and at the same time are thence in the
pride of their own intelligence; these produce adulteries as of a father
with a daughter-in-law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

They who confirm themselves that all evils are remitted by the Holy
Supper, without other repentance and without conversion of life, and who
do evils, and are in the belief that afterwards evil or sins are taken
away by the Holy Supper, their adultery is with the maternal aunt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="84.">84.</span></span>

Because the Jewish nation had by traditions falsified all things of the
Word, it is called by the Lord an adulterous nation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

When charity is acknowledged and not faith, and yet the life of charity
is not lived, and they still read the Word, it is the adultery of sister
and brother. There are those who frequent the temple, and then pray
devoutly and care nothing for evils of life, as thefts, secret
robberies, adulteries, hatreds, revenges, cursings of enemies and those
who do not favor them. This is with a sister.

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

The love of self, especially of ruling and yet thinking from the Word,
is such as that of Sodom, wherefore they demanded the angels from the
house of Lot.

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

Those who speak much concerning God, and yet care nothing about
deceiving men and depriving them of their goods, commit adultery with
maidservants, whom they change frequently.

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

THE HELLS OF ADULTERERS. There are many hells of these, according to the
kinds of adultery, which are various.

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

I have seen harlots who hid themselves in the western region and
obstructed the roads, that none might approach except they were willing;
I was taken thither; and they were harlots who were all cast into a
marshy pool, remote at the back, in the west; they were such as were
openly harlots.

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

Those who had exercised whoredom secretly, without the knowledge of
others, and were such to the end of life, were cast into a dark cavern
in the west.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

Some harlots of noble family who excelled in genius, and also could
reason about God, are cast into a marshy pool in the southern region.

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

Other harlots who were able to steal men by arts not known in the world,
compelling them into their proprium by praises and by the immersion of
their mind into themselves, and because then being without protection
from the Lord, they were delivered over to them, such women are cast
into a place burning as it were with sulphur and fire, according to
appearance. They dwell in the southwestern quarter, and similar men are
cast into a dark abyss sloping under the pool of the women. Women
fascinate men, and men women, by diabolical arts, which are many and
which it is not allowed to recount.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

Those who are adulterers spiritually are distinguished from adulterers
naturally; the latter, if they perceive delight in adulteries, and no
delight in marriages, are excluded from heaven, and are all sent into
hells; but the adulterers spiritually, although they perceive nothing
unlawful in adulteries, are yet explored and even amended, and others
are allotted places according to life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

There are some in excrementitious hells who are addicted to variety, and
by it have extinguished the conjugial; and at the same time are
voluptuous; they are in the province of the intestines, under the
former, where are everywhere sinks and a foul odor; and everywhere there
are caverns from which such an odor exhales.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

Those who had a communion of wives are bound as it were into a bundle,
and the bundle is tied together by a stretched-out serpent and they are
cast into a whirlpool which is beyond the spiritual world of this earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

They who seduced by the appearance of piety, and thence persuade
themselves that adulteries are not contrary to the Christian life, are
sent into Gehenna, whence is perceived a stench as of burnt bones and
hair, and are there in the fantasy that they are bitten by serpents;
when in heat they are on fire, and when they approach heaven they become
frozen like ice, and are miserably tortured.

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

Monks and Jesuits who have acted thus under the pretext of piety, and on
account of pity towards them, with the promise that they would remit
sins, are also committed to Gehenna.

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THE MEMBERS DEDICATED TO GENERATION IN BOTH SEXES.
Those societies which correspond to the genitals are distinct from
others, because that region in the body is also distinct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

Those who love infants, and educate them in heaven, constitute the
province of the genital members, especially of the testicles and the
neck of the womb, and live the most sweet and happy life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

There are societies of the third heaven, which especially correspond to
those members, because they have conjugial love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](dcj03)
