[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dcj00)  [Next](dcj02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877850542/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*De Conjugio*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1788\], tr. by John Whitehead
\[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### De Conjugio

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

THE REPRESENTATION OF CONJUGIAL LOVE BY MOST BEAUTIFUL THINGS. Love
truly conjugial is represented in heaven by various things. It is
represented by adamantine auras; sparkling as if from rubies and
carbuncles; also by most beautiful rainbows and golden rains, which,
when they are beheld, fill the bystanders with such pleasurableness and
such delights, that they affect the inmosts of the mind. I have heard
the angels, when conjugial love was so represented in the paradises of
heaven, say that they were filled with such delight, that they could not
express it otherwise than that it was delight itself, from which, as
from their origin, all the rest of delights arise; and this delight was
said to be a pure delight of the mind without any excitation of lust,
for such is conjugial love in its origin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

Since love truly conjugial is in its origin pure delight itself of the
mind, and that love is the fundamental of all loves, and from love is
all the beauty of the angels in heaven, for love or the affection of
love forms everyone, wherefore every angel is as to his face the image
of his love or affection, hence it is that all the beauty of the angels
in heaven is from their conjugial love; for the inmost of their life
which shines through is thence. An angel was seen by me, who was in pure
conjugial love (he was from the third heaven); such was his beauty that
the bystanders were carried away with admiration, saying that it was
beauty itself in its essence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

That love truly conjugial is such beauty, and also such delight, is from
its first origin, which is the union of the Divine love of the Lord with
His Divine wisdom; then the marriage of the Lord with heaven, and with
the church, and thence with everyone the marriage of good and truth,
concerning which origins of love truly conjugial it shall be spoken in
their places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGAL THERE IS NOTHING WHATEVER OF LASCIVIOUSNESS.
Those who do not know what love truly conjugial is, and who are not in
it, may think that it is not given without lasciviousness, but yet the
difference is such as is between heaven and hell; for their delight
appears in externals as if the same, but every external derives its
quality and its essential nature from internals. The internal of
conjugial love is from the Lord, and thence from heaven, and from
everything auspicious and happy there; but the internal of
lasciviousness or of adultery is from the devil, thus from hell and from
everything inauspicious and unhappy. Every external derives its essence
from internals; therefore neither are the external of conjugial love and
the external of adultery alike. The external of conjugial love is filled
with all the delights of heaven, and the enjoyment of heaven which is in
that love expels all the enjoyment of hell; hence those two enjoyments
in external form are, because of their internals, altogether dissimilar.
The angels also clearly perceive from the sphere of the love of two
consorts whether what is lascivious is in it, and its quality and
quantity, and so far remove themselves from them. The reason that the
angels so far remove themselves is, that the lasciviousness of adultery
communicates with the hells, but the chastity of marriage with heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL IS CHASTITY ITSELF. Celibacy is not called chastity
in the heavens, nor is a girl called chaste, neither is an unmarried
woman, nor a virgin, but a wife who turns away from adultery is called
chaste; likewise a husband who turns away from it, because love truly
conjugial is what is called in heaven chastity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE IS INNOCENCE ITSELF. Consorts who are in conjugial love
appear in heaven like the innocent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE IS LOVE TO THE LORD. All who are in love truly conjugial
are in love to the Lord, because it descends from the marriage of the
Lord with the church; hence it is that they who are in the third heaven,
who are all in love to the Lord, are in love truly conjugial. Love truly
conjugial cannot be given except by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

TWO CONSORTS IN HEAVEN MAKE ONE ANGEL. There is between two consorts in
heaven a similar conjunction as there is in every man between the will
and the understanding, or between the good which is of the will and the
truth which is of the understanding; because the female by nature is
affection, which is of the will, and the male is by nature thought,
which is of the understanding; more concerning these in the work on
Heaven and Hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

THOSE WHO HAVE FOR AN END IN MARRIAGES LASCIVIOUSNESS SUCH AS IS OF
ADULTERY. There appeared to me as if in a kitchen, wherein was a dark
fire-place, without fire on the hearth, \[women\] with knives in their
hands with which they, as it were, wished to slay infants; they were
crafty, cunning, and malicious, all harlots, secretly alluring men to
themselves from every quarter. These being inspected by the angels,
appeared like intestines in pairs of balls, one of which was filthily
bloody, the other foully yellow; thus were represented their lusts when
they were inspected by angels. All were such women as seek matrimony
solely for the sake of adultery with others, because then they do not
fear scandal on account of illegitimate offspring, which they attribute
to the husband; their lot is most cruel; all things there are filthy;
they dwell in caves, and on account of their ugliness and deformity they
fear to be seen, nor can they longer allure any adulterer because they
are deformed and have a foul smell; men, also, with whom adulteries are
the end of matrimony, and afterward have lived with adulteresses,
acquire such a nausea for a wife that they fly from them. They become at
length impotences, and with them the life of thought and speech perishes
in the society of wives, and especially in the society of their own
wives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

MICE. Lascivious wives, and also unmarried women who make light of
whoredoms, dwell in two kinds of places, some in the western region in
front, and some behind. All that are there knew how to insinuate
themselves with men by simulated affections, by which they acquired the
lascivious love of some male, caring nothing whether they were good
affections or whether evil affections. Those who dwell in front were
crafty and cunning, and of such a genius that they could perceive of
what nature, disposition, inclination, and cupidity were the men whom
they wished to allure, especially in depriving a man of his wealth, and
in the meantime that they may live luxuriously. They dwell there in
caves wherein all things are fetid, and the places where they dwell
smell like the smell where mice are; they even appear when seen by
angels like great mice. I have heard certain ones, who had been in their
caves, saying that the smell was that of mice, and that their places
were fetid and filthy; but that they knew how, by phantasies, to render
themselves beautiful, and also to decorate these places with various
articles, but this only for some moments; for when the phantasies cease
the appearances cease, and then all things are foul. It is said even
that they delight in those foul and filthy things, the more so the more
interiorly they are in them. That they are thus delighted is from
correspondences with such a life. They were often seen by me, sometimes
when by phantasies they had assumed beauty, appearing then magnificent
in dress and charming in countenance, but as soon a fantastic thought
was removed from them, which is done by a good spirit and by an angel,
they appear deformed altogether like devils, some black, some horribly
flamy, some like corpses, and also they were often seen by me like great
mice with long tails. Their concupiscences appeared thus. What is
wonderful, there are some spirits of both sexes who in the appearance of
their passions appear like cats, and those mice fear them just as mice
fear cats on earth; they appear like cats because they cared nothing for
religious things, except that they heard them but retained nothing of
them. I saw that in those caves are noble wives, yea, of such men as
were of the first nobility; but all there are compelled to labor, but no
one of them can go out, nor is it permitted to let them out, because
they are cunning beyond the rest of spirits, and enter the affections of
men secretly and draw away their minds; in this they are more skillful
than the rest, and so they are shut up, that at last they do not open a
finger to let them out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

They, however, who dwell below in the western region are similar and in
greater number. They are unmarried females who have given themselves to
whoredom and passed their whole life in whoredom; there is a similar
smell of mice there, not so strong, and they also appear like mice, but
smaller. The caverns where they are appear winding and subterranean, one
cavern below another, and a great multitude is there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

I have seen the larger mice, when a preacher came to them, hold by
phantasy a book of psalms in their hand, and look towards certain from
whom they draw what to answer, and answer as from themselves; this by
cunning, and then they feign devotion, when yet they have no devotion at
all; so they deceive the preachers, but they do this in the gates; but
within in the caverns they answer nothing, because they cannot look to
those from whom they draw the answers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

VARIOUS THINGS CONCERNING MARRIAGE AND ADULTERIES (1) Heaven is marriage
and adultery is hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

\(2\) Marriage descends from the marriage of good and truth, and
adultery from the marriage of evil and falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

\(3\) Therefore there is given priestly adultery which in external
appearance is similar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

\(4\) In heaven they abhor adulteries, and therefore heaven is closed to
adulterers; and hell is opened wide according to the quality and
quantity of the adultery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

\(5\) A man by conjugial love receives the form of love in the mind, and
therefrom in the body, thus the form of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

And a man by adulteries receives the form of adultery, thus the form of
hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

\(6\) Conjugial love is the fundamental love of all heavenly loves, and
it is the image of heaven, thus of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

\(7\) Heavenly joy is founded upon conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

\(8\) Hence the heavenly joys which the angels have solely from thence
are innumerable; and scarcely one of those innumerable joys is known in
the world, because at this day adultery reigns there even from falsity
of doctrine, but that they were known in part to the ancients.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

\(9\) Angelic wisdom grows by marriages, and it is in the place of
procreation to them; for which reason it is a procreation of wisdom,
whence daughters, sons, father, and mother in the Word signify such
things as are of good and truth, thus which are of wisdom; passages may
be adduced from the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

\(10\) From adulteries all ignorance and stupidity in spiritual things
grow, because it is the marriage of falsity and evil. The falsification
and adulteration of the truth and good of the Word is signified by
whoredoms there, may be proved from the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

\(11\) To love the consort is to do good before the Lord, because this
is chastity itself; and the church itself is called virgin and daughter,
as the daughter and the virgin of Zion and Jerusalem. Passages may be
quoted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

\(12\) Conjugial love has communication with heaven, and the organs of
generation have correspondence with the third heaven; especially the
womb, concerning which correspondence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

Even intercourse from conjugial love communicates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

\(13\) That love arises from the Lord's influx alone through the third
heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

\(13\) (a) The third heaven is the conjugial of heaven; thus marriages
are held as most holy in heaven; and adulteries profane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

\(14\) What adulteries are, considered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

\(15\) Conjugial love increases in potency and effect to eternity,
insomuch that it is love as to all power and effect, thence is the life
of their souls; but with adulteries love decreases as to power and
effect, even so that it becomes impotence and a stock, and scarce of any
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

\(16\) No one can be in conjugial love unless he be spiritual by combat
against evils and their falsities, and unless he acknowledges the Lord
and His Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

\(17\) The wife and husband are consociated as to mind as one flesh. It
is my bone and my flesh, as Adam said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

\(18\) Conjugial love continually unites, that they be (one man).

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

\(19\) Conjugial love depends on the love of the wife, and such is the
love of the husband in reciprocation, and the love of the wife does not
depend on the love of the husband; the reason is, because like as the
will actuates the understanding, good actuates truth, hence it is that
it is said that the husband ought to cleave to the wife; the contrary is
the case with those who are not in conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

\(20\) The wife wills to think and will as the husband, and the husband
as the wife, and because each wills this, each is led by the Lord as
one, and the two are one angel; for when the will and the understanding
are not one's own, but the other's, and this mutually and reciprocally,
it cannot be otherwise than that they be led by the Lord as one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

\(21\) Hereditary evil becomes by adulteries continually more malignant,
which is on account of adulteries which are considered allowable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

\(22\) Adulteries are most filthy may appear only from this, that the
seed of the man as to its spiritual, and also as to its interior
natural, adds itself to the body of the woman, for the man's life is in
it; what, then, can it be, when the lives of several men are introduced
at the same time, but filthiness and interior putridity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

\(23\) An example that one acquires such a nausea and disgust against
his wife, as not to be able to look at her, merely when he doubted about
God and the Word, was the priest, i. . . .

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

\(24\) Conjugial love is such love, such delight, and such wisdom to
those, that heaven is in it; that so far they are men, is confirmed by
angels of heaven by a living voice. Afterwards they looked into hell,
and said that there was all filthiness, and that especially adulterers
and adulteresses appear like swine and hogs, and those who are like
swine and hogs delight in ordure; and they said that one of them
delighted in it so much that he wished to eat it. This coincides with
the prophet who was ordered to make for himself a cake with dung.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

\(25\) By conjugial love the interiors of the mind are opened, because
the influx into it is from the Lord through the third heaven; thence a
man becomes receptive of all celestial loves and likewise of truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

\(26\) In conjugial love is the inmost of conscience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE WITH THE ANGELS. I have spoken concerning conjugial love
with angels, and they said that it is the inmost of all loves, and that
it is such that a consort sees his consort in his soul and in his mind,
so that his spiritual image is there; and thus that a consort has the
consort as if in himself, and this is cohabitation in the spiritual
sense. This also was represented by angelic ideas which cannot be
expressed. Hence their conjunctions are delicious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

TO ONE MAN ONE WIFE. In the Christian world, where interior things of
the church are revealed, and where the Lord is worshiped, and it is
known that from Him is heaven and the church, and the church is
conjoined with Him, as a wife with a husband, and that there is but one
church, and that with those who are of that church there will be the
conjunction of good and truth, it is not allowed to take several wives,
for this would be to pervert the spiritual which is, or can be in
marriage. Wherefore, if a Christian man should take several wives, it
would be as if he had with himself two churches; also as if truth should
take its essence from two goods, with which marriage is not given; for
good is the esse of truth, and the esse or essence of one truth from two
goods is not given. Whence it is that love truly conjugial can by no
means be given in the case of one man with several wives, for thus it
would be lasciviousness that would enter; besides, love cannot be
divided, since it is from the affection of one, which is of the will,
concordant with the thought of another, which is of the understanding,
and this unanimity and cohabitation, which makes the essence of
conjugial love, cannot be given (in the case of several wives). In a
word, with them there is not the Christian Church, wherefore when an
angel in heaven only thinks of several wives, the celestial and angelic
perishes, and joy as well as wisdom with him, and he falls from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

There have been seen those from Christians who have confirmed themselves
about polygamy, they were several thousands in one society; for those
who are alike as to love form a society, and conjugial love is the
fundamental of all, and when the Last Judgment took place, that region
appeared as if swallowed up by hell, and afterwards it was said that
they knew nothing about their members of generation, just as if they had
been without them; they had confirmed themselves in this from the
Judaism of the Old Testament, because it was then lawful to take several
wives; but it is lawful in Mohammedanism everywhere. It was permitted to
the Jews because the Jews were external men, inwardly idolaters, with
whom the interiors of the church were not, nor were opened; wherefore
they did not recognize the Lord. What it is with Mohammedans shall be
told hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

In a word, several consorts and one husband cannot become one flesh,
that is, one mind, which consists of will and understanding, the
marriage of which, as far as relates to the mind in its existence,
presents a marriage; for all things in the universe relate to the
marriage of good and truth; thus to marriage, in order that they may be
anything, and produce anything, and marriage itself in its very form and
its very essence, is presented in man with his compeer; likewise in an
angel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

A PLURALITY OF WIVES AMONG MOHAMMEDANS. I have spoken with Mohammedans
about the spiritual marriage, that it is the marriage of good and truth,
and that good loves truth, like two consorts, and that they desire to be
conjoined, and to produce goods and truths, like daughters and sons, and
to procreate families as it were. This they understood well, and also
that conjugial love descends from that spiritual origin, and that all
the spiritual with man undergoes a change, so that it may scarcely be
recognized when it descends into the natural, but is known only by
correspondences. From which it appears that those who have several wives
conceded to them from their religion, cannot have love truly conjugial;
and it is said that a plurality of wives was conceded to them, or
polygamy was permitted, because those who are in warm countries, more
than those who are in cold countries, burn with libidinous heat;
therefore if polygamy had not been permitted them, many of them would
rush into adulteries more than Europeans, and would thus act contrary to
their religious persuasion, and to act contrary to that is to profane
what is holy. It was shown further that all their love of marriage is
lascivious, thus not spiritual, and cannot become spiritual unless they
acknowledge the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

The lot of those in the other life is such, that first, as in the world
they there take several wives besides concubines \[pellices\]; but
because in the spiritual world the conjunction is of souls, and they are
of different souls, they cannot be together, but separate from each
other spontaneously, and are finally conjoined to a woman who is of
similar soul; thus gradually they separate from their women, and thus
finally are united with one with whom their soul accords; moreover, they
who persist in polygamy, in the course of time become so feeble and
impotent that they are disgusted with marriage, for lasciviousness
brings this with itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

Those of them who are in their heaven have but one wife, and have
rejected more, for there is a Mohammedan heaven distinct from the
Christian heaven; but they who at last, as do many, acknowledge the Lord
as one with the Father, are separated into heavens, which communicate
with the Christian heavens, and with them there is conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

They have heard from the angels conjugial love described as to its
delights and pleasantnesses, and that it endures to eternity with an
infinite variety of delights and pleasantnesses, and they wondered, many
of them therefore received faith in the Lord, and were sent among the
angels of the Christian heavens, and instructed concerning the Lord and
in the doctrine of love and faith towards Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

THE STATE OF CONSORTS AFTER DEATH. Almost everyone who has lived in
marriage in the world, after death either meets with his wife, if she
died first, or awaits her. When they meet, they mutually explore each
other as to what their mutual affection was; and if there had not been
mutual affection, they separate spontaneously, for two dissimilar
affections and thoughts cannot consociate, for there is a communication
of all affections and thence of thoughts; if there is not a concordance,
a great uneasiness begins, then difficult breathing, like a discordant
panting, so that they cannot but be separated, and then they are
conjoined with others according to similitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](dcj02)
