[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](krz04)  [Next](krz06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Karezza Method*, by J. William Lloyd \[1931\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16b">p. 16b</span>

## MAGNETATION

As I have said, I coined for Albert Chavannes, as a title for his little
brochure on this subject, the word "Magnetation." This was intended to
express the theory, then so prevalent, that the thrills and pleasures of
sex and love were caused by the transmission and reception of currents
of "animal magnetism," or "vital electricity," which could be conveyed
by contact or passes from one human body to another, and that diseases
even could be cured by the same agency, as in "laying on of hands."
There has been much controversy on this matter. It has been argued by
some that the "currents," the "magnetic attractions," etc., felt by the
susceptible, were purely imaginary and ideological, - that the lover
induced his own thrills, the patient cured himself. We may waive much of
this. While today one hears very little of this magnetism, the fact
remains that the presence and the touch, explain it as we may, of
certain people, give us intense, vivid feelings and produce powerful
reactions, while the presence and touch of others may shock, or leave us
indifferent or repelled. Practically this is sufficient. This *seems*
like magnetic action and for all our purposes we may assume that the
seeming is a fact.

It is assumed therefore that ordinarily the male is positive

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

to the female, who is negative to him, and the masculine organs are
positive to the feminine organs. This may be called the normal or usual
relation, but it is possible to voluntarily or involuntarily reverse
this, and in most cases, between lovers in close contact, certain parts
in each are negative to the contacting parts of the other, which may be
positive to them. This fact, that the entire personality, in all its
parts, is not necessarily positive or negative at the same time, is one
important to remember, for it explains much and is like a key to the
whole art of Karezza. Thus a woman may be very positive and even
dominant in her love, while her body remains most alluringly passive. Or
she may open her eyes and make them positive while the rest remains
negative. Or she may put positiveness into the caress of her hands
alone, or will it into some other part of her being, or entirely assume
and play the masculine, positive part, while the man assumes the
feminine. Of this more will be said later.

But in general, though the woman allures and makes herself a drawing
lodestone, it is the man who takes and should take the active, positive
role and is "the artist in touch." The man who would succeed in Karezza,
then, must cultivate the art of magnetic touch. He should learn to think
of himself as an electric battery, of which it may be said that the
right hand is the positive pole (in right-handed people only, of
course), and the left hand the negative, capable of transmitting to
other and receptive human beings an electric current. If both his hands
are in contact with someone, he must feel the current flowing from his
right hand *thru* the body he touches into his left hand, and he must
learn how to reverse this and send a current at will *from* his left
hand *to* his right hand. If he touches with only one hand, or one part,
then he must feel that he touches positively and the flesh he touches is
negative or receptive to him. He must learn to will the current he gives
through the body he touches, through its nerves, to any part he wishes
to electrify, to thrill or to soothe, and to feel convincingly that he
is doing so. In Karezza his organs must ordinarily be felt to be
positive, and the woman's negative, for the best results to both. He may
even practice on himself, learning to feel his own magnetism, to test
it; and how to cure various pains and ailments by his own touch.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Understand me - a man may succeed beautifully in Karezza who has done
nothing of all this, nor even heard of it, because of natural magnetism
and intuition of what to do, but even he would do better to consciously
understand his powers and deliberately will to direct their use.

The fact that magnetic touch has been found a successful method of
invigorating the weak and curing the sick, is one proof that should
never be overlooked that Karezza, practiced normally, with a wise
avoidance of excess, is not only not injurious, as so often claimed, but
is really conducive to health. I have been told that Harry Gaze, the
Western lecturer, advocates Karezza as a means of maintaining eternal
youth, and personally I am convinced that nothing else known is so
efficient in preserving youth, hope, beauty, romance and the joy of
life.

A man should learn, therefore, to touch the woman he loves in such a way
that he transmits to her a vivid electric current that thrills her with
delightful feeling, while it relieves his nervous tension of accumulated
surplus force. At the same time, if the parties are well-mated, she will
be generating and returning, in some roundabout way, something to him,
which equally satisfies him, prevents all sense of loss, and makes him
equally thrilled and happy. There is a circuit and exchange which
finally perfectly balances and leaves each content.

The man who would be an artist in touch must learn to put this vital
elixir into his fingertips, his palms, into the glance of his eyes,
suggest it in the tones of his voice, convey it at will from any part of
his body which may touch the body of another - yes, even to convey it by
mere aura, invisibly, secretly, to another body, near, but not in
contact. He must learn to touch with firm and thrilling strength, or
with tender gentleness and restfulness. He must learn to stroke and
caress with an exquisite delicacy, tactfulness and grace, suggesting
music. In the actual embrace he must learn to alternate violent speed
and force (yet controlled and never really rude or inconsiderate), in
his movements, with touches delicate and soothing, in a contrast of
symphonic "storm and peace," which may sink to absolute quietude of
strong, tender enfolding.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

O touch me, touch me *right!* she said -  
(O God, how often womanhood hath said!)  
That we two ones as one be wed,  
That all with all, throughout, we wed,  
Close, close and tender close! she said,  
The touch that *knows*, O Man! she said  
O touch me, touch me right! she said.

The ideal of the woman should be to apprehend with exquisite intuition
every mood of the man almost before he knows it himself and to meet it
with sympathy, comprehension and response - relaxing, revivifying,
restraining, applauding, reinforcing, encouraging, quieting or thrilling
as his need may be. She must realize that her love and admiration are
really the psychic basis of the whole relation. The ideal of the man
must be to manifest a glorious strength, and passion, held, as a rider
would hold a mettled stallion, under an equally glorious control - to
prove himself as skillful and chivalrous as heroic. Thus each will be
irradiated by the glowing admiration of the other, which is the highest
bliss of love.

Probably the most untellably delightful of all human sensations is to
touch the flesh of a perfectly mated lover, where the soul is innocent,
the heart satisfied, and the magnetic currents seem divinely strong.

There is so much, so *much*,  
In human touch!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cleanness](krz06)
