[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](krz02)  [Next](krz04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Karezza Method*, by J. William Lloyd \[1931\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

## SOUL-BLENDING

And still beyond the embrace that begets the body is the embrace that
begets the soul, that invokes the soul from the Soul.

The wonderful embraces, sacred, occult and unspeakably tender, pure as
prayer;

The hour-long, longer indwelling of him within her, conceiving her again
like a child, the hour-long, longer, over-closing of her upon him,
bearing him again like a babe in her womb.

The infinite understanding of each by the other, the transcendent uplift
of each by the other;

No tumult orgasmal here; not because crushed out, simply because not
desired, simply because this is beyond that, a saner, broader joy; the
great currents, flowing through wider channels, rage not nor whirl, for
where the greater is there the lesser is not demonstrative.

Here is harmony too sweet for violence, osmosis of soul within soul,
rhythmically blending, inflowing, outflowing; singing without words;
silent music of divine instrument.

Symphony of sex of nerve, heart, thought, and soul in touch, at-one-ing.

Absolute peace, realized heaven, the joy that never disappoints, that
exceeds imagination, that cannot be described.

The love ineffable, the inspiration of brain, the energizing of muscle,
the illumination of feature, the healing of body, the expression of
soul.

Spiritual sex-exchanging; the masculine in her uttering, the feminine in
him receiving, positive and negative alternating at will.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

Spiritual sex-begetting; the impregnation of each by the other with
beautiful thoughts, divine dreams, high hopes, noble ambitions, pure
aspirations, clairvoyant vision, the birth-bed of genius.

The giving of each to the other to the uttermost impulse of blessing,
the receiving of each by the other to the uttermost nerve terminal of
body, to the uttermost fine filament of spirit.

Not followed by exhaustion, but by days of genius, clear and exalted
vision, buoyant and happy health.

Not followed by revulsion, but by hours, days, weeks, years, a lifetime,
maybe, of tender memories, clinging, affectionate longing to caress
again, to be re-embracing.

(Nay, is it not true, beyond all truth, that those who have once thus
bathed, blended, soul in soul, are eternally married?)

The embrace of at-one-ness, of expression, and purification and
revivification, that incarnates the divine in the human.

Not possible except to the pure and poetic, to true and innocent lovers,
fitting, responding, liberating.

To whom soul and body are both sacred, to whom this communion is a
religious rite the most sacred.

The embrace of the Cosmic souls, the angel-mates in their heaven.

No vision this, dear friends, no poetic metaphor merely, for lo! I have
lived it all many, many times, hundreds of others have lived it many
times, every member of the race shall sometime, in some life, live it.

It is joy and truth, the joy of joys and truth of truths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What is Karezza?](krz04.md)
