[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](krz10)  [Next](krz12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Karezza Method*, by J. William Lloyd \[1931\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27b">p. 27b</span>

## THE WINE OF SEX

The sexual elixir, essence, magnetism, whatever it is, in the human
blood, is the true natural stimulant and joy-giver of life. It is this
that gives the "illusion," the "glamour," the romance," the "blindness,"
the "madness," the "thrill," and all the rest of which the lore of love
tells us. All other stimulants are artificial - this one is absolutely
natural; all other stimulants are poisons - this one is food; all others
have reactions, are finally narcotics and depressants - this one has no
reactions; reaction only appears in its absence, when it is lost or
wasted.

It is courage, wit, sparkle, radiance, imagination, high spirits,
enthusiasm, creative-passion, religious fervor - everything that lifts
life above the clod and the monotonous

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

levels. It is the inspiration, directly or indirectly, of almost every
poem, song, painting, or other work of art. It has led more men to
battle than any bugle note or national peril. It is the great kindler
and sustainer of ideals.

Very few understand this or realize it sufficiently. It is commonly
observed how lovers glow and radiate and move in an enchanted world; but
this is all attributed to love itself. On the contrary, it is the wine
of sex that gives love its enchantment and divine dreams. This is easily
proven by giving lovers unrestricted license to express their
transports. No sooner have they wasted the wine of sex by reckless
embraces - often a single orgasm will thus temporarily demagnetize the
man - though they love each other just the same, as they will each
stoutly assert - the irresistible attraction and radiance and magnetic
thrills are gone, and there is a strange drop into cool, critical
intellection or indifference, or perhaps dislike. But as the wine of sex
reaccumulates and lifts again in the glass, the old magic and charm
reappear.

And in this is a clear natural lesson as to the inestimable value of
this elixir in human life and in the ethics of the love-life itself. The
one thing that makes life worth living is not its cold facts, but the
romantic glow and glamour with which a vivid and kindled imagination
invests them, and any manner of conducting the love-life which can
create and maintain this zest and charm at its highest is clearly the
ethical one. Ascetics, perceiving only that the sex forces give
inspiration and that orgasms waste them, and wrongly arguing that in sex
life sexual waste is inevitable, teach that the sexes should avoid each
other and turn all sex forces into channels of ambition, public service,
religion, etc. This is like telling a man that he should give all his
money for the public good, but should avoid earning any; fails to
recognize that it takes sexual consciousness, sexual association to
develop sexual force. Others, going a step further, getting a glimmer of
this last, urge that the sexes associate, but Platonically only. These
fail to see that to hold a delicious cup constantly to the lips of a
thirsty man and yet forbid him to drink, is to waste his force in
needless cravings and foolish battles to subdue them and finally usually
ends in failure and a sickening sense of guilt.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

On the other hand, to have frequent orgasmal embraces, as most married
lovers do, is to keep the wine in the sexual lovers low by constant
spilling, to thus kill all romance and delight and finally starve and
tire out love itself.

Here comes in the application and immense value of Karezza. It is
perfect self-control, and yet, once understood and rightly practiced, it
is such a perfect and complete satisfaction to all the nerves and
appetites concerned that all sense of denial or restriction is lost in
one of higher, larger, sweeter expression. It brews and fills every
vessel with the sexual wine of ambition, charm, enchantment, as nothing
else can, and maintains it steadily at a high tide, preventing all
losses by preventing all reaction, thus making life continuous romance,
genius and joy.

It avoids alike the waste of starvation and the waste of excess, the
wastefulness of self-torture and self-battle to overcome a perfectly
natural and wholesome hunger for sexual contact and closeness - it not
only avoids all these wastes, it cultivates the grape and presses the
wine into the cup of life which is alone capable of giving man normal
inspiration and poetic happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Karezza Method](krz12.md)
