[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](krz19)  [Next](krz21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Karezza Method*, by J. William Lloyd \[1931\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53b">p. 53b</span>

## FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

It will be noticed that I lay great stress upon the value of love in
Karezza and of refined feeling. For success there cannot be too much of
both. Great love and poetry of feeling represent the ideal in the
practice of the art of love. But I never forget the limitations of real
life. Not all people can be poets. And I quite recognize that it often
happens that very good people wish to marry or unite their lives,
because they are lonely or physically starving, who yet have not and
never could have any great, mutual romantic love. The practical question
is: Can such successfully or beneficially practice Karezza? Certainly.
The mere skeleton or essential framework of Karezza is this: That the
parties be honest and kind toward each other, sexually healthy, the
woman willing, the man potent, mutually at peace in their consciences
about the matter, and united in their desire that there shall be no
orgasm on the man's part. On this basis they can succeed and with
benefit, but their happiness and peace will be very inferior compared to
what it would be if deeper and higher emotions could be included. But
when two pure and trustful friends once begin a relation of this kind,
it seldom fails to go on to more beautiful attainments. Karezza seems to
create inevitably a tendency to caress and be tender. It is a sort of
natural marriage ceremony, which marries more and more with every
repetition.

In relation to Karezza the question of the orgasm continually arises.
The early writers on male continence, I believe, all argued that the
seminal secretion resembled that of the tears, was normally secreted and
reabsorbed and need never be discharged, except for procreation. Other
physiologists, of a later date, declared that the semen, once secreted,
could never be reabsorbed and must find discharge, thus denying those
who have contended that reabsorbed semen was what gave the "illusion,"
the thrill, the virile feeling, the strongly sexed man knows. It is now

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

believed that this inspiring elixir comes from the ductless glands.

It is very well to have a healthy scepticism about science as about
theology. The theories and assertions of science too often crumble and
fade before our very eyes. What we *know* from experience and
observation in practice is a safer guide. And the practical facts are
these: An accumulation of semen does occur in almost every man,
sometimes, varying very much with different men, which apparently must
have vent. It is a surplus. Either more has been secreted than can be
absorbed, or, once secreted, it cannot be absorbed. Anyway it will come
out. In the man who has nothing to do with women this causes the "wet
dream," which is a perfectly natural way of getting rid of a surplus. In
Karezza it causes the occasional failure. At least it is one cause. For
no matter how expert the Karezza artist, the occasional failure to
restrain the orgasm must be counted on. That beautiful equilibrium
between the parties which leaves both so satisfied sometimes fails to
occur and the man's orgasm irresistibly approaches, he is obliged to
withdraw, and his Karezza becomes a *coitus interruptus*. The success of
Karezza appears to depend on the sublimation of mere sex feelings into
predominance of love feelings, and upon a diffusion of sex-consciousness
so that too much is not concentrated locally. If local concentration
becomes too great, an explosion inevitably follows. I have observed that
if the woman a man loves becomes suddenly cold or angry toward him this
local concentration is very apt to occur. It is more apt to occur with a
fickle and moody or coquettish woman than with a steady and deep one;
with a weak woman whose passion is fitful than with a strong woman whose
great passion lifts and carries her partner on an even tide. It is
harder to be continent on a full meal than on an empty stomach; harder
soon after a bath. A vivid emotional experience of any kind may cause
it, or intense intellectual exercise. The approach of a change in the
weather, if sharp and marked, especially a "cold snap," may bring it
about. It is all right and not to be worried over. *Coitus interruptus*
used to be considered very bad for the man, but the modern view is that
it is harmless, but may affect the woman nervously by leaving her
unsatisfied. But this does not apply to the well-trained

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Karezza couple
because, first the woman has the relation so frequently and so
satisfyingly that she can well afford an occasional lapse; and,
secondly, she knows that in a few hours, perhaps in a single hour, she
may have it again, usually rather better than ordinarily, therefore has
no excuse for nervousness. Just as the man must always be kind to the
woman and stop the relation at any moment if she grows weary, or for any
other reason wishes it, so the woman must be kind to him, cheerful,
sweet and patient if he sometimes fails, and by this calling up of her
affectional nature effectually cures the morbid self-pity which might
make her nervously ill. Most men feel that they must have the orgasm at
certain intervals, and there are scientists who have claimed to have
discovered a sexual rhythm or periodicity in man which would seem to
support this. But this sexual cycle in man appears to occur from once in
four day to once a month, according to the individual. On the other hand
almost all women want intercourse very frequently and long and leisurely
each time, and sexual scientists support this too. It is admitted also
by the highest authorities (they do not know Karezza) that *coitus
interruptus* is the surest of all ways to avoid undesired pregnancy,
while the contraceptives are none of them safe. Now all these things can
be reconciled in Karezza. Let the man learn Karezza and his wife can
have intercourse as often and as long as she likes, while the occasional
failure gives him the relief of the orgasm at the time of his "period"
or some other time.

And there is the question of the woman's orgasm. It is held by quite a
good many men, some women, and many physicians say the same, that a
woman also needs the orgasm, and that if she does not have it her health
suffers. It is also commonly claimed that the woman's orgasm is
essential in conception for the best results.

With these contentions I disagree. I consider the female orgasm an
acquired habit and not natural. The male needs the orgasm to expel the
sperm, but the female has no analogous need - her orgasm has nothing to
do with expelling the ovum.

In all the animal embraces I have been able to witness, while the orgasm
of the male was evident, I could see no evidence of a female orgasm. If
the female orgasm is not

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

necessary and does not occur below woman, why should it be necessary of
occur *in woman*?

"To give her pleasure," is the answer, and a good one, but I hold that
if she will have Karezza, she can have a finer, sweeter pleasure without
it.

My objections to the female orgasm in Karezza (for it is to be noted
that in the original "male continence" the woman had the orgasm if she
wanted it) are threefold:

*That* self-control is more difficult for the man where the woman thus
indulges herself.

*That* after her orgasm the woman is less magnetic, enthused and
delightful as a partner, enjoys the Karezza less, and quite often soon
becomes indifferent, depressed or irritable.

*That* indulgence in the orgasm on either side cultivates the merely
sexual at the expense of the affectional, the romantic, the spiritual.

As I know that a woman who has known the perfect orgasm may deliberately
abandon its practice completely in favor of Karezza, on the ground of
its being less satisfying than Karezza minus all orgasm, and as I know
that women who have never in all their lives had an orgasm may be
beautifully satisfied and blissfully happy as well as healthy in Karezza
without it, and this more and more as the years go on, I feel that I
have good grounds for saying that I believe the orgasm in the woman is
entirely unnecessary and artificial and that she is better off without
it.

The ordinary male orgasmal embrace seldom satisfies the woman. It is too
brief and animal for her. And if she is not satisfied in sex of course
she suffers. But if she can have the orgasm with it, that gives her a
kind of satisfaction, and that is why the orgasm seems beneficial to
her, and her physician seeing the benefit endorses the act. But the same
woman could be better satisfied in the non-orgasmal embrace of perfect
and prolonged Karezza, and then the orgasm would be seen to be needless
- that is *my* position.

My objections to the female orgasm in conception are as follows:

When a woman has an orgasm she has a discharge of vital-force and is
left demagnetized, as a man is after an orgasm. I believe she
demagnetizes the germ in so doing

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

and that in this state it is less fit for impregnation than if there had
been no orgasm - but this may be mere theory.

I believe, too, that the ideal way in the *procreative* embrace is for
the man to waive all attempt at pleasure or to prolong the embrace, but
to have his orgasm as quickly and forcefully as possible, directing all
his magnetism into the seed and drawing nothing of her vital-force from
the woman, but leaving it all for the child, and then to come
immediately away and entirely withdraw from the room. The woman to have
no orgasm, and to remain after the act quiet and recumbent for an hour
or more. This also is theory, but at least I can say that where *my*
advice was asked and followed pregnancy occurred, where before was
sterility.

And this I *know*, that a woman can conceive without herself having an
orgasm. There is every probability, I would say, considering the sexual
lives of the average, that the majority of women conceive without it. I
believe she conceives more easily and surely without it, for it is
reasonable to infer that the spasmodic motions and abdominal
contractions of the orgasm would tend to expel the sperm and then leave
the parts negative and flaccid, instead of avid and receptive.

I know that a woman can have conception without having an orgasm, have a
normal pregnancy and easy parturition, give birth to a perfect child,
destined to grow up beautiful and healthy in body and a genius in mind.
What more or better can any mother do? There remains the further
question of Karezza in pregnancy: I feel sure the woman is better off in
pregnancy without the usual orgasmal intercourse. It is liable on the
man's part to be too violent and to cause her injury. And for the woman
herself to have an orgasm might certainly bring a miscarriage. But on
the other hand, I believe an occasional very gentle and quiet and tender
Karezza (the man being careful of his weight) is most beneficial to the
pregnant woman, and even to the unborn babe which is thus bathed in the
magnetic aura and enfolded in the love of both its parents.

The woman feels it a very great comfort to have her husband's love
embrace at such a time and often peculiarly longs for it. I have never
seen or heard of any bad results from it and I recommend its considerate
use.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

The advantages of Karezza, as a love-act and otherwise, may be summed up
as follows:

-   It permits the embrace more frequently.
-   It permits full penetration, contact and motion to the fullest
    extent, with no intervening substance whatever, thus completely
    satisfying woman's greatest sexual craving, which is for long
    continued, tender touch, as deep as possible, as long as possible.
-   It gives the slower, more deliberate, more luxurious nature of the
    woman plenty of time to be fully aroused and fully satisfied.
-   It satisfies her love-nature along with her sex-nature - which to
    her is the most important thing.
-   It removes all fear of pregnancy, so that she feels safe.
-   It requires no lotions, douches, greases, tampons, plugs, pessaries,
    drugs, syringes, skin-pockets, rubber bags, napkins, getting up in
    the cold, or any adjustments whatever - it leaves the poetry of the
    act not only intact, but intensifies it. Thus it satisfies the
    imagination, the craving for the ideal.

Because it cultivates self-control and requires the sublimation and
transmutation of the merely sexual into the tender, the loving, the
gentle, the romantic, its inevitable tendency is elevating, not
degrading, to redeem and purify sex, not only to maintain its perfect
natural innocence, but to add to it the chivalrous, the moral, the
religious, in an ascending scale. Thus it satisfies the mind and soul.

It gives complete birth control. <span id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5)

A general knowledge and use of it must certainly lift most of the odium
which now attaches to everything sexual, thus increasing the respect for
and appreciation of sex, its liberty and exercise, thereby automatically
removing gradually the curse of social reproach.

Between the well-mated it leaves no sense of weakness or exhaustion, but
one rather of sweet satisfaction, fullness of realization, peace, often
a physical glow and mental glamour that lasts for days, as if some
ethereal stimulant, or rather nutriment, had been received.

As this satisfaction is always normally combined with a grateful
affectionateness and tender yearning toward the partner, it maintains,
increases and makes habitual the union.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

Where properly and successfully performed between the well-mated it
gives the most absolute and perfect satisfaction without the orgasm.

Withdrawing the sexual electricity from the merely sex-organs,
distributing it throughout the system and discharging it from every part
toward the loved one, exchanging with that loved one, every part so used
is electrified and vitalized and becomes more beautiful - Karezza is the
greatest

beautifier. And this satisfaction, joy and perfected love inevitably
react to increase the general physical health and mental vigor - Karezza
maintains youth and is one of the best of the health exercises.

#### \_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[58:3](krz20.htm#fr_5) This is not true. It does,
however, make conception less likely. *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix to the Karezza Method](krz21)
