[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The Religious System of the Amazulu

### note to the hypertext transcription

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This book is composed of a series of interviews conducted by Callaway
with Zulu informants, of which only the answers of the natives to
Callaway's questions are usually given. As such, it is made up primarily
of prose explanations of concepts and ideas that Callaway, a more or
less sympathetic English missionary, found to be of interest. There are
no sacred narratives, transcriptions of ceremonies, or anything else of
that nature, although the book is still interesting, and in many ways
more informative than it might be otherwise.

In the book, the Zulu originals are presented in parallel columns
alongside the English translations. In this electronic edition, only the
English is given, and all text printed in column in the original is
redered indented (i.e., inside of &lt;blockquote&gt; tags).

Certain letters in the Zulu words are italicized as part of the
orthography (c and x always, h most of the time); this has not been
reproduced, primarily because it would have been moderately difficult to
italicize the letters in the words and also to reverse the italics where
the entire word is in italics. Also, this is no longer standard Zulu
orthography, and the lack of the italics will not hinder comprehension
of the words for anyone who speaks Zulu. For those of us who do not
speak Zulu, the italics are also not really necessary.

Last, but not least, please be aware that this book cuts off in
mid-sentence at the end. We have checked a number of copies of this book
and the card catalogs for the British Library and the Library of
Congress, and this is apparently the way that the book was printed, and
not just an error in the copy used for scanning or with this edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Index](index.md)
