[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](rsa04) [Next](rsa06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### NOTE.

S<span class="small">INCE</span> writing [Note 62, p.
91](rsa01.htm#page_91_note_62), on the Shade or Shadow of a man, I have
found that many of the natives connect the shade with the spirit to a
much greater extent than I supposed.

 Their theory is not very consistent with itself nor very intelligible,
neither is it easy to understand on what kind of observation it is
founded. It is something of this kind. They say the shadow—that
evidently east by the body—is that which will ultimately become the
*itongo* or spirit when the body dies. In order to ascertain if this was
really the meaning, I asked, "Is the shadow which my body casts when I
am walking, my spirit?" The reply was, "No; it is not your *itongo* or
spirit,"—(evidently understanding me to mean by "my spirit" an ancestral
guardian spirit watching over me, and not my own spirit)—"but it will be
the *itongo* or ancestral spirit for your children when you are dead."
It is said that the long shadow shortens as a man approaches his end,
and contracts into a very little thing. When they see the shadow of a
man thus contracting, they know he will die. The long shadow goes away
when a man is dead; and it is that which is meant when it is said, "The
shadow has departed." There is, however, a short shadow which remains
with the corpse and is buried with it. The long shadow becomes an
*itongo* or ancestral spirit.

 In connection with this, the natives have another superstition. If a
friend has gone out to battle, and they are anxious about him, they take
his sleeping-mat and stand it upright in the sun. If it throws a long
shadow, he is still living. If a short one, or none at all, he is dead!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](rsa06)
