[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ttlaw03.md) 
[Next](ttlaw05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766103021/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Law and the Word by Thomas Troward \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### CHAPTER II

### SOME PSYCHIC EXPERIENCES

THE preceding chapter has introduced the reader to the general subject
of etheric vibration as one of the natural forces of the Universe, both
as the foundation of all matter and as the medium for the transmission
of energy to immense distances, and also as something continually
emanating from human beings. In the present chapter I shall consider it
more particularly in this last aspect, which, as included in our own
personality, very immediately concerns ourselves. I will commence with
an instance of the practical application of this fact. Some years ago I
was lunching at the house of Lady ------ in company of a well-known
mental healer whom I will call Mr. Y. and a well-known London physician
whom I will call Dr. W. Mr. Y. mentioned the case of a lady whose leg
had been amputated above the knee some years previously to her coming
under his care, yet she frequently felt pains in

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the (amputated) knee and lower part of the left leg and foot. Dr. W.
said this was to be attributed to the nerves which convey to the brain
the sensation of the extremities, much as a telegraph line might be
tapped in the middle, and Mr. Y. agreed that this was perfectly true on
the purely physical side. But he went on to say, that accidentally
putting his hand where the amputated foot should have been he felt it
there. Then it occurred to him that since there was no material foot to
be touched, it must be through the medium of his own psychic body that
the sensation of touch was conveyed to him, and accordingly he asked the
lady to imagine that she was making various movements with the amputated
limb, all of which he felt, and was able to tell her what each movement
was, which she said he did correctly. Then, to carry the experiment
further, he re, versed the process and with his hand moved the invisible
leg and foot in various ways, all of which the lady felt and described.
He then determined to treat the invisible leg as though it were a real
one, and joined up the circuit by taking her left foot in his right hand
and her right foot (the amputated one) in his left, with the result that
she immediately felt relief;

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

and after successive treatments in this way was entirely cured.

A well authenticated case like this opens up a good many interesting
questions regarding the Psychic Body, but the most important point
appears to me to be that we are able to experience sensation by means of
it. In this case, however, and those mentioned in the preceding chapter,
the physical body was actually present, and if we stopped at this point,
we might question whether its presence was not a sine qua non for the
action of the etheric vibrations. I will therefore pass on to a class of
examples which show that very curious phenomena can take place without
the physical body being on the spot. There are numerous well verified
cases of the kind to be found in the records of the Society for
Psychical Research and in other books by trustworthy writers; but it may
perhaps interest the present reader to hear one or two instances of my
personal experience which, though they may not be so striking as some of
those recorded by others, still point in the same direction.

My first introduction to Scotland was when I delivered the course of
lectures in Edinburgh which led to the publication of my first book,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the "Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science." The following years I gave a
second course of lectures in Edinburgh, but the friends who had kindly
entertained me on the former occasion had in the meanwhile gone to live
elsewhere. However, a certain Mr. S., whose acquaintance I had made on
my previous visit, invited me to stay with him for a day or two while I
could look round for other accommodation, though, as it turned out, I
remained at his house during the whole month I was in Edinburgh. I had,
however, never seen his house, which was on the opposite side of the
town to where I had stayed before. I arrived there on a Tuesday, and Mr.
S. and his family at once met me with the question:

"What were you thinking of at ten o'clock on Sunday evening?"

I could not immediately recall this, and also wanted to know the reason
of their question.

"We have something curious to tell you," they replied, "but first try to
remember what you were thinking of at ten o'clock on Sunday
evening--were you thinking about us?"

Then I recollected that about that time I was saying my usual prayers
before going to bed and had asked that, if I could stay only a

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

day or two with Mr. S., I should be directed to a suitable place for the
remainder of the time.

"That explains it," they replied; and then they went on to tell me that
at the hour in question Mr. S. and his son, a young man of about twenty,
had entered their dining-room together and seen me standing leaning
against the mantel-shelf. They were both hard-headed Scotchmen engaged
in business in Edinburgh, and certainly not the sort of people to
conjure up fanciful imaginings, nor is it likely that the same fancy
should have occurred to both of them; and therefore I can only suppose
that they actually saw what they said they did. Now I myself was in
London at the time of this appearance in Edinburgh, of which I had no
consciousness whatever; at the same time the fact of my being seen in
Edinburgh exactly at the time when my thought, in prayer, was centred
upon Mr. S.'s house (which I had not then seen) is a coincidence
suggesting that in some way my Thought had made itself visible there in
the image of my external personality.

In this case, as I have said, I was not conscious of my psychic visit to
Edinburgh, but I

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

will now relate a converse instance, which occurred in connection with
my first visit there. At that time I had never been in Scotland, and so
far as I knew was never likely to go there. I was wide awake, writing in
my study at Norwood, where I then lived, when I suddenly found myself in
a place totally unknown to me, where stood the ruins of an ancient
abbey, part of which, however, was still roofed over and used as a place
of worship. I felt much interested, and among other things I noted a
Latin inscription on a tablet in one of the walls. There seemed to be an
invisible guide showing me over the place, who then pointed out a long
low house opposite the abbey, and said; "This is the house of the
clergyman of the abbey"; and I was then taken inside the house and shown
a number of antique-looking rooms. Then I came to myself, and found I
was sitting at my writing-table in Norwood. I had, however, a clear
recollection of the place I had seen, but no idea where it was, or
indeed whether any such place really existed. I also remembered a
portion of the Latin inscription, which I at once wrote down in a
note-book, as my curiosity was aroused.

As I have said. I had no reason at that time

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to suppose I should ever go to Scotland, but some weeks later I was
invited to lecture in Edinburgh. Another visitor in the house where I
was a guest there, was the wife of the County Court Judge of Cumberland,
and I showed her and our hostess the part of the Latin inscription I had
retained, and suggested that perhaps it might exist somewhere in
Edinburgh. However nothing answering to what I had seen was to be found,
so we relegated the whole thing to the region of unaccountable fancies,
and thought no more about it. The Judge's wife took her departure before
me, and kindly invited me to spend a few days at their residence near
Carlisle on my return journey, which I did. One day she drove me out to
see Lanercost Abbey, one of the show-places of the neighbourhood, and
walking round the building I found in one of the walls the Latin
inscription in question. I called Mrs. -----, who was a little way off,
and said: "Look at this inscription."

She at once replied: "Why! that is the very inscription we were all
puzzling over in Edinburgh!"

It turned out to be an inscription in memory of the founder of the
abbey, dating from somewhere

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

in the eleven-hundreds. The whole place answered exactly to what I had
seen, and the long low parsonage was there also.

"I should have liked you to see it inside," said Mrs. ------, "but I
have never met the vicar, though I know his mother-in-law, so we must
give it up."

We were just entering our carriage when the garden-gate opened, and who
should come out but the mother-in-law.

"Oh, Mrs. ------," she said, addressing the Judge's wife, "I am here on
a visit and you must come in and take tea." So we went in and were shown
over the house, much as I had been in my vision, and some portions were
so old that, among other rooms, we were shown the one occupied by King
Edward I on his march against Scotland in the year 1296, when the
Scottish regalia was captured, and the celebrated Crowning-Stone was
brought to England and placed in Westminster Abbey, where it has ever
since remained--a stone having an occult relation to the history of the
British and American peoples of the highest interest to both, but as
there is already an extensive literature on this subject I will not
enter upon it here.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

I will now relate another curious experience. We had only recently taken
up our residence at Norwood, when one day I was seated in the
dining-room, but suddenly found myself in the hall, and saw two ladies
going up the stairs. They passed close to me, and turning round the
landing at the top of the stairs passed out of sight in a perfectly
natural manner. They looked as solid as any one I have ever seen in my
life. One of them was a stout lady with a rather florid complexion,
apparently between forty-five and fifty, wearing a silk blouse with thin
purple and white stripes. Leaning on her arm was a slightly-built old
lady with white ringlets, dressed all in black and wearing a lace
mantilla. I noticed their appearance particularly. The next moment I
found I was really sitting in the dining-room, and that the ladies I had
seen were nothing but visionary figures. I wondered what it could mean,
but as we had only recently taken the house, thought it better not to
mention it to any of my family, for fear of causing them alarm. But a
few days later I mentioned it to a Mrs. F. who I knew had had some
experience in such matters, and she said: "You have seen either some one
who has lived in the house or who is

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

going to live there." Then the matter dropped.

About a month later my wife arranged by correspondence for a certain
Miss B. to come as governess to our children. When she arrived there was
no mistaking her identity. She was the stout lady I had seen, and the
next morning she came down to breakfast dressed in the identical blouse
with purple and white stripes. There was no mistaking her, but I was
puzzled as to who the other figure could be whom I had seen along with
her. I resolved, however, to say nothing about the matter until we
became better acquainted, lest she should think that my mind was not
quite balanced. I therefore held my peace for six months, at the end of
which time I concluded that we knew enough of each other to allow one
another credit for being fairly level-headed. Then I thought, now if I
tell her what I saw she may perhaps be acted upon by suggestion and
imagine a resemblance between the unknown figure and some acquaintance
of hers, so I will not begin by telling her of the vision, but will
first ask if she knows any one answering to the description, and give
her the reason afterwards. I therefore took a suitable opportunity of
asking her if she knew any such person,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

describing the figure to her as accurately as I could.

Her look of surprise grew as I went on, and when I had finished she
explained with astonishment: "Why, Mr. Troward, where could you have
seen my mother? She is an invalid, and I am certain you have never seen
her, and yet you have described her most accurately."

Then I told her what I had seen. She asked what I thought was the
explanation of the appearance, and the only explanation I could give
was, that I supposed she was on the look-out for a post and paid us a
preliminary visit to see whether ours would suit her, and that, being
naturally interested in her welfare, her mother had accompanied her.
Perhaps you will say: "What came of it?" Well, nothing "came of it," nor
did anything "come" of my psychic visits to Edinburgh and Lanercost
Abbey. Such occurrences seem to be simple facts in Nature which, though
on some occasions connected with premonitions of more or less
importance, are by no means necessarily so. They are the functioning of
certain faculties which we all possess, but of the nature of which we as
yet know very little.

It will be noticed that in the first of these

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

three cases I myself was the person seen, though unaware of the fact. In
the last I was the percipient, but the persons seen by me were
unconscious of their visit; and in the second case I was conscious of my
presence at a place which I had never heard of, and which I visited some
time after. In two of these cases, therefore, the persons, making the
psychic visit, were not aware of having done so, while in the third, a
memory of what had been seen was retained. But all three cases have this
in common, that the psychic visit was not the result of an act of
conscious volition, and also, that the psychic action took place at a
long distance from the physical body.

From these personal experiences, as well as from many well authenticated
cases recorded by other writers, I should be inclined to infer that the
psychic action is entirely independent of the physical body, and in
support of this view I will cite yet another experience.

It was about the year 1875, when I was a young Assistant Commissioner in
the Punjab, that I was ordered to the small up-country station of
Akalpur, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and took possession of the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Assistant
Commissioner's bungalow there, On the night of our arrival in the
bungalow, my wife and I had our charpoys--light Indian bedsteads--placed
side by side in a certain room and went to bed. The last thing I
remembered before falling asleep, was seeing my wife sitting up in bed,
reading with a lamp on a small table beside her. Suddenly I was awakened
by the sound of a shot, and starting up, found the room in darkness. I
immediately lit a candle which was on a chair by my bedside, and found
my wife still sitting up with the book on her knee, but the lamp had
gone out.

"Take me away, take me into another room," she exclaimed.

"Why, what is the matter?" I said.

"Did you not see it?" she replied.

"See what?" I asked.

"Don't stop to ask any questions," she replied; "get me out of this room
at once; I can't stop here another minute."

I saw she was very frightened, so I called up the servants, and had our
beds removed to a room on the other side of the house, and then she told
me what she had seen. She said: "I was sitting reading as you saw me,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

when looking round, I saw the figure of an Englishman standing close by
my bedside, a fine-looking man with a large fair moustache and dressed
in a grey suit. I was so surprised that I could not speak, and we
remained looking at each other for about a minute. Then he bent over me
and whispered: "Don't be afraid," and with that there was the sound of a
shot, and everything was in darkness.

"My dear girl, you must have fallen asleep over your book and been
dreaming," I said.

"No, I was wide awake," she insisted; "you were asleep, but I was awake
all the time. But you heard the shot, did you not?"

"Yes," I replied, "that is what woke me--some one must have fired a shot
outside."

"But why should any one be shooting in our garden at nearly midnight?"
my wife objected.

It certain seemed strange, but it was the only explanation that
suggested itself; so we had to agree to differ, she being convinced that
she had seen a ghost, and that the shot had been inside the room, and I
being equally convinced that she had been dreaming, and that the shot
had been fired outside the house.

The next morning the owner of the bungalow, an old widow lady, Mrs. La
Chaire, called

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

to make kindly enquiries as to whether she could be of any service to us
on our arrival. After thanking her, my wife said: "I expect you will
laugh at me, but I cannot help telling you there is something strange
about the bungalow"; and she then went on to narrate what she had seen.

Instead of laughing the old lady looked more and more serious as she
went on, and when she had done asked to be shown exactly where the
apparition had appeared. My wife took her to the spot, and on being
shown it old Mrs. La Chaire exclaimed: "This is the most wonderful thing
I have ever heard of. Eighteen years ago my bed was on the very spot
where yours was last night, and I was lying in it too ill to move, when
my husband, whom you have described most accurately, stood where you saw
him and shot himself dead."

This statement of the widow convinced me that my wife had really seen
what she said she had, and had not dreamed it; and this experience has
led me to make further enquiries into the nature of happenings of this
kind, with the result, that after carefully eliminating all cases which
could be accounted for in any other manner, I have found myself
compelled to admit

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

a considerable number of instances of what are called "ghosts," on the
word of persons whose veracity and soundness of judgment I should not
doubt on any other subject. It is often said that you never meet any one
who has himself seen a ghost, but only those who have heard of somebody
else seeing one. This I can entirely contradict, for I have met with
many trustworthy persons of both sexes, who have given me accounts of
such appearances having been actually witnessed by themselves. In
conclusion, I may mention that I was telling this story some twenty
years later to a Colonel Fox, who had known the unfortunate man who
committed suicide, and he said to me: "Do you know what were the last
words he said to his wife?"

"No," I replied.

"The very same words he spoke to your wife," said Colonel Fox.

This is the story I refer to in my book "Bible Mystery and Bible
Meaning" as that of "the Ghost that I did not see." I do not attempt to
offer any explanation of it, but merely give the facts as they occurred,
and the reader must form his own theory on the subject; but the reason I
bring in this story in the present

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

connection is, that in this instance there could be no question of the
physical body contributing to the psychic phenomenon, since the person
seen had been dead for nearly twenty years; and coupling this fact with
the distance from the physical body at which the psychic action took
place in the other cases I hale mentioned, I think there is a very
strong presumption that the psychic powers can, and do, act
independently of the physical body; though of course it does not follow
from this that they cannot also act in conjunction with it.

On the other hand, a comparison of the present case with those
previously mentioned, fails to throw any light on the important question
whether the deceased feels any consciousness of the action which the
percipient sees, or whether what is seen is like a sort of photograph
impressed upon the atmosphere of a particular locality, and visible only
to certain persons, who are able to sense etheric wave-lengths which are
outside the range of the single octave forming the solar spectrum. It
throws no light on this question, because, in the case of my being seen
by Mr. S. in Edinburgh and that of Miss B. and her mother being seen by
me at Norwood, none of us were conscious

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of having been at those places; while in the case of my psychic visit to
Lanercost Abbey, and other similar experiences I have had, I have been
fully aware of seeing the places in question. The evidence tells both
ways, and I can therefore only infer that there are two modes of psychic
action, in one of which the person projecting that action, whether
voluntarily or involuntarily, experiences corresponding sensations, and
the other in which he does not; but I am unable to offer any criterion
by which the observer can, with certainty, distinguish between the two.

It appears to me, that such instances as those I have mentioned, point
to ranges of etheric action beyond those ordinarily recognized by
physical science, but the principle seems to be the same, and it is for
this reason that I have taken the modern scientific theory of etheric
vibration as our starting-point. The universe is one great whole, and
the laws of one part cannot contradict those of another; therefore the
explanation of such queer happenings is not to be found by denying the
well-ascertained laws of Nature on the physical plane, but by
considering whether these laws do not extend further. It is on this
account that I would lay

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

stress on the Mathematical side of things, and have adduced instances
where various discoveries have been made by following up the sequence
indicated by the laws already known, and which have thus enabled us to
fill up gaps in our knowledge, which would otherwise stop, or at least
seriously hinder, our further progress. It is in this way that Jachin
helps Boaz, and that the undeviating nature of Law, so far from limiting
us, becomes our faithful ally if we will only allow it to do so.

I think, then, that the scientific idea of the ether, as a universal
medium pervading all space, and permeating all substance, will help us
to see that many things which are popularly called super-natural, are to
be attributed to the action of known laws working under, as yet, unknown
conditions, and therefore, when we are confronted with strange
phenomena, a knowledge of the general principles involved, will show us
in what direction to look for an explanation. Now applying this to the
present subject, we may reasonably argue, that since all physical matter
is scientifically proved to consist of the universal ether in various
degrees of condensation, there may be other degrees of condensation,
forming other modes of

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

matter, which are beyond the scope of physical vision and of our
laboratory apparatus. And similarly, we may argue, that just as various
effects can be produced on the physical plane, by the action of etheric
waves of various lengths, so other effects might be produced on these
finer modes of matter, by etheric waves of other lengths. And in this
connection we must not forget that a gap occurs between the "dark heat"
groups and the Hertzian group, consisting of five octaves of waves, the
lengths of which have been theoretically calculated, but whose action
has not yet been discovered. Here we admittedly have a wide field for
the working of known laws under as yet unknown conditions; and again,
how can we say that there are not ranges of unknown waves, yet smaller
than the minute ultra-violet ones, which commence the present known
scale, or transcending those largest ones, which bear our messages
across the Atlantic? Mathematically, there is no limit to the scale in
either direction; and so, taking our stand on the demonstrated facts of
science, we find, that the known laws of Nature point to their
continuation in modes of matter and of force, of which we have as yet no
conception. It is therefore not

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

at all necessary to spurn the ground of established science to spread
the wings of our fancy; rather it affords us the requisite basis from
which to start, just as the aeronaut cannot rise without a solid surface
from which to spring.

Now if we realize that the ether is an infinitely subtle fluid,
pervading all space, we see that it must constitute a connecting link
between all modes of substance, whether visible or invisible, in all
worlds, and may therefore be called the Universal Medium; and following
up our conception of the Continuity of Law, we may suppose that trains
of waves, inconceivably smaller or greater than any known to modern
science, are set up in this medium, in the same way as the
electro-magnetic waves with which we are acquainted; that is, by an
impulse which generates them from some particular point. In the region
of finer forces we are now prospecting, this impulse might well be the
Desire or Will of the spiritual entity which we ourselves are--that
thinking, feeling, inmost essence of ourself, which is the "noumenon" of
our individuality, and which, for the sake of brevity we call our "Ego,"
a Latin word which simply means "I myself." This idea of spiritual
impulse is quite familiar

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

to us in our every-day talk. We speak of an impulsive person, meaning
one who acts on a sudden thought without giving due heed to
consequences; so in our ordinary speech we look upon thought as the
initial impulse, only we restrict this to the case of unregulated
thought. But if unregulated thought acts as a centre of impulse, why
should not regulated thought do the same? Therefore we may accept the
idea of Thought as the initial impulse, which starts trains of waves in
the Universal Medium, whether with or without due consideration, and
having thus recognized its dynamic power, we must learn to make the
impulsions we thus send forth intelligent, well defined, and directed to
some useful purpose. The operator at some wireless station does not use
his instruments to send out a lot of jumbled-up waves into the ether,
but controls the impulsions into a definite and intelligible order, and
we must do the same.

On some such lines as these, then, we may picture the desire of the Ego
as starting a train of waves in the Universal Medium, which are
reproduced in corresponding *form* on reaching their destination. As
with the electro-magnetic waves, they may spread all round, just

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

as ripples do if we throw a stone into a pond; but they will only take
form where there is a correspondence able to receive them. This is what
in the language of electrical engineers is called "Syntony," which means
being tuned to the same rate of vibration, and no doubt it is from some
such cause, that we sometimes experience what seem inexplicable feelings
of attraction or repulsion towards different persons. This also appears
to furnish a key to thought-transference, hypnotism, and other allied
phenomena.

If the reader questions whether thought is capable of generating
impulses in the etheric medium I would refer him to the experiment
mentioned in Chapter XIV of my "Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science,"
where I describe how, when operating with Dr. Baraduc's biometer, I
found that the needle revolved through a smaller or large arc of the
circle, in response to my mental intention of concentrating a smaller or
larger degree of force upon it. Perhaps you will say that the difference
in the movement of the needle depended on the quantity of magnetism that
was flowing from me, to say nothing of other known forces, such as heat,
light, electricity, etc. Well, that is precisely

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the proposition I am putting forward. What caused the difference in the
intensity of the magnetic flow was my intention of varying it, so that
we come back to mental action as the centre of impulsion from which the
etheric waves were generated. If, then, such a demonstration can be
obtained on the plane of purely physical matter, why need we doubt that
the same Law will work in the same way, in respect of those finer modes
of substance, and wider ranges of etheric vibrations, which, starting
from the basis of recognized physical science, the Law of Continuity
would lead to by an orderly sequence, and which the occurrence of what,
for want of a better name, we call occult phenomena require for their
explanation?

Before passing on to the more practical generalizations to be drawn from
the suggestions contained in this chapter, I may advert to an objection
sometimes brought by the sceptical in this matter. They say: "How is it
that apparitions are always seen in the dark?" and then they answer
their own question by saying, it is because superstitious people are
nervous in the dark and imagine all sorts of things. Then they laugh and
think they have disposed

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

of the whole subject. But it is not disposed of quite so easily, for not
only are there many well attested cases of such appearances in broad
daylight, but there are also scientific facts, showing that if we are
right in explaining such happenings by etheric action, such action is
snore readily produced at night than in the presence of sunlight.

In the early part of 1902 Marconi made some experiments on board the
American liner *Philadelphia*, which brought out the remarkable fact
that, while it was possible to transmit signals to a distance of fifteen
hundred miles during the night, they could not be transmitted further
than seven hundred miles during the day. The same was found to be the
case by Lieutenant Solari of the Italian Navy, at whose disposal the
ship *Carlo Alberta* was placed by the King of Italy in 1902, for the
purpose of making investigations into wireless telegraphy; and summing
up the points which he considered to have been fully established by his
experiments on board that ship, he mentions among them the fact, that
sunlight has the effect of reducing the power of the electro-magnetic
waves, and that consequently a greater force is required to produce a
given result by day than

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

by night. Here, then, is a reason why we might expect to see more
supernatural appearances, as we call them, at night than in the
day--they require a smaller amount of force to produce them. At the same
time, it is found that the great magnetic waves which cover immense
distances, work even more powerfully in the light than in the dark. May
it not be that these things show, that there is more than a merely
metaphorical use of words, when the Bible tells us of the power of Light
to dissipate, and bring to naught, the powers of Darkness, while the
Light itself is the Great Power, using the forces of the universe on the
widest scale? Perhaps it is none other than the continuity of unchanging
universal principles extending into the mysterious realms of the
spiritual world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[29:1](ttlaw04.htm#fr_0.md) For various reasons I am
not giving the actual names of places and persons in this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Man's Place in the Creative Order](ttlaw05.md)
