[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ttlaw01) 
[Next](ttlaw03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766103021/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Law and the Word by Thomas Troward \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# FOREWORD

### THOMAS TROWARD

### AN APPRECIATION

How is one to know a friend? Certainly not by the duration of
acquaintance. Neither can friendship be bought or sold by service
rendered. Nor can it be coined into acts of gallantry or phrases of
flattery. It has no part in the small change of courtesy. It is outside
all these, containing them all and superior to them all.

To some is given the great privilege of a day set apart to mark the
arrival of a total stranger panoplied with all the insignia of
friendship. He comes unannounced. He bears no letter of introduction. No
mutual friend can vouch for him. Suddenly and [silently](errata.htm#0)
he steps unexpectedly out of the shadow of material concern and
spiritual obscurity, into the radiance of intimate friendship, as a
picture is projected upon a lighted screen. But unlike the phantom
picture he is an instant

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

reality that one's whole being immediately recognizes, and the radiance
of fellowship that pervades his word, thought and action holds all the
essence of long companionship.

Unfortunately there are too few of these bright messengers of God to be
met with in life's pilgrimage, but that Judge Troward was one of them
will never be doubted by the thousands who are now mourning his
departure from among us. Those whose closest touch with him has been the
reading of his books will mourn him as a friend only less than those who
listened to him on the platform. For no books ever written more clearly
expressed the author. The same simple lucidity and gentle humanity, the
same effort to discard complicated non-essentials, mark both the man and
his books.

Although the spirit of benign friendliness pervades his writings and
illuminated his public life, yet much of his capacity for friendship was
denied those who were not privileged to clasp hands with him and to sit
beside him in familiar confidence. Only in the intimacy of the fireside
did he wholly reveal his innate modesty and simplicity of character.
Here

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

alone, glamoured with his radiating friendship, was shown the wealth of
his richly-stored mind equipped by nature and long training to deal
logically with the most profound and abstruse questions of life. Here
indeed was proof of his greatness, his unassuming superiority, his
humanity, his keen sense of honour, his wit and humour, his generosity
and all the characteristics of a rare gentleman, a kindly philosopher
and a true friend.

To Judge Troward was given the logician's power to strip a subject bare
of all superfluous and concealing verbiage, and to exhibit the gleaming
jewels of truth and reality in splendid simplicity. This supreme
quality, this ability to make the complex simple, the power to
subordinate the non-essential, gave to his conversation, to his
lectures, to his writings, and in no less degree to his personality, a
direct and charming naïveté that at once challenged attention and
compelled confidence and affection.

His sincerity was beyond question. However much one might differ from
him in opinion, at least one never doubted his profound faith and
complete devotion to truth. His

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

guileless nature was beyond ungenerous suspicions and selfish ambitions.
He walked calmly upon his way wrapped in the majesty of his great
thoughts, oblivious to the vexations of the world's cynicism. Charity
and reverence for the indwelling spirit marked all his human relations.
Tolerance of the opinions of others, benevolence and tenderness dwelt in
his every word and act. Yet his careful consideration of others did not
paralyze the strength of his firm will or his power to strike hard blows
at wrong and error. The search for truth, to which his life was devoted,
was to him a holy quest. That he could and would lay a lance in defence
of his opinions is evidenced in his writings, and has many times been
demonstrated to the discomfiture of assailing critics. But his urbanity
was a part of himself and never departed from him.

Not to destroy but to create was his part in the world. In developing
his philosophy he built upon the foundation of his predecessors. No good
and true stone to be found among the ruins of the past, but was
carefully worked into his superstructure of modern thought, radiant with
spirituality, to the building of which the enthusiasm of his life was
devoted.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

To one who has studied Judge Troward, and grasped the significance of
his theory of the "Universal Sub-conscious Mind," and who also has
attained to an appreciation of Henri Bergson's theory of a "Universal
Livingness," superior to and outside the material Universe, there must
appear a distinct correlation of ideas. That intricate and ponderously
irrefutable argument that Bergson has so patiently built up by deep
scientific research and unsurpassed profundity of thought and
crystal-clear reason, that leads to the substantial conclusion that man
has leapt the barrier of materiality only by the urge of some external
pressure superior to himself, but which, by reason of infinite effort,
he alone of all terrestrial beings has succeeded in utilizing in a
superior manner and to his advantage: this well-rounded and exhaustively
demonstrated argument in favour of a super-livingness in the universe,
which finds its highest terrestrial expression in man, appears to be the
scientific demonstration of Judge Troward's basic principle of the
"Universal Sub-conscious Mind." This universal and infinite
God-consciousness which Judge Troward postulates as man's
sub-consciousness, and from which man was

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

created and is maintained, and of which all physical, mental and
spiritual manifestation is a form of expression, appears to be a
corollary of Bergson's demonstrated "Universal Livingness." What Bergson
has so brilliantly proven by patient and exhaustive processes of
science, Judge Troward arrived at by intuition, and postulated as the
basis of his argument, which he proceeded to develop by deductive
reasoning.

The writer was struck by the apparent parallelism of these two
distinctly dissimilar philosophies, and mentioned the discovery to Judge
Troward who naturally expressed a wish to read Bergson, with whose
writings he was wholly unacquainted. A loan of Bergson's "Creative
Evolution" produced no comment for several weeks, when it was returned
with the characteristic remark, "I've tried my best to get hold of him,
but I don't know what he is talking about." I mention the remark as
being characteristic only because it indicates his extreme modesty and
disregard of exhaustive scientific research.

The Bergson method of scientific expression was unintelligible to his
mind, trained to intuitive reasoning. The very elaborateness

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

and microscopic detail that makes Bergson great is opposed to Judge
Troward's method of simplicity. He cared not for complexities, and the
intricate minutiæ of the process of creation, but was only concerned
with its motive power--the spiritual principles upon which it was
organized and upon which it proceeds.

Although the conservator of truth of every form and degree wherever
found, Judge Troward was a ruthless destroyer of sham and pretence. To
those submissive minds that placidly accept everything indiscriminately,
and also those who prefer to follow along paths of well-beaten opinion,
because the beaten path is popular, to all such he would perhaps appear
to be an irreverent iconoclast seeking to uproot long accepted dogma and
to overturn existing faiths. Such an opinion of Judge Troward's work
could not prevail with any one who has studied his teachings.

His reverence for the fundamental truths of religious faith was
profound, and every student of his writings will testify to the great
constructive value of his work. He builded upon an ancient foundation a
new and nobler structure of human destiny, solid in its simplicity and
beautiful in its innate grandeur.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

But to the wide circle of Judge Troward's friends he will best and most
gloriously be remembered as a teacher. In his magic mind the
unfathomable revealed its depths and the illimitable its boundaries;
metaphysics took on the simplicity of the ponderable, and man himself
occupied a new and more dignified place in the Cosmos. Not only did he
perceive clearly, but he also possessed that quality of mind even more
rare than deep and clear perception, that clarity of expression and
exposition that can carry another and less-informed mind along with it,
on the current of its understanding, to a logical and comprehended
conclusion.

In his books, his lectures and his personality he was always ready to
take the student by the hand, and in perfect simplicity and friendliness
to walk and talk with him about the deeper mysteries of life--the life
that includes death--and to shed the brilliant light of his wisdom upon
the obscure and difficult problems that torment sincere but rebellious
minds.

His artistic nature found expression in brush and canvas and his great
love for the sea is reflected in many beautiful marine sketches. But if
painting was his recreation, his work

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

was the pursuit of Truth wherever to be found, and in whatever disguise.

His life has enriched and enlarged the lives of many, and all those who
knew him will understand that in helping others he was accomplishing
exactly what he most desired. Knowledge, to him, was worth only what it
yielded in uplifting humanity to a higher spiritual appreciation, and to
a deeper understanding of God's purpose and man's destiny.

A man, indeed! He strove not for a place,  
Nor rest, nor rule. He daily walked with God.  
His willing feet with service swift were shod--  
An eager soul to serve the human race,  
Illume the mind, and fill the heart with grace--  
Hope blooms afresh where’er those feet have trod.

PAUL DERRICK.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Some Facts In Nature](ttlaw03)
