[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ttlaw04.md) 
[Next](ttlaw06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766103021/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Law and the Word by Thomas Troward \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAPTER III

### MAN'S PLACE IN THE CREATIVE ORDER

IN the preceding chapters we have found certain definite facts,--that
all known matter is formed out of one primordial Universal
Substance,--that the ether spreading throughout limitless space is a
Universal Medium, through which it is possible to convey force by means
of vibrations,--and that vibrations can be started by the power of
Sound. These we have found to be well established facts of ordinary
science, and taking them as our starting-point, we may now begin to
speculate as to the possible workings of the known laws under unknown
conditions.

One of the first things that naturally attract our attention is the
question,--How did Life originate? On this point I may quote two leading
men of science. Tyndall says: "I affirm that no shred of trustworthy
experimental testimony exists, to prove that life in our day has ever
appeared independently of antecedent

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

life"; and Huxley says: "The doctrine of biogenesis, or life only from
life, is victorious along the whole line at the present time." Such is
the testimony of modern science to the old maxim "Omne vivum ex vivo."
"All life proceeds from antecedent life." Think it out for yourself and
you will see that it could not possibly be otherwise.

Whatever may be our theory of the origin of life on the physical plane,
whether we regard it as commencing in a vivified slime at the bottom of
the sea, which we call protoplasm, or in any other way, the question of
how life got there still remains unanswered. The protoplasm being
material substance, must have its origin like all other material
substances, in the undifferentiated etheric Universal Substance, no
particle of which has any power of operating upon any other particle
until some initial vibration starts the movement; so that, on any theory
whatever, we are always brought back to the same question: What started
the condensation of the ether into the beginnings of a world-system? So
whether we consider the life which characterizes organized matter, or
the energy which characterizes inorganic matter. we cannot avoid the
conclusion, that both

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

must have their source in some Original Power to which we can assign no
antecedent. This is the conclusion which has been reached by all
philosophic and religious systems that have really tried to get at the
root of the matter, simply because it is impossible to form any other
conception.

This Living Power is what we mean when we speak of the All-Originating
Spirit. The existence of this Spirit is not a theological invention, but
a logical and scientific ultimate, without predicating which, nothing
else can be accounted for. The word "Spirit" comes from the Latin
"spiro" "I breathe," and so means "The Breath," as in Job xxxiii,
4,--"The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath
given me life"; and again in Ps. xxxiii, 6--"By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth."

In the opening chapter of Genesis, we are told that "the Spirit of God
moved upon the face of the waters." The words rendered "the Spirit of
God" are, in the original Hebrew "rouah Ælohim," which is literally "the
Breathing of God"; and similarly, the ancient

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

religious books of India, make the "Swára" or Great Breath the
commencement of all life and energy. The word "rouah" in Genesis is
remarkable. According to rabbinical teaching, each letter of the Hebrew
alphabet has a certain symbolic significance, and when examined in this
manner, the root from which this word is derived conveys the idea of
Expansive Movement. It is the opposite of the word "hoshech," translated
"darkness" in the same passage of our Bible, which is similarly derived
from a root conveying the idea of Hardening and Compressing. It is the
same idea that is personified in the Zendavesta, the sacred book of the
ancient Persians, under the names of Ormuzd, the Spirit of Light; and
Ahriman, the Spirit of Darkness; and similarly in the old Assyrian myth
of the struggle between the Sun-God and Tiámat, the goddess of darkness.

This conception of conflict between two opposite principles, Light and
Darkness, Compression and Expansion, will be found to underlie all the
ancient religions of the world, and it is conspicuous throughout our own
Scriptures. But it should be borne in mind that the oppositeness of
their nature does not necessarily mean conflict. The two principles

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

of Expansion and Contraction are not necessarily destructive; on the
contrary they are necessary correlatives to one another. Expansion alone
cannot produce form; cohesion must also be present. It is the regulated
balance between them that results in Creation. In the old legend, if I
remember rightly, the conflict is ended by Tiámat marrying her former
opponent. They were never really enemies, but there was a
misunderstanding between them, or rather there was a misunderstanding on
the part of Tiámat so long as she did not perceive the true character of
the Spirit of Light, and that their relation to one another was that of
co-operation and not of opposition. Thus also St. John tells us that
"the light shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehended it not"
(John i, 5). It is this want of comprehension that is at the root of all
the trouble.

The reader should note, however, that I am here speaking of that
Primeval Substance, which necessarily has no light in itself, because
there is as yet no vibration in it, for there can be no light without
vibration. We must not make the mistake of supposing that Matter is evil
in itself: it is our misconception of it that makes it the vehicle of
evil; and we must distinguish

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

between the darkness of Matter and moral darkness, though there is a
spiritual correspondence between them. The true development of Man
consists in the self-expansion of the Divine Spirit working through his
mind, and thence upon his psychic and physical organisms, but this can
only be by the individual's *willingness to receive* that Spirit. Where
the hindrance to this working is only caused by ignorance of the true
relation between ourselves and the Divine Spirit, and the desire for
truth is present, the True Light will in due course disperse the
darkness. But on the other hand, if the hindrance is caused by
*unwillingness* to be led by the Divine Spirit, then the Light cannot be
*forced* upon any one, and for this reason Jesus said: "This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that
doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that
his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God" (John iii:
19-21). In physical science these things have an exact parallel in
"Ohm's Law" regarding the resistance offered

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

by the conductor to the flow of the electric current. The correspondence
is very remarkable and will be found more fully explained in a later
chapter. The Primary Darkness, both of Substance and of Mind, has to be
taken into account, if we would form an intelligent conception of the
twofold process of Involution and Evolution continually at work in
ourselves, which, by their combined action, are able to lead to the
limitless development both of the individual and of the race.

According to all teaching, then, both ancient and modern, all life and
energy have their source in a Primary Life and Energy, of which we can
only say that IT IS. We cannot conceive of any time when it was not,
for, if there was a time when no such Primary Energizing Life existed,
what was there to energize it? So we are landed in a *reductio ad
absurdum* which leaves no alternative but to predicate the Eternal
Existence of an All-Originating Living Spirit.

Let us stop for a moment to consider what we mean by "Eternal." When, do
you suppose, twice two began to make four? And when, do you suppose,
twice two will cease to make four? It is an eternal principle, quite

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

independent of time or conditions. Similarly with the Originating Life.
It is above time and above conditions--in a word it is
*undifferentiated* and contains in itself the *potential* of infinite
differentiation. This is what the Eternal Life is, and what we want for
the expansion of our own life is a truer comprehension of it. We are
like Tiámat, and must enter into intelligent and loving union with the
Spirit of Light, in order to realize the infinite possibilities that lie
before us. This is the ultimate meaning of the maxim "Omne vivum ex
vivo."

We see, then, that the material universe, including our own bodies, has
its origin in the undifferentiated Universal Substance, and that the
first movement towards differentiation must be started by some initial
impulse, analogous to those which start vibrations in the ether known to
science; and that therefore this impulse must, in the first instance,
proceed from some Living Power eternal in itself, and independent of
time and conditions. Now all the ancient religions of the world concur,
in attributing this initial impulse to the power of Sound; and we have
seen, that as a matter of fact, sound has the power of starting
vibrations,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

and that these vibrations have an exact correspondence with the quality
of the sound, what we now call synchronous vibration.

At this point, however, we are met by another fact. Cosmic activity
takes place only in certain definite areas. Solar systems do not jostle
each other in space. In a word the Sound, which thus starts the initial
impulse of creation, is guided by Intelligent Selection. Now sounds,
directed by purposeful intention, amount to Words, whether the words of
some spoken language or the tapping of the Morse code--it is the meaning
at the back of the sound that gives it verbal significance. It is for
this reason, that the concentration of creative energy in particular
areas, has from time immemorial been attributed to "The Word." The old
Sanskrit books call this selective concentrative power "Vach," which
means "Voice," and is the root of the Latin word "Vox," having the same
meaning. Philo, and the Neo-Platonists of Alexandria who follow him,
call it "Logos," which means the same; and we are all familiar with the
opening verses of St. John's Gospel and First Epistle in which he
attributes Creation to "The Word."

Now we know, as a scientific fact, that solar

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

systems have a definite beginning in the gyration of nebulous matter,
circling through vast fields of interstellar space, as the great nebula
in Andromeda does at the present day. Æons upon æons elapse, before the
primary nebula consolidates into a solar system such as ours is now; but
science shows, that from the time when the nebula first spreads its
spiral across the heavens, the mathematical element of Law asserts
itself, and it is by means of our recognition of the mathematical
relations between the forces of attraction and repulsion, that we have
been able to acquire any knowledge on the subject. I do not for an
instant wish to suggest that the Spiritual Power has not continued to be
in operation also, but a centre for the working of a Cosmic Law being
once established, the Spiritual Power works through that Law and not in
opposition to it. On the other hand, the selection of particular
portions of space for the manifestation of cosmic activity, indicates
the action of free volition, not determined by any law except the
obvious consideration of allowing room for the future solar system to
move in. Similarly also with regard to time. Spectroscopic analysis of
the light from the stars, which are suns many of them much

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

greater than our own, shows that they are of various ages--some quite
young, some arrived at maturity, and some passing into old age. Their
creation must therefore be assigned to different epochs, and we thus see
the Originating Spirit exercising the powers of Selection and Volition
as to the time when, as well as to the place where, a new world-system
shall be inaugurated.

Now it is this power of inauguration that all the ancient systems of
teaching attribute to the Divine Word. It is the passing of the
undifferentiated into differentiation, of the unmanifested into
manifestation, of the unlocalized into localization. It is the ushering
in of what the Brahminical books call a "Manvantara" or world-period,
and in like manner our Bible says that "In the beginning was the Word."
The English word "word" is closely allied to the Latin word "verbum"
which signifies both *word* and *verb*. Grammarians tell us that the
verb "to be" is a verb-substantive, that is, it does not indicate any
action passing from the subject to the object. Now this exactly
describes the Spirit in its Eternity. We cannot conceive of It except as
always BEING; but the distribution of world-systems both in time

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and space shows that it is not always cosmically active. In itself,
apart from manifestation, it is Pure Beingness, if I may coin such a
word; and it is for this reason that the Divine Name announced to Moses
was "I AM." But the fact that Creation exists, shows that from this
Substantive Pure Being there flows out a Verb Active, which reproduces
in action, what the I AM is in essence. It is just the same with
ourselves. We must first *be* before we can *do*, and we can *do* only
to the extent to which we *are*. We cannot express powers which we do
not possess; so that our doing necessarily coincides with the quality of
our being. Therefore the Divine Verb reproduces the Divine Substantive
by a natural sequence. It is *generated* by the Divine "I AM," and for
this reason it is called "The Son of God." So we see that The Verb, The
Word, and The Son of God, are all different expressions for the same
Power.

Creative vibration in the Universal Substance can, therefore, only be
conceived of, as being inaugurated by the "Word" which *localizes* the
activity of the Spirit in particular centres. This idea, of the
localization of the Spirit through the "Word," should be fully

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

realized as the energizing principle on the scale of the Macrocosm or
"Great World," because, as we shall find later on, the same principle
acts in the same way on the scale of the Microcosm or "Small World,"
which is the individual man. This is why these things have a personal
interest for us, otherwise they would not be worth troubling about. But
a mistake to be avoided at this point, is that of supposing that the
"Word" is something which dictates to the Spirit when and where to
operate. The "Word" is the word of the Spirit itself, and not that of
some higher authority, for the Spirit being First Cause there can be
nothing anterior to dictate to it; there can be nothing before that
which is First. The "Word" which centralizes the activity of the Spirit,
is therefore that of the Spirit itself. We have an analogy in our own
case. If I go to New York the first movement in that direction is that
of my Thought or Desire. It is true that in my present state of
evolution I have to follow the usual methods of travel, but so far as my
Thought is concerned, I have been there all the time. Indeed, such a
case as the one I have mentioned, of my being seen in Edinburgh while I
was physically in London, seems to

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

point to the actual transference of some part of the personality to
another locality, and similarly with my visit to Lanercost Abbey; and
the reader must remember, that such phenomena are by no means
uncommon--they are the natural action of some part of our personality,
and must therefore follow some natural law, even though we may at
present know very little of how it works.

We see, therefore, both from *a priori* reasoning, and from observed
facts, that it is the Word, Thought, or Desire of the Spirit, that
localizes its activity in some definite centre. The student should bear
this in mind as a leading principle, for he will find that it is of
general application, alike in the case of individuals, of groups of
individuals, and of entire nations. It is the key to the relation
between Law and Personality, the opening of the Grand Arcanum, the
equilibrating of Jachin and Boaz, and it is therefore of immediate
importance to ourselves.

We may take, then, as a starting-point for further enquiry, the maxim
that Volition creates Centres of Spiritual Activity. But perhaps you
will say: "If this be true, what word or words am I to employ?" This is
a

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

question which has puzzled a good many people before you. This "Word"
which so many have been in search of, has been variously called "the
Lost Word," "the Word of Power," "the Schemhammaphorasch or Secret Name
of God," and so on. A quaint Jewish legend of the Middle Ages says that
the "Hidden Name" was secretly inscribed in the innermost recesses of
the Temple; but that, even if discovered, which was most unlikely, it
could not be retained because, guarding it, were sculptured lions, which
gave such a supernatural roar as the intruder was quitting the spot,
that all memory of the "Hidden Name" was driven from his mind. Jesus,
however, says the legend, knew this and dodged the lions. He transcribed
the Name, and cutting open his thigh, hid the writing in the incision,
which, by magical art, he at once closed up; then, after leaving the
Temple, he took the writing out and so retained the knowledge of the
Name. In this way the legend accounts for his power to work miracles.

Jesus, indeed, possessed the Word of Power, though not in the way told
in the legend, and he repeatedly proclaimed it in his
teaching:--"According to your Faith be it unto you"

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --"Verily, I say
unto you, whosoever shall say to this mountain, 'Be thou taken up and
cast into the sea'; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe
that what he saith shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he
saith" (Mark xi, 23). And similarly in the Old Testament we are told
that the Word is nigh to us, even in our hearts and in our mouth (Deut.
xxx, 14). What keeps the Word of Power hidden, is our belief that
nothing so simple could possibly be it.

At the same time, simple though it be, it has Law and Reason at the back
of it, like everything else. The ancient Egyptians seem to have had
clearer ideas on this subject than we have. "The name was to the
Egyptians the *idea* of the thing, without which it could not exist, and
the knowledge of which therefore gave power over that which answered to
it." "The *idea* of the thing represented its *soul*." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) This is the same conception as the
"archetypal ideas" of Plato, only carried further, so as to apply, not
only to classes, but to each individual of the class, and, as we shall
see later, there is a good deal of truth in it.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Put broadly, the
conception is this--every external fact must have a spiritual origin, an
internal energizing principle, which causes it to exist in the
particular form in which it does. The outward fact is called the
Phenomenon, and the corresponding inward principle is called the
Noumenon. The dictionary definition of these two words is as follows:
"Phenomenon--the appearance which anything makes to our consciousness as
distinguished from what it is in itself." "Noumenon--an unknown and
unknowable substance or thing as it is in itself--the opposite to the
Phenomenon or form through which it becomes known to the senses or the
understanding" (Chambers' Twentieth Century Dictionary). Whether the
dictionary be right in saying that the "noumena" of things are entirely
unknowable, the reader must decide for himself; but the present book is
an attempt to learn something about the "noumena" of things in general,
and of ourselves in particular, and what I want to convey is, that the
"noumenon" of anything is its essence, *in terms of the Universal Energy
and the Universal Substance, in their relation to the particular Form in
question*. Probably the Latin word "Nomen," a Name, is derived

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

from this Greek word, and in this sense everything has its "hidden
name"; and the region in which Thought-Power works, is this region of
spiritual beginnings. It deals with "hidden names"--that inward essence
which determines the outward form of things, persons, and circumstances
alike; and it is in order to make this clearer, that I have commenced by
sketching briefly the general principles of Substance and Energy as now
recognized by modern science.

If I have made my meaning clear, you will see that what is wanted is not
the knowledge of particular words, but an understanding of general
principles. At the same time I would not assert that the reciting of
certain forms of words, such as the Indian "mantras" or the word AUM, to
which Oriental teachers attach a mystic significance, is entirely
without power. But the power is not in the words *but in our belief in
their power*. I will give an amusing instance of this. On several
occasions I have been consulted by persons who supposed themselves to be
under the influence of "malicious magnetism," emanating in some cases
from known, and in others from unknown, sources; and the remedy I have
prescribed has been this.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Look the adverse
power, mentally, full in the face, and then assuming an attitude of
confidence say "Cock-a-doodle-doo." The enquirers have sometimes smiled
at first, but in every case the result has been successful. Perhaps this
is why Æsculapius is represented as accompanied by a cock. Possibly the
ancient physicians were in the habit of employing the
"Cock-a-doodle-doo" treatment; and I might recommend it to the faculty
to-day as very effective in certain cases. Now I do not think the reader
will attribute any particularly occult significance to
"Cock-a-doodle-doo." The power is in the mental attitude. To
"cock-a-doodle-doo" at any suggestion is to treat it with scorn and
derision, and to assume the very opposite of that receptive attitude
which enables a suggestion to affect us. That is the secret of this
method of treatment, and the principle is the same in all cases.

It matters, then, very little what particular words we use. What does
matter is the intention and faith with which we use them. But perhaps
some reader will here take the rôle of cross-examining counsel, and say:
"You have just said it is a case of synchronous vibration--then surely
it is the actual sound of the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

particular syllables that counts--how do you square this with your
present statement?" The answer is that the Law is always the same, but
the mode of response to the Law is always according to the nature of the
medium in which it is operating. On the plane of physical matter the
vibrations are in tune with physical sounds, as in the experiments with
the eidophone; and similarly, on the plane of ideas or "noumena," the
response is in terms of that plane. The word which creates "noumena," or
spiritual centres of action, must itself belong to the world of
"noumena," so that it is not illogical to say that it is the intention
and faith that counts, and not the external sound. In this is the secret
of the Power of Thought. It is the reproduction, on the miniature scale
of the individual, of the same mode of Power that makes the worlds. It
is that Power of Personality, which, combined with the action of the
Law, brings out results which the Law alone could never do--as the old
maxim has it, "Nature unaided fails."

This brings us to another important question--is not the creative power
of the Word limited by the immutability of the Law? If the Law cannot be
altered in the least particular,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

how can the Word be free to do what it likes? The answer to this is
contained in another maxim: "Every creation carries its own mathematics
along with it." You cannot create anything without at the same time
creating its relation to everything else, just as in painting a
landscape, the contour you give to the trees will determine that of the
sky. Therefore, whenever you create anything, you thereby start a train
of causation, which will work out in strict accordance with the sort of
thought that started it. The stream always has the quality of its
source. Thought which is in line with the Unity of the Great Whole, will
produce correspondingly harmonious results, and Thought which is
disruptive of the great Principle of Unity, will produce correspondingly
disputive results--hence all the trouble and confusion in the world. Our
Thought is perfectly free, and we can use it either constructively or
destructively as we choose; but the immutable Law of Sequence will not
permit us to plant a thought of one kind, and make it bear fruit of
another.

Then the question very naturally suggests itself: Why did not God create
us so that we could not think negative or destructive

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

thoughts? And the answer is: Because He could not. There are some things
which even God cannot do. He cannot do anything that involves a
contradiction in terms. Even God could not make twice two either more or
less than four. Now I want the student to see clearly why making us
incapable of wrong-thinking would involve a contradiction in terms, and
would therefore be an impossibility. To see this we must realize what is
our place in the Order of the Universe. The name "Man" itself indicates
this. It comes from the Sanscrit root MN, which, in all its derivatives,
conveys the idea of Measurement, as in the word Mind, through the Latin
*mens*, the faculty which compares things and estimates them
accordingly; Moon, the heavenly body whose phases afford the most
obvious standard for the periodical measurement of time; Month, the
period thus measured; "Man," the largest of the Indian weights; and so
on. Man therefore means "The Measurer," and this very aptly describes
our place in the order of evolution, for it indicates the relation
between Personal Volition and Immutable Law.

If we grant the truth of the maxim "Nature unaided fails" the whole
thing becomes

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

clear, and the entire progress of applied science proves the truth of
this maxim. To recur to an illustration I have employed in my previous
books, the old ship-builders thought that ships were bound to be built
of wood and not of iron, because wood floats in water and iron sinks;
but now nearly all ships are made of iron. Yet the specific gravities of
wood and iron have not altered, and a log of wood floats while a lump of
iron sinks, just the same as they did in the days of Drake and
Frobisher. The only difference is, that people thought out the
*underlying principle* of the law of flotation, and reduced it to the
generalized statement that anything will float, the weight of which is
less than that of the mass displaced by it, whether it be an iron ship
floating in water, or a balloon floating in air. So long as we restrict
ourselves to the mere recollection of observed facts, we shall make no
progress; but by carefully considering *why* any force acted in the way
it did, under the particular conditions observed, we arrive at a
generalization of principle, showing that the force in question is
capable of hitherto unexpected applications if we provide the necessary
conditions. This is the way in which all advances have been

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

trade on the material side, and on the principle of Continuity we may
reasonably infer that the same applies to the spiritual side also.

We may generalize the whole position thus. When we first observe the
working of the Law under the conditions spontaneously provided by
Nature, it appears to limit us; but by seeking the *reason* of the
action exhibited under these limited conditions, we discover the
principle, and true nature, of the Law in question, and we then learn
from the Law itself, what conditions to supply in order to give it more
extended scope, and direct its energy to the accomplishment of definite
purposes. The maxim we have to learn is that "Every Law *contains in
itself* the principle of its own Expansion," which will set us free from
the limitation which that Law at first appeared to impose upon us. The
limitation was never in the Law, but in the conditions under which it
was working, and our power of selection and volition enables us to
provide new conditions, not spontaneously provided by Nature, and thus
to *specialize* the Law, and disclose immense powers which had always
been latent in it, but which would for ever remain hidden unless brought
to light by the co-operation of

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the Personal Factor. The Law itself never changes, but we can
*specialize* it by realizing the principle involved and providing the
conditions thus indicated. This is our place in the Order of the
Universe. We give definite direction to the action of the Law, and in
this way our Personal Factor is always acting upon the law, whether we
know it or not; and the Law, under the influence thus impressed upon it,
is all the time re-acting upon us.

Now we cannot conceive any limit to Evolution. To suppose a point where
it comes to an end is a contradiction in terms. It is to suppose that
the Eternal Life Principle is used up, which is to deny its Eternity;
and, as we have seen, unless we assume its Eternity, it is impossible to
account either for our own existence or that of anything else.
Therefore, to say that a point will ever be reached where it will be
used up, is as absurd as saying that a point will be reached where the
sequence of numbers will be used up. Evolution, the progress from lower
to higher modes of manifestation of the underlying Principle of Life, is
therefore eternal, but, in regard to the human race, this progress
depends entirely on the extent to which we grasp the principles of

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the Law of our own Being, and so learn to specialize it in the right
direction. Then if this be our place in the Universal Order, it becomes
clear that we could not occupy this place unless we had a perfectly free
hand to choose the conditions under which the Law is to operate; and
therefore, in order to pass beyond the limits of the mineral, vegetable
and animal kingdoms, and reach the status of being Persons, and not
things, we must have a freedom of selection and volition, which makes it
equally possible for us to select either rightly or wrongly; and the
purpose of sound teaching is to make us see the eternal principles
involved, and thus lead us to impress our Personality upon the Law, in
the way that will bring out the infinite possibilities of good which the
Law, rightly employed, contains. If it were possible to do this by an
automatic Law, doubtless the Creative Wisdom would have made us so. This
is why St. Paul says: "If there had been a law given which could have
given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law" (Gal. iii,
21). Note the words "a law *given*," that is to say, imposed by external
command; but it could not be. The laws of the Universe are Cosmic. In

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

themselves they are *impersonal*, and the infinite possibilities
contained in them, can only be brought out by the co-operation of the
Personal Factor. It is only as we grasp the true relation between Jachin
and Boaz, that we can enter into the Temple either of our own
Individuality, or of the boundless Universe in which we live. The
reason, therefore, why God did not make us mechanically incapable of
wrong thinking, is simply because the very idea involves a contradiction
in terms, which negatives all possibility of Creation. The conception
lands us in a *reductio ad absurdum*.

Therefore, we are free to use our powers of Personality as we will, only
we must take the consequences. Now one error we are all very apt to fall
into, is the mistaken use of the Will. Its proper function is to keep
our other faculties in line with the Law, and thus enable us to
specialize it; but many people seem to think that by force of will they
can somehow manage to coerce the Law; in other words, that by force of
will they can sow a seed of one kind and make it bear fruit of another.
The Spirit of Life seeks to express itself in our individuality, through
the three avenues of reason, feeling, and will; but as in the Masonic

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

legend of the murder of Hiram Abif, the architect of Solomon's Temple,
it is beaten back on the side of reasoning, by the plummet of a logic
based on false premises; on the side of feeling, by the level of
conventional ideas; and on the side of will, by the hammer of a
shortsighted self-will, which gives the finishing blow; and it is not
until the true perception of the Principle of Life is resurrected within
us, that the Temple can be completed according to the true plan.

It should be remembered that the will is not the Creative Faculty in us.
It is the faculty of Conception that is the creative agent, and the
business of the Will is to keep that faculty in the right direction,
which will be determined by an enlightened Reason. Conception creates
ideas which are the seed, that, in due time, will produce fruit after
its own kind. In a broad sense we may call it the Imaging Faculty, only
we must not suppose that this necessarily implies the visualizing of
mental images, which is only a subsidiary mode of using this faculty. An
"immaculate conception" is therefore the only means by which the New
Liberated Man can be born in each of us. The sequence is always the
same. The Will holds the Conception

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

together, and the idea thus formed gives direction to the working of the
Law. But this direction may be either true or inverted; and the
impersonal Law will work constructively or destructively, according to
the conception which it embodies. In this way, then, will-power may be
used to hold together an inverted conception--the conception that our
personal force of will is sufficient to bear down all opposition. But
this mental attitude ignores the fact, that the fundamental principle of
creative power is the Wholeness of the Creation; and that, therefore,
the idea of forcing compliance with our wishes, by the power of our
individual will, is an inverted conception, which, though it may appear
to succeed for a time, is bound to fail eventually, because it
antagonizes the very power it is seeking to use. This inverted use of
the Will is the basis of "Black Magic," a term some readers will perhaps
smile at, but which is practised at the present day to a much greater
extent than many of us have any idea of--not always, indeed, with a full
consciousness of its nature, but in many ways which are the first steps
on the Left-hand Path. Its mark is the determination to act by
Self-will, rather than using our

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

will to co-operate with that continuous forward movement of the Great
Whole, which is the Will of God. This inverted will entirely misses the
point regarding the part we are formed to play in the Creative Order,
and so we miss the development of our own individuality, and retrograde
instead of going forward.

But if we work *with* the Law instead of against it, we shall find that
our word, that is to say our conception, will become more and more the
Word of Power, because it specializes the general Law in some particular
direction. The Law will serve us exactly to the extent to which we first
observe the Law. It is the same in everything. If the electrician tries
to go counter to the fundamental principle, that the electric current
always flows from a higher to a lower potential, he will be able to do
nothing with it; but let him observe this fundamental law and there is
nothing that electricity will not do for him within the field of its own
nature. In this sense, then, of specializing the general Law in a
particular direction, we may lay down the maxim that "The Law flows from
the Word, and not *vice versa*."

When we use our Word in this way, not as

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

expressing a self-will that seeks to crush all that does not submit to
it, but as a portion, however small, of the Universal Cause, and
therefore with the desire of acting in harmony with that Cause, then our
word becomes a constructive, instead of a destructive power. Its
influence may be very small at first, because there is still a great
mass of doubt at the back of our mind, and every doubt is, in reality, a
Negative Word warring against our Affirmative Word; but, by adhering to
our principle, we shall gradually gain experience in these things, and
the creative value of our word will grow accordingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[59:1](ttlaw05.htm#fr_1.md) "Out of Egypt" by Miss
Crouse. Gorham Press, Boston. U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Law of Wholeness](ttlaw06.md)
