[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmmi04)  [Next](tmmi06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### METEOR MYTHS.

In the myths not dealing with the origin of things the same degree of
resemblance is found between the Mission Indians and the Mohave. The
elaborate Diegueño Chaup stories published by Miss Du Bois have a close
parallel among the Mohave. This equivalent Mohave tradition has not been
obtained in full, but an outline has been heard related which leaves no
doubt of the correspondence

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

of the versions of the two tribes. It is interesting that Miss Du Bois
states that her Diegueño informants believe their Chaup story to have
been borrowed from the Mohave. Similarly the Luiseño informant from whom
the Dakwish or Meteor myth given below was secured stated to the author
that what he knew was only part of the entire Dakwish myth, that part,
namely, which relates to Luiseño territory: and that another portion of
the story, which tells of the doings of Dakwish in the country of the
Diegueño, with an accompaniment of songs, was known to these people.
Certain episodes and elements of the Diegueño Chaup stories have also
been found in other Mohave myths, notably the one of the two Cane
brothers, which may be regarded as a somewhat differentiated version of
the same story. In this Cane story occurs Kwayu, the meteor, who is
mentioned also in other Mohave legends as a destructive cannibalistic
being. Chaup himself is the meteor, and while the greater part of the
Chaup story has no direct reference to the meteor, the identification is
present in the minds of the Indians. That the meteor was important in
the beliefs of the Indians of southern California is further shown by
the Luiseño Dakwish myth given below, and by a somewhat similar story
from the Saboba, a more northern division of the Luiseño, printed in
this journal some years ago. It must therefore be concluded that the
meteor is one of the most important special conceptions in the mythology
of all southern California, not of innate or inherent importance, but
through a selection which for some reason or other has taken place. To
this personification have been attached whole mythological episodes that
have no real connection with it. These enlarged meteor myths have in
many cases been made into myth-ceremonies of the kind characteristic of
the region. We have therefore to see in the meteor myths of southern
California a special, and as it were accidental, but striking
development characteristic of the culture area, very much as the story
of the deer and bear children is of northern California, and the story
of the visit to the dead in pursuit of a wife is of the San Joaquin
Valley.

The dakwish, it is said by the Luiseño, is not infrequently seen. Often
it causes death, though some men can see it and not die. It is described
as being like a bird, having soft white feathers all over its body.
Around its head are tied feather ropes, and these hold in place the
elat, the board ceremonially swallowed by medicine-men and also worn as
a headdress. As the dakwish moves, its feathers fall and it leaves them
behind. It can be seen every night at San Jacinto Mountain, turning like
a ball of light.

When a woman, who now is old, was young, she was camped on the top of
Palomar Mountain with her family. They had gone there

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

to gather acorns. At night they slept by a large fire. She awoke and
heard a noise as of a dog chewing. Near them was a large pine-tree. On
this she saw the dakwish sitting with its head bent, holding a person
that it was eating. The young woman woke the others of her family. Then,
after they all had seen it, the dakwish went away. Not long afterward
one of the family, a young woman, died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pauma Luiseño Story of Dakwish](tmmi06)
