[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmmi03)  [Next](tmmi05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MOHAVE ACCOUNT OF ORIGINS.

It is interesting to compare with this story the corresponding myth of
the Mohave. The Mohave live on the Colorado River in both California and
Arizona. They are a primarily agricultural people with a more developed
tribal sense and warlike spirit than the Mission Indians. Located as
they are on the borders of the Southwest, in fact in part within it,
they present many cultural features that are not found among the Mission
Indians. In fact, as compared with the Mohave, the Mission Indians and
the Indians of northern California form a unit as regards their general
culture.

The Mohave origin myth has been obtained much more fully than the
Luiseño, in fact at such length that it is possible to give only an
outline in the present connection.

According to the Mohave, the first were the sky, a man, and the earth, a
woman. These met far in the west, and from them were born, first
Matevilye, and after him his daughter the frog, Mastamho who is usually
called his younger brother, all the people, the animals, and plants. All
these went upward toward the east, under the leadership of Matevilye.
Matevilye himself did not walk. He merely moved four times, twice to the
left and twice to the right. Thereby he arrived at Ahavulypo, a narrow
defile on the Colorado River above Cottonwood Island, probably near the
lower end of Eldorado Canyon. He stretched out his arms to the ends of
the world and thereby found this spot to be the centre of the earth.
Here he built a house. He became sick because the frog his daughter,
whom he had offended by an indecency, ate his excrement; and it was
known that he would die. When he died, Coyote, whose intentions were
suspected, was

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

sent far away to bring fire for the funeral pyre, During Coyote's
absence fire was produced among the people by the fly, a woman, who
rubbed her thigh. Matevilye was then burned. According to the usual
account, although this episode does not form part of the version on
which the present relation is based, Coyote returned as the pyre was in
flames. The people surrounded this in a close ring. Coyote succeeded in
leaping over the head of the badger, who was short, seized Matevilye's
heart, and escaped with it. Under the direction of Mastamho the people
then made for Matevilye the first mourning ceremony in the world.

The remaining bones and ashes were offensive to the people. Mastamho
therefore successively made wind, hail, and rain to obliterate them, but
failed. As a fourth resource he then went far northward in four steps,
taking the people with him. Plunging his stick into the ground, he made
water come forth. Three times he stopped this with his foot, until the
fourth time it flowed southward to form the Colorado River. As the water
flowed, a boat emerged from the ground. He entered this and put the
people into it with himself. They constituted six tribes not yet
separated. As the boat floated down the river, he tilted it to one side
and the other, making the river valley flat and wide in the places where
he did so.

When the boat arrived at the ocean, the head of the Gulf of California,
Mastamho left it and Went northward, carrying the people on his arms.
The water was deep and he ascended a mountain. Everything was covered
with water except the top of this peak. By taking a step in each of the
four cardinal directions, he made the water recede. He then planted
seeds of the vegetation which was to furnish subsistence to the desert
tribes. Then, still accompanied by all the people, he went on northward
to Avikwame, the sacred mountain of the Mohave, not far north from their
villages, and called Dead or Newberry Mountain by the whites. There he
too built a house for himself and the people.

He made the people shout four times and thus produced daylight, the sun,
and the moon. Then he tried the medicine-men, making those sit down who
did not talk properly, and designating those who spoke right. These men
upon being born on earth would be successful shamans.

Far in the south in the ocean, in a house of hair, lived Humasereha, an
immense snake. One of the people on Avikwame pretended to be sick, and
Humasereha, the great medicine-man, was sent for. He came northward,
rattling with his tail and making rain, and thunder. When he arrived he
inserted his head into the door, It was so large that the house was
almost tilted over. As soon as his head had entered the house it was cut
off and he died. Therefore it is that

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

medicine-men, who are thought to be the cause of almost all disease and
death, are killed by the Mohave.

Then Mastamho sent off five of the tribes, telling them what country to
inhabit and how to live. The sixth, the Mohave, he ordered to stay in
the adjacent country and there to live and build their houses. Then he
was alone. He questioned himself what to do and how to "die," that is to
say, what shape to assume to terminate his existence in human form. He
tried departing in various directions and sinking into the ground, but
was dissatisfied. Then he stretched out his arms. Feathers grew over him
until he had wings. On the fourth trial he was able to fly. Then he went
off as the fish eagle.

It is obvious that the general course and tenor of the Mohave creation
is similar to that of the Mission Indians. All beings are generated by
the primeval heaven and earth. The people move in a body, following a
leader, whose death is later caused by the frog. At his death Coyote
succeeds, in spite of the precautions taken, in seizing a part of his
body. The second great leader, Mastamho, is relatively more important
among the Mohave than his counterpart is among the Mission Indians, as
Matevilye, the first, does little but lead the people from their place
of origin to the centre of the world, build a house, and die. Mastamho
makes the all-important river and the sun and moon. His other
achievements all relate not to nature but to man. He journeys with the
still united people, saves them from the flood, instructs them how to
build houses, ordains and instructs medicine-men, provides food, and
separates the various tribes, giving to each its distinctive customs.
Other accounts, not here considered, deal more fully with his
instructions to mankind regarding the arts of life and ceremonial
institutions. The similarity of this tradition to the corresponding
accounts among the Mission Indians, even in many points of detail, could
not well be closer, and is the more important on account of the
considerable cultural differences between the tribes. It is therefore
evident that mythologically all the tribes of southern California, from
the Colorado River to the sea, with the possible exception of the Santa
Barbara islanders, of whose beliefs nothing is known, form a close unit
as compared with the remainder of California.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meteor Myths](tmmi05)
