[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Theosophy](../index.md)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap09.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter X

# THE RESULT OF THEOSOPHICAL STUDY

"MEMBERS of the Theosophical Society study these truths and Theosophists
endeavour to live them." What manner of man then is the true Theosophist
in consequence of his knowledge? What is the result in his daily life of
all this study?

Finding that there is a Supreme Power who is directing the course of
evolution, and that He is all-wise and all-loving, the Theosophist sees
that everything which exists within this scheme must be intended to
further its progress. He realizes that the scripture which tells us that
all things are working together for good, is not indulging in a flight
of poetic fancy or voicing a pious hope, but stating a scientific fact.
The final attainment of unspeakable glory is an absolute certainty for
every son of man, whatever may be his present condition; but that is by
no means all. Here and at this present moment he is on his way towards
the glory; and all the circumstances surrounding him are intended to
help and not to hinder him, if only they are rightly understood. It is
sadly true that in the world there is much of evil and of sorrow and of
suffering; yet from the higher point of view the Theosophist sees that
terrible though this be, it is only temporary and superficial, and is
all being utilized as a factor in the progress.

When in the days of his ignorance he looked at it from its own level it
was almost impossible to see this; while he looked from beneath at the
under side of life, with his eyes fixed all the time upon some apparent
evil, he could never gain a true grasp of its meaning. Now he raises
himself above it to the higher levels of thought and consciousness, and
looks down upon it with the eye of the spirit and understands it in its
entirety, so he can see that in very truth all is well--not that all
will be well at some remote period, but that even now at this moment, in
the midst of incessant striving and apparent evil, the mighty current of
evolution is still flowing, and so all is well because all is moving on
in perfect order towards the final goal.

Raising his consciousness thus above the storm and stress of worldly
life, he recognizes what used to seem to be evil, and notes how it is
apparently pressing back-wards against the great stream of progress; but
he also sees that the onward sweep of the divine law of evolution bears
the same relation to this superficial evil as does the tremendous
torrent of Niagara to the fleckings of foam upon its surface. So while
he sympathizes deeply with all who suffer, he yet realizes what will be
the end of that suffering, and so for him despair or hopelessness is
impossible. He applies this consideration to his own sorrows and
troubles, as well as to those of the world, and therefore one great
result of his Theosophy is a perfect serenity--even more than that, a
perpetual cheerfulness and joy.

For him there is an utter absence of worry, because in truth there is
nothing left to worry about, since he knows that all must be well. His
higher Science makes him a confirmed optimist, for it shows him that
what-ever of evil there may be in any person or in any movement, it is
of necessity temporary, because it is opposed to the resistless stream
of evolution; whereas whatever is good in any person or in any movement
must necessarily be persistent and useful, because it has behind it the
omnipotence of that current, and therefore it must abide and it must
prevail.

Yet it must not for a moment be supposed that because he is so fully
assured of the final triumph of good he remains careless or unmoved by
the evils which exist in the world around him. He knows that it is his
duty to combat these to the utmost of his power, because in doing this
he is working upon the side of the great evolutionary force, and is
bringing nearer the time of its ultimate victory. None will be more
active than he in labouring for the good, even though he is absolutely
free from the feeling of helplessness and hopelessness which so often
oppresses those who are striving to help their fellow-men.

Another most valuable result of his Theosophical study is the absence of
fear. Many people are constantly anxious or worried about something or
other; they are fearing lest this or that should happen to them, lest
this or that combination may fail, and so all the while they are in a
condition of unrest; and most serious of all for many is the fear of
death. For the Theosophist the whole of this feeling is entirely swept
away. He realizes the great truth of reincarnation. He knows that he has
often before laid aside physical bodies, and so he sees that death is no
more than sleep--that just as sleep comes in between our days of work
and gives us rest and refreshment, so between these days of labour here
on earth, which we call lives, there comes a long night of astral and of
heavenly life to give us rest and refreshment and to help us on our way.

To the Theosophist death is simply the laying aside for a time of this
robe of flesh. He knows that it is his duty to preserve the bodily
vesture as long as possible, and gain through it all the experience he
can; but when the time comes for him to lay it down he will do so
thankfully, because he knows that the next stage will be a much
pleasanter one than this. Thus he will have no fear of death, although
he realizes that he must live his life to the appointed end, because he
is here for the purpose of progress, and that progress is the one truly
momentous matter. His whole conception of life is different; the object
is not to earn so much money, not to obtain such and such a position;
the one important thing is to carry out the divine plan. He knows that
for this he is here, and that everything else must give way to it.

Utterly free also is he from any religious fears or worries or troubles.
All such things are swept aside for him, because he sees clearly that
progress towards the highest is the divine Will for us, that we cannot
escape from that progress, and that whatever comes in our way and
whatever happens to us is meant to help us along that line; that we
ourselves are absolutely the only people who can delay our advance. No
longer does he trouble and fear about himself. He simply goes on and
does the duty which comes nearest in the best way that he can, confident
that if he does this all will be well for him without his perpetual
worrying. He is satisfied quietly to do his work and to try to help his
fellows in the race, knowing that the great divine Power behind will
press him onward slowly and steadily, and do for him all that can be
done, so long as his face is set steadfastly in the right direction, so
long as he does all that he reasonably can.

Since he knows that we are all part of one great evolution and all
literally the children of one Father, he sees that the universal
brotherhood of humanity is no mere poetical conception, but a definite
fact; not a dream of something which is to be in the dim distance of
Utopia, but a condition existing here and now. The certainty of this
all-embracing fraternity gives him a wider outlook upon life and a broad
impersonal point of view from which to regard everything. He realizes
that the true interests of all are in fact identical, and that no man
can ever make real gain for himself at the cost of loss or suffering to
some one else. This is not to him an article of religious belief, but a
scientific fact proved to him by his study. He sees that since humanity
is literally a whole, nothing which injures one man can ever be really
for the good of any other, for the harm done influences not only the
doer but also those who are about him.

He knows that the only true advantage for him is that benefit which he
shares with all. He sees that any advance which he is able to make in
the way of spiritual progress or development is something secured not
for himself alone but for others. If he gains knowledge or self-control,
he assuredly acquires much for himself, yet he takes nothing away from
anyone else, but on the contrary he helps and strengthens others.
Cognizant as he is of the absolute spiritual unity of humanity, he knows
that, even in this lower world, no true profit can be made by one man
which is not made in the name of and for the sake of humanity; that one
man's progress must be a lifting of the burden of all the others; that
one man's advance in spiritual things means a very slight yet not
imperceptible advance to humanity as a whole; that every one who bears
suffering and sorrow nobly in his struggle towards the light is lifting
a little of the heavy load of the sorrow and suffering of his brothers
as well.

Because he recognizes this brotherhood not merely as a hope cherished by
despairing men, but as a definite fact following in scientific series
from all other facts; because he sees this as an absolute certainty, his
attitude towards all those around him changes radically. It becomes a
posture ever of helpfulness, ever of the deepest sympathy, for he sees
that nothing which clashes with their higher interests can be the right
thing for him to do, or can be good for him in any way.

It naturally follows that he becomes filled with the widest possible
tolerance and charity. He cannot but be always tolerant, because his
philosophy shows him that it matters little what a man believes, so long
as he is a good man and true. Charitable also he must be, because his
wider knowledge enables him to make allowances for many things which the
ordinary man does not understand. The standard of the Theosophist as to
right and wrong is always higher than that of the less instructed man,
yet he is far gentler than the latter in his feeling towards the sinner,
because he comprehends more of human nature. He realizes how the sin
appeared to the sinner at the moment of its commission, and so he makes
more allowances than is ever made by the man who is ignorant of all
this.

He goes further than tolerance, charity, sympathy; he feels positive
love towards mankind, and that leads him to adopt a position of watchful
helpfulness. He feels that every contact with others is for him an
opportunity, and the additional knowledge which his study has brought to
him enables him to give advice or help in almost any case which comes
before him. Not that he is perpetually thrusting his opinions upon other
people. On the contrary, he observes that to do this is one of the
commonest mistakes made by the uninstructed. He knows that argument is a
foolish waste of energy, and therefore he declines to argue. If anyone
desires from him explanation or advice he is more than willing to give
it, yet he has no sort of wish to convert anyone else to his own way of
thinking.

In every relation of life this idea of helpfulness comes into play, not
only with regard to his fellowmen but also in connection with the vast
animal kingdom which surrounds him. Units of this kingdom are often
brought into close relation with man, and this is for him an opportunity
of doing something for them. The Theosophist recognizes that these are
also his brothers, even though they may be younger brothers, and that he
owes a fraternal duty to them also--so to act and so to think that his
relation with them shall be always for their good and never for their
harm.

Preeminently and above all, this Theosophy is to him a doctrine of
common sense. It puts before him, as far as he can at present know them,
the facts about God and man and the relations between them; then he
proceeds to take these facts into account and to act in relation to them
with ordinary reason and common sense. He regulates his life according
to the laws of evolution which it has taught him, and this gives him a
totally different standpoint, and a touchstone by which to try
everything--his own thoughts and feelings, and his own actions first of
all, and then those things which come before him in the world outside
himself.

Always he applies this criterion: Is the thing right or wrong, does it
help evolution or does it hinder it? If a thought or a feeling arises
within himself, he sees at once by this test whether it is one he ought
to encourage. If it be for the greatest good of the greatest number then
all is well; if it may hinder or cause harm to any being in its
progress, then it is evil and to be avoided. Exactly the same reason
holds good if he is called upon to decide with regard to anything
outside himself. If from that point of view a thing be a good thing,
then he can conscientiously support it; if not, then it is not for him.

For him the question of personal interest does not come into the case at
all. He thinks simply of the good of evolution as a whole. This gives
him a definite foothold and the clear criterion, and removes from him
altogether the pain of indecision and hesitation. The Will of the Deity
is man's evolution; whatever therefore helps on that evolution must be
good; whatever stands in the way of it and delays it, that thing must be
wrong, even though it may have on its side all the weight of public
opinion and immemorial tradition.

Knowing that the true man is the ego and not the body, he sees that it
is the life of the ego only which is really of moment, and that
everything connected with the body must unhesitatingly be subordinated
to those higher interests. He recognizes that this earth-life is given
to him for the purpose of progress, and that that progress is the one
important thing. The real purpose of his life is the unfoldment of his
powers as an ego, the development of his character. He knows that there
must be evolvement not only of the physical body but also of the mental
nature, of the mind and of the spiritual perceptions. He sees that
nothing short of absolute perfection is expected of him in connection
with this development; that all power with regard to it is in his own
hands; that he has everlasting time before him in which to attain this
perfection, but that the sooner it is gained the happier and more useful
will he be.

He recognizes his life as nothing but a day at school, and his physical
body as a temporary vesture assumed for the purpose of learning through
it. He knows at once that this purpose of learning lessons is the only
one of any real importance, and that the man who allows himself to be
diverted from that purpose by any consideration whatever is acting with
inconceivable stupidity. To him the life devoted exclusively to physical
objects, to the acquisition of wealth or fame, appears the merest
child's play--a senseless sacrifice of all that is really worth haying
for the sake of a few moments' gratification of the lower part of his
nature. He "sets his affection on things above and not on things of the
earth", not only because he sees this to be the right course of action,
but because he realizes so clearly the valuelessness of these things of
earth. He always tries to take the higher point of view, for he knows
that the lower is utterly unreliable--that the lower desires and
feelings gather round him like a dense fog, and make it impossible for
him to see anything clearly from that level.

Whenever he finds a struggle going on within him he remembers that he
himself is the higher, and that this which is the lower is not the real
self, but merely an uncontrolled part of one of its vehicles. He knows
that though he may fall a thousand times on the way towards his goal,
his reason for trying to reach it remains just as strong after the
thousandth fall as it was in the beginning, so that it would not only be
useless but unwise and wrong to give way to despondency and
hopelessness.

He begins his journey upon the road of progress at once--not only
because he knows that it is far easier for him now than it will be if he
leaves the effort until later, but chiefly because if he makes the
endeavour now and succeeds in achieving some progress, if he rises
thereby to some higher level, he is in a position to hold out a helping
hand to those who have not yet reached even that step on the ladder
which he has gained. In that way he takes a part, however humble it may
be, in the great divine work of evolution.

He knows that he has arrived at his present position only by a slow
process of growth, and so he does not expect instantaneous attainment of
perfection. He sees how inevitable is the great law of cause and effect,
and that when he once grasps the working of that law he can use it
intelligently in regard to mental and moral development, just as in the
physical world we can employ for our own assistance those laws of Nature
the action of which we have learnt to understand.

Understanding what death is, he knows that there can be no need to fear
it or to mourn over it, whether it comes to himself or to those whom he
loves. It has come to them all often before, so there is nothing
unfamiliar about it. He sees death simply as a promotion from a life
which is more than half physical to one which is wholly superior, so for
himself he unfeignedly welcomes it; and even when it comes to those whom
he loves, he recognizes at once the advantage for them, even though he
cannot but feel a pang of regret that he should be temporarily separated
from them so far as the physical world is concerned. But he knows that
the so-called dead are near him still, and that he has only to cast off
for a time his physical body in sleep in order to stand side by side
with them as before.

He sees clearly that the world is one, and that the same divine laws
rule the whole of it, whether it be visible or invisible to physical
sight. So he has no feeling of nervousness or strangeness in passing
from one part of it to another, and no feeling of uncertainty as to what
he will find on the other side of the veil. He knows that in that higher
life there opens before him a splendid vista of opportunities both for
acquiring fresh knowledge and for doing useful work; that life away from
this dense body has a vividness and a brilliancy to which all earthly
enjoyment is as nothing; and so through his clear knowledge and calm
confidence the power of the endless life shines out upon all those round
him.

Doubt as to his future is for him impossible, for just as by looking
back on the savage he realizes that which he was in the past, so by
looking to the greatest and wisest of mankind he knows what he will be
in the future. He sees an unbroken chain of development, a ladder of
perfection rising steadily before him, yet with human beings upon every
step of it, so that he knows that those steps are possible for him to
climb. It is just because of the unchangeableness of the great law of
cause and effect that he finds himself able to climb that ladder,
because since the law works always in the same way, he can depend upon
it and he can use it, just as he uses the laws of Nature in the physical
worlds. His knowledge of this law brings to him a sense of perspective
and shows him that if something comes to him, it comes because he has
deserved it as a consequence of actions which he has committed, of words
which he has spoken, of thought to which he has given harbour in
previous days or in earlier lives. He comprehends that all affliction is
of the nature of the payment of a debt, and therefore when he has to
meet with the troubles of life he takes them and uses them as a lesson,
because he understands why they have come and is glad of the opportunity
which they give him to pay off something of his obligation.

Again, and in yet another way, does he take them as an opportunity, for
he sees that there is another side to them if he meets them in the right
way. He spends no time in bearing prospective burdens. When trouble
comes to him he does not aggravate it by foolish repining but sets
himself to endure so much of it as is inevitable, with patience and"
with fortitude. Not that he submits himself to it as a fatalist might,
for he takes adverse circumstances as an incentive to such development
as may enable him to transcend them, and thus out of long-past evil he
brings forth a seed of future growth. For in the very act of paying the
outstanding debt he develops qualities of courage and resolution that
will stand him in good stead through all the ages that are to come.

He is distinguishable from the rest of the world by his perennial
cheerfulness, his undaunted courage under difficulties, and his ready
sympathy and helpfulness; yet he is at the same time emphatically a man
who takes life seriously, who recognizes that there is much for everyone
to do in the world, and that there is no time to waste. He knows with
utter certainty that he not only makes his own destiny but also gravely
affects that of others around him, and thus he perceives how weighty a
responsibility attends the use of his power.

He knows that thoughts are things and that it is easily possible to do
great harm or great good by their means, He knows that no man liveth to
himself, for his every thought acts upon others as well; that the
vibrations which he sends forth from his mind and from his mental nature
are reproducing themselves in the minds and the mental natures of other
men, so that he is a source either of mental health or of mental ill to
all with whom he comes in contact.

This at once imposes upon him a far higher code of social ethics than
that which is known to the outer world, for he knows that he must
control not only his acts and his words, but also his thoughts, since
they may produce effects more serious and more far-reaching than their
outward expression in the physical world. He knows that even when a man
is not in the least thinking of others, he yet inevitably affects them
for good or for evil. In addition to this unconscious action of his
thought upon others he also employs it consciously for good. He sets
currents in motion to carry mental help and comfort to many a suffering
friend, and in this way he finds a whole new world of usefulness opening
before him.

He ranges himself ever on the side of the higher rather than the lower
thought, the nobler rather than the baser. He deliberately takes the
optimistic rather than the pessimistic view of everything, the helpful,
rather than the cynical, because he knows that to be fundamentally the
true view. By looking continually for the good in everything that he may
endeavour to strengthen it, by striving always to help and never to
hinder, he becomes ever of greater use to his fellow-men, and is thus in
his small way a co-worker with the splendid scheme of evolution. He
forgets himself utterly and lives but for the sake of others, realizing
himself as a part of that scheme; he also realizes the God within him,
and learns to become ever a truer expression of Him, and thus in
fulfilling God's Will, he is not only blessed himself, but becomes a
blessing to all.
