[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Theosophy](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap03) [Next](chap05)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter IV

# THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE

ALL the impulses of life which I have described as building the
interpenetrating worlds come forth from the Third Aspect of the Deity.
Hence in the Christian scheme that Aspect is called "the Giver of Life",
the Spirit who brooded over the face of the waters of space. In
Theosophical literature these impulses are usually taken as a whole, and
called the First Outpouring.

When the worlds had been prepared to this extent, and most of the
chemical elements already existed, the Second Outpouring of life took
place, and this came from the Second Aspect of the Deity. It brought
with it the power of combination. In all the worlds it found existing
what may be thought of as elements corresponding to those worlds. It
proceeded to combine those elements into organisms which it then
ensouled, and in this way it built up the seven kingdoms of Nature.
Theosophy recognizes seven kingdoms, because it regards man as separate
from the animal kingdom and it takes into account several stages of
evolution which are unseen by the physical eye, and gives to them the
mediæval name of "elemental kingdoms".

The divine Life pours itself into matter from above, and its whole
course may be thought of in two stages--the gradual assumption of
grosser and grosser matter, and then the gradual casting off again of
the vehicles which have been assumed. The earliest level upon which its
vehicles can be scientifically observed is the mental--the fifth
counting from the finer to the grosser, the first on which there are
separated globes. In practical study it is found convenient to divide
this mental world into two parts, which we call the higher and the lower
according to the degree of density of their matter. The higher consists
of the three finer subdivisions of mental matter; the lower part of the
other four.

When the outpouring reaches the higher mental world it draws together
the ethereal elements there, combines them into what at that level
correspond to substances and of these substances builds forms which it
inhabits. We call this the first elemental kingdom.

After a long period of evolution through different forms at that level,
the wave of life, which is all the time pressing steadily downwards,
learns to identify itself so fully with those forms that, instead of
occupying them and withdrawing from them periodically, it is able to
hold them permanently and make them part of itself, so that now from
that level it can proceed to the temporary occupation of forms at a
still lower level. When it reaches this stage we call it the second
elemental kingdom, the ensouling life of which resides upon the higher
mental levels, while the vehicles through which it manifests are on the
lower.

After another vast period of similar length, it is found that the
downward pressure has caused this process to repeat itself; once more
the life has identified itself with its forms, and has taken up its
residence upon the lower mental levels, so that it is capable of
ensouling bodies in the astral world. At this stage we call it the third
elemental kingdom.

We speak of all these forms as finer or grosser relatively to one
another, but all of them are almost infinitely finer than any with which
we are acquainted in the physical world. Each of these three is a
kingdom of Nature, as varied in the manifestations of its different
forms of life as is the animal or vegetable kingdom which we know. After
a long period spent in ensouling the forms of the third of these
elemental kingdoms it identifies itself with them in turn, and so is
able to ensoul the etheric part of the mineral kingdom, and becomes the
life which vivifies that--for there is a life in the mineral kingdom
just as much as in the vegetable or the animal, although it is in
conditions where it cannot manifest so freely. In the course of the
mineral evolution the downward pressure causes it to identify itself in
the same way with the etheric matter of the physical world, and from
that to ensoul the denser matter of such minerals as are perceptible to
our senses.

In the mineral kingdom we include not only what are usually called
minerals, but also liquids, gases and many etheric substances the
existence of which is unknown to western science. All the matter of
which we know anything is living matter, and the life which it contains
is always evolving. When it has reached the central point of the mineral
stage the downward pressure ceases, and is replaced by an upward
tendency; the outbreathing has ceased and the indrawing has begun.

When mineral evolution is completed, the life has withdrawn itself again
into the astral world, but bearing with it all the results obtained
through its experiences in the physical. At this stage it ensouls
vegetable forms, and begins to show itself much more clearly as what we
commonly call life--plant-life of all kinds; and at a yet later stage of
its development it leaves the vegetable kingdom and ensouls the animal
kingdom. The attainment of this level is the sign that it has withdrawn
itself still further, and is now working from the lower mental world. In
order to work in physical matter from that mental world it must operate
through the intervening astral matter; and that astral matter is now no
longer part of the garment of the group-soul as a whole, but is the
individual astral body of the animal concerned, as will be later
explained.

In each of these kingdoms it not only passes a period of time which is
to our ideas almost incredibly long, but it also goes through a definite
course of evolution, beginning from the lower manifestations of that
kingdom and ending with the highest. In the vegetable kingdom, for
example, the life-force might commence its career by occupying grasses
or mosses and end it by ensouling magnificent forest trees. In the
animal kingdom it might commence with mosquitoes or with animalculæ, and
might end with the finest specimens of the mammalia.

The whole process is one of steady evolution, from, lower forms to
higher, from the simpler to the more complex. But what is evolving is
not primarily the form, but the life within it. The forms also evolve
and grow better as time passes; but this is in order that they may be
appropriate vehicles for more and more advanced waves of life. When the
life has reached the highest level possible in the animal kingdom, it
may then pass on into the human kingdom, under conditions which will
presently be explained.

The outpouring leaves one kingdom and passes to another, so that if we
had to deal with only one wave of this outpouring we could have in
existence only one kingdom at a time. But the Deity sends out a constant
succession of these waves, so that at any given time we find a number of
them simultaneously in operation. We ourselves represent one such wave;
but we find evolving alongside us another wave which ensouls the animal
kingdom--a wave which came out from the Deity one stage later than we
did. We find also the vegetable kingdom, which represents a third wave,
and the mineral kingdom, which represents a fourth; and occultists know
of the existence all round us of three elemental kingdoms, which
represent the fifth, sixth and seventh waves. All these, however, are
successive ripples of the same great outpouring from the Second Aspect
of the Deity.

We have here, then, a scheme of evolution in which the divine Life
involves itself more and more deeply in matter, in order that through
that matter it may receive vibrations which could not otherwise affect
it--impacts from without, which by degrees arouse within it rates of
undulation corresponding to their own, so that it learns to respond to
them. Later on it learns of itself to generate these rates of
undulation, and so becomes a being possessed of spiritual powers.

We may presume that when this outpouring of life originally came forth
from the Deity, at some level altogether beyond our power of cognition,
it may perhaps have been homogeneous; but when it first comes within
practical cognizance, when it is itself in the intuitional world, but is
ensouling bodies made of the matter of the higher mental world, it is
already not one huge world-soul but many souls. Let us suppose a
homogeneous outpouring, which may be considered as one vast soul, at one
end of the scale; at the other, when humanity is reached, we find that
one vast soul broken up into millions of the comparatively little souls
of individual men. At any stage between these two extremes we find an
intermediate condition, the immense world-soul already subdivided, but
not to the utmost limit of possible subdivision.

Each man is a soul, but not each animal or each plant. Man, as a soul,
can manifest through only one body at a time in the physical world,
whereas one animal soul manifests simultaneously through a number of
animal bodies, one plant soul through a number of separate plants. A
lion, for example, is not a permanently separate entity in the same way
as a man is. When the man dies--that is, when he as a soul lays aside
his physical body--he remains himself exactly as he was before, an
entity separate from all other entities. When the lion dies, that which
has been the separate soul of him is poured back into the mass from
which it came--a mass which is at the same time providing the souls for
many other lions. To such a mass we give the name of "group-soul".

To such a group-soul is attached a considerable number of lion
bodies--let us say a hundred. Each of those bodies while it lives has
its hundredth part of the group-soul attached to it, and for the time
being this is apparently quite separate, so that the lion is as much an
individual during his physical life as the man; but he is not a
permanent individual. When he dies the soul of him flows back into the
group-soul to which it belongs, and that identical lion-soul cannot be
separated again from the group.

A useful analogy may help comprehension. Imagine the group-soul to be
represented by the water in a bucket, and the hundred lion bodies by a
hundred tumblers. As each tumbler is dipped into the bucket it takes out
from it a tumblerful of water (the separate soul). That water for the
time being takes the shape of the vehicle which it fills, "and is
temporarily separate from the water which remains in the bucket, and
from the water in the other tumblers.

Now put into each of the hundred tumblers some kind of colouring matter
or some kind of flavouring. That will represent the qualities developed
by its experiences in the separate soul of the lion during its lifetime.
Pour back the water from the tumbler into the bucket; that represents
the death of the lion. The colouring matter or the flavouring will be
distributed through the whole of the water in the bucket, but will be a
much fainter colouring, a much less pronounced flavour when thus
distributed than it was when confined in one tumbler. The qualities
developed by the experience of one lion attached to that group-soul are
therefore shared by the entire group-soul, but in a much lower degree.

We may take out another tumblerful of water from that bucket, but we can
never again get exactly the same tumblerful after it has once been
mingled with the rest. Every tumblerful taken from that bucket in the
future will contain some traces of the colouring or flavouring put into
each tumbler whose contents have been returned to the bucket. Just so
the qualities developed by the experience of a single lion will become
the common property of all lions who are in the future to be born from
that group-soul, though in a lesser degree than that in which they
existed in the individual lion who developed them.

That is the explanation of inherited instincts; that is why the duckling
which has been hatched by a hen takes to the water instantly without
needing to be shown how to swim; why the chicken just out of its shell
will cower at the shadow of a hawk; why a bird which has been
artificially hatched, and has never seen a nest, nevertheless knows how
to make one, and makes it according to the traditions of its kind.

Lower down in the scale of animal life enormous numbers of bodies are
attached to a single group-soul--countless millions, for example, in the
case of some of the smaller insects; but as we rise in the animal
kingdom the number of bodies attached to a single group-soul becomes
smaller and smaller, and therefore the differences between individuals
become greater.

Thus the group-souls gradually break up. Returning to the symbol of the
bucket, as tumbler after tumbler of water is withdrawn from it, tinted
with some sort of colouring matter and returned to it, the whole
bucketful of water gradually becomes richer in colour. Suppose that by
imperceptible degrees a kind of vertical film forms itself across the
centre of the bucket, and gradually solidifies itself into a division,
so that we have now a right half and a left half to the bucket, and each
tumblerful of water which is taken out is returned always to the same
section from which it came.

Then presently a difference will be set up, and the liquid in one half
of the bucket will no longer be the same as that in the other. We have
then practically two buckets, and when this stage is reached in a
group-soul it splits into two, as a cell separates by fission. In this
way, as the experience grows ever richer, the group-souls grow smaller
but more numerous, until at the highest point we arrive at man with his
single individual soul, which no longer returns into a group, but
remains always separate.

One of the life-waves is vivifying the whole of a kingdom; but not every
group-soul in that life-wave will pass through the whole of that kingdom
from the bottom to the top. If in the vegetable kingdom a certain
group-soul has ensouled forest trees, when it passes on into the animal
kingdom it will omit all the lower stages--that is, it will never
inhabit insects or reptiles, but will begin at once at the level of the
lower mammalia. The insects and reptiles will be vivified by group-souls
which have for some reason left the vegetable kingdom at a much lower
level than the forest tree. In the same way the group-soul which has
reached the highest levels of the animal kingdom will not individualize
into primitive savages, but into men of somewhat higher type, the
primitive savages being recruited from group-souls which have left the
animal kingdom at a lower level.

Group-souls at any level or at all levels arrange themselves into seven
great types, according to the Minister of the Deity through whom their
life has poured forth, These types are clearly distinguishable in all
the kingdoms, and the successive forms taken by any one of them form a
connected series, so that animals, vegetables, minerals and the
varieties of the elemental creatures may all be arranged into seven
great groups, and the life coming along one of those lines will not
diverge into any of the others.

No detailed list has yet been made of the animals, plants or minerals
from this point of view; but it is certain that the life which is found
ensouling a mineral of a particular type will never vivify a mineral of
any other type than its own, though within that type it may vary. When
it passes on to the vegetable and animal kingdoms it will inhabit
vegetables and animals of that; type and of no other; and when it
eventually reaches humanity it will individualize into men of that type
and of no other.

The method of individualization is the raising of the soul of a
particular animal to a level so much higher than that attained by its
group-soul that it can no longer return to the latter. This cannot be
done with *any* animal, but only with, those whose brain is developed to
a certain level, and the method usually adopted to acquire such mental
development is to bring the animal into close contact with man.
Individualization, therefore, is possible only for domestic animals, and
only for certain kinds even of those. At the head of each of the seven
types stands one kind of domestic animal--the dog for one, the cat for
another, the elephant for a third, the monkey for a fourth, and so on.
The wild animals can all be arranged on seven lines leading up to the
domestic animals; for example, the fox and the wolf are obviously on the
same line with the dog, while the lion, the tiger and the leopard
equally obviously lead up to the domestic-cat; so that the group-soul
animating a hundred lions mentioned some time ago might at a later stage
of its evolution have divided into, let us say, five group-souls each
animating twenty cats.

The life-wave spends a long period of time in each kingdom; we are now
only a little past the middle of such an æon, and consequently the
conditions are not, favourable for the achievement of that
individualization which normally comes only at the end of a period. Rare
instances of such attainment may occasionally be observed on the part of
some animal much in advance of the average. Close association with man
is necessary to produce this result. The animal if kindly treated
develops devoted affection for his human friend, and also unfolds his
intellectual powers in trying to understand that friend and to
anticipate his wishes. In addition to this, the emotions and the
thoughts of the man act constantly upon those of the animal, and tend to
raise him to a higher level both emotionally and intellectually. Under
favourable circumstances this development may proceed so far as to raise
the animal altogether out of touch with the group to which he belongs,
so that his fragment of a group-soul becomes capable of responding to
the outpouring which comes from the First Aspect of the Deity.

For this final outpouring is not like the others, a mighty outrush
affecting thousands or millions simultaneously; it comes to each one
individually as that one is ready to receive it. This outpouring has
already descended as far as the intuitional world; but it comes no
farther than that until this upward leap is made by the soul of the
animal from below; but when that happens this Third Outpouring leaps
down to meet it, and in the higher mental world is formed an ego, a
permanent individuality--permanent, that is, until, far later in his
evolution, the man transcends it and reaches back to the divine unity
from which he came. To make this ego, the fragment of the group-soul
(which has hitherto played the part always of ensouling force) becomes
in its turn a vehicle, and is itself ensouled by that divine Spark which
has fallen into it from on high. That Spark may be said to have been
hovering in the monadic world over the group-soul through the whole of
its previous evolution, unable to effect a junction with it until its
corresponding fragment in the group-soul had developed sufficiently to
permit it. It is this breaking away from the rest of the group-soul and
developing a separate ego which marks the distinction between the
highest animal and the lowest man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: The Constitution of Man](chap05)
