[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2255)  [Next](sbe2257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### TENTH LESSON.

A single mendicant, having collected alms for many, might, without
consulting his fellow-ascetics, give them to those whom he list; as this
would be sinful, he should not do so. Taking the food, he should go
there (where his teacher &c. is) and speak thus: 'O long-lived
*S*rama*n*a! there are near or remote (spiritual) relations of mine: a
teacher, a sub-teacher, a religious guide, a Sthavira, a head of a
Ga*n*a, a Ga*n*adhara, a founder of a Ga*n*a; forsooth, I shall give it
them.' The other may answer him: 'Well now, indeed, O long-lived one!
give such a portion!' As much as the other commands, thus much he should
give; if the other commands the whole, he should give the whole. (1)

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

A single mendicant, having collected agreeable food, might cover it with
distasteful food, thinking: 'The teacher or sub-teacher, &c., seeing
what I have received, might take it himself; indeed, I shall not give
anything to anybody!' As this would be sinful, he should not do so.

Knowing this, he should go there (where the other mendicants are),
should put the vessel in his out-stretched hand, show it (with the
words): Ah, this! ah, this!' and hide nothing. (2)

A single mendicant, having received some food, might eat what is good,
and bring what is discoloured and tasteless; as this would be sinful, he
should not do so. (3)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept any part of the
sugar-cane <span id="fr_375"></span>[1](#fn_369), whether small or
large, pea-pods, seed-pods, of which articles a small part only can be
eaten, and the greater part must be rejected; for such things are impure
and unacceptable. (4)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept meat or fish
containing many bones, so that only a part of it can be eaten and the
greater part must be rejected; for such meat or fish, &c., is impure and
unacceptable. (5)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour may be invited to meat or fish
containing many bones, (by the householder who addresses him thus): 'O
long-lived *S*rama*n*a! will you accept meat with many bones?' Hearing
such a communication, he should

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

say, after consideration: 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) it is not
meet for me to accept meat with many bones; if you want to give me a
portion of whatever size, give it me; but not the bones!' If after these
words the other (i.e. the householder) should fetch meat containing many
bones, put it in a bowl and return with it, (the mendicant) should not
accept such a bowl, whether out of the other's hand or a vessel <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_370); for it is impure and unacceptable. But
if he has inadvertently accepted it, he should not say: 'No, away, take
it!' Knowing this, he should go apart, and in a garden or an upâ*s*raya,
where there are few eggs, &c., (all down t o) cobwebs, eat the meat or
fish, and taking the bones, he should resort to a secluded spot and
leave them on a heap of ashes, &c. (see II, 1, 1, § 2). (6)

If a householder should fetch fossil salt or sea salt, put it in a bowl
and return with it, a monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept
it out of the other's hand or vessel; for, &c.

But if he has inadvertently accepted it, he should return with it to the
householder, if he is not yet too far away, and say, after
consideration <span id="fr_377"></span>[2](#fn_371): 'Did you give me
this with your full knowledge or without it?' He might answer: I did
give it without my full knowledge; but indeed, O long-lived one! I now
give it you; consume it or divide it (with others)!'

Then being permitted by, and having received it from, the householder,
he should circumspectly eat it or drink it, and what he cannot eat or
drink he

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

should share with his fellow-ascetics in the neighbourhood, who follow
the same rules of conduct, are agreeable, and not to be shunned; but if
there are no fellow-ascetics, the same should be done as in case one has
received too much food.

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (7)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_369"></span>[114:1](sbe2256.htm#fr_375) They are detailed
in the original: a*m*taru*kkh*uya*m*, a piece between two knots;
u*kkh*uga*md*iya*m*, a piece containing a knot; u*kkh*u*k*oyagam (?),
u*kkh*umeraga*m*, top of a stalk; u*kkh*usâlaga*m*, long leaf;
u*kkh*u*d*âlaga*m*, fragment of a leaf.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[115:1](sbe2256.htm#fr_376) Parahattha*m*si vâ
parapâya*m*si vâ. This is a typical phrase, and seems rather out of
place here.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[115:2](sbe2256.htm#fr_377) Âloe*gg*â, he
should show, would perhaps be better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 1, Lesson 11](sbe2257)
