[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2258)  [Next](sbe2260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### SECOND LESSON.

Some householders are of clean habits and the mendicants, because they
never bathe, are covered with uncleanliness; they smell after it, they
smell badly, they are disagreeable, they are loathsome. Hence the
householders, with regard to the mendicant, put off some work which
otherwise they would have done before, and do some work which otherwise
they would have put off.

Hence it has been said to the mendicant, &c.,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

that he should not use, for religious postures, &c., a lodging used by
the householder. (1)

This is the reason: While a mendicant lives together with householders,
the householder might, for his own sake, have prepared something to eat.
Then, afterwards, he might, for the sake of the mendicant, prepare or
dress food, &c., and the mendicant might desire to eat or drink or
swallow it.

Hence it has been said to the mendicant, &c. (see above). (2)

This is the reason: While the mendicant lives together with a
householder, there may be ready wood cleft for the use of the
householder. Then, afterwards, (the householder) might, for the sake of
the mendicant, cleave or buy or steal wood, kindle or light, by rubbing
wood on wood, the fire-body, and the mendicant might desire to dry or
warm himself at, or enjoy, the fire.

Hence it has been said to the mendicant, &c. (see above). (3)

When in the night or twilight a mendicant, to ease nature, leaves the
door open, a thief, watching for an occasion, might enter. It is not
meet for the mendicant to say: This thief enters or does not enter, he
hides himself or does not hide himself, he creeps in or does not creep
in, he speaks or does not speak; he has taken it, another has taken it,
it is taken from that man; this is the thief, this is the accomplice,
this is the murderer, he has done so <span
id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_380). The householder will suspect the
ascetic, the mendicant,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

who is not a thief, to be the thief. Hence it has been said to the
mendicant, &c. (4)

A monk or a nun should not use, for religious postures, &c., sheds of
grass or straw which contain eggs, living beings, &c. But they may do so
if they contain few eggs, few living beings, &c. (5)

A mendicant should not stay in halting-places, garden houses, family
houses, monasteries, where many fellow-ascetics are frequently arriving.

1\. If the reverend persons continue to live in those places after
staying there for a month <span id="fr_387"></span>[1](#fn_381) in the
hot or cold seasons or for the rainy season (he should say): 'O
long-lived one! you sin by overstaying the fixed time.' (6)

2\. If the reverend persons repeatedly live in halting-places, &c.,
after staying there for the proper time, without passing two or three
intermediate months somewhere else, (he should say): 'O long-lived one!
you sin by repeating your retreat in the same place.' (7)

3\. Here, in the east, west, north, or south, there are, forsooth, some
faithful householders, householders' wives, &c., who are not well
acquainted with the rules of monastic life (with regard to the fitness
of lodging-places); nevertheless they believe in, perceive, are
convinced of, (the merit of) giving lodging to mendicants. They
(accordingly) give lodging-places for the sake of many *S*rama*n*as and
Brâhma*n*as, guests, paupers, and beggars, in workshops, chapels,
temples, assembly halls, wells, houses or halls for shopkeeping or for
keeping or building carriages, distilleries, houses where Darbha-grass,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

bark, trees, wood or charcoal are being worked, houses on burial-places,
rooms for retirement near the place of sacrifice <span
id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_382), empty houses, hill-houses, caves,
stone-houses, or palaces. He should say to those reverend persons who
live in such-like places as workshops, &c., together with other guests:
'O long-lived one! you sin by living in a place frequented by other
sectarians.' (8)

4\. Here, in the east, &c. They accordingly give, &c. (all as in §8 down
to) palaces. If the mendicants come there while the other religious men
do not come there, they sin by living in a place not frequented by other
mendicants. (9)

5\. In the east, west, north, or south there are faithful householders,
viz. a householder or his wife, &c., who will speak thus: 'It is not
meet that these illustrious, pious, virtuous, eloquent, controlled,
chaste ascetics, who have ceased from sexual intercourse, should dwell
in a lodging which is âdhâkarmika <span id="fr_389"></span>[2](#fn_383):
let us give to the mendicants the lodgings which are ready for our use,
viz. workshops, &c., and let us, afterwards, prepare lodgings for our
own use, viz. workshops, &c.' Hearing and perceiving such talk, if the
reverend persons frequent such-like lodgings, viz. workshops, &c., and
live in them which are ceded by other people (they should be warned): 'O
long-lived one! that (lodging is infected by the sin called)
var*g*akriyâ.' (10)

6\. Here, in the east, &c. (see § 8 all down to) they give
lodging-places for the sake of many *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as,
guests, paupers, and beggars, after having well counted them, in
workshops, &c.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If the reverend
persons frequent such-like lodgings, viz. workshops, &c., and live in
them which are ceded by other people (they should be warned): 'O
long-lived one! that (lodging is infected by the sin called)
mahâvar*g*akriyâ.' (11)

7\. Here, in the east, &c. They accordingly give, for the sake of many
sorts of *S*rama*n*as <span id="fr_390"></span>[1](#fn_384), after
having well counted them, lodging-places, viz. workshops, &c. If the
reverend persons frequent such-like lodgings, viz. workshops, &c., and
live in them which are ceded by other people (they should be warned): 'O
long-lived one! that (lodging is infected by the sin called)
sâvadyakriyâ.' (12)

8\. Here, in the east, &c. They accordingly prepare, for the sake of one
sort of *S*rama*n*as, lodgings, viz. workshops, &c., for which purpose
great injury is done to the earth, water, fire, wind-bodies, plants, and
animals, great injury, great cruelty, great and manifold sinful acts; by
wasting cold water or strewing (the ground), smearing it with cowdung,
shutting the doors and securing the bed, lighting a fire. If the
reverend persons frequent such-like lodgings, viz. workshops, &c., and
lead in such ceded lodgings an ambiguous <span
id="fr_391"></span>[2](#fn_385) life (they should be warned): 'O
long-lived one! that (lodging is infected by the sin called)
mahâsâvadyakriyâ.' (is)

9\. But if the lodgings, viz. workshops, &c., are

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

prepared by the householders for their own sake under the same
circumstances as detailed in the preceding paragraph, and the reverend
persons frequent such-like lodgings, they lead, in those lodgings, an
unambiguous life. 'O long-lived one! that (lodging is infected by the
very small sin called) alpasâvadyakriyâ.'

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_380"></span>[125:1](sbe2259.htm#fr_386) For if he gives
warning of the thief, the warner or the thief might be slain; but if he
gives no warning, no life will be lost, though the mendicant's integrity
may be doubted.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[126:1](sbe2259.htm#fr_387) Or any fixed
period, which the mendicant has vowed not to exceed staying in one
place.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[127:1](sbe2259.htm#fr_388) *S*ântig*ri*ha.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[127:2](sbe2259.htm#fr_389) See note
[5](sbe2243.htm#fn_307) on [p. 81](sbe2243.htm#page_81).

<span id="fn_384"></span>[128:1](sbe2259.htm#fr_390) There are five
sorts of Srama*n*as enumerated in the following hemistich, which occurs
not only in *S*îlâṅka's commentary, but also in that of the Sthânâṅga
Sûtra, as Dr. Leumann informs me: Nigga*m*tha, Sakka, Tâvasa, Gerua,
Â*g*îva pa*mk*ahâ sama*n*â. Nirgranthas, *S*âkyas, Tâpasas, Gairikas,
Â*g*îvakas.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[128:2](sbe2259.htm#fr_391) Dupakkha*m* te
kamma seva*m*ti, lit. use twofold work; the meaning is, according to the
commentary, that they act like householders, though they make a show of
monastic life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 2, Lesson 3](sbe2260)
