[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2264)  [Next](sbe2266.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### SECOND LESSON.

A monk or a nun, seeing any sort (of diseases), should not talk of them
in this way: 'He has got boils, or leprosy, &c. (see I, 6, 1, § 3); his
hand is cut, or his foot, nose, ear, lip is cut.' For as all such
people, spoken to in such language, become

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

angry, hence, considering well, they should not speak to them in such
language. (1)

A monk or a nun, seeing any sort (of good qualities), should speak thus:
'He is strong, powerful, vigorous, famous, well-formed,
well-proportioned, handsome.' For as all such people, spoken to in such
language, do not become angry, they should, considering well, speak to
them in such language. (2)

A monk or a nun, seeing any sort of such things as walls or ditches, &c.
(see II, 3, 2, § 14), should not speak of them in this way: This is
well-executed, finely executed, beautiful, excellent, (so done) or to be
done;' they should not use such sinful, &c., language. (3)

A monk or a nun, seeing walls, &c., should speak about them in this way:
'This has been executed with great effort, with sin, with much labour;
it is very magnificent, it is very beautiful, it is very fine, it is
very handsome;' considering well, they should use such sinless, &c.,
language. (4)

A monk or a nun, seeing food, &c., prepared, should not speak about it
in this way: 'This is well executed, finely executed, beautiful,
excellent, (so done) or to be done;' considering well, they should not
use such sinful, &c., language. (5)

A monk or a nun, seeing food, &c., prepared, should speak about it in
this way: 'This has been executed with great effort, with sin, with much
labour; it is very good, it is excellent, it is well seasoned, it is
most delicious, it is most agreeable;' considering well, they should use
such sinless, &c., language. (6)

A monk or a nun, seeing a man, a cow, a buffalo, deer, cattle, a bird, a
snake, an aquatic animal of

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

increased bulk, should not speak about them in this way: 'He (or it) is
fat, round, fit to be killed or cooked;' considering well, they should
not use such sinful, &c., language. (7)

A monk or a nun, seeing a man, a cow, &c., of increased bulk, should
speak about them in this way: 'He is of increased bulk, his body is well
grown, well compacted, his flesh and blood are abundant, his limbs are
fully developed;' considering well, they should use such sinless, &c.,
language. (8)

A monk or a nun, seeing any sort of cows (or oxen), should not speak
about them in this way: 'These cows should be milked or tamed or
covered, should draw a waggon or car;' considering well, they should not
use such sinful, &c., language. (9)

A monk or a nun, seeing any sort of cows (or oxen), should speak about
them in this way: 'It is a young cow, a milch cow, she gives much milk,
it is a short or a large one, a beast of burden;' considering well, they
should use such sinless, &c., language. (10)

A monk or a nun, seeing big trees in parks, on hills, or in woods,
should speak about them in this way: 'These (trees) are fit for palaces,
gates, houses, benches, bolts, boats, buckets, stools, trays, ploughs,
mattocks(?), machines, poles, the nave of a wheel(?), ga*nd*î <span
id="fr_427"></span>[1](#fn_421.md), seats, beds, cars, sheds;' considering
well, they should not use such sinful, &c., language. (11)

A monk or a nun, seeing big trees in parks, on hills, or in woods,
should speak about them in this way: 'These trees are noble, high and
round, big;

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

they have many branches, extended branches, they are very magnificent,'
&c. (see § 4); considering well, they should use such sinless, &c.,
language. (12)

A monk or a nun, seeing many wild fruits, should not speak about them in
this way: 'They are ripe, they should be cooked or eaten, they are just
in season, or soft, or they have just split;' considering well, they
should not use such sinful, &c., language. (13)

A monk or a nun, seeing many wild fruits, should speak about them in
this way: They are very plentiful, they contain many seeds, they are
fully grown, they have developed their proper shape;' considering well,
they should use such sinless, &c., language. (14)

A monk or a nun, seeing many vegetables, should not speak about them in
this way: 'They are ripe, they are dark coloured, shining, fit to be
fried or roasted or eaten;' considering well, they should not use such
sinful, &c., language. (15)

A monk or a nun, seeing many vegetables, should speak about them in this
way: 'They are grown up, they are fully grown, they are strong, they are
excellent, they are run to seed, they have spread their seed, they are
full of sap;' considering well, they should use such sinless, &c.,
language. (16)

A monk or a nun, hearing any sort of sounds, should not speak about them
in this way: 'This is a good sound, this is a bad sound;' considering
well, they should not use such sinless, &c., language; but they should
call them good, if they are good; bad, if they are bad; considering
well, they should use such sinless, &c., language. (17)

In the same manner they should speak about the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (five) colours, as
black, &c.; the (two) smells, as pleasant or unpleasant; the (five)
tastes, as sharp &c.; the (five) kinds of touch, as hard, &c. (18)

A monk or a nun, putting aside wrath, pride, deceit, and greed,
considering well, speaking with precision, what one has heard, not too
quick, with discrimination, should employ language in moderation and
restraint.

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (19)

End of the Fourth Lecture, called Modes of Speech.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[154:1](sbe2265.htm#fr_427.md) The Guzerati
commentator explains ga*nd*î by a kind of utensil. The Sanskrit
commentaries give no explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 5, Lesson 1](sbe2266.md)
