[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2201)  [Next](sbe2203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THE origin and development of the *G*aina sect is a subject on which
some scholars still think it safe to speak with a sceptical caution,
though this seems little warranted by the present state of the whole
question; for a large and ancient literature has been made accessible,
and furnishes ample materials for the early history of the sect to all
who are willing to collect them. Nor is the nature of these materials
such as to make us distrust them. We know that the sacred books of the
*G*ainas are old, avowedly older than the Sanskrit literature which we
are accustomed to call classical. Regarding their antiquity, many of
those books can vie with the oldest books of the northern Buddhists. As
the latter works have successfully been used as materials for the
history of Buddha and Buddhism, we can find no reason why we should
distrust the sacred books of the *G*ainas as an authentic source of
their history. If they were full of contradictory statements, or the
dates contained in them would lead to contradictory conclusions, we
should be justified in viewing all theories based on such materials with
suspicion. But the character of the *G*aina literature differs little in
this respect also from the Buddhistical, at least from that of the
northern Buddhists. How is it then that so many writers are inclined to
accord a different age and origin to the *G*aina sect from what can be
deduced from their own literature? The obvious reason is the similarity,
real or apparent, which European scholars have discovered between
*G*ainism and Buddhism. Two sects which have so much in common could
not, it was thought, have been independent from each other, but one sect
must needs

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

have grown out of, or branched off from the other. This â priori opinion
has prejudiced the discernment of many critics, and still does so. In
the following pages I shall try to destroy this prejudice, and to
vindicate that authority and credit of the sacred books of the *G*ainas
to which they are entitled. We begin our discussion with an inquiry
about Mahâvîra, the founder or, at least, the last prophet of the
*G*aina church. It will be seen that enough is known of him to
invalidate the suspicion that he is a sort of mystical person, invented
or set up by a younger sect some centuries after the pretended age of
their assumed founder.

The *G*ainas, both *S*vetâmbaras and Digambaras, state that Mahâvîra was
the son of king Siddhârtha of Ku*nd*apura or Ku*nd*agrâma. They would
have us believe that Ku*nd*agrâma was a large town, and Siddhârtha a
powerful monarch. But they have misrepresented the matter in overrating
the real state of things, just as the Buddhists did with regard to
Kapilavastu and *S*uddhodana. For Ku*nd*agrâma is called in the
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra a sa*m*nivesa, a term which the commentator interprets
as denoting a halting-place of caravans or processions. It must
therefore have been an insignificant place, of which tradition has only
recorded that it lay in Videha (Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II, 15, § 17). Yet by
combining occasional hints in the Bauddha and *G*aina scriptures we can,
with sufficient accuracy, point out where the birthplace of Mahâvîra was
situated; for in the Mahâvagga of the Buddhists <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) we read that Buddha, while sojourning at
Ko*t*iggâma, was visited by the courtezan Ambapâli and the Li*kkh*avis
of the neighbouring capital Vesâli. From Ko*t*iggâma he went to where
the *Ñ*âtikas <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) (lived.md). There he lodged
in the *Ñ*âtika Brick-hall <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_1.md), in the
neighbourhood of which place the courtezan

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ambapâli possessed
a park, Ambapâlivana, which she bequeathed on Buddha and the community.
From there he went to Vesâli, where he converted the general-in-chief
(of the Li*kkh*avis), a lay-disciple of the Nirgranthas (or *G*aina
monks). Now it is highly probable that the Ko*t*iggâma of the Buddhists
is identical with the Ku*nd*aggâma of the Gainas. Apart from the
similarity of the names, the mentioning of the *Ñ*âtikas, apparently
identical with the *Gñ*ât*ri*ka Kshatriyas to whose clan Mahâvîra
belonged, and of Sîha, the *G*aina, point to the same direction.
Ku*nd*agrâma, therefore, was probably one of the suburbs of Vai*s*âlî,
the capital of Videha. This conjecture is borne out by the name Vesâlie,
i.e. Vai*s*âlika given to Mahâvîra in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga I, 3 <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_2.md). The commentator explains the passage in
question in two different ways, and at another place a third explanation
is given. This inconsistency of opinion proves that there was no
distinct tradition as to the real meaning of Vai*s*âlika, and so we are
justified in entirely ignoring the artificial explanations of the later
*G*ainas. Vai*s*âlika apparently means a native of Vai*s*âlî: and
Mahâvîra could rightly be called that when Ku*nd*agrâma was a suburb of
Vai*s*âlî, just as a native of Turnham Green may be called a Londoner.
If then Ku*nd*agrâma was scarcely more than an outlying village of
Vai*s*âlî, it is evident that the sovereign of that village could at
best have been only a petty chief. Indeed, though the *G*ainas fondly
imagine Siddhârtha to have been a powerful monarch and depict his royal
state in glowing, but typical colours, yet their statements, if stripped
of all rhetorical ornaments, bring out the fact

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

that Siddhârtha was but a baron; for he is frequently called merely
Kshatriya--his wife Tri*s*alâ is, so far as I remember, never styled
Devî, queen, but always Kshatriyâ*n*î. Whenever the *Gñ*ât*ri*ka
Kshatriyas are mentioned, they are never spoken of as Siddhârtha's
Sâmantas or dependents, but are treated as his equals. From all this it
appears that Siddhârtha was no king, nor even the head of his clan, but
in all probability only exercised the degree of authority which in the
East usually falls to the share of landowners, especially of those
belonging to the recognised aristocracy of the country. Still he may
have enjoyed a greater influence than many of his fellow-chiefs; for he
is recorded to have been highly connected by marriage. His wife
Tri*s*alâ was sister to *K*e*t*aka, king of Vai*s*âlî <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_3.md). She is called Vaidehî or Videhadattâ <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_4.md), because she belonged to the reigning line
of Videha.

Buddhist works do not mention, for aught I know, *K*e*t*aka, king of
Vai*s*âlî; but they tell us that the government of Vesâli was vested in
a senate composed of the nobility and presided over by a king, who
shared the power with a viceroy and a general-in-chief <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_5.md). In *G*aina books we still have traces of
this curious government of the Li*kkh*avis; for in the Nirayâvalî
Sûtrâ <span id="fr_7"></span>[4](#fn_6.md) it is related that king
*K*e*t*aka, whom Kûnika, al. A*g*âta*s*atru, king of *K*ampâ, prepared
to attack with a strong army, called together the eighteen confederate
kings of Kâ*s*î and Ko*s*ala, the Li*kkh*avis and Mallakis, and asked
them whether they would satisfy Kûnika's demands or go to war with him.
Again, on the death of Mahâvîra the eighteen confederate kings,
mentioned above, instituted a festival to be held in memory of that
event <span id="fr_8"></span>[5](#fn_7.md), but no separate mention is made
of *K*e*t*aka, their pretended sovereign. It is therefore probable that
*K*e*t*aka was simply one of these confederate kings and of equal power
with them. In addition to this, his power was checked by the

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

constitution of Vesâli. So we are enabled to understand why the
Buddhists took no notice of him, as his influence was not very great,
and, besides, was used in the interest of their rivals. But the *G*ainas
cherished the memory of the maternal uncle and patron of their prophet,
to whose influence we must attribute the fact, that Vai*s*âlî used to be
a stronghold of *G*ainism, while being looked upon by the Buddhists as a
seminary of heresies and dissent.

We have traced the connection of Mahâvira's family not out of mere
curiosity, which indiscriminately collects all historical facts however
insignificant in themselves, but for the reason that the knowledge of
this connection enables us to understand how Mahâvîra came to obtain his
success. By birth he as well as Buddha was a member of a feudal
aristocracy similar to that of the Yâdavas in the legends about
K*ri*sh*n*a, or that of the Râjpoots of the present day. In feudal
societies family ties are very strong and long remembered <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_8.md). Now we know for certain that Buddha at
least addressed himself chiefly to the members of the aristocracy, that
the *G*ainas originally preferred the Kshatriyas to the Brâhmans <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_9.md). It is evident that both Mahâvîra and
Buddha have made use of the interest and support of their families to
propagate their order. Their prevalence over other rivals was certainly
due in some degree to their connection with the chief families of the
country.

Through his mother Mahâvîra was related to the ruling dynasty in
Magadha; for *K*e*t*aka's daughter *K*ellanâ <span
id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_10.md) was married to Se*n*iya Bimbhisâra <span
id="fr_12"></span>[4](#fn_11.md) or Bimbisâra, king of Magadha, and
residing in Râ*g*ag*ri*ha. He is praised by the *G*ainas and Buddhists,
as the friend and patron of both

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mahâvîra and
Buddha. But Kûnika or, as the Buddhists call him, A*g*âta*s*atru <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_12.md), his son by *K*ellanâ, the Videhan lady,
showed no favour to the Buddhists in the earlier part of his reign; only
eight years before Buddha's death he became his patron. We should go
wrong in believing him to have sincerely been converted. For a man who
avowedly murdered his father <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_13.md), and
waged war against his grandfather <span id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_14.md),
is not likely to have cared much about theology. His real motive in
changing his religious policy we may easily guess. He planned to add
Videha to his dominions, just as his father had added Aṅga to his
kingdom of Magadha; he therefore built the fort at Pâ*t*aligrâma <span
id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_15.md), in order not to repel but subdue the
Va*gg*ians or V*rig*is, a tribe of Videha, and at last fixed a quarrel
on the king of Vai*s*âlî, his grandfather. As the latter was the
maternal uncle of Mahâvîra, A*g*âta*s*atru, by attacking this patron of
the *G*ainas, lost in some degree their sympathy. Now he resolved on
siding with their rivals, the Buddhists, whom he formerly had persecuted
as friends of his father's, whom, as has been said above, he finally put
to death. We know that A*g*âta*s*atru succeeded in conquering Vai*s*âlî,
and that he laid the foundation of the empire of the Nandas and Mauryas.
With the extension of the limits of the empire of Magadha a new field
was opened to both religions, over which they spread with great
rapidity. It was probably this auspicious political conjuncture to which
*G*ainism and Buddhism chiefly owed their success, while many similar
sects attained only a local and temporal importance.

The following table gives the names of the relations of Mahâvîra, or, as
we should call him when not speaking of

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

him as a prophet of the *G*ainas, Vardhamâna or *Gñ*ât*ri*putra <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_16.md):--

<span id="img__01500"></span> ![](img/_01500.jpg)

I do not intend to write a full life of Mahâvîra, but to collect only
such details which show him at once a distinct historical person, and as
different from Buddha in the most important particulars. Vardhamâna was,
like his father, a Kâ*s*yapa. He seems to have lived in the house of his
parents till they died, and his elder brother, Nandivardhana, succeeded
to what principality they had. Then, at the age of twenty-eight, he,
with the consent of those in power, entered the spiritual career, which
in India, just as the church in Roman Catholic countries, seems to have
offered a field for the ambition of younger sons. For twelve years he
led a life of austerities, visiting even the wild tribes of the country
called Râ*dh*â. After the first year he went about naked <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_17.md). From the end of these twelve years of
preparatory self-mortification dates Vardhamâna's Kevaliship. Since that
time he was recognised as omniscient, as a prophet of the *G*ainas, or a
Tîrthakara, and had the titles *G*ina, Mahâvîra, &c., which were also
given to *S*âkyamuni. The last thirty years of his life he passed in
teaching his religious system and organising his order of ascetics,
which, as we have seen above, was patronised or at least countenanced
chiefly by those princes with whom he was related through his mother,
viz. *K*e*t*aka, Sre*n*ika, and Kûnika, the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

kings of Videha, Magadha, and Aṅga. In the towns which lay in these
parts he spent almost all the rainy seasons during his spiritual
career <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_18.md), though he extended his
travels as far west and north as *S*râvastî and the foot of the
Himalaya. The names of his chief disciples, the eleven Ga*n*adharas or
apostles of the *G*ainas, as detailed in the Kalpa Sûtra (List of
Sthaviras, § 1), are given without any variation by both divisions of
the church, the *S*vetâmbaras and Digambaras. Of the details of
Mahâvîra's life, mentioned in the canonical books, his rivalry with, and
victory over Go*s*âla, the son of Makkhali, and lastly, the place of his
death, the small town Pâpâ, deserve to be noticed. Nor are we by any
means forced to rely on the tradition of the *G*ainas only, since for
some particulars we have the testimony of the Buddhists also, in whose
writings Mahâvîra is mentioned under his well-known name Nâtaputta, as
the head of the Niga*nth*as or *G*aina monks and a rival of Buddha. They
only misstated his Gotra as that of Agnivai*s*yâyana; in this particular
they confounded him with his chief apostle Sudharman, the only one of
all the apostles who survived him and took the lead in the church after
his teacher's death. Mahâvîra being a contemporary of Buddha, they both
had the same contemporaries, viz. Bimbisâra and his sons, Abhayakumâra
and A*g*âta*s*atru, the Li*kkh*avis and Mallas, Go*s*âla Makkhaliputra,
whom we accordingly meet with in the sacred books of either sect. From
the Buddhist Pi*t*akas it appears, as we have seen above, that
Mahâvîra's followers were very numerous in Vai*s*âlî, a fact that is in
perfect accordance with what the *G*ainas relate about his birth in the
vicinity of that town, and which at the same time well agrees with his
connection with the chief magistrate of the place. In addition to this,
some tenets of the Niga*nth*as, e. g. the Kiriyavâda and the belief that
water is inhabited by souls, are mentioned in the sacred books of the
Buddhists, in perfect accordance with

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

the *G*aina creed. Lastly, the Buddhists are correct in assuming the
town Pâpâ as the scene of Nâtaputta's death.

Comparing this outline of Mahâvîra's life with that of Buddha's, we can
detect little or nothing in the former which can be suspected as having
been formed after the latter by tradition. The general resemblance
between the lives of both is due to their being lives of ascetics, which
from the nature of the things must present some uniformity, which
certainly will appear greater to the mind of a European historian of our
times than to that of an ancient Hindu. Some names of Mahâvîra's
relations are similar to those of Buddha's: the former's wife was
Ya*s*odâ, the latter's Ya*s*odharâ; the former's elder brother was
Nandivardhana, the latter's step-brother Nanda; Buddha's name as a
prince was Siddhartha, which was the name of Mahâvîra's father. But if
the similarity of these names proves anything, it proves no more than
that names of this description were much used then among the Kshatriyas,
as surely they were at all times <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_19.md).
Nor is it to be wondered at that two Kshatriyas should have founded
sects in opposition, or at least in disregard to the authority of the
Brâhmans. For, as I shall try to prove in the sequel, the Kshatriyas
were the most likely of all to become what the Brâhmans would call
'untrue ascetics.'

We shall now put side by side the principal events of Buddha's and
Mahâvîra's lives, in order to demonstrate their difference. Buddha was
born in Kapilavastu, Mahâvîra in a village near Vai*s*âlî; Buddha's
mother died after his birth, Mahâvîra's parents lived to see him a
grown-up man; Buddha turned ascetic during the lifetime and against the
will of his father, Mahâvîra did so after the death of his parents and
with the consent of those in power; Buddha led a life of austerities for
six years, Mahâvîra for twelve; Buddha thought these years wasted time,
and that all his penances were useless for attaining his end, Mahâvîra
was convinced of the necessity of his

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

penances <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_20.md), and persevered in some of
them even after becoming a Tîrthakara. Amongst Buddha's opponents
Go*s*âla Makkhaliputra is by no means so prominent as amongst
Mahâvira's, nor among the former do we meet *G*amâli, who caused the
first schism in the *G*aina church. All the disciples of Buddha bear
other names than those of Mahâvîra. To finish this enumeration of
differences, Buddha died in Kusinagara, whereas Mahâvira died in Pâpâ,
avowedly before the former.

I have dwelt so long on the subject of Mahâvira's life in order to make
the reader acquainted with facts which must decide the question whether
the origin of *G*ainism was independent of Buddhism or not. Though most
scholars do not go the length of denying that Mahâvira and Buddha were
different persons, yet some will not admit that this decides the
question at issue. Professor Weber, in his learned treatise on the
literature of the *G*ainas <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_21.md), says
that he still regards 'the *G*ainas merely as one of the oldest sects of
Buddhism. According to my opinion,' he writes, 'this is not precluded by
the tradition about the origin of its founder having partly made use of
another person than Buddha Sâkyamuni; nay, even of one whose name is
frequently mentioned in Buddhist legends as one of Buddha's contemporary
opponents. This rather suggests to me that the *G*ainas intentionally
disowned Buddha, being driven to this extremity by the animosity of
sect. The number and importance of coincidences in the tradition of
either sect regarding their founders is, on the whole, overwhelming.'

Professor Weber's last argument, the very one on which he seems to base
his theory, has, according to my opinion, been fully refuted by our
preceding inquiry. This theory, in itself, would require the strongest
proof before we could admit it as even probable. Generally, heterodox
sects claim to be the most authentic and correct interpreters of the
words and

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

tenets of their founders. If a sect begins to recognise another
authority than that of the original founder of the main church, it
either adopts another faith already in existence, or starts a new one.
In the first case the previous existence of the *G*aina faith in some
form or other has to be admitted; in the second we must suppose that the
malcontent Buddhists searched in their scriptures for an opponent of
Buddha, on whom they might foist their heretical theories, a course in
which they were not followed by any other of the many sects of Buddhism.
Now, granted for argument's sake, that they really did what they are
charged with, they must have proceeded with the utmost dexterity, making
use of, and slightly altering all occasional hints about the Niga*nth*as
and Nâtaputta which they were able to hunt up in their ancient
scriptures, inventing new facts, and fabricating documents of their own,
which to all, not in the secret, would seem just as trustworthy as those
of their opponents. Indeed the Buddhistical and *G*aina traditions about
Mahâvîra, the circumstances in, and the people with whom he lived, so
very well tally with, complete and correct each other that the most
natural and plausible way to account for this fact, which our preceding
inquiry has established, seems to be that both traditions are, in the
main, independent of each other, and record what, at the time of their
attaining a fixed form, was regarded as historical truth.

We shall now consider the resemblance between Buddhism and *G*ainism
which has struck so many writers on this topic and greatly influenced
their opinion regarding their mutual relation. Professor Lassen <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) adduces four points of coincidence which,
according to his opinion, prove that the Gainas have branched off from
the Bauddhas. We shall discuss them one after the other.

Both sects give the same titles or epithets to their prophets: *G*ina,
Arhat, Mahâvîra, Sarva*gñ*a, Sugata, Tathâgata, Siddha, Buddha,
Sambuddha, Pariniv*ri*ta, Mukta, &c. All these words occur more or less
frequently in the writings of both sects; but there is this difference,
that with the exception

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

of *G*ina, and perhaps *S*rama*n*a, the preference is given to some set
of titles by one sect, and to another set by the rival sect; e. g.
Buddha, Tathâgata, Sugata, and Sambuddha are common titles of
*S*âkyamuni, and are only occasionally used as epithets of Mahâvîra. The
case is exactly reverse with regard to Vîra and Mahâvîra, the usual
titles of Vardhamâna. More marked still is the difference with regard to
Tîrthakara, meaning prophet with the *G*ainas, but founder of an
heretical sect with the Bauddhas. What then may be safely inferred from
the peculiar choice which either sect made from these epithets and
titles? That the *G*ainas borrowed them from the older Buddhists? I
think not. For if these words had once been fixed as titles, or gained
some special meaning beyond the one warranted by etymology, they could
only have been adopted or rejected. But it was not possible that a word
which had acquired some special meaning should have been adopted, but
used in the original sense by those who borrowed it from the Buddhists.
The most natural construction we can put on the facts is, that there was
and is at all times a number of honorific adjectives and substantives
applicable to persons of exalted virtue. These words were used as
epithets in their original meaning by all sects; but some were selected
as titles for their prophets, a choice in which they were directed
either by the fitness of the word itself, or by the fact that such or
such a word was already appropriated by heterodox sects as a title for
their highest authority. Thus the etymological meaning of Tîrthakara is
founder of a religion, prophet, and accordingly this title was adopted
by the *G*ainas and other sects, whereas the Buddhists did not adopt it
in this sense, but in that of an heterodox or heretical teacher, showing
thereby their enmity towards those who used Tîrthakara as an honorific
title. Again, Buddha is commonly used in about the same sense as mukta,
that is a liberated soul, and in this meaning it is still employed in
*G*aina writings, whilst with the Buddhists the word has become a title
of their prophet. The only conclusion which might be forced from these
facts is, that the Buddhists at the time when they formed

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

their terminology were opponents of the Gainas, but not vice versâ.

Lassen, as a second argument in favour of the priority of Buddhism,
adduces the fact that both sects worship mortal men, their prophets,
like gods, and erect statues of them in their temples. As Buddhism and
*G*ainism excepted none of the many sects, the founders of which
pretended, like Buddha or Mahâvîra, to omniscience and absolute
perfection. have continued long enough to come within the reach of our
knowledge--and all or many of them may, for aught we know, have given
the same divine honours to their saints, as the Buddhists and *G*ainas
did to their own prophets--it cannot be alleged that the practice of the
Buddhists rather than of any other sect was imitated by the *G*ainas, or
vice versâ. On the contrary, there is nothing in the notion of Buddha
that could have favoured the erecting of statues and temples for his
followers to worship them, but rather much that is inconsistent with
this kind of adoration. while the *G*ainas commit no inconsistency in
worshipping Mahâvîra in his apotheosis. But I believe that this worship
had nothing to do with original Buddhism or *G*ainism, that it did not
originate with the monks, but with the lay community, when the people in
general felt the want of a higher cult than that of their rude deities
and demons, and when the religious development of India found in the
Bhakti the supreme means of salvation. Therefore instead of seeing in
the Buddhists the originals, and in the *G*ainas the imitators, with
regard to the erection of temples and worship of statues, we assume that
both sects were, independently from each other, brought to adopt this
practice by the perpetual and irresistible influence of the religious
development of the people in India.

The third point of resemblance between both sects, the stress which is
laid on the ahi*m*sâ or not killing of living beings, will be treated
more fully in the sequel. For this reason I quickly pass over to
Professor Lassen's fourth argument, viz. that the Buddhists and *G*ainas
measure the history of the world by those enormous periods of time which
bewilder and awe even the most imaginative fancy.

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is true that
regarding this the *G*ainas outdo the Buddhists, but they have the idea
of such periods in common not only with the latter but also with the
Brâhmans. The main features of the chronological system of the *G*ainas
equally differ from those of the Buddhists as from those of the
Brâhmans. For it is impossible to derive the Utsarpi*n*î and
Avasarpi*n*î eras, with their six Aras, from the Buddhistical four great
and eighty smaller Kalpas, which are as it were the acts and scenes in
the drama of the successive creations and dissolutions of the universe,
nor from the Yugas and Kalpas of the Brâhmans. I am of opinion that the
Buddhists have improved on the Brahmanic system of the Yugas, while the
*G*ainas invented their Utsarpi*n*î and Avasarpi*n*î eras after the
model of the day and night of Brahmâ.

We have postponed the discussion of Professor Lassen's third argument,
the ahi*m*sâ, because it will be better treated together with the other
moral precepts of both sects. Professor Weber <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) has pointed out the near relation existing
between the five great vows of the Gainas and the five cardinal sins and
virtues of the Buddhists; and Professor Windisch <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_24) has compared the *G*aina vows (mahâvrata.md)
with the ten obligations of the Buddhists (dasasil).

The Ten Precepts for the Buddhist ascetics are the following <span
id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_25.md):

1\. I take the vow not to destroy life.

2\. I take the vow not to steal.

3\. I take the vow to abstain from impurity.

4\. I take the vow not to lie.

5\. I take the vow to abstain from intoxicating drinks which hinder
progress and virtue.

6\. I take the vow not to eat at forbidden times.

7\. I take the vow to abstain from dancing, singing, music, and stage
plays.

8\. I take the vow not to use garlands, scents, unguents, or ornaments.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

9\. I take the vow not to use a high or broad bed.

10\. I take the vow not to receive gold or silver.

The Buddhists have also Eight Precepts (a*tth*aṅgasîla), of which the
first five (pa*ñk*asîla) are binding, on every Buddhist, while the rest
are only recommended to pious laymen <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_26.md):

1\. One should not destroy life.

2\. One should not take that which is not given.

3\. One should not tell lies.

4\. One should not become a drinker of intoxicating drinks.

5\. One should refrain from unlawful sexual intercourse--an ignoble
thing.

6\. One should not eat unseasonable food at nights.

7\. One should not wear garlands or use perfumes.

8\. One should sleep on a mat spread on the ground.

The five Buddhist vows nearly agree with those of the *G*aina ascetics,
viz.:

1\. Not to destroy life (ahi*m*sâ).

2\. Not to lie (sûn*ri*ta).

3\. Not to take that which is not given (asteya).

4\. To abstain from sexual intercourse (brahma*k*arya).

5\. To renounce all interest in worldly things, especially to call
nothing one's own (aparigraha).

The fifth precept of the *G*ainas is much more comprehensive than the
corresponding one of the Buddhists, but the other precepts are the same,
in a different order, as Nos. 1-4 of the Buddhists. The agreement is
indeed so striking that it would seem hard to avoid the conclusion that
one sect borrowed their precepts from the other. Yet the question
whether the Buddhists or the *G*ainas were the borrowers, would still
remain an open one. It can be shown, however, that neither the Buddhists
nor the *G*ainas have in this regard any claim to originality, but that
both have only adopted the five vows of the Brahmanic ascetics
(sa*m*nyâsin). The latter must keep the following five vows <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_27.md):

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

1\. Abstention from injuring living beings.

2\. Truthfulness.

3\. Abstention from appropriating the property of others.

4\. Continence.

5\. Liberality.

And five minor vows:

6\. Abstention from anger.

7\. Obedience towards the Guru.

8\. Avoidance of rashness.

9\. Cleanliness.

10\. Purity in eating.

The first four great vows of the Sa*m*nyâsin agree with those of the
*G*aina Bhikshu, and are enumerated in the same order. It is therefore
probable that the *G*ainas have borrowed their own vows from the
Brâhmans, not from the Buddhists, because the latter have changed the
order of the vows, making truthfulness either the third or fourth
cardinal virtue instead of giving it the second place. Besides it is
highly improbable that they should have imitated the Buddhists, when
they had in the Brahmanic ascetics much older and more respected models.

It is worth remarking that the fifth great vow or precept is peculiar to
each of the three religious systems, probably because the Brahmanic
fifth vow, viz. liberality, could not be enjoined on mendicants such as
the monks of the Buddhists and *G*ainas were. The *G*ainas previous to
Mahâvîra's time had only four great vows, since the fourth was included
in the fifth. But Mahâvîra brought the number of the vows again up to
five, a number which seems to have been regarded as solemn, since the
Buddhists have adopted it likewise in their moral code.

Our foregoing inquiry suggests where we have to look for the originals
of the monastic orders of the *G*ainas and Buddhists. The Brahmanic
ascetic was their model, from which they borrowed many important
practices and institutions of ascetic life. This observation is not an
entirely new one. Professor Max Müller has already, in his Hibbert
Lectures (p. 351), started a similar opinion; likewise Professor Bühler,
in his translation of the Baudhâyana Sûtra

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (passim); and
Professor Kern, in his History of Buddhism in India. In order to show to
what extent the life of *G*aina monks is but an imitation of the life of
the Brahmanic ascetics, I shall now compare the rules given to the
latter in Gautama's and Baudhâyana's law-books <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) with the rules for *G*aina monks. In most
cases the Buddhists conform to the same rules; this will also be briefly
noticed.

11\. An ascetic shall not possess (any) store <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_29.md).' The *G*aina and Buddhist monks are also
forbidden to have anything which they could call their own. See the
fifth vow of the *G*ainas (aparigraha). Even those things which the
*G*aina monk always carries about himself, as clothes, alms-bowl, broom,
&c., are not regarded as his property, but as things necessary for the
exercise of religious duties (dharmopakara*n*a).

12\. (He must be) chaste.' This is the fourth great vow of the *G*ainas
and in Baudhâyana, the fifth of the Buddhists.

13\. 'He must not change his residence during the rainy season <span
id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_30.md).' Bühler remarks in a note: 'This rule
shows that the Vasso of the Bauddhas and *G*ainas is also derived from a
Brahmanic source.'

14\. 'He shall enter a village only in order to beg.' The *G*ainas are
not so strict in this respect, as they allow a monk to sleep in a
village or town. However he must not stay too long <span
id="fr_32"></span>[4](#fn_31.md). Mahâvîra did not stay longer than one
night in a village or five nights in a town <span
id="fr_33"></span>[5](#fn_32.md).

15\. 'He shall beg late (after people have finished their meals),
without returning twice <span id="fr_34"></span>[6](#fn_33.md).' The
*G*aina monks collect food in the morning or at noon, probably to avoid
meeting with their rivals. They generally but once in a day go out
begging; but one who has fasted for more than one day may go a begging
twice a day <span id="fr_35"></span>[7](#fn_34.md).

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

16\. 'Abandoning all desires (for sweet food).' The same is prescribed
in the fourth clause of the fifth great vow of the *G*ainas <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_35.md), and is, besides, the apparent motive in
many rules for the acceptance or rejection of alms.

17\. 'He shall restrain his speech, his eyes, (and) his actions.' This
nearly agrees with the three Guptis of the *G*ainas, or the restraining
of the mind, speech, and body <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_36.md).

18\. 'He shall wear a cloth to cover his nakedness <span
id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_37.md).' The *G*aina rules about dress are not so
simple; for they allow a *G*aina to go naked or to wear one, two, or
three garments, but a young, strong monk should as a rule wear but one
robe <span id="fr_39"></span>[4](#fn_38.md). Mahâvîra went about
naked <span id="fr_40"></span>[5](#fn_39.md), and so did the
*G*inakalpikas, or those who tried to imitate him as much as possible.
But they also were allowed to cover their nakedness <span
id="fr_41"></span>[6](#fn_40.md).

19\. 'Some (declare that he shall wear) an old rag after having washed
it.' Baudhâyana <span id="fr_42"></span>[7](#fn_41.md) says: 'He shall wear
a dress dyed yellowish-red.' This rule agrees more with the practice of
the Buddhists than that of the *G*ainas. The latter are forbidden to
wash or dye their clothes, but they must wear them in the same condition
in which they are given <span id="fr_43"></span>[8](#fn_42.md). However,
the *G*ainas have only carried into the extreme the original intention
of the Brahmanic rule, viz. that the dress of ascetics should be as
simple and mean as possible. For they seem to take a sort of pride in
outdoing their Brahmanic rivals as regards rigorous conduct, mistaking
nastiness and filthiness for the highest pitch of ascetic virtue <span
id="fr_44"></span>[9](#fn_43.md), while on the other hand the Buddhists
studied to bring their conduct in accordance with the dictates of
humanity.

20\. 'He shall not take parts of plants and trees except such as have
become detached (spontaneously).' The *G*ainas have the same precept,
but they go still farther

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

in allowing a *G*aina to eat only such vegetables, fruits, &c. as have
no trace of life left <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44.md).

21\. 'Out of season he shall not dwell a second night in (the same)
village.' We have seen above that Mahâvîra carried out this precept
whatever may have been the practice of the monks in general.

22\. 'He may either shave or wear a lock on the crown of the head.' The
*G*ainas have improved on this rule as they make baldness binding for
all monks. According to Baudhâyana <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_45.md) a
Brâhman on becoming an ascetic had to cause 'the hair of his head, his
beard, the hair on his body, and his nails to be cut.' The same
practice, at least as regards the cutting of the hair, was observed by
the *G*ainas on the same occasion. Hence the phrase: 'becoming bald (or
tearing out one's hair) to leave the house and enter the state of
houselessness <span id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_46.md).'

23\. 'He shall avoid the destruction of seeds.' The reader will observe,
in many passages of the second book of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra, how careful
*G*aina monks should be of avoiding to injure eggs, living beings,
seeds, sprouts, &c. It seems therefore that the *G*ainas have only
generalised the above rule in applying it to all small beings of the
animal and vegetable world.

24\. (He shall be) indifferent towards (all) creatures, whether they do
him an injury or a kindness.'

25\. 'He shall not undertake (anything for his temporal or spiritual
welfare).'

The last two rules could just as well be taken from a sacred book of the
*G*ainas, for they are in full. accordance with the drift of their
religion. Mahâvîra strictly carried them out. 'More than four months
many sorts of living beings gathered on his body, crawled about it, and
caused there pain <span id="fr_48"></span>[4](#fn_47.md).' 'Always well
guarded, he bore the pains (caused by) grass, cold, fire, flies, and
gnats; manifold pains <span id="fr_49"></span>[5](#fn_48.md).' 'He with
equanimity bore, underwent, and suffered all pleasant

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

or unpleasant occurrences, arising from divine powers, men, or
animals <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49.md).' It is frequently said of
the ascetic in the last stage of his spiritual career that 'he does
desire neither life nor death <span id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_50.md).'

There are some more precepts in Baudhâyana which bear a close
resemblance to such of the *G*ainas. 'With the three means of
punishment, (viz.) words, thoughts, and acts, he shall not injure
created beings <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_51.md).' This is only an
amplification of the first great vow (see above). 'Means of punishment'
is what the *G*ainas call weapon (*s*astra <span
id="fr_53"></span>[4](#fn_52).md).

'He shall carry a cloth for straining water for the sake of
purification.' 'He shall perform the necessary purifications with water
which has been taken out (of a well or a tank) and has been
strained <span id="fr_54"></span>[5](#fn_53.md).' These rules are strictly
observed by the *G*aina monks. They also carry a cloth for straining
water. The commentator Govinda explains pavitra, a cloth for straining
water,' by 'a bunch of Ku*s*a grass for removing insects from the
road <span id="fr_55"></span>[6](#fn_54.md): If Govinda be right, and had
the authority of a really old tradition, which I do not doubt, we have
here the Brahmanic counterpart of the broom (ra*g*ohara*n*a or
pâdapro*ñkh*ana) with which the *G*aina monks sweep the road and the
place where they walk or sit down, for removing insects.

The outfit of a Brahmanic ascetic consists in sticks, a rope, a cloth
for straining water, a water vessel, and an almsbowl <span
id="fr_56"></span>[7](#fn_55.md): The *G*aina monks also carry sticks, at
least now-a-days, though I remember no passage in the Pi*t*akas
expressly allowing the use of a stick. They have also a rope belonging
to the alms-bowl <span id="fr_57"></span>[8](#fn_56.md), an alms-bowl, and
a water vessel <span id="fr_58"></span>[9](#fn_57.md). Of the cloth for
straining water, and the broom, we have already spoken. The filter for
the mouth (mukhavastrika) remains as the only article exclusively used

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

by the *G*ainas. On the whole, therefore, the *G*ainas were outfitted
very much like their Brahmanic models, the Sa*m*nyâsins or Bhikshus.

'Let him eat food, given without asking, regarding which nothing has
been settled beforehand, and which has reached him accidentally, so much
only as is sufficient to sustain life <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_58.md).' The reader will find on perusing the
*G*aina 'rules for begging <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_59.md)' that
only that food is considered pure and acceptable' which has been
obtained under exactly the same circumstances as have been laid down in
the above rule of Baudhâyana for Brahmanic ascetics. The Buddhists are
not so strict in this regard, as they accept invitations for dinner, of
course, prepared especially for them.

From the comparison which we have just instituted between the rules for
the Brahmanic ascetic and those for the *G*aina monk, it will be
apparent that the latter is but a copy of the former. But now the
question may be raised whether the Nirgrantha is a direct copy of the
Sa*m*nyâsin, or an indirect one. For it might be assumed that the
Nirgrantha copied the Buddhist Bhikkhu, who himself was but a copy of
the Sa*m*nyâsin. As I have hinted above, this suggestion is not a
probable one, for there being a model of higher antiquity and authority,
the *G*ainas would probably have conformed rather to it than to the less
respected and second-hand model of their rivals, the Buddhists. But
besides this prima facie argument against the assumption in question,
the adoption of certain Brahmanic rules, noticed above, by the *G*inas,
which were not followed by the Buddhists, proves that the latter were
not the model of the former.

There remains another possibility, but a still more improbable one, viz.
that the Brahmanic ascetic copied the Buddhist Bhikkhu or *G*aina monk.
I say still more improbable, because, firstly, the Sa*m*nyâsin makes
part of the system of the four stages, or Â*s*ramas, which if not so old
as Brahmanism itself, is at least much older than both Buddhism and
*G*ainism; secondly, the Brahmanic ascetics were scattered all over
India, while the Buddhists were

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

confined, at least in the first two centuries of their church, to a
small part of the country, and therefore could not have been imitated by
all the Sa*m*nyâsins; thirdly, Gautama, the lawgiver, was certainly
older than the rise of Buddhism. For Professor Bühler thinks that the
lower limit for the composition of the Âpastamba Sara must be placed in
the fourth or fifth century B.C. <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)
Baudhâyana is older than Âpastamba; according to Bühler <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_61.md), the distance in years between them must
be measured rather by centuries than by decades. Again, Gautama is older
than Baudhâyana <span id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_62.md). Gautama, therefore,
and perhaps Baudhâyana, must have lived before the rise of Buddhism, and
as the former teaches already the complete system of Brahmanic ascetism,
he cannot have borrowed it from the Buddhists. But if Bühler should be
wrong in his estimation of the time when those codes of sacred laws were
composed, and if they should turn out to be younger than the rise of
Buddhism, they certainly cannot be so by many centuries. Even in that
case, which is not a probable one, those lawgivers are not likely to
have largely borrowed from the Buddhists whom the Brâhmans at that time
must have despised as false pretenders of a recent origin. They would
certainly not have regarded laws as sacred which were evidently
appropriated from heretics. On the other hand the Buddhists had no
reason not to borrow from the Brâhmans, because they greatly respected
the latter for the sake of their intellectual and moral superiority.
Hence the *G*ainas and Buddhists use the word Brâhma*n*a as an honorific
title, applying it even to persons who did not belong to the caste of
Brâhmans.

It may be remarked that the monastical order of the *G*ainas and
Buddhists though copied from the Brâhmans were chiefly and originally
intended for Kshatriyas. Buddha addressed himself in the first line to
noble and rich men, as has been pointed out by Professor Oldenberg <span
id="fr_64"></span>[4](#fn_63.md). For

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddha, in his
first sermon at Benares, speaks of his religion as that yass’ atthâya
kulaputtâ sammad eva agârasmâ anagâriya*m* pabba*g*anti: for the sake of
which sons of noble families leave the house and enter the state of
houselessness <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64.md). That the *G*ainas too
gave the Kshatriyas the preference over the Brâhmans is proved by that
curious legend about the transfer of the embryo of Mahâvîra from the
womb of the Brâhma*n*î Devânandâ to that of the Kshatriyâ*n*î Tri*s*alâ,
it being alleged that a Brâhma*n*î or another woman of low family was
not worthy to give birth to a Tîrthakara <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_65.md).

On the other hand it is probable that Brahmanic ascetics did not regard
fellow-ascetics of other castes as quite their equals, though they were
just as orthodox as themselves. For in later times the opinion prevailed
that only Brâhmans were entitled to enter the fourth Â*s*rama, and as a

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

proof for this theory a verse of Manu, VI, 97, as Professor Bühler
informs me, was quoted. But not all commentators drew the same inference
from that verse. Leaving aside this controverted point, it certainly
became, in later times, the custom that a Brahman, as a rule, passed
through four, a nobleman through three, a citizen through two, a *S*ûdra
through one of the four Â*s*ramas <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_66.md).

From all this it becomes probable that the non-Brahmanic ascetics even
in early times were regarded as an order separate and distinguished from
the Brahmanic ascetics. We can understand that this position of
non-Brahmanic ascetics led to the formation of sects inclining to
dissent. That the untrue ascetics had such an origin, may be collected
from a remark of Vasish*th*a. It is known that the performance of
religious ceremonies was discontinued by the ascetics, but some went
beyond this and discontinued the recitation of the Veda. Against
transgressors of this kind Vasish*th*a <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) has the following quotation: 'Let him
discontinue the performance of all religious ceremonies, but let him
never discontinue the recitation of the Veda. By neglecting the Veda he
becomes a *S*ûdra; therefore he shall not neglect it.' An inhibition
pronounced so emphatically presupposes the real occurrence of the
practices forbidden. If therefore some ascetics already had ceased to
recite the Veda, we may conclude that others began to disregard it as
revelation and the highest authority. That those who were regarded as a
sort of inferior ascetics, the non-Brahmanic ascetics, were most likely
to make this step, is easy to imagine. We see thus that the germs of
dissenting sects like those of the Buddhists and the *G*ainas were
contained in the institute of the fourth Â*s*rama, and that the latter
was the model of the heretical sects; therefore Buddhism and *G*ainism
must be regarded as religions developed out of Brahmanism not by a
sudden reformation, but prepared by a religious movement going on for a
long time.

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

We have seen that neither the *G*aina legends about their last prophet,
nor the ascetic life ordained for *G*aina monks, nor any other religious
practices adhered to by the faithful, warrant our assuming that the
*G*aina sect has developed, in one way or other, out of the Buddhistical
church. It remains for me to show that the difference of both creeds as
regards the principal tenets is such as not to admit a common origin.
Whatever Buddha may have taught and thought about the state of
Nirvâ*n*a, whether he went the length to identify it with absolute
non-existence, or imagined it to be a sort of existence different from
all we know or can conceive, it is beyond doubt, and a striking feature
of Buddha's philosophy, that he combated the Brahmanic theory of the
Âtman, as being the absolute and permanent soul, according to the
pantheist as well as the monadic point of view. But the *G*ainas fully
concur in the Brahmanic theory of the Âtman, with only this difference,
that they ascribe to the Âtmans a limited space, while the Brâhmans of
the Sâṅkhya, Nyâya, and Vai*s*eshika schools contend that the Âtmans are
co-extensive with the universe. On the other hand, the Buddhistical
theory of the five Skandhas with their numerous subdivisions have no
counterpart in the psychology of the *G*ainas. A characteristic dogma of
the *G*ainas which pervades their whole philosophical system and code of
morals, is the hylozoistic theory that not only animals and plants, but
also the smallest particles of the elements, earth, fire, water, and
wind, are endowed with souls (*g*îva). No such dogma, on the other hand,
is contained in the philosophy of the Buddhists. To Indian philosophers
the various degrees of knowledge up to omniscience are matters of great
moment. The *G*ainas have a theory of their own on this head, and a
terminology which differs from that of the Brahmanic philosophers and of
the Buddhists. Right knowledge, they say, is fivefold: (1) mati, right
perception; (2) *s*ruta, clear knowledge based on mati; (3) avadhi, a
sort of supernatural knowledge; (4) mana*h*paryâya, clear knowledge of
the thoughts of others; (5) kevala, the highest degree of knowledge,
consisting in omniscience. This psychological theory is a fundamental

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

one of the *G*ainas, as it is always before the mind of the authors of
the sacred books when describing the spiritual career of the saints. But
we search in vain for something analogous in the Buddhist scriptures. We
could multiply the instances of difference between the fundamental
tenets of both sects, but we abstain from it, fearing to tire the
reader's patience with an enumeration of all such cases. Such tenets as
the *G*ainas share with the Buddhists, both sects have in common with
the Brahmanic philosophers, e. g. the belief in the regeneration of
souls, the theory of the Karman, or merit and demerit resulting from
former actions, which must take effect in this or another birth, the
belief that by perfect knowledge and good conduct man can avoid the
necessity of being born again and again, &c. Even the theory that from
time immemorial prophets (Buddhas or Tîrthakaras) have proclaimed the
same dogmas and renewed the sinking faith, has its Brahmanic counterpart
in the Avatâras of Vish*n*u. Besides, such a theory is a necessary
consequence both of the Buddhistical and *G*aina creed. For what Buddha
or Mahâvîra had revealed was, of course, regarded by the followers of
either as truth and the only truth; this truth must have existed from
the beginning of time, like the Veda of the Brâhmans; but could the
truth have remained unknown during the infinite space of time elapsed
before the appearance of the prophet? No, would answer the pious
believer in Buddhism or *G*ainism, that was impossible; but the true
faith was revealed in different periods by numberless prophets, and so
it will be in the time to come. The theory of former prophets seems,
therefore, to be a natural consequence of both religions; besides, it
was not wholly unfounded on facts, at least as regards the Gainas. For
the Nirgranthas are never spoken of in the Buddhist writings as a newly
risen sect, nor Nâtaputta as their founder. Accordingly the Nirgranthas
were probably an old sect at the time of Buddha, and Nâtaputta only the
reformer of the *G*aina church, which may have been founded by the
twenty-third Tîrthakara, Pâr*s*va. But what seems astonishing is the
fact that the *G*ainas and Bauddhas have hit on nearly the

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

same number of prophets believed to have risen since the creation of the
present order of things, the former worshipping twenty-four Tîrthakaras,
the latter twenty-five Buddhas. I do not deny that in developing this
theory one sect was influenced by the other; but I firmly believe that
it cannot be made out which of the two sects first invented, or borrowed
from the Brâhmans, this theory. For if the twenty-five Buddhas were
worshipped by the Buddhists of the first centuries after the Nirvâ*n*a,
the belief in twenty-four Tîrthakaras is equally old, as it is common to
the Digambaras and *S*vetâmbaras, who separated probably in the second
century after the Nirvâ*n*a. However the decision of the question
whether the Buddhists or the *G*ainas originally invented the theory of
the succession of prophets, matters little; it cannot influence the
result to which the previous discussion has led us, viz. (1) that
*G*ainism had an origin independent from Buddhism, that it had a
development of its own, and did not largely borrow from the rival sect;
(a) that both *G*ainism and Buddhism owed to the Brâhmans, especially
the Sa*m*nyâsins, the groundwork of their philosophy, ethics, and
cosmogony.

Our discussion has as yet been conducted on the supposition that the
tradition of the *G*ainas as contained in their sacred books may on the
whole be credited. But the intrinsic value of this tradition has been
called into question by a scholar of wide views and cautious judgment.
Mr. Barth, in the Revue de l’Histoire des Religions, vol. iii, p. 90,
admits that an historical personage is hidden under Nâtaputta, but he
doubts that valid inferences may be drawn from the sacred books of the
*G*ainas which, avowedly, have been reduced to writing in the fifth
century A.D., or nearly a thousand years after the foundation of the
sect. For, in his opinion, 'the self-conscient and continuous existence
of the sect since that remote epoch, i.e. the direct tradition of
peculiar doctrines and records, has not yet been demonstrated. During
many centuries,' he says, 'the Gainas had not become distinct from the
numerous groups of ascetics who could not boast of more than an obscure
floating

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

existence.' The tradition of the *G*ainas appears to Mr. Barth to have
been formed of vague recollections in imitation of the Buddhist
tradition.

Mr. Barth seems to base his theory on the assumption that the *G*ainas
must have been careless in handing down their sacred lore, since they
formed, for many centuries, but a small and unimportant sect. I cannot
see the force of this argument of Mr. Barth's. Is it more likely that a
sect of which the not very numerous followers are scattered over a large
country, or a church which has to satisfy the religious wants of a great
multitude, will better preserve its original tenets and traditions? It
is impossible to decide this question on à priori grounds. The Jews and
the Parsis may be adduced as instances in favour of the former view, the
Roman Catholic church as one in favour of the latter. But we are not
obliged to rely on such generalities in order to decide the question at
issue with regard to the *G*ainas, for they were so far from having only
dim notions of their own doctrines that they pronounced as founders of
schisms those who differed from the great bulk of the faithful in
comparatively unimportant details of belief. This fact is proved by the
tradition about the seven sects of the *S*vetâmbaras made known by Dr.
Leumann <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68.md). The Digambaras also, who
separated from the *S*vetâmbaras probably in the second or third century
after the Nirvâ*n*a, differ from their rivals but little with regard to
philosophical tenets; yet they were nevertheless stigmatised by the
latter as heretics on account of their rules of conduct. All these facts
show that the *G*ainas, even previous to the redaction of their sacred
books, had not a confused and undefined creed, which would have been
liable to become altered and defiled by doctrines adopted from widely
different religions, but one in which even the minutest details of
belief were fixed.

What has been said about the religious doctrines of the *G*ainas can
also be proved of their historical traditions. For the detailed lists of
teachers handed down in the several Ga*kkh*as <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_69.md), and those incorporated in their sacred

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

books, show that the *G*ainas did possess an interest in the history of
their church. I do not deny that a list of teachers may be invented, or
an incomplete one filled up or made pakka, as the Hindus would say; the
necessity of proving itself to be legitimately descended from a
recognised authority may induce a sect to invent the names of a line of
teachers. But what could have caused the *G*ainas to fabricate such a
detailed list of teachers, *G*a*n*as, and *S*âkhâs as that in the Kalpa
Sûtra? Of most of the details the *G*ainas of later times knew nothing
beyond what they found in the Kalpa Sûtra itself,--and that is
unfortunately very little,--nor did they pretend to anything more. For
all practical purposes the short list of Sthaviras, as it stands in the
Kalpa Sûtra, would have been sufficient; the preservation of the
detailed list, containing so many bare names, proves that they must have
had an interest for the members of the early church, though the more
accurate knowledge of the times and events chronicled in that list was
lost after some centuries.

However, it is not enough to have proved that the *G*ainas, even before
the redaction of their sacred books, possessed the qualities necessary
for continuing their creed and tradition, and preserving them from
corruptions caused by large borrowings from other religious systems; we
must also show that they did do what they were qualified to do. This
leads us to a discussion of the age of the extant *G*aina literature.
For if we succeed in proving that the *G*aina literature or at least
some of its oldest works were composed many centuries before they were
reduced to writing, we shall have reduced, if not closed, the gap
separating the prophet of the *G*ainas from their oldest records.

The redaction of the *G*aina canon or the Siddhânta took place,
according to the unanimous tradition, on the council of Valabhi, under
the presidency of Devarddhi. The date of this event, 980 (or 993) A*V*.,
corresponding to 454 (or 467) A.D. <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70.md),
is incorporated in the Kalpa Sûtra (§ 148). Devarddhi Ga*n*in, says the
tradition, perceiving the Siddhânta in

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

danger of becoming extinct, caused it to be written in books. Before
that time teachers made no use of written books when teaching the
Siddhânta to novices, but after that time they did use books. The latter
part of this statement is evidently true. For in olden times books were
not used, it being the custom of the Brâhmans to rely rather on the
memory than on the MSS., and in this they were, almost without doubt,
followed by the *G*ainas and Buddhists. But now-a-days Yatis use MSS.
when teaching the sacred lore to their novices. There is no reason why
we should not credit the tradition that this change in the method of
instruction was brought about by Devarddhi Ga*n*in; for the event was of
too great importance not to be remembered. To provide every teacher or
at least every Upâ*s*raya with copies of the sacred books, Devarddhi
Ga*n*in must have issued a large edition of the Siddhânta. This is
probably the meaning of the traditional record that Devarddhi caused the
Siddhânta to be written in books, for it is hardly credible that the
*G*aina monks should never before have attempted to write down what they
had to commit to memory; the Brâhmans also have MSS. of their sacred
books, though they do not use them in handing down the Veda. These MSS.
were intended for private use, to aid the memory of the teacher. I make
no doubt that the same practice was observed by the *G*aina monks, the
more so as they were not, like the Brâhmans, influenced by any theory of
their own not to trust to MSS., but were induced merely by the force of
the prevalent custom to hand down their sacred lore by word of mouth. I
do not maintain that the sacred books of the *G*ainas were originally
written in books, for the same argument which has been brought forward
to prove that the Buddhist monks could have had no MSS., as they are
never mentioned in their sacred books, in which 'every movable thing,
down to the smallest and least important domestic utensils, is in some
way or other referred to <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_71.md),' the same
argument, I say, holds good with regard to the Gainas as long as the

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

monks led a wandering life; but when the monks were settled in
Upâ*s*rayas exclusively belonging to themselves, they may have kept
there their MSS. as they do now-a-days.

Devarddhi's position relative to the sacred literature of the *G*ainas
appears therefore to us in a different light from what it is generally
believed to have been. He probably arranged the already existing MSS. in
a canon, taking down from the mouth of learned theologians only such
works of which MSS. were not available. Of this canon a great many
copies were taken, in order to furnish every seminary with books which
had become necessary by the newly introduced change in the method of
religious instruction. Devarddhi's edition of the Siddhânta is therefore
only a redaction of the sacred books which existed before his time in
nearly the same form. Any single passage in a sacred text may have been
introduced by the editor, but the bulk of the Siddhânta is certainly not
of his making. The text of the sacred books, before the last redaction
of the Siddhânta, did not exist in such a vague form as it would have
been liable to if it were preserved only by the memory of the monks, but
it was checked by MSS.

On this premise we now proceed to inquire into the date of the
composition of the sacred books of the Gainas. Their own dogmatical
theory that all sacred books were revealed by the first Tîrthakara,
shall only be noticed to be dismissed. We must try to discover better
grounds for fixing the age when the chief works of the Siddhânta were
composed.

As single passages may have crept into the text at any time, we can draw
no valid inferences from them, even if they be sanctioned by Devarddhi's
receiving them into his revised text. I attach therefore no great weight
to the lists of barbarous or un-Aryan tribes <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72.md), nor to the mention of all seven schisms,
the last of which occurred 584 A*V*. <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_73.md)
Nothing is more common than that such details should be

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

added as a gloss, or be incorporated even in the text, by those who
transmitted it either in writing or in instructing their pupils. But an
argument of more weight is the fact that in the Siddhânta we find no
traces of Greek astronomy. In fact the *G*aina astronomy is a system of
incredible absurdity, which would have been impossible, if its author
had had the least knowledge of the Greek science. As the latter appears
to have been introduced in India about the third or fourth century A.D.,
it follows that the sacred books of the *G*ainas were composed before
that time.

Another argument which offers itself for fixing the period of the
composition of the sacred books, is the language in which they are
written. But, unfortunately, it is not at all clear whether the sacred
books have been handed down in that language in which they were
composed, or in that in which they were pronounced, and transcribed in
later generations, according to the then current idiom, till Devarddhi's
edition put an end to the modernising of the language of the sacred
books. I am inclined to believe the latter view to be correct, and look
upon the absence of a self-consistent orthography of the *G*aina Prâkrit
as the effect of the gradual change of the vernacular language in which
the sacred books were recited. In all MSS. of *G*aina texts, the same
word is not always spelt in the same way. The differences of spelling
refer chiefly to the retention, omission, or attenuation of single
consonants between vowels, and the retention of the vowels e, o, before
two consonants, or their change in i, u. It is hardly possible that the
different spellings of a word should all correctly represent the
pronunciation of that word at any given time, e*g*. bhûta, bhûya; udaga,
udaya, uaya; lobha, loha <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_74.md), &c.; but
probably we must regard these methods of spelling as historical
spellings, that is to say, that all different spellings presented in the
MSS. which formed the materials for Devarddhi's edition of the
Siddhânta, were looked upon as authentical and were preserved in all
later copies of the sacred texts. If this assumption is correct, we

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

must regard the most archaic spellings as representing the pronunciation
at or shortly after the epoch of the composition of the sacred books,
and the most modern one as representing the pronunciation at or shortly
before the redaction of the Siddhânta <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75.md). Now on comparing the *G*aina Prâkrit
especially in the oldest form attainable with the Pâli on one side, and
the Prâkrit of Hâla, Setubandha, &c. on the other, it will appear to
approach more the Pâli than the later Prâkrit. We may therefore conclude
that chronologically also the sacred books of the *G*ainas stand nearer
those of the Southern Buddhists than the works of later Prâkrit writers.

But we can fix the date of the *G*aina literature between still narrower
limits by means of the metres employed in the sacred books. I am of
opinion that the first book of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra and that of the
Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga Sûtra may be reckoned among the most ancient parts of
the Siddhânta; the style of both works appears to me to prove the
correctness of this assumption. Now a whole lesson of the
Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga Sûtra is written in the Vaitâlîya metre. The same metre
is used in the Dhammapadam and other sacred books of the Southern
Buddhists. But the Pâli verses represent an older stage in the
development of the Vaitâlîya than those in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga, as I
shall prove in a paper on the post-Vedic metres soon to be published in
the Journal of the German Oriental Society. Compared with the common
Vaitâlîya verses of Sanskrit literature, a small number of which occur
already in the Lalita Vistara, the Vaitâlîya of the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga must
be considered to represent an earlier form of the metre. Again, ancient
Pâli works seem to contain no verses in the Âryâ metre; at least there
is none in the Dhammapadam, nor have I found one in other works. But
both the Â*k*ârâṅga and Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

contain each a whole lecture in Âryâ verses of a form which is decidedly
older than, and probably the parent of the common Âryâ. The latter is
found in the younger parts of the Siddhânta, in the Brahmanical
literature, both in Prâkrit and in Sanskrit, and in the works of the
Northern Buddhists, e. g. the Lalita Vistara, &c. The form of the
Trish*t*ubh metre in ancient *G*aina works is younger than that in the
Pâli literature and older than that in the Lalita Vistara. Finally the
great variety of artificial metres in which the greater number of the
Gâthâs in the Lalita Vistara, &c., is composed and which are wanting in
the *G*aina Siddhânta, seems to prove that the literary taste of the
*G*ainas was fixed before the composition of the latter works. From all
these facts we must conclude that the chronological position of the
oldest parts of the *G*aina literature is intermediate between the Pâli
literature and the composition of the Lalita Vistara. Now the Pâli
Pi*t*akas were written in books in the time of Va*tt*a Gâma*n*i, who
began to reign 88 B.C. But they were in existence already some centuries
before that time. Professor Max Müller sums up his discussion on that
point by saying: 'We must be satisfied therefore, so far as I can see,
at present with fixing the date, and the latest date, of a Buddhist
canon at the time of the Second Council, 377 B.C. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76.md)' Additions and alterations may have been
made in the sacred texts after that time; but as our argument is not
based on a single passage, or even a part of the Dhammapada, but on the
metrical laws of a variety of metres in this and other Pâli books, the
admission of alterations and additions in these books will not
materially influence our conclusion, viz. that the whole of the *G*aina
Siddhânta was composed after the fourth century B.C.

We have seen that the oldest works in the *G*aina canon are older than
the Gâthâs in the Lalita Vistara. As this work is said to have been
translated into Chinese 65 A.D., we must place the origin of the extant
*G*aina literature before the beginning of our era. If we may judge
about

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

the distance in time of the questionable date from either limit by the
greater or less resemblance of the oldest *G*aina works in verse with
such of the Southern and Northern Buddhists as regards metrical or
stylistic peculiarities, we should place the beginning of the *G*aina
literature nearer the time of the Pâli literature, rather than that of
the Northern Buddhists. This result agrees pretty well with a tradition
of the *S*vetâmbaras. For they say <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_77.md)
that after the twelve years’ famine, while Bhadrabâhu was the head of
the church, the Aṅgas were brought together by the Saṅgha of
Pâ*t*aliputra. Now Bhadrabâhu's death is placed 170 A*V*. by the
*S*vetâmbaras, and 162 A*V*. by the Digambaras; he lived therefore,
according to the former, under *K*andragupta, who is said to have
ascended the throne 155 A*V*. Professor Max Müller assigns to
*K*andragupta the dates 315-291 B.C.; Westergaard prefers 320 B.C. as a
more likely date for *K*andragupta, and so does Kern <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_78.md). However this difference matters little:
the date of the collection or, perhaps more correctly, the composition
of the *G*aina canon would fall somewhere about the end of the fourth or
the beginning of the third century B.C. It is worth noticing, that
according to the above-cited tradition, the Saṅgha of Pâ*t*aliputra
collected the eleven Aṅgas without the assistance of Bhadrabâhu. As the
latter is claimed by the Digambaras for one of their teachers, and as
the *S*vetâmbaras, though doing the same, still continue the list of
Sthaviras from Sambhûtavi*g*aya, Bhadrabâhu's fellow Sthavira, not from
Bhadrabâhu himself, it seems to follow that the Aṅgas, brought together
by the Saṅgha of Pâ*t*aliputra, formed the canon of the *S*vetâmbaras
only, not that of the whole Gaina church. In that case we should not go
wrong in placing the date of the canon somewhat later, under the
patriarchate of Sthûlabhadra, i.e. in the first part of the third
century B.C.

If the result of our preceding inquiry deserves credit--and I see no
counter arguments entitling us to mistrust our conclusion--the origin of
the extant *G*aina literature cannot be placed earlier than about 300
B.C., or two centuries after

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

the origin of the sect. But we are not from this fact obliged to assume
that the *G*ainas in the time intermediate between their last prophet
and the composition of their canon had to rely on nothing more solid
than a religious and legendary tradition, never brought into a fixed
form. In that case, Mr. Barth's objections to the trustworthiness of the
*G*aina tradition would, it is true, not be without ground. However, we
are told by the *S*vetâmbaras, as well as the Digambaras, that besides
the Aṅgas, there existed other and probably older works, called Pûrvas,
of which there were originally fourteen. The knowledge of these Pûrvas
was gradually lost, till at last it became totally extinct. The
tradition of the *S*vetâmbaras about the fourteen Pûrvas is this: the
fourteen Pûrvas had been incorporated in the twelfth Aṅga, the
D*ri*sh*t*ivâda, which was lost before 1000 A*V*. But a detailed table
of contents of it, and consequently of the Pûrvas, has survived in the
fourth Aṅga, the Samavâyâṅga, and in the Nandî Sûtra <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_79.md). Whether the Pûrvas, contained in the
D*ri*sh*t*ivâda, were the original ones, or, as I am inclined to
believe, only abstracts of them, we cannot decide; at all events there
has been a more detailed tradition about what they contained.

Now we should as a rule be careful in crediting any tradition about some
lost book or books of great antiquity, because such a tradition is
frequently invented by an author to furnish his doctrines with an
authority from which they may be derived. But in our case, there are no
grounds for suspecting the correctness of so general and old a tradition
as that about the Pûrvas. For the Aṅgas do not derive their authority
from the Pûrvas, but are believed to be coeval with the creation of the
world. As a fraud, the tradition about the Pûrvas would therefore be
unintelligible; but accepted as truth, it well falls in with our views
about the development of the Gaina literature. The name itself testifies
to the fact that the Pûrvas were superseded by a new canon, for pûrva
means former,

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

earlier <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_80.md); and it is assuredly not by
accident that the knowledge of the Pûrvas is said to have commenced to
fade away at the same time when the Aṅgas were collected by the Saṅgha
of Pâ*t*aliputra. For after Bhadrabâhu, only ten out of the fourteen
Pûrvas were known.

This then is the most natural interpretation we can place on the
tradition about the fourteen Pûrvas, that they were the oldest sacred
books, which however were superseded by a new canon. But as regards the
cause of the abolition of the old canon and the composition of a new
one, we are left to conjecture, and only as such I shall give my
opinion. We know that the D*ri*sh*t*ivâda, which included the fourteen
Pûrvas, dealt chiefly with the d*ri*sh*t*is or philosophical opinions of
the *G*ainas and other sects. It may be thence inferred that the Pûrvas
related controversies held between Mahâvîra and rival teachers. The
title pravâda, which is added to the name of each Pûrva, seems to affirm
this view. Besides, if Mahâvîra was not the founder of a new sect, but
as I have tried to prove, the reformer of an old one, it is very likely
that he should vigorously have combated the opinions of his opponents,
and defended those he had accepted or improved. The founder of a
religion has to establish his own system, he is not so much in danger to
become a mere controversialist as a reformer. Now if the discourses of
Mahâvîra, remembered and handed down by his disciples, were chiefly
controversies, they must have lost their interest when the opponents of
Mahâvîra had died and the sects headed by them had become extinct. Could
such contentions about philosophical questions which were no more of any
practical importance, and bickerings of divines all but forgotten,
though these things were of paramount interest to the contemporary
world, serve as a canon for later generations who lived in thoroughly
changed circumstances? The want of a canon suiting the condition of the

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

community must have made itself felt, and it led, in my opinion, to the
composition of a new canon and the neglect of the old one.

Professor A. Weber <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) assigns as the
probable cause of the D*ri*sh*t*ivâda being lost, that the development
of the *S*vetâmbara sect had arrived at a point where the diversity of
its tenets from those embodied in that book became too visible to be
passed over. Therefore the D*ri*sh*t*ivâda, which contained the Pûrvas,
fell into neglect. I cannot concur in Professor Weber's opinion, seeing
that the Digambaras also have lost the Pûrvas, and the Aṅgas to boot. It
is not probable that the development of *G*ainism during the two first
centuries after the Nirvâ*n*a should have gone on at so rapid a pace
that its two principal sects should have been brought to the necessity
of discarding their old canon. For, as stated above, after the splitting
of the church in these two sects the philosophical system of the
*G*ainas remained stationary, since it is nearly the same with both
sects. As regards ethics, both sects, it is true, differ more. But as
the extant canon of the *S*vetâmbaras is not falling into neglect,
though many practices enjoined in it have long since been abandoned, it
is not more probable that they should have been more sensible on the
same score at the time when the Pûrvas formed their canon. Besides, some
of the Pûrvas are said to have continued to be extant long after the
time which we have assigned for the formation of the new canon. At last
they disappeared, not by an intentional neglect, I presume, but because
the new canon set into clearer light the *G*aina doctrines, and put them
forward more systematically than had been done in the controversial
literature of the Pûrvas.

Our discussion, which we here close, has, I hope, proved that the
development of the *G*aina church has not been, at any time, violently
interrupted by some very extraordinary events; that we can follow this
development from its true beginning through its different stages, and
that Gainism is as much independent from other sects, especially from

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddhism, as can
be expected from any sect. We must leave to future researches to work
out the details, but I hope to have removed the doubts, entertained by
some scholars, about the independence of the *G*aina religion and the
value of its sacred books as trustworthy documents for the elucidation
of its early history.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

It remains for me to add a few remarks about the two works which have
been translated in this book.

The Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra, or, as it is sometimes called, the Sâmâyika <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_82.md), is the first of the eleven Aṅgas. It
treats of the â*k*âra, or conduct, which falls under the last of the
four heads, or anuyogas, into which the sacred lore is divided, viz.
Dharmakathâ, Ga*n*ita, Dravya, and *K*ara*n*akara*n*a. The Â*k*ârâṅga
Sûtra contains two books, or *S*rutaskandhas, very different from each
other in style and in the manner in which the subject is treated. The
subdivisions of the second book being called *K*ûlâs, or appendices, it
follows that only the first book is really old. That it was considered
so even in later times, is apparent from a remark of *S*îlâṅka, who
wrote the commentary, which is the oldest one extant <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_83.md). For speaking of the maṅgala or auspicious
sentence which, according to a current theory, must occur at the
beginning, in the middle, and at the end of each work, Sîlâṅka points
out as such the first sentence of the first lesson of the first lecture,
the first sentence of the fifth lesson of the fifth lecture, and the
latter half of the 16th verse in the fourth lesson of the eighth lecture
of the first book. It is evident that he regarded the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra
as ending with the last-named passage, which is the last but one of the
first book.

The first book, then, is the oldest part of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra; it is
probably the old Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra itself to which other treatises have
been added. For it is complete in

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

itself; it describes in rather enigmatical language the progress of the
faithful towards the highest perfection. The last lecture, a sort of
popular ballad on the glorious suffering of the prophet, was perhaps
added in later times, but as it stands now it serves well to illustrate
and to set a high example of the true ascetic's life. But the greater
part of the book is in prose of the most bewildering kind. Frequently we
meet with fragments only of sentences, or with sentences which it is
impossible to construe. This reminds us of the style of the Brahmanical
Sûtras; but there is this difference, that in the last-named works the
single aphorisms are the necessary links in the logical concatenation of
ideas, while in our book the single sentences or parts of sentences do
not seem to be connected with one another in order to carry on the
illustration of an idea. They do not read like a logical discussion, but
like a sermon made up by quotations from some then well-known sacred
books. In fact the fragments of verses and whole verses which are
liberally interspersed in the prose text go far to prove the correctness
of my conjecture; for many of these 'disjecta membra' are very similar
to verses or Pâdas of verses occurring in the Sûtrak*ri*tâṅga,
Uttarâdhyayana, and Da*s*avaikâlika Sûtras. They must therefore be taken
as allusions to standard authorities. The same must be assumed of at
least some prose sentences, especially those which are incomplete in
themselves. Other passages again seem to be added to those quotations in
order to explain or to complete them. I shall give a few specimens. I,
4, 1, 3 we read, aho ya râo *g*atamâ*n*ĕ dhîre; this is a Pâda of a
Trish*t*ubh, and accordingly a quotation. The words which follow, sayâ
âgayapanna*n*e, explain the meaning of that quotation, aho ya râo =
sayâ, *g*atamâ*n*e dhîre = âgayapannâ*n*e. The text continues pamatte
bahiyâ pâsa. This is probably a Pâda of a *S*loka; the rest of the
sentence, appamatte sayâ parakkame*gg*â, is the moral application of the
preceding one. We should therefore translate: 'Day and night exerting
himself and steadfast,' i.e. always having ready wisdom. 'Look, the
careless stand outside,' (therefore)

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

being careful he should always exert himself. The commentator however
does not separate the quotations from the glosses, but takes all these
passages as parts of one sentence, which he interprets in the way that
it has been rendered in the text of my translation, [p.
37](sbe2220.htm#page_37.md).

In this as in many other cases I have preferred to give in my
translation the meaning which *S*îlâṅka has given in his commentary. For
it is sometimes extremely difficult to separate the quotations from the
remaining text. I have never dared to do so when they could not be
proved to be parts of verses. I had therefore to leave unnoticed all
such passages which, as the one quoted above, might be taken as a Pâda
of a *S*loka; for in every prose work such passages occur, though they
never were meant for verse. They may, therefore, only accidentally
resemble parts of a *S*loka in our book too, though the great number of
such passages is rather suspicious. The greatest difficulty however we
should incur if we were to point out the prose quotations, though there
are certainly such, e. g. I, 3, 1, 1, suttâ amu*n*î, mu*n*i*n*o
satata*m* *g*âgaranti. Such phrases differ in style from the rest of the
prose part; but it would be impossible to draw the line between them and
the work of the real author. From what has been said, it will appear how
difficult it is to do justice to such a work as the first book of the
Â*k*ârâṅga in the first attempt to translate it. In most cases I have
contented myself with rendering the text according to the interpretation
of the commentator. It must be left to future labours to come nearer the
meaning of the author than it has been preserved by the tradition of the
scholiasts.

Formerly the first book contained nine lectures instead of eight, one
lecture, the Mahâparinnâ, being now lost. It was, according to some
authorities, Samavâyâṅga, Nandî, Âva*s*yaka Niryukti, and
Vidhiprabhâ <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_84.md), the ninth lecture; but
according to the Niryukti of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra, which contains a
systematic exposition of the subjects treated in the single lectures and
lessons of the Â*k*ârâṅga itself, and

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

to *S*îlâṅka and the other commentators, it was the eighth lecture. It
contained seven lessons, and treated of some details of ascetic
life <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_85.md). The fact that the same
subjects were treated in the second book probably occasioned the loss of
the Mahâparinnâ, 'because it was superfluous <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_86.md).'

The second book consists of four parts (*K*ûlâ) or appendices. There
were originally five *K*ûlâs, but the fifth, the Nisîhiya*ggh*a*n*a, is
now reckoned as a separate work. The first and second parts lay down
rules for conduct. Their style is very different from that of the first
book, being rather cumbrous, and not at all aphoristical. The greatest
difficulty in translating these parts is caused by the numerous
technical terms, some of which remain obscure, notwithstanding the
explanation of the commentary; others again are simply transcribed into
Sanskrit by the scholiast, and seem to require no definition to be
understood by the modern *G*ainas. But it is different with us, who are
frequently reduced to guessing at the meaning of technicalities which a
Yati could explain at once. It is therefore to be hoped that some
scholars in India, who can avail themselves of the instruction of a
Yati, will turn their attention to this subject, and get an authentic
explanation of the many technical terms the meaning of which cannot be
ascertained by a European scholar by the means of *G*aina works only.

The third and fourth *K*ûlâs have, according to the Pari*s*ish*t*a
Parvan IX, been revealed to the eldest sister of Sthûlabhadra by
Sîmandhara, a *G*ina living in Pûrvavideha, a mythical continent. This
tradition is very remarkable, as it assigns what we should call the
composition of the two last parts of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra to the same
time when the Kalpa Sûtra, which treats of a similar subject, was
composed.

The third part is of great interest, as it contains the materials from
which the Life of Mahâvîra in the Kalpa Sûtra has been worked out. In
fact most of the prose paragraphs occur with but small alterations in
the Kalpa

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sûtra. The latter
work adds little that is material from an historical point of view, but
a great deal of descriptions which have become typical and are to be
found in other *G*aina works adapted to similar circumstances. The
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra contains, besides the above-mentioned paragraphs, some
verses which are wanting in the Kalpa Sûtra, On comparing these verses
with those in the eighth lecture of the first book, we become aware of
the great difference which subsists between both portions of the
Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra, for in both, kindred subjects are treated in Âryâ
verses, yet the difference in style and in the treatment of the metre is
such as can only be explained by the assumption of a considerable
distance of time.

The latter part of the third *K*ûlâ, which treats of the five great
vows, with their twenty-five clauses, calls for no further remark; nor
is anything more to be said about the twelve verses which make up the
fourth *K*ûlâ, but that they are probably old, and have been added here
for want of a better place.

The translation of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra is based on my edition of the
text in the Pâli Text Society <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_87.md), and
the commentaries printed in the Calcutta edition of the Â*k*ârâṅga
Sûtra. They are

1\. *T*îkâ of Sîlâṅka, also called Tattvâditya, said to have been
finished in the *S*aka year 798 or 876 A.D., with the help of Vâhari
Sâdhu.

2\. Dîpikâ of *G*inaha*m*sa Sûri, a teacher of the B*ri*hat Kharatara
Ga*kkh*a. The Dîpikâ is almost verbally copied from the *T*îkâ, which it
pretends to reduce to a smaller compass. But the reduction consists
almost entirely in the omission of *S*îlâṅka's comments on the Niryukti
verses, which form his introduction to every lecture and lesson.

3\. Pâr*s*va*k*andra's Bâlâvabodha or Gu*g*erati Gloss. In some parts of
the second book, which are not explained in the older commentaries, this
gloss was the only help I had. It generally closely follows the
explanation of the older commentaries, more especially that of the
Dîpikâ.

About the Kalpa Sûtra I have spoken at some length in

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

the introduction to my edition of that work <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_88.md), to which I refer the reader for further
particulars. Since that time Professor Weber has taken up the subject in
his treatise on the Sacred Books of the *G*ainas and corrected some
mistakes of mine. He ascertained that the whole Kalpa Sûtra is
incorporated as the eighth lecture in the Da*s*â*s*rutaskandha, the
fourth *Kh*eda Sûtra. Professor Weber concurs in my opinion that the
'Rules for Yatis' may be the work of Bhadrabâhu <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_89.md), and that the List of Sthaviras' probably
has been added by Devarddhi, the editor of the Siddhânta. I do not
think, however, that Devarddhi was the author of the Life of Mahâvîra
also, as Professor Weber suggests. For if it were the work of so well
known a man, tradition would certainly not have allowed such a fact to
become forgotten. It was a different thing with the List of Sthaviras,
which consists of four or five distinct treatises only put together and
added to the Lives of the *G*inas by the editor of the work. We cannot
argue from the style of the Lives of the *G*inas that that part must be
younger than the Rules for Yatis; for the same difference of style
occasioned by the diversity of the matter exists between the third
*K*ûlâ of the Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra and the two preceding ones. Nor can the
meagreness of the contents be adduced as an argument against the
antiquity of the Lives of the *G*inas, since they were probably not
intended for biographical treatises, but served a liturgical purpose;
for when the images of the Tîrthakaras are worshipped in the temples
they are addressed with hymns, one of which sums up the Kalyâ*n*akas or
auspicious moments <span id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_90.md). It is

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

with these Kalyâ*n*akas that the Lives of the *G*inas are chiefly
concerned, and this fact seems to prove that the custom of mentioning
the Kalyâ*n*akas in the worship of the Tîrthakaras is a very old one;
for otherwise it would be impossible to conceive what could have induced
an author to treat so largely of so barren a subject as has been done in
the Kalpa Sûtra. But whatever may be the age of the several parts of the
Kalpa Sûtra, it is certain that this work has been held in high esteem
by the *G*ainas for more than a thousand years. It therefore deserves a
place in this collection of translations from the Sacred Books of the
East. I could only have wished to make my translation more worthy of the
place where it is to make its appearance; but if I have somewhat fallen
short in my performance, I hope it will be accepted as an excuse that I
had to translate into a language which is not my own, works of a
literature which, notwithstanding all that has been done for it, still
is all but virgin soil to us.

HERMANN JACOBI.

MÜNSTER, WESTPHALIA,  
      June, 1884.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[x:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_0.md) See Oldenberg's edition,
pp. 231, 232; the translation, p. 104 seq., of the second part, Sacred
Books of the East, vol. xvii.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_2.md) The passages in which the
*Ñ*âtikas occur seem to have been misunderstood by the commentator and
the modern translators. Rhys Davids in his translation of the
Mahâparinibbâna-Sutta (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi) says in a
note, p. 24:. At first Nâdika is (twice) spoken of in the plural number;
but then, <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> thirdly, in the last clause,
in the singular. Buddhaghosa explains this by saying that there were two
villages of the same name on the shore of the same piece of water.' The
plural *Ñ*âtikâ denotes, in my opinion, the Kshatriyas, the singular is
the adjective specifying Gi*ñ*gakâvasatha, which occurs in the first
mention of the place in the Mahâparinibbâna-Sutta and in the Mahâvagga
VI, 30, 5, and must be supplied in the former book wherever Nâdika is
used in the singular. I think the form Nâdika is wrong, and *Ñ*âtika,
the spelling of the Mahâvagga, is correct. Mr. Rhys Davids is also
mistaken in saying in the index to his translation: 'Nâdika, near
Patna.' It is apparent from the narrative in the Mahâvagga that the
place in question, as well as Ko*t*iggâma, was near Vesâli.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_3.md) See Weber, Indische
Studien, XVI, p. 262.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_4.md) See Kalpa Sûtra, my
edition, p. 113. *K*e*t*aka is called the maternal uncle of Mahâvîra.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_5.md) See Kalpa Sûtra, Lives
of the *G*inas, § no; Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II, 15, § 15.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xii:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_6.md) Turnour in the Journal
of the Royal As. Soc. of Bengal, VII, p. 992.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xii:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_7.md) Ed. Warren, p. 27.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xii:5](sbe2202.htm#fr_8.md) See Kalpa Sûtra, Lives
of the *G*inas.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xiii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_9.md) The *G*ainas are very
particular in stating the names and gotras of Mahâvîra's relations, of
whom they have recorded little else. Kalpa Sûtra, Lives of the *G*inas,
§ 109.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_10.md) See Kalpa Sûtra,
Lives of the *G*inas, §§ 17 and 18.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiii:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_11.md) See Nirayâvalî
Sûtra, ed. Warren, p. 22. She is commonly called by the Buddhists
Vaidehî; in a Thibetan life of Buddha her name is *S*rîbhadrâ, which.
reminds us of the name of *K*e*t*aka's wife Subhadrâ. See Schiefner in
Mémoires de l’Académie Impériale de St. Pétersbourg, tome iv, p. 253.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xiii:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_12.md) He is usually called
only Se*n*iya or Sre*n*ika; the full name is given in the
Da*s*â*s*rutaskandha, Weber, Ind. Stud. XVI, p. 469.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xiv:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_13.md) That the same person
is intended by both names is evident from the fact that according to
Buddhist and *G*aina writers he is the father of Udâyin or
Udayibhaddaka, the founder of Pâ*t*aliputra in the records of the
*G*ainas and Brahmans.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xiv:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_14.md) The story is told
with the same details by the Buddhists; see Kern, Der Buddhismus and
seine Geschichte in Indien, I, p. 249 (p. 195 of the original), and the
*G*ainas in the Nirayâvalî Sûtra.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xiv:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_15.md) See above.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xiv:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_16.md) Mahâparinibbâna-Sutta
I, 26, and Mahâvagga VI, 28, 7 seq.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xv:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_17.md) Nâtaputta in Pâli and
Prâkrit. The Buddhists call him Niga*nth*a Nâtaputta, i.e.
*Gñ*ât*ri*putra the Nirgrantha or *G*aina monk.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xv:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_18.md) This period of his
life is the subject of a sort of ballad incorporated in the Â*k*ârâṅga
Sûtra (I, 8).

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xvi:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_19.md) See Kalpa Sûtra,
Lives of the *G*inas, § 122; *K*ampâ, 3; Vai*s*âlî, 12; Mithilâ, 6;
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, 14; Bhadrikâ, 2; Âlabhikâ, 1; Pa*n*itabhûmi, 1;
*S*râvastî, 1; Pâpâ, 1. All these towns, with the exception of
Pa*n*itabhûmi, *S*râvastî, and perhaps Âlabhikâ, lay within the limits
of the three kingdoms mentioned in the text.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xvii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_20.md) See Petersburg
Dictionary, ss. vv.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xviii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_21.md) These twelve years
of penance were indeed always thought essential for obtaining
perfection, and every ascetic who endeavours to quit this life with the
best claims to enter one of the highest heavens, or even Nirvâ*n*a, has
to undergo a similar course of preparatory penance, which lasts twelve
years.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xviii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_22.md) Indische Studien,
XVI, 210.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xix:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_23.md) Indische
Alterthumskunde, IV, p. 763 seq.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_24.md) Fragment der
Bhagavatî, II, pp. x75, 187.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_25.md) Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, XXVIII, p. 222, note.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxii:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_26.md) Rhys Davids,
Buddhism, p. 16e.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_27.md) Rhys Davids,
Buddhism, p.139.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxiii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_28.md) Baudhâyana II, to,
18; see Bühler's translation, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p.
275.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxv:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_29.md) See Bühler's
translation, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, pp. 191, 192. The
numbers in the text refer to the paragraphs in Gautama's third book. The
similar passages of Baudhâyana are referred to in the notes.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxv:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_30.md) Compare Baudhâyana
II, 6, 11, s6.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxv:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_31.md) Baudhâyana II, 6, 11,
20.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxv:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_32.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II,
2, 2, § 6.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxv:5](sbe2202.htm#fr_33.md) Kalpa Sûtra, Lives of
the *G*inas, § 119.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxv:6](sbe2202.htm#fr_34.md) Baudhâyana II, 6, 12,
22.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxv:7](sbe2202.htm#fr_35.md) Kalpa Sûtra, Rules
for Yatis, § 20.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_36.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II,
15, v, § 15,

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxvi:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_37.md) Kalpa Sûtra, Lives
of the *G*inas, § 118.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxvi:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_38.md) Baudhâyana, l.c.;16.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxvi:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_39.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II,
5, 1, § 1.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxvi:5](sbe2202.htm#fr_40.md) Kalpa Sûtra, Lives
of the *G*inas, § 117.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxvi:6](sbe2202.htm#fr_41.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra I,
7, 7, 1.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxvi:7](sbe2202.htm#fr_42.md) L.c. § 21.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxvi:8](sbe2202.htm#fr_43.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II,
5, 2, I, and I, 7, 5, 2.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxvi:9](sbe2202.htm#fr_44.md) Compare Â*k*ârâṅga
Sûtra II, 2, 2, 1.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxvii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_45.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra
II, I, 7, 6, and 8th Lesson.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxvii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_46.md) Baudhâyana II, 10,
17, 10.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxvii:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_47.md) Mu*md*e bhavittâ
agârâo a*n*agâriya*m* pavvaie.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxvii:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_48.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra I,
8, 1, 2.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xxvii:5](sbe2202.htm#fr_49.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra I,
8, 3, 1.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xxviii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_50.md) Kalpa Sûtra, Lives
of the *G*inas, § 117, towards the end.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xxviii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_51.md) E. g. Kalpa Sûtra,
Rules for Yatis, § 51.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xxviii:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_52.md) Baudhâyana II, 6,
11, 23.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xxviii:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_53.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra,
p. 1, note 2.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xxviii:5](sbe2202.htm#fr_54.md) Baudhâyana II, 6,
11, 24, 25.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xxviii:6](sbe2202.htm#fr_55.md) See Professor
Bühler's translation, p. 260, note.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xxviii:7](sbe2202.htm#fr_56.md) Baudhâyana II, 10,
17, 11.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xxviii:8](sbe2202.htm#fr_57.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra,
p. 67, note 3.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xxviii:9](sbe2202.htm#fr_58.md) Though a monk is
allowed to carry a water vessel besides his alms-bowl, still it is
thought more meritorious to have but one bowl.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xxix:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_59.md) Baudhâyana II, 10,
18, 13.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xxix:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_60.md) Â*k*ârâṅga Sûtra II,
1.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xxx:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_61.md) Sacred Laws of the
Aryas, part i, introduction, p. xliii.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xxx:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_62.md) L.c. p. xxii.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xxx:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_63.md) L.c. p. xlix.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xxx:4](sbe2202.htm#fr_64.md) Buddha, sein Leben,
&c., p. 557 seq.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_65.md) Mahâvagga I, 6, 12.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xxxi:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_66.md) This legend is
rejected as absurd by the Digambaras, but the Svetâmbaras staunchly
uphold its truth. As it is found in the Â*k*ârâṅga, the Kalpa Sûtra, and
many other books, it cannot be doubted that it is very old. However, it
is not at all clear for what reason so absurd a legend could have been
invented and have gained currency. Yet I may be allowed to offer my
opinion on this dark point. I assume that Siddhârtha had two wives, the
Brâhma*n*î Devânandâ, the real mother of Mahâvîra, and the Kshatriyâ*n*î
Trisalâ; for the name of the alleged husband of the former, viz.
*Ri*shabhadatta, cannot be very old, because its Prâkrit form would in
that case probably be Usabhadinna instead of Usabhadatta. Besides, the
name is such as could be given to a *G*aina only, not to a Brahman. I
therefore make no doubt that *Ri*shabhadatta has been invented by the
*G*ainas in order to provide Devânandâ with another husband. Now
Siddhârtha was connected with persons of high rank and great influence
through his marriage with Trisalâ. It was, therefore, probably thought
more profitable to give out that Mahâvîra was the son, and not merely
the step-son of Trisalâ, for this reason, that he should be entitled to
the patronage of her relations. This story could all the more easily
have gained credence as Mahâvîra's parents were dead many years when he
came forward as a prophet. But as the real state of things could not
totally have been erased from the memory of the people, the story of the
transfer of the embryos was invented. The latter idea was not an
original conception of the *G*ainas, but it is evidently borrowed from
the Purâ*n*ic story of the transfer of the embryo of K*ri*sh*n*a from
the womb of Devakî to that of Rohi*n*î. The worship of K*ri*sh*n*a seems
to have been popular during the first centuries of the development of
the *G*aina creed; for the *G*ainas have reproduced the whole history of
K*ri*sh*n*a, with small alterations, in relating the life of the
twenty-second Tîrthakara, Arish*t*anemi, who was a famous Yâdava.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xxxii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_67.md) Max Müller, The
Hibbert Lectures, p. 343.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xxxii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_68.md) Chapter x, 4.
Bühler's translation.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xxxvi:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_69.md) See Indische
Studien, XVI.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xxxvi:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_70.md) See Dr. Klatt, Ind.
Ant. XI.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xxxvii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_71.md) It is possible,
but not probable, that the date of the redaction fell sixty years later,
514 (527) A.D.; see Kalpa Sûtra, introduction, p. 15.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xxxviii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_72.md) Sacred Books of
the East, vol. xiii, introduction, p. xxxiii.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xxxix:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_73.md) Among the latter
Ârava may denote the Arabs, as Weber thinks, or, as I prefer to think,
the Tamils, whose language is called Aravamu by the Dravidians.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xxxix:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_74.md) See Weber, Indische
Studien, XVI, p. 237.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xl:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_75.md) I do not contend that
no double forms of any word were current at any time, for there must
have been a good many double forms, but I doubt that r early every word
should have existed in two or three forms.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xli:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_76.md) It might be objected
that archaic spellings are due to the influence of the knowledge of
Sanskrit; but the *G*ainas must always have been so well acquainted with
Prâkrit that they needed not any help from the Sanskrit to understand
their sacred books. On the contrary, in their Sanskrit MSS. we
frequently meet with words spelt like Prâkrit words. Besides, some
spellings cannot be explained as Sanskriticisms, e*g*. dâraga for
dâraya, the Sanskrit prototype being dâraka.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xlii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_77.md) Sacred Books of the
East, vol. x, p. xxxii.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xliii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_78.md) Pari*s*ish*t*a
Parvan IX, 55 seqq.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xliii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_79.md) Geschiedenis van
het Buddhisme in Indie, ii, p. 266 note.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xliv:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_80.md) See Weber, Indische
Studien, XVI, p. 341 seqq.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[xlv:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_81.md) The *G*ainas explain
the meaning of the word pûrva in the following way. The Tîrthakara
himself taught the Pûrvas to his disciples, the Ga*n*adharas. The
Ga*n*adharas then composed the Aṅgas. There is evidently some truth in
this tradition, as it does not agree with the dogma of the Aṅgas, being
taught already by the first Tîrthakara. See Weber, Indische Studien,
XVI, p. 353.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[xlvi:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_82.md) Indische Studien,
XVI, p. 248.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[xlvii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_83.md) See Professor
Weber's remarks on the possible bearing of this name in the treatise I
had so often occasion to quote, p. 243 seqq.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[xlvii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_84.md) It was not,
however, the first commentary, for Sîlâṅka mentions one by Gandhahastin.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[xlix:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_85.md) See Weber, Indische
Studien, XVI, p. 251 seq.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[l:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_86.md) See Calcutta edition,
I, p. 435 seq., vv. 251-268.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[l:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_87.md) Sâisayatta*n*e*n*a,
Weber, l.c.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[li:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_88.md) The Âyârâ*m*ga Sutta
of the Çvetâmbara Jains, London, 1882.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[lii:1](sbe2202.htm#fr_89.md) The Kalpa Sûtra of
Bhadrabâhu, Leipzig, 1879. Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes,
VII, 1.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[lii:2](sbe2202.htm#fr_90.md) That the 'Rules for
Yatis' must have been composed at least six generations after Mahâvîra
is evident from §§ 3-8, but probably the work is still younger. For in §
6 the Sthaviras, who come immediately after the disciples of the
Ga*n*adharas, are spoken of in some contrast to the 'Srama*n*as
Nirgranthas of the present time.' Yet the work cannot be comparatively
young, because it appears from §§ 28-30 that the *G*inakalpa had not yet
fallen into disuse, as it had done in later times.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[lii:3](sbe2202.htm#fr_91.md) The rites are
described and the hymns given in a modern work called
*K*aturvi*m*satitîrthaṅkarâ*n*âm pû*g*â, a MS. of which belongs to the
Deccan College.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I, Lecture 1, Lesson 1](sbe2203.md)
