[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2270)  [Next](sbe2272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECOND LESSON.

He may beg for a domicile in a traveller's hall, &c. (see II, 1, 8, §
2), having reflected (on its fitness); he should ask permission to take
possession

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

of it from the landlord or the steward of that place: 'Indeed, O
long-lived one! for the time and in the space you concede us, we shall
dwell here <span id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_444),' &c. (see 1, § 2). Now
what further after the place is taken possession of? He should not
remove from without to within, or vice versa, any umbrella or stick, &c.
(see II, 2, 3, § 2) belonging to *S*rama*n*as or Brâhma*n*as (previously
settled there); nor should he wake up a sleeping person, nor offend or
molest the (inmates). (1)

A monk or a nun might wish to go to a mango park; they should then ask
the landlord's or steward's permission (in the manner described above).
Now what further after the place is taken possession of? Then they might
desire to eat a mango. If the monk or the nun perceive that the mango is
covered with eggs, living beings, &c. (see II, 1, 1, § 2), they should
not take it; for it is impure, &c. (2)

If the monk or the nun perceive that the mango is free from eggs, living
beings, &c., but not nibbled at by animals, nor injured, they should not
take it; for it is impure, &c. But if they perceive that the mango is
free from eggs, living beings, &c., and is nibbled at by animals and
injured, then they may take it; for it is pure, &c. <span
id="fr_451"></span>[2](#fn_445) (3)

The monk might wish to eat or suck one half of a mango or a mango's peel
or rind or sap or smaller particles. If the monk or the nun perceive
that the above-enumerated things are covered with eggs, or living
beings, they should not take them; for they are impure, &c. But they may
take them, if they are

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

free from eggs, &c., and nibbled at by animals or injured <span
id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_446). (4)

A monk or a nun might wish to go to a sugarcane plantation. They should
ask permission in the manner described above. The monk or the nun might
wish to chew or suck sugar-cane. In that case the same rules as for
eating mango apply also; likewise if they wish to chew or to suck the
sugar-cane's pulp, fibres, sap, or smaller particles. (5)

A monk or a nun might wish to go to a garlic field. They should ask
permission in the manner described above. The monk or the nun might wish
to chew or suck garlic. In that case the same rules as for eating
mangoes apply also; likewise if they wish to chew or suck the bulb or
peel or stalk or seed of garlic <span id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_447).
(6)

A monk or a nun, having got possession of a place in a traveller's hall,
&c., should avoid all occasions to sin (proceeding from any preparations
made by) the householders or their sons, and should occupy that place
according to the following rules. (7)

Now this is the first rule:

He may beg for a domicile in a traveller's hall, &c., having reflected
(on its fitness for a stay), &c. (§ 2 of the preceding Lesson is to be
repeated here).

This is the first rule. (8)

Now follows the second rule:

A monk resolves: 'I shall ask for possession of a dwelling-place, &c.,
for the sake of other mendicants,

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

and having taken possession of it for their sake, I shall use it.'

This is the second rule. (9)

Now follows the third rule:

A monk resolves: 'I shall ask for possession of a dwelling-place, &c.,
for the sake of other mendicants, and having taken possession of it for
their sake, I shall not use it.'

This is the third rule. (10)

Now follows the fourth rule:

A monk resolves: 'I shall not ask for possession of a dwelling-place,
&c., for the sake of other mendicants; but if the dwelling-place, &c.,
has already been ceded to them, I shall use it.'

This is the fourth rule. (11)

Now follows the fifth rule:

A monk resolves: 'I shall ask for possession of a dwelling-place for my
own sake, not for two, three, four, or five persons.'

This is the fifth rule. (12)

Now follows the sixth rule:

If a monk or a nun, occupying a dwelling-place in which there is
Ikka*d*a reed, &c. (see II, 2, 3, § 18), get this thing, then they may
use it; otherwise they should remain in a squatting or sitting posture.

This is the sixth rule. (13)

Now follows the seventh rule:

A monk or a nun may beg for a dwelling-place paved with clay or wood. If
they get it, then they may use it; otherwise they should remain in a
squatting or sitting posture.

This is the seventh rule.

One who has adopted one of these seven rules, should not say, &c. (all
as in II, 1, 11, § 12). (14)

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

I have heard the following explanation by the venerable (Mahâvîra): The
Sthaviras, the venerable ones, have declared that dominion <span
id="fr_454"></span>[1](#fn_448) is fivefold:

The lord of the gods' dominion;

The king's dominion;

The houseowner's <span id="fr_455"></span>[2](#fn_449) dominion;

The householder's <span id="fr_456"></span>[3](#fn_450) dominion;

The religious man's <span id="fr_457"></span>[4](#fn_451) dominion.

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (15)

End of the Seventh Lecture, called Regulation of Possession.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_443"></span>[173:1](sbe2270.htm#fr_449) Oggaha.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[174:1](sbe2271.htm#fr_450) § 2 of the
preceding Lesson is repeated word for word.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[174:2](sbe2271.htm#fr_451) See II, 1, 1, §§ 3,
4.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[175:1](sbe2271.htm#fr_452) In the text § 3 is
repeated with the necessary alterations.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[175:2](sbe2271.htm#fr_453) *S*ilâ*n*ka, in his
commentary, remarks that the meaning of the Sûtras about eating mangoes,
sugar-cane, and garlic should be learned from the Sixteenth Lesson of
the Nishîtha Sûtra.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[177:1](sbe2271.htm#fr_454) Oggaha, avagraha.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[177:2](sbe2271.htm#fr_455) Gâhâvaî,
g*ri*hapati. In another part of the commentary it is explained
grâmamahattarâdi, his dominion is grâmapâ*t*akâdikam.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[177:3](sbe2271.htm#fr_456) Sâgâriya, sâgârika.
It is explained *s*ayyâtara, host. His dominion is shampasâlâdi.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[177:4](sbe2271.htm#fr_457) Sâhammiya,
sâdharmika. His dominion is vasatyâdi, his domicile which extends for a
Yo*g*ana and a quarter. When he takes possession (parigraha) of it, he
must ask permission of the possessors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 8](sbe2272)
