[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2263)  [Next](sbe2265) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

### FOURTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### MODES OF SPEECH <span id="fr_419"></span>[1](#fn_413).

#### FIRST LESSON.

A monk or a nun, hearing and perceiving these uses of speech, should
know that the following ones are not to be employed and have not
hitherto been employed (by persons of exemplary conduct); those who
speak in wrath or in pride, for deception or for gain, who speak,
knowingly or unknowingly, hard words. They should avoid all this, which
is blamable. Employing their judgment, they should know something for
certain and something for uncertain <span
id="fr_420"></span>[2](#fn_414): (1) (N. N.) having received food or not
having received food, having eaten it or not having eaten it, has come
or has not come, comes or does not come, will come or will not come. (2)

Well considering (what one is to say), speaking with precision, one
should employ language in moderation and restraint: the singular, dual,
plural; feminine, masculine, neuter gender; praise, blame,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

praise mixed with blame, blame mixed with praise; past, present, or
future (tenses), the first and second, or third (person) <span
id="fr_421"></span>[1](#fn_415). If one thinks it necessary to speak in
the singular, he should speak in the singular; if he thinks it necessary
to speak in the plural, he should speak in the plural, &c. Considering
well: this is a woman, this is a man, this is a eunuch, this is to be
called thus, this is to be called otherwise, speaking with precision, he
should employ language in moderation and restraint. (3)

For the avoidance of these occasions to sin, a mendicant should know
that there are four kinds of speech: the first is truth; the second is
untruth; the third is truth mixed with untruth; what is neither truth,
nor untruth, nor truth mixed with untruth, that is the fourth kind of
speech: neither truth nor untruth <span id="fr_422"></span>[2](#fn_416).
Thus I say.

All past, present, and future Arhats have taught and declared, teach and
declare, will teach and declare these four kinds of speech; and they
have explained all those things which are devoid of intellect, which
possess colour, smell, taste, touch, which are subject to decay and
increase, which possess various qualities. (4)

A monk (or a nun should know that) before (the utterance) speech is
speech in (antecedent) non-existence <span
id="fr_423"></span>[3](#fn_417); that while uttered, it is (real)
speech;

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

that the moment after it has been uttered, the spoken speech is speech
in (subsequent) non-existence. (5)

A monk or a nun, well considering, should not use speech whether truth
or untruth, or truth mixed with untruth, if it be sinful, blamable,
rough, stinging, coarse, hard, leading to sins, to discord and factions,
to grief and outrage, to destruction of living beings. (6)

A monk or a nun, considering well, should use true and accurate speech,
or speech which is neither truth nor untruth (i.e. injunctions); for
such speech is not sinful, blamable, rough, stinging, &c. (7)

A monk or a nun, if addressing a man who, if addressed, does not answer,
should not say: 'You loon! you lout <span
id="fr_424"></span>[1](#fn_418)! you *S*ûdra! you low-born wretch! you
slave! you dog! you thief! you robber! you cheat! you liar! &c.; you are
such and such! your parents <span id="fr_425"></span>[2](#fn_419) are
such and such!' Considering well, they should not use such sinful,
blamable, &c., speech. (8)

But in that case they should say: 'N. N.! O long-lived one! O long-lived
ones! O layman! O pupil! O faithful one! O lover of faith!' Considering
well, they should use such sinless, blameless, &c., speech. (9)

A monk or a nun, if addressing a woman who, if addressed, does not
answer, should not say: 'You hussy! you wench! &c.' (repeat the above
list of

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

abusive words adapted to females). Considering well, they should not use
such sinful, blamable, &c., speech. (10)

A monk or a nun, if addressing a woman who, if addressed, does not
answer, should say: 'O long-lived one! O sister! madam! my lady! O
lay-sister! O pupil! O faithful one! O lover of faith!' Considering
well, they should use such sinless, blameless, &c., speech. (11)

A monk or a nun should not say: 'The god <span
id="fr_426"></span>[1](#fn_420) of the sky! the god of the thunderstorm!
the god of lightning! the god who begins to rain! the god who ceases to
rain! may rain fall or may it not fall! may the crops grow or may they
not grow! may the night wane or may it not wane! may the sun rise or may
it not rise! may the king conquer or may he not conquer!' They should
not use such speech. (12)

But knowing the nature of things, he should say: The air; the follower
of Guhya; a cloud has gathered or come down; the cloud has rained.'

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (13)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_413"></span>[149:1](sbe2264.htm#fr_419) Bhâsa*g*âya.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[149:2](sbe2264.htm#fr_420) The commentator
understands this passage and the following paragraph in a different way:
a man of ripe judgment should utter no such positive assertions, e. g.
it is certain (that it will rain), or it is not certain, &c. He seems to
have been of opinion that the prohibition in the last sentence, savvam
eta*m* sâva*gg*a*m* va*gg*e*gg*â, extends also to the following
sentence. But this is not probable, as eta*m* generally refers to what
precedes, and ima*m* to what follows.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[150:1](sbe2264.htm#fr_421)
Pa*kk*akkhavaya*n*a*m*, parokkhavaya*n*a*m*.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[150:2](sbe2264.htm#fr_422) The first, second,
and third cases refer to assertions, the fourth (asatyam*ri*shâ) to
injunctions.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[150:3](sbe2264.htm#fr_423) Literally,
non-speech. The commentary has the terms used in the translation, which
are taken from the Vai*s*eshika philosophy. But it is well known that
many *G*ainas have adopted and written on the Vai*s*eshika philosophy,
and that the Gainas themselves maintain <span id="page_151">p.
151</span> that one of their own creed, *Kh*uluya-Rohagutta, is the
author of the Vai*s*eshika Dar*s*anam; see Kalpa Sûtra, p. 119.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[151:1](sbe2264.htm#fr_424) The original has
hole, gole, which are said by the commentator to have been used, in
another country, as abusive words. My conjectural translation is based
on the meaning of the Sanskrit words ho*d*â, golâ.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[151:2](sbe2264.htm#fr_425) It is well known
that the Hindus include the parents of the abused party in their
maledictions.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[152:1](sbe2264.htm#fr_426) This prohibition to
use the word god in such phrases as the god (deva) rains, is a curious
instance of the rationalism of the early *G*ainas. As they were allowed
to speak nothing but the truth, they were enjoined not to say, the god
rains,' but the air (a*m*talikkha*m*) rains.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 4, Lesson 2](sbe2265)
