[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2239)  [Next](sbe2241.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

#### SIXTH LESSON.

A mendicant who is fitted out with one robe, and a bowl as second
(article), will not think: I shall beg for a second robe. He should beg
for such a robe only as is allowed to be begged for, 'and he should wear
it in the same state as he receives it. This is, &c. (see lesson 4, §
1).

But when the hot season has come, one should leave off the used-up
clothes; one should be clad with one or no garment--aspiring to freedom
from bonds. Knowing what the Revered One, &c. (see lesson 5, § 1).

When the thought occurs to a mendicant: 'I am myself, alone; I have
nobody belonging to me, nor do I belong to anybody,' then he should
thoroughly know himself as standing alone--aspiring to freedom from
bonds. Penance suits him. Knowing what the Revered One has declared, one
should thoroughly and in all respects conform to it. (1)

A male or female mendicant eating food &c. should not shift (the morsel)
from the left jaw to the right jaw, nor from the right jaw to the left
jaw, to get a fuller taste of it, not caring for the taste (of
it)--aspiring to freedom from bonds. Penance suits him. Knowing what the
Revered One has declared, one should thoroughly and in all respects
conform to it. (2)

If this thought occurs to a monk: 'I am sick and not able, at this time,
to regularly mortify the flesh,' that monk should regularly reduce his
food; regularly reducing his food, and diminishing his sins, 'he should
take proper care of his body, being

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

immovable like a beam; exerting himself he dissolves his body <span
id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_280).' (3.md)

Entering a village, or a scot-free town, or a town with an earth-wall,
or a town with a small wall, or an isolated town, or a large town, or a
sea-town, or a mine, or a hermitage, or the halting-places of
processions, or caravans, or a capital <span
id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_281.md)--a monk should beg for straw; having
begged for straw he should retire with it to a secluded spot. After
having repeatedly examined and cleaned the ground, where there are no
eggs, nor living beings, nor seeds, nor sprouts, nor dew, nor water, nor
ants, nor mildew, nor waterdrops, nor mud, nor cobwebs--he should spread
the straw on it. Then he should there and then effect (the religious
death called) itvara <span id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_282). (4.md)

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

This is the truth: speaking truth, free from passion, crossing (the
sa*m*sâra), abating irresoluteness, knowing all truth and not being
known, leaving this frail body, overcoming all sorts of pains and
troubles through trust in this (religion), he accomplishes this fearful
(religious death). Even thus he will in due time put an end to
existence. This has been adopted by many who were free from delusion; it
is good, wholesome, proper, beatifying, meritorious. Thus I say. (5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[72:1](sbe2240.htm#fr_284.md) There is no finite
verb in this sentence, nor any word which could supply its place. The
old *G*aina authors were so accustomed to surround their meaning with
exclusions and exceptions, and to fortify it with a maze of parentheses,
that they sometimes apparently forgot to express the verb, especially
when they made use of fragments of old verses, as in the present case.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[72:2](sbe2240.htm#fr_285.md) This is one of the
most frequent gamas or identical passages which form a rather
questionable ornament of the Sûtra style. The gamas are usually
abbreviated, e*g*. villages, &c., all down to capital, or eggs, &c., all
down to cobwebs, which we shall presently meet with.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[72:3](sbe2240.htm#fr_286.md) Itvara or
iṅgitamara*n*a consists in starving oneself, while keeping within a
limited space. A religious death is usually permitted only to those who
have during twelve years undergone preparatory penance, consisting
chiefly in protracted periods of fasting. The scholiast says that in our
case the itvara is not enjoined for sick persons who can no longer
sustain austerities; but they should act as if they were to commit the
itvara suicide, hoping that in five or six days the sickness would leave
them, in which case they are to return to their former life. But if they
should not get better but die, it is all for the best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I, Lecture 7, Lesson 7](sbe2241.md)
