[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2265)  [Next](sbe2267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### FIFTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### BEGGING OF CLOTHES <span id="fr_428"></span>[1](#fn_422).

#### FIRST LESSON.

A monk or a nun wanting to get clothes, may beg for cloth made of wool,
silk, hemp, palm-leaves, cotton, or Arkatûla, or such-like clothes. If
he be a youthful, young, strong, healthy, well-set monk, he may wear one
robe, not two; if a nun, she should possess four raiments, one two
cubits broad, two three cubits broad, one four cubits broad <span
id="fr_429"></span>[2](#fn_423). If one does not receive such pieces of
cloth, one should afterwards sew together one with the other. (1)

A monk or a nun should not resolve to go further than half a yo*g*ana to
get clothes. As regards the acceptance of clothes, those precepts which
have been given in the (First Lesson of the First Lecture, called)
Begging of Food <span id="fr_430"></span>[3](#fn_424), concerning one
fellow-ascetic, should be repeated here; also concerning many
fellow-ascetics, one female fellow-ascetic, many female fellow-ascetics,
many *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as; also about (clothes) appropriated by
another person <span id="fr_431"></span>[4](#fn_425). (2)

A monk or a nun should not accept clothes which the layman, for the
mendicant's sake, has bought,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

washed, dyed, brushed, rubbed, cleaned, perfumed, if these clothes be
appropriated by the giver himself. But if they be appropriated by
another person, they may accept them; for they are pure and acceptable.
(3)

A monk or a nun should not accept any very expensive clothes of the
following description: clothes made of fur, fine ones, beautiful ones;
clothes made of goats' hair, of blue cotton, of common cotton, of Bengal
cotton, of Pa*tt*a, of Malaya fibres, of bark fibres, of muslin, of
silk; (clothes provincially called) Desaraga, Amila, Ga*gg*ala, Phâliya,
Kâyaha; blankets or mantles. (4)

A monk or a nun should not accept any of the following plaids of fur and
other materials: plaids made of Udra, Pe*s*a fur <span
id="fr_432"></span>[1](#fn_426), embroidered with Pe*s*a fur, made of
the fur of black or blue or yellow deer, golden plaids, plaids
glittering like gold, interwoven with gold, set with gold, embroidered
with gold, plaids made of tigers' fur, highly ornamented plaids, plaids
covered with ornaments. (5)

For the avoidance of these occasions to sin there are four rules for
begging clothes to be known by the mendicants.

Now, this is the first rule:

A monk or a nun may beg for clothes specifying (their quality), viz.
wool, silk, hemp, palm-leaves, cotton, Arkatûla. If they beg for them,
or the householder gives them, they may accept them; for they are pure
and acceptable.

This is the first rule. (6)

Now follows the second rule:

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

A monk or a nun may ask for clothes which they have well inspected, from
the householder or his wife, &c. After consideration, they should say:
'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) please give me one of these clothes!'
If they beg for them, or the householder gives them, they may accept
them; for they are pure and acceptable.

This is the second rule. (7)

Now follows the third rule:

A monk or a nun may beg for an under or upper garment. If they beg for
it, &c. (see § 7).

This is the third rule. (8)

Now follows the fourth rule:

A monk or a nun may beg for a left-off robe, which no other *S*rama*n*a
or Brâhma*n*a, guest, pauper or beggar wants. If they beg, &c. (see §
7).

This is the fourth rule.

A monk or a nun who have adopted one of these four rules should not say,
&c. (all as in II, 1, 11, § 12, down to) we respect each other
accordingly. (9)

A householder may perhaps say to a mendicant begging in the prescribed
way: O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! return after a month, ten nights, five
nights, to-morrow, to-morrow night; then we shall give you some
clothes.' Hearing and perceiving such talk, he should, after
consideration, say: 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) it is not meet
for me to accept such a promise. If you want to give me (something),
give it me now!'

After these words the householder may answer: O long-lived *S*rama*n*a!
follow me! then we shall give you some clothes.' The mendicant should
give the same answer as above.

After his words the householder may say (to one

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

of his people): 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) fetch that robe! we
shall give it the *S*rama*n*a, and afterwards prepare one for our own
use, killing all sorts of living beings.'

Hearing and perceiving such talk, he should not accept such clothes; for
they are impure and unacceptable. (10)

The householder <span id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_427) may say (to one of
his people): 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) fetch that robe, wipe or
rub it with perfume, &c. (see II, 2, 1, § 8); we shall give it to the
*S*rama*n*a.'

Hearing and perceiving such talk, the mendicant should, after
consideration, say: 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) do not wipe or
rub it with perfume, &c. If you want to give it me, give it, such as it
is!'

After these words the householder might nevertheless offer the clothes
after having wiped or rubbed them, &c.; but the mendicant should not
accept them, for they are impure and unacceptable. (11)

The householder may say (to another of his people): 'O long-lived one!
(or, O sister!) bring that robe, clean or wash it with cold or hot
water!'

The mendicant should return the same answer as above (in §11) and not
accept such clothes. (12)

The householder may say (to another of his

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

people): 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) bring that cloth, empty it
of the bulbs, &c. (see II, 2, 1, § 5); we shall give it to the
*S*rama*n*a.' Hearing and perceiving such talk, the mendicant should
say, after consideration: 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) do not
empty that cloth of the bulbs, &c.; it is not meet for me to accept such
clothes.' After these words the householder might nevertheless take away
the bulbs, &c., and offer him the cloth; but he should not accept it;
for it is impure and unacceptable. (13)

If a householder brings a robe and gives it to the mendicant, he should,
after consideration, say: 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) I shall, in
your presence, closely inspect the inside of the robe.'

The Kevalin says: This is the reason: There might be hidden in the robe
an earring or girdle or gold and silver, &c. (see II, 2, 1, § 11), or
living beings or seeds or grass. Hence it has been said to the
mendicant, &c., that he should closely inspect the inside of the robe.
(14)

A monk or a nun should not accept clothes which are full of eggs or
living beings, &c.; for they are impure, &c. A monk or a nun should not
accept clothes which are free from eggs or living beings, &c., but which
are not fit nor strong nor lasting nor to be worn <span
id="fr_434"></span>[1](#fn_428)--which though pleasant are not fit (for
a mendicant); for they are impure and unacceptable. (15)

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

A monk or a nun may accept clothes which are fit, strong, lasting, to be
worn, pleasant and fit for a mendicant; for they are pure and
acceptable. (16)

A monk or a nun should not wash his clothes, rub or wipe them with
ground drugs, &c., because they are not new.

A monk or a nun should not clean or wash his clothes in plentiful water,
because they are not new. (17)

A monk or a nun should not make his clothes undergo the processes
(prohibited in § 17), because they have a bad smell. (18)

A monk or a nun wanting to air or dry (in the sun) their clothes, should
not do so on the bare ground or wet earth or rock or piece of clay
containing life, &c. (see II, 1, 5, § 2). (19) <span
id="fr_435"></span>[1](#fn_429)

A monk or a nun wanting to air or dry (in the sun) their clothes, should
not hang them for that purpose on a post of a house, on the upper timber
of a door-frame, on a mortar, on a bathing-tub, or on any such-like
above-ground place, which is not well fixed or set, but shaky and
movable. (20)

A monk or a nun wanting to air or dry (in the sun) their clothes, should
not lay them for that purpose on a dyke, wall, rock, stone, or any
such-like above-ground place, &c. (21)

A monk or a nun wanting to air or dry (in the sun) their clothes, should
not do it on a pillar, a raised platform, a scaffold, a second story, a
flat roof, or any such-like above-ground place, &c. (22)

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Knowing this, he should resort to a secluded spot, and circumspectly air
or dry his clothes there on a heap of ashes or bones, &c. (see II, 1, 1,
§ 1), which he has repeatedly inspected and cleaned.

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (23)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_422"></span>[157:1](sbe2266.htm#fr_428) Vatthesa*n*â.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[157:2](sbe2266.htm#fr_429) The first to wear
in the cloister, the second and third for out-of-door, the fourth for
assemblies.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[157:3](sbe2266.htm#fr_430) See II, 1, 1, § 11.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[157:4](sbe2266.htm#fr_431) See II, 1, 1, § 13.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[158:1](sbe2266.htm#fr_432) According to the
commentary udra and pe*s*a are animals in Sindh.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[160:1](sbe2266.htm#fr_433) Here and in the
following paragraph the original adds nettâ, which may be = nîtvâ,
bringing (the clothes); but the following words seem to militate against
this rendering. For the householder's order to fetch (âhara) the clothes
would be superfluous, if he had already brought (nettâ) them. Unless
âhara has here some other meaning than the common one, perhaps 'take
it,' nettâ cannot be translated 'having brought them.'

<span id="fn_428"></span>[161:1](sbe2266.htm#fr_434) If they contain
stains of mustard or A*ñg*ana, &c. The commentator quotes two *s*lokas
which, as I understand them, assign to the different parts of the cloth
different significations as omina. They run thus: *K*attâri deviyâ bhâgâ
do ya bhâgâ ya mâ*n*usâ asurâ*n*a ya do bhâgâ ma*ggh*e vatthassa
rakkhaso \|\| devesu uttamo lobho mâ*n*usesu ya ma*ggh*imo \| asuresu ya
gala*nn*a*m* mara*n*a*m* *g*â*n*a rakkhase \|\|

<span id="fn_429"></span>[162:1](sbe2266.htm#fr_435) If the garment
falls on the ground, it would come in contact with dust, &c., then it
would contain living beings and be no more pure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 5, Lesson 2](sbe2267)
