[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2256)  [Next](sbe2258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ELEVENTH LESSON.

Some mendicants say unto (others) who follow the same rules of conduct,
or live in the same place, or wander from village to village, if they
have received agreeable food and another mendicant falls sick <span
id="fr_378"></span>[1](#fn_372): 'Take it! give it him! if the sick
mendicant will not eat it, thou mayst eat it.' But he (who is ordered to
bring the food) thinking, 'I shall eat it myself,' covers it and shows
it (saying): This is the lump of food, it is rough to the taste <span
id="fr_379"></span>[2](#fn_373), it is pungent, it is bitter, it is
astringent, it is sour, it is sweet; there is certainly nothing in it
fit for a sick person.' As this would be sinful, he should not do so.
But he should show him which parts are not fit for a sick person
(saying): 'This particle is pungent, this one bitter, this one
astringent, this one sour, this one sweet.' (1)

Some mendicants say unto (others) who follow the same rules of conduct,
or live in the same place, or wander from village to village, if they
have received agreeable food and another mendicant falls sick: 'Take it!
give it him! if the mendicant will not eat it, bring it to us!' 'If
nothing prevents me, I shall

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

bring it.' (Then he might act as stated in § 1, which would be sinful.)
(2)

For the avoidance of these occasions to sin there are seven rules for
begging food and as many for begging drink, to be known by the
mendicants.

Now, this is the first rule for begging food. Neither hand nor vessel
are wet <span id="fr_380"></span>[1](#fn_374): with such a hand or
vessel he may accept as pure, food, &c., for which he himself begs or
which the other gives him. That is the first rule for begging food. (3)

Now follows the second rule for begging food. The hand and the vessel
are wet. The rest as in the preceding rule. That is the second rule for
begging food. (4)

Now follows the third rule for begging food. In the east, &c., there are
several faithful householders, &c., (all down to) servants: they have
put (food) in some of their various vessels, as a pan, a pot, a
winnowing basket, a basket, a precious vessel. Now (the mendicant)
should again know: is the hand not wet and the vessel wet; or the hand
wet and the vessel not wet? If he collect alms with an alms-bowl or with
his hand <span id="fr_381"></span>[2](#fn_375), he should say, after
consideration: 'O long-lived one! (or, O sister!) with your not-wet
hand, or with your wet vessel, put (alms) in this my bowl, or hand, and
give it me!' Such-like food, for which he himself begs or which the
other gives him, he may accept; for it is pure and acceptable. That is
the third rule for begging food. (5)

Now follows the fourth rule for begging food. A

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

monk or a nun may accept flattened grains, &c. (cf. II, 1, 1, § 5), for
which they beg themselves or which the other gives them, if it be such
as to require little cleaning or taking out (of chaff); for it is pure,
&c. That is the fourth rule for begging food. (6)

Now follows the fifth rule for begging food. A monk or a nun may accept
food which is offered on a plate or a copper cup or any vessel, if the
moisture on the hands of the giver is almost dried up; for, &c. That is
the fifth rule for begging food. (7)

Now follows the sixth rule for begging food. A monk or a nun may accept
food which had been taken up from the ground, either taken up for one's
own sake or accepted for the sake of somebody else, whether it be placed
in a vessel or in the hand; for, &c. That is the sixth rule for begging
food. (8)

Now follows the seventh rule for begging food. A monk or a nun may
accept food of which only a part may be used, and which is not wanted by
bipeds, quadrupeds, *S*rama*n*as, Brâhma*n*as, guests, paupers, and
beggars, whether they beg for it themselves, or the householder gives it
them. That is the seventh rule for begging food. (9)

These are the seven rules for begging food; now follow the seven rules
for begging drink. They are, however, the same as those about food, only
the fourth gives this precept: A monk or a nun may accept as drink water
which has been used for watering flour or sesamum, &c. (II, 1, 7, § 7),
if it be such as to require little cleaning and taking out (of impure)
articles; for, &c. (10)

One who has adopted one of these seven rules for begging food or drink
should not say: 'These reverend persons have chosen a wrong rule, I
alone

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

have rightly chosen.' (But he should say): 'These reverend persons, who
follow these rules, and I who follow that rule, we all exert ourselves
according to the commandment of the *G*ina, and we respect each other
accordingly.'

This certainly is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (11)

End of the First Lecture, called Begging of Food.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_372"></span>[116:1](sbe2257.htm#fr_378) This is the way in
which the commentator construes the sentence. There is some confusion in
the text, which cannot easily be removed.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[116:2](sbe2257.htm#fr_379) Loe, Sanskrit
rûksha?

<span id="fn_374"></span>[117:1](sbe2257.htm#fr_380) Sa*m*sa*tth*a; it
would perhaps be more correct to translate this word, soiled with the
food in question.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[117:2](sbe2257.htm#fr_381) These are the
pa*d*iggahadhârî and the pâ*n*ipa*d*iggahiya, lit, one who uses his hand
instead of an alms-bowl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 2, Lesson 1](sbe2258)
