[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2246)  [Next](sbe2248) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

# SECOND BOOK

## FIRST PART <span id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_318).

### FIRST LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### BEGGING OF FOOD <span id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_319).

#### FIRST LESSON.

WHEN a male or a female mendicant, having entered the abode of a
householder with the intention of collecting alms, recognises <span
id="fr_324"></span>[3](#fn_320) food, drink, dainties, and spices as
affected by, or mixed up with, living beings, mildew, seeds or sprouts,
or wet with water, or covered with dust--either in the hand or the pot
of another <span id="fr_325"></span>[4](#fn_321)--they should not, even
if they can get it, accept of such food, thinking that it is impure and
unacceptable <span id="fr_326"></span>[5](#fn_322). (1)

But if perchance they accept of such food, under pressing
circumstances <span id="fr_327"></span>[6](#fn_323), they should go to a
secluded spot, a garden, or a monk's hall--where there are no

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

eggs, nor living beings, nor sprouts, nor dew, nor water, nor ants, nor
mildew, nor drops (of water), nor mud, nor cobwebs--and rejecting (that
which is affected by), and cleaning that which is mixed up (with living
beings, &c.), they should circumspectly eat or drink it. But with what
they cannot eat or drink, they should resort to a secluded spot, and
leave it there on a heap of ashes or bones, or rusty things, or chaff,
or cowdung, or on any such-like place which they have repeatedly
examined and cleaned. (2)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept as alms whatever
herbs they recognise, on examining them, as still whole, containing
their source of life, not split longwise or broadwise, and still alive,
fresh beans, living and not broken; for such food is impure and
unacceptable. (3)

But when they recognise after examination that those herbs are no more
whole, do not contain their source of life, are split longwise or
broadwise, and no more alive, fresh beans, lifeless and broken, then
they may accept them, if they get them; for they are pure and
acceptable. (4)

A monk or nun on a begging-tour should not accept as alms whatever
flattened grains, grains containing much chaff, or half-roasted spikes
of wheat, &c., or flour of wheat, &c., or rice or flour of rice, they
recognise as only once worked <span id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_324); for
such food is impure and unacceptable. (5)

But when they recognise these things as more than once worked, as twice,
thrice worked, then they may accept them, if they get them; for they are
pure and acceptable. (6)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

A monk or a nun desiring to enter the abode of a householder for
collecting alms, should not enter or leave it together with a heretic or
a householder; or a monk who avoids all forbidden food, &c., together
with one who does not. (7)

A monk or a nun entering or leaving the out-of-door places for religious
practices or for study <span id="fr_329"></span>[1](#fn_325) should not
do so together with a heretic or a householder; or a monk who avoids all
forbidden food, together with one who does not. (8)

A monk or a nun wandering from village to village should not do so
together with a heretic or a householder; or a monk who avoids all
forbidden food, together with one who does not. (9)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not give, immediately or
mediately, food, &c., to a heretic or a householder; or a monk who
avoids all forbidden food, to one who does not. (1o)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept food, &c., from a
householder whom they know to give out of respect for a Nirgrantha, in
behalf of a fellow-ascetic, food, &c., which he has bought or stolen or
taken, though it was not to be taken nor given, but was taken by force,
by acting sinfully towards all sorts of living beings; for such-like
food, &c., prepared by another man <span id="fr_330"></span>[2](#fn_326)
or by the giver himself, brought out of the house or not brought out of
the house, belonging to the giver or not belonging to him, partaken or
tasted of, or not partaken or tasted of, is impure and unacceptable.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

In this precept substitute for 'on behalf of one fellow-ascetic,' (2) on
behalf of many fellow-ascetics, (3) on behalf of one female
fellow-ascetic, (4) on behalf of many female fellow-ascetics; so that
there will be four analogous precepts. (11)

A monk or a nun should not accept of food, &c., which they know has been
prepared by the householder for the sake of many *S*rama*n*as and
Brâhma*n*as, guests, paupers, and beggars, after he has counted them,
acting sinfully towards all sorts of living beings; for such food,
whether it be tasted of or not, is impure and unacceptable. (12)

A monk or a nun should not accept of food, &c., procured in the way
described in § 1I for the sake of the persons mentioned in § 12, if the
said food, &c., has been prepared by the giver himself, has been brought
out of the house, does not belong to the giver, has not been partaken or
tasted of; for such food, &c., is impure and unacceptable; but if the
food, &c., has been prepared by another person, has been brought out of
the house, belongs to the giver, has been partaken or tasted of, one may
accept it; for it is pure and acceptable. (13)

A monk or a nun wishing to enter the abode of a householder with the
intention of collecting alms, should not, for the sake of food or drink,
enter or leave such always liberal, always open houses, where they
always give a morsel, always the best morsel, always a part of the meal,
always nearly the half of it.

This certainly is the whole duty of a monk or a nun in which one should,
instructed in all its meanings and endowed with bliss, always exert
oneself.

Thus I say. (14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_318"></span>[88:1](sbe2247.htm#fr_322) *K*û*d*a.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[88:2](sbe2247.htm#fr_323) Pi*nd*aisha*n*â.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[88:3](sbe2247.htm#fr_324) This is the typical
beginning of most precepts or sûtras in this *k*û*d*â: se bhikkhû vâ
bhikkhu*n*î vâ gâhâvaikula*m* pi*md*avâyapa*d*iyâe a*n*upavi*tth*e
samâ*n*e se *gg*a*m* pu*n*a *g*â*n*e*gg*â. In the sequel I have
shortened this rather lengthy preamble.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[88:4](sbe2247.htm#fr_325) By the other is
meant the householder or the giver (dât*ri*).

<span id="fn_322"></span>[88:5](sbe2247.htm#fr_326) This is the typical
conclusion of all prohibitions: aphâsuya*m* a*n*esa*n*i*gg*a*m* ti
mannamâ*n*e lâbhe sa*m*te no pa*d*iggâhe*gg*â. In the translation the
plural is used throughout, in order to avoid the necessity of always
repeating 'he or she.'

<span id="fn_323"></span>[88:6](sbe2247.htm#fr_327) As e. g. total want
of another opportunity to get suitable food during famine and sickness.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[89:1](sbe2247.htm#fr_328) Pounded or cooked or
roasted, &c., because after only one operation sperms of life might
still be left.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[90:1](sbe2247.htm#fr_329) These are the
vi*k*ârabhûmi and vihârabhûmi.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[90:2](sbe2247.htm#fr_330) Purisa*m*taraka*d*a.
I have rendered this word according to the interpretation of the
commentators; but in a similar passage, 8, 3, §§ 2 and 3, they
understand the word to mean appropriated by another person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 1, Lesson 2](sbe2248)
