[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2259)  [Next](sbe2261) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THIRD LESSON.

'It <span id="fr_392"></span>[1](#fn_386) is difficult to obtain pure,
acceptable alms; it is indeed not free from such preparations as
strewing the ground (with Darbha-grass), smearing it (with cowdung),
shutting the doors and securing the beds. And he (the mendicant)
delights in pilgrimage, religious exercises, study, begging for a bed, a
couch, or other alms.'

Some mendicants explain thus (the requisites of a lodging); they are
called upright, searching after liberation, practising no deceit.

Some householders (who, having learned the requisites of a
lodging-place, fit one out accordingly, try to deceive the mendicants,
saying): 'This lodging, which we offer you, has been assigned to you, it
has been originally prepared for our sake, or for the sake of some
relations, it has been used, it has been relinquished.'

Explaining <span id="fr_393"></span>[2](#fn_387) thus, he truly
explains. (The teacher says): Well, he is (an explainer of the truth).
(1)

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

If a mendicant, at night or at the twilight, leaves or enters a small
lodging, one with a small door, a low or crammed lodging, (he should put
forward) first his hand, then his foot, and thus circumspectly leave or
enter it.

The Kevalin says: This is the reason: There might be a badly bound,
badly placed, badly fastened, loose umbrella, pot, stick, staff, robe,
hide, leather boots or piece of leather belonging to *S*rama*n*as or
Brâhma*n*as; and the mendicant, when leaving or entering (the lodging)
at night or twilight, might stumble or fall; stumbling or falling he
might hurt his hand or foot, &c. (see IV, 1, 7, § 1), kill, &c., all
sorts of living beings.

Hence it has been said to the mendicant, &c., that one (should put
forward) first the hand, then the foot, and thus circumspectly leave or
enter such a lodging. (2)

He (the mendicant) should, at halting-places, &c., ask for a
lodging-place, after having inquired who is the landlord or who is the
tenant. H e should ask permission to use the lodging-place in this way:
'By your favour, O long-lived one! we shall dwell here for a while (for
the time and in the place) which you will concede.' (If the landlord
should object and say that he owns the lodging for a limited time only,
or if he asks for the number of monks for which the lodging is required,
he should answer) <span id="fr_394"></span>[1](#fn_388): 'As long as
this lodging belongs to you, (or) for the sake of as

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

many fellow-ascetics (as shall stand in need of it), we shall occupy the
lodging; afterwards we shall take to wandering.' (3)

A monk or a nun may know the name and gotra of him in whose lodging he
lives; in that case they should not accept food, &c., in that house
whether invited or not invited; for it is impure and unacceptable. (4)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a
lodging-place which is used by the householder, which contains fire or
water; for it is not fit for a wise man to enter or leave it, &c. (cf.
II, 1, 4, § 1). (5)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
for which they have to pass through the householder's abode, or to which
there is no road; for it is not fit, &c. (see last paragraph). (6)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
where the householder or his wife, &c., might bully or scold, &c., each
other (see II, 2, 1, § 9); for it is not fit, &c. (7)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
where the householder or his wife, &c., rub or anoint each other's body
with oil or ghee or butter or grease; for it is not fit, &c. (8)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
where the householder or his wife, &c., rub or shampoo each other's body
with perfumes, ground drugs, powder, lodhra, &c. (see II, 2, 1, § 8);
for it is not fit, &c. (9)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
where the householder or his

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

wife, &c., clean, wash, or sprinkle each other's body with cold or hot
water; for it is not fit, &c. (10)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
where the householder or his wife, &c., go about naked or hide
themselves, or talk about sexual pleasures, or discuss a secret plan;
for it is not fit, &c. (11)

A monk or a nun should not use for religious postures, &c., a lodging
which is a much-frequented playground <span
id="fr_395"></span>[1](#fn_389); for it is not fit, &c. (12)

1\. If a monk or a nun wish to beg for a couch, they should not accept
one which they recognise full of eggs, living beings, &c. (13)

2\. If the couch is free from eggs, living beings, but is heavy, they
should not accept such a couch. (14)

3\. If the couch is free from eggs, living beings, light, but not
movable, they should not accept such a couch. (15)

4\. If the couch is free from eggs, living beings, &c., light, movable,
but not well tied, they should not accept such a couch <span
id="fr_396"></span>[2](#fn_390). (16)

5\. If the couch is free from eggs, living beings, light, movable, and
well tied, they may accept such a couch. (17)

For the avoidance of these occasions to sin there are four rules,
according to which the mendicant should beg for a couch.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

Now this is the first rule for begging for a couch.

If a monk or a nun beg for a couch, specifying (its quality), viz. one
of Ikka*t*a-reed, a hard one, one of *G*antuka-grass, of
Para-grass <span id="fr_397"></span>[1](#fn_391), of peacock feathers,
of hay, of Ku*s*a-grass, of brush-hair, of Pa*kk*aka, of Pippala, of
straw, they should, after consideration, say: 'O long-lived one! (or, O
sister!) please give me this here!' If the householder prepares one of
the above-specified couches, or if the mendicant asks himself, and the
householder gives it, then he may accept it as pure and acceptable.

This is the first rule. (18)

Now follows the second rule.

If a monk or a nun beg for a couch (of the above-detailed description)
after having well inspected it, they should, after consideration, say:
'O long-lived one! &c.' (all as in the first rule).

This is the second rule <span id="fr_398"></span>[2](#fn_392). (19)

If a monk or a nun beg for a couch of the above-detailed description,
viz. one of Ikka*t*a-grass, &c., from him in whose house he lives, they
may use it if they get it; if not, they should remain in a squatting or
sitting posture (for the whole night).

This is the third rule. (20)

Now follows the fourth rule.

If a monk or a nun beg for a couch such as it is spread, either on the
ground or on a wooden plank, they may use it if they get it; if not,
they

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

should remain in a squatting or sitting posture (for the whole night).

This is the fourth rule. (21)

A monk who has adopted one of these four rules, should not say, &c. (all
as in II, 1, 11, § 12, down to) we respect each other accordingly. (22)

If a monk or a nun wish to give back a couch, they should not do so, if
the couch contains eggs, living beings, &c. But if it contains few
living beings, &c., they may restrainedly do so, after having well
inspected, swept, and dried it <span id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_393).
(23)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour or in a residence or on a pilgrimage
from village to village should first inspect the place for easing
nature. The Kevalin says: This is the reason: If a monk or a nun, in the
night or the twilight, ease nature in a place which they have not
previously inspected, they might stumble or fall, stumbling or falling
they might hurt the hand or foot, &c., kill, &c., all sorts of living
beings. (24)

A monk or a nun might wish to inspect the ground for their couch away
from <span id="fr_400"></span>[2](#fn_394) that occupied by a teacher or
sub-teacher, &c. (see II, 1, 10, § 1), or by a young one or an old one
or a novice or a sick man or a guest, either at the end or in the
middle, either on even or uneven ground, or at a place where there is a
draught or where there is no draught. They should then well inspect and
sweep

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the floor), and
circumspectly spread a perfectly pure bed or couch. (25)

Having spread a perfectly pure bed or couch, a monk or a nun might wish
to ascend it. When doing so, they should first wipe their body from head
to heels; then they may circumspectly ascend the perfectly pure bed or
couch, and circumspectly sleep in it. (26)

A monk or a nun sleeping in a perfectly pure bed or couch (should have
placed it at such a distance from the next one's) that they do not touch
their neighbour's hand, foot, or body with their own hand, foot, or
body; and not touching it, should circumspectly sleep in their perfectly
pure bed or couch. (27)

Before inhaling or breathing forth, or coughing or sneezing or yawning
or vomiting or eructating, a monk or a nun should cover their face or
the place where it lies; then they may circumspectly inhale or breathe
forth, &c. (28)

Whether his lodging <span id="fr_401"></span>[1](#fn_395) be even or
uneven; full of, or free from, draughts; full of, or free from, dust;
full of, or free from, flies and gnats; full of, or free from, dangers
and troubles--in any such-like lodging one should contentedly stay, nor
take offence at anything.

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (29)

End of the Second Lecture, called Begging for a Couch.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_386"></span>[129:1](sbe2260.htm#fr_392) The commentators
say that this passage contains the mendicant's answer to an invitation
to live in this or that village. By the second it is meant the lodging.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[129:2](sbe2260.htm#fr_393) The commentator
supposes here the householder to further <span id="page_130">p.
130</span> inquire after the requisites of, and the objections to, the
lodging-place. The mendicant should explain them.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[130:1](sbe2260.htm#fr_394) The passage in
parentheses contains what the commentator supplies.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[132:1](sbe2260.htm#fr_395)
Âi*nn*asa*m*lekkha*m*. I am not certain whether I have found the correct
meaning.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[132:2](sbe2260.htm#fr_396) In the first case,
there would be sa*m*yamavirâdhanâ, or obstruction to control; in the
second, âtmavirâdhanâ, injury to him who lifts the couch; in the third,
tatparityâga; in the fourth, bandhanâdipalimantha, friction of the
ropes. The word which I have translated movable is pa*d*ihâriya
pratihâruka. The translation is conjectural.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[133:1](sbe2260.htm#fr_397) The commentator
says that from this grass artificial flowers are produced.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[133:2](sbe2260.htm#fr_398) According to the
commentary the first and second rules may not be adopted by a
ga*kkh*a-nirgata, or a monk who is attached to no order of monks.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[134:1](sbe2260.htm#fr_399) One past
[preterit](errata.htm#1) participle vi*n*i*tth*u*n*iya is left out in
the translation, as I do not know its meaning.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[134:2](sbe2260.htm#fr_400) Nannattha with
instr., here explained muktvâ. Though I suspect the correctness of this
translation, I have nothing better to offer.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[135:1](sbe2260.htm#fr_401) Se*gg*â, here
explained by vasati.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 3, Lesson 1](sbe2261)
