[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](clrv02.md) 
[Next](clrv04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0835670953/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Clairvoyance*, by C.W. Leadbeater, \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### SIMPLE CLAIRVOYANCE: FULL

We have defined this as a mere opening of etheric or astral sight, which
enables the possessor to see whatever may be present around him on
corresponding levels, but is not usually accompanied by the power of
seeing anything at a great distance or of reading either the past or the
future. It is hardly possible altogether to exclude these latter
faculties, for astral sight necessarily has considerably greater
extension than physical, and fragmentary pictures of both past and
future are often casually visible even to clairvoyants who do not know
how to seek specially for them; but there is nevertheless a very real
distinction between such incidental glimpses and the definite power of
projection of the sight either in space or time.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

We find among sensitive people all degrees of this kind of clairvoyance,
from that of the man who gets a vague impression which hardly deserves
the name of sight at all, up to the full possession of etheric and
astral vision respectively. Perhaps the simplest method will be for us
to begin by describing what would be visible in the case of this fuller
development of the power, as the cases of its partial possession will
then be seen to fall naturally into their places.

Let us take the etheric vision first. This consists simply, as has
already been said, in susceptibility to a far larger series of physical
vibrations than ordinary, but nevertheless its possession brings into
view a good deal to which the majority of the human race still remains
blind. Let us consider what changes its acquisition produces in the
aspect of familiar objects, animate and inanimate, and then see to what
entirely new factors it introduces us. But it must be remembered that
what I am about to describe is the result of the full and
perfectly-controlled possession of the faculty only, and that most of
the instances met with in real life will be likely

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

to fall far short of it in one direction or another.

The most striking change produced in the appearance of inanimate objects
by the acquisition of this faculty is that most of them become almost
transparent, owing to the difference in wavelength of some of the
vibrations to which the man has now become susceptible. He finds himself
capable of performing with the utmost ease the proverbial feat of
"seeing through a brick wall," for to his newly-acquired vision the
brick wall seems to have a consistency no greater than that of a light
mist. He therefore sees what is going on in an adjoining room almost as
though no intervening wall existed; he can describe with accuracy the
contents of a locked box, or read a sealed letter; with a little
practice he can find a given passage in a closed book. This last feat,
though perfectly easy to astral vision, presents considerable difficulty
to one using etheric sight, because of the fact that each page has to be
looked at *through* all those which happen to be superimposed upon it.

It is then asked whether under these circumstances a man sees always
with this

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

abnormal sight, or only when he wishes o do so. The answer is that if
the faculty is perfectly developed it will be entirely under his
control, and he can use that or his more ordinary vision at will. He
changes from one to the other as readily and naturally as we now change
the focus of our eyes when we look up from our book to follow the
motions of some object a mile away. It is, as it were, a focussing of
consciousness on the one or the other aspect of what is seen: and though
the man would have quite clearly in his view the aspect upon which his
attention was for the moment fixed, he would always be vaguely conscious
of the other aspect too, just as when we focus our sight upon any object
held in our hands we yet vaguely see the opposite wall of the room as a
background.

Another curious change, which comes from the possession of this sight,
is that the solid ground upon which the man walks becomes to a certain
extent transparent to him, so that he is able to see down into it to a
considerable depth, much as we can now see into fairly clear water. This
enables him to watch a creature burrowing underground, to

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

distinguish a vein of coal or of metal if not too far below the surface,
and so on.

The limit of etheric sight when looking through solid matter appears to
be analogous to that imposed upon us when looking through water or mist.
We cannot see beyond a certain distance, because the medium through
which we are looking is not perfectly transparent.

The appearance of animate objects is also considerably altered for the
man who has increased his visual powers to this extent. The bodies of
men and animals are for him in the main transparent, so that he can
watch the action of the various internal organs, and to some extent
diagnose some of their diseases.

The extend sight also enables him to perceive, more or less clearly,
various classes of creatures, elemental and otherwise, whose bodies are
not capable of reflecting any of the rays within the limit of the
spectrum as ordinarily seen. Among the entities so seen will be some of
the lower orders of nature-spirits—those whose bodies are composed of
the denser etheric matter. To this class

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

belong nearly all the fairies, gnomes, and brownies, about whom there
are still so many stories remaining among Scotch and Irish mountains and
in remote country places all over the world.

The vast kingdom of nature-spirits is in the main an astral kingdom, but
still there is a large section of it which appertains to the etheric
part of the physical plane, and this section, of course, is much more
likely to come within the ken of ordinary people than the others.
Indeed, in reading the common fairy stories one frequently comes across
distinct indications that it is with this class that we are dealing. Any
student of fairy love will remember how often mention is made of some
mysterious ointment or drug, which when applied to a man's eyes enables
him to see the members of the fairy commonwealth whenever he happens to
meet them.

The story of such an application and its results occurs so constantly
and comes from so many different parts of the world that there must
certainly be some truth behind it, as there always is behind really
universal popular tradition. Now no such anointing of the eyes

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

alone could by any possibility open a man's astral vision, though
certain ointment rubbed over the whole body will very greatly assist the
astral body to leave the physical in full consciousness—a fact the
knowledge of which seems to have survived even to mediaeval times, as
will be seen from the evidence given at some of the trials for
witchcraft. But the application to the physical eye might very easily so
stimulate its sensitiveness as to make it susceptible to some of the
etheric vibrations.

The story frequently goes on to relate how when the human being who has
used this mystical ointment betrays his extended vision in some way to a
fairy, the latter strikes or stabs him in the eye, thus depriving him
not only of the etheric sight, but of that of the denser physical plane
as well. (See *The Science of Fairy Tales* by E. S. Hartlane, in the
"Contemporary Science" series—or indeed almost any extensive collection
of fairy stories.) If the sight acquired had been astral, such a
proceeding would have been entirely unavailaing, for no injury to the
physical apparatus would affect an astral faculty; but if the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

vision produced by the ointment were etheric, the destruction of the
physical eye would in most cases at once distinguish it, since that is
the mechanism by means of which it works.

Anyone possessing this sight of which we are speaking would also be able
to perceive the etheric double of man; but since this is so nearly
identical in size with the physical, it would hardly be likely to
attract his attention unless it were partially protected in trance or
under the influence of anaesthetics. After death, when it withdraws
entirely from the dense body, it would be clearly visible to him, and he
would frequently see it hovering over newly-made graves as he passed
through a church yard or cemetery. If he were to attend a spiritualistic
seance he would see the etheric matter oozing out from the side of the
medium, and could observe the various ways in which the communicating
entities make use of it.

Another fact which could hardly fail soon to thrust itself upon his
notice would be the extension of his perception of colour. He would find
himself able to see several entirely new colours, not in the least
resembling any

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of those included in the spectrum as we at present know it, and
therefore of course quite indescribable in any terms at our command. And
not only would he see new objects that were wholly of these new colours,
but he would also discover that modifications had been introduced into
the colour of many objects with which he was quite familiar, according
to whether they had or had not some tinge of these new hues intermingled
with the old. So that two surfaces of colour which to ordinary eyes
appeared to match perfectly would often present distinctly different
shades to his keener sight.

We have now touched upon some of the principal changes which would be
introduced into a man's world when he gained etheric sight; and it must
always be remembered that in most cases a corresponding change would at
the same time be brought about in his other senses also, so that he
would be capable of hearing, and perhaps even of feeling, more than most
of those around him. Now supposing that in addition to this he obtained
the sight of the astral plane, what further changes would be observable?

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Well, the changes would be many and great; in fact, a whole new world
would open before his eyes. Let us consider its wonders briefly in the
same order as before, and see first what difference there would be in
the appearance of inanimate objects. On this point I may begin by
quoting a recent quaint answer given in *The Vahan*.

"There is a distinct difference between etheric sight and astral sight,
and it is the latter which seems to correspond to the fourth dimension.

"The easiest way to understand he difference is to take an example. If
you looked at a man with both the sights in turn, you would see the
buttons at the back of his coat in both cases; only if you used etheric
sight you would see them *through* him, and would see the shank-side as
nearest to you, but if you looked astrally, you would see it not only
like that, but just as if you were standing behind the man as well.

"Or if you were looking etherically at a wooden cube with writing on all
its sides, it would be as though the cube were glass, so that you could
see through it, and you would

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

see the writing on the opposite side all backwards, while that on the
right and left sides would not be clear to you at all unless you moved,
because you see it edgewise. But if you looked at it astrally you would
see all the sides at once, and all the right way up, as though the whole
cube had been flattened out before you, and you would see every particle
of the inside as well—not *through* the others, but all flattened out.
You would be looking at it from another direction, at right angles to
all the directions that we know.

"If you look at the back of a watch etherically you see all the wheels
through it, and the face *through them*, but backwards; if you look at
it astrally, you see the face right way up and all the wheels lying
separately, but nothing on the top of anything else."

Here we have at once the keynote, the principal factor of the change;
the man is looking at everything from an absolutely new point of view,
entirely outside of anything that he has ever imagined before. He has no
longer the slightest difficulty in reading any page in a closed book,
because he is not now looking at it through all the other pages

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

before it or behind it, but is looking straight down upon it as though
it were the only page to be seen. The depth at which a vein of metal or
of coal may lie is no longer a barrier to his sight of it, because he is
not now looking through the intervening depth of earth at all. The
thickness of a wall, or the number of walls intervening between the
observer and the object, would make a great deal of difference to the
clearness of the etheric sight; they would make no difference whatever
to the astral sight, because on the astral plane they would *not*
intervene between the observer and the object. Of course that sounds
paradoxical and impossible, and it is quite inexplicable to a mind not
specially trained to grasp the idea; yet it is none the less absolutely
true.

This carries us straight into the middle of the much-vexed question of
the fourth dimension—a question of the deepest interest, though one that
we cannot pretend to discuss in the space at our disposal. Those who
wish to study it as it deserves are recommended to begin with Mr. C. H.
Hinton's *Scientific Romances* or Dr. A. T. Schofield's *Another*

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *World*, and then
follow on with the former author's larger work, *A New Era of Thought*.
Mr. Hinton not only claims to be able himself to grasp mentally some of
the simpler fourth dimensional figures, but also states that anyone who
will take the trouble to follow out his directions may with perseverance
acquire that mental grasp likewise. I am not certain that the power to
do this is within the reach of everyone, as he thinks, for it appears to
me to require considerable mathematical ability; but I can at any rate
bear witness that the tesseract or fourth-dimensional cube which he
describes is a reality, for it is quite a familiar figure upon the
astral plane. He has now perfected a new method of representing the
several dimensions by colours instead of by arbitrary written symbols.
He states that his will very much simplify the study, as the reader will
be able to distinguish instantly by sight any part or feature of the
tesseract. A full description of this new method, with plates, is said
to be ready for the press, and is expected to appear within a year, so
that intending students of this fascinating subject might do well to
await its publication.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

I know that Madame Blavatsky, in alluding to the theory of the fourth
dimension, has expressed an opinion that it is only a clumsy way of
stating the idea of the entire permeability of matter, and that Mr. W.
T. Stead has followed along the same lines, presenting the conception to
his readers under the name of *throughth*. Careful, oft-repeated and
detailed investigation does, however, seem to show quite conclusively
that this explanation does not cover all the facts. It is a perfect
description of etheric vision, but the further and quite different idea
of the fourth dimension as expounded by Mr. Hinton is the only one which
gives any kind of explanation down here of the constantly-observed facts
of astral vision. I would therefore venture deferentially to suggest
that, when Madame Blavatsky wrote as she did, she had in mind etheric
vision and not astral, and that the extreme applicability of the phrase
to this other and higher faculty, of which she was not at the moment
thinking, did not occur to her.

The possession of this extraordinary and scarcely expressible power,
then, must always be borne in mind through all that follows. It

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

lays every point in the interior of every solid body absolutely open to
the gaze of the seer, just as every point in the interior of a circle
lies open to the gaze of a man looking down upon it.

But even this is by no means all that it gives to its possessor. He see
not only the inside as well as the outside of every object, but also its
astral counterpart. Every atom and molecule of physical matter has its
corresponding astral atoms and molecules, and the mass which is built up
out of these is clearly visible to our clairvoyant. Usually the astral
part of any object projects somewhat beyond the physical part of it, and
thus metals, stones and other things are seen surrounded by an astral
aura.

It will be seen at once that even in the study of inorganic matter a man
gains immensely by the acquisition of this vision. Not only does he see
the astral part of the object at which he looks, which before was wholly
hidden from him; not only does he see much more of its physical
constitution than he did before, but even what was visible to him before
is now seen much more clearly

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and truly. A moment's consideration will show that his new vision
approximates much more closely to true perception than does physical
sight. For example, if he looks astrally at a glass cube, its sides will
all appear equal, as we know they really are, whereas on the physical
plane he sees the further side in perspective—that is, it appears
smaller than the nearer side, which is, of course, a mere illusion due
to his physical limitations.

When we come to consider the additional facilities which it offers in
the observation of animate objects we see still more clearly the
advantages of the astral vision. It exhibits to the clairvoyant the aura
of plants and animals, and thus in the case of the latter their desires
and emotions, and whatever thoughts they may have, are all plainly shown
before his eyes.

But is in dealing with human beings that he will most appreciate the
value of this faculty, for he will often be able to help them far more
effectually when he guides himself by the information which it gives
him.

He will be able to see the aura as far up as the astral body, and though
that leaves all the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

higher part of a man still hidden from his gaze, he will nevertheless
find it possible by careful observation to learn a good deal about the
higher part form what is within his reach. His capacity of examining the
etheric double will give him considerable advantage in locating and
classifying any defects or diseases of the nervous system, while from
the appearance of the astral body he will be at once aware of all the
emotions, passions, desires and tendencies of the man before him, and
even of very many of his thoughts also.

As he looks at a person he will see him surrounded by the luminous mists
of the astral aura, flashing with all sorts of brilliant colours, and
constantly changing in hue and brilliancy with every variation of the
person's thoughts and feelings. He will see this aura flooded with the
beautiful rose-colour of pure affection, the rich blue of devotional
feeling, the hard, dull brown of selfishness, the deep scarlet of
angers, the horrible lurid red of sensuality, the livid grey of fear,
the black clouds of hatred and malice, or any of the other hundredfold
indications so easily to be red in it by a practised eye; and thus it
will be

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

impossible for any persons to conceal from him the real state of their
feelings on any subject.

These varied indications of the aura are of themselves a study of very
deep interest, but I have no space to deal with them in detail here. A
much fuller account of them, together with a number of coloured
illustrations, will be found in my work on the subject *Man Visible and
Invisible*.

Not only does the astral aura show him the temporary result of the
emotion passing through it at the moment, but it also gives him, by the
arrangement and proportion of its colours when in a condition of
comparative rest, a clue to the general disposition and character of its
owner. For the astral body is the expression of as much of the man as
can be manifested on that plane, so that from what is seen in it much
more which belongs to higher planes may be inferred with considerable
certainty.

In this judgement of character our clairvoyant will be much helped by so
much of the person's thought as expresses itself on the astral plane,
and consequently comes within

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

his purview. The true home of thought is on the mental plane, and all
thought first manifests itself there as a vibration of the mind-body.
But if it be in any way a selfish thought, or if it be connected in any
way with an emotion or a desire, it immediately descends into the astral
plane, and takes to itself a visible form of astral matter.

In the case of the majority of men almost all thought would fall under
one or other of these heads, so that practically the whole of their
personality would like clearly before friend's astral vision, since
their astral bodies and the thought-forms constantly radiating from them
would be to him as an open book in which their characteristics were writ
so largely that he who ran might read. Anyone wishing to gain some idea
as to *how* the thought-forms present themselves to clairvoyant vision
may satisfy themselves to some extent by examining the illustrations
accompanying Mrs. Besant's valuable article on the subject in *Lucifer*
for September 1896.

We have seen something of the alteration in the appearance of both
animate and inanimate objects when viewed by one possessed

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

of full clairvoyant sight as far as the astral plane is concerned; let
us now consider what entirely new objects he will see. He will be
conscious of a far greater fulness in nature in many directions, but
chiefly his attention will be attracted by the living denizens of this
new world. No detailed account of them can be attempted within the space
at our disposal; for that the reader is referred to No. V of the
*Theosophical Manuals*. Here we can do no more than barely enumerate a
few classes only of the vast hosts of astral inhabitants.

He will be impressed by the protean forms of the ceaseless tide of
elemental essence, ever swirling around him, menacing often, yet always
retiring before a determined effort of the will; he will marvel at the
enormous army of entities temporarily called out of this ocean into
separate existence by the thoughts and wishes of man, whether good or
evil. He will watch the manifold tribes of the nature-spirits at their
work or at their play; he will sometimes be able to study with
ever-increasing delight the magnificent evolution of some of the lower
orders of the glorious

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

kingdom of the devas, which corresponds approximately to the angelic
host of Christian terminology.

But perhaps of even keener interests to him than any of these will be
the human denizens of the astral world, and he will find them divisible
into two great classes—those whom we call the living, and those others,
most of them infinitely more alive, whom we so foolishly misname the
dead. Among the former he will find here and there one wide awake and
fully conscious, perhaps sent to bring him some message, or examining
him keenly to see what progress he is making; while the majority of his
neighbours, when away from their physical bodies during sleep, will
drift idly by, so wrapped up in their own cogitations as to be
practically unconscious of what is going on around them.

Among the great host of the recently dead he will find all degrees of
consciousness and intelligence, and all shades of character—for death,
which seems to our limited vision so absolute a change, in reality
alters nothing of the man himself. On the day after his death he is
precisely the same man as he was the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

day before it, with the same disposition, the same qualities, the same
virtues and vices, save only that he has cast aside his physical body;
but the loss of that no more makes him in any way a different man than
would the removal of an overcoat. So among the dead our student will
find men intelligent and stupid, kind-hearted and morose, serious and
frivolous, spiritually-minded and sensually-minded, just as among the
living.

Since he can not only see the dead, but speak with them, he can often be
of very great use to them, and give them information and guidance which
is of the utmost value to them. Many of them are in a condition of great
surprise and perplexity, and sometimes even of acute distress, because
they the facts of the next world so unlike the childish legends which
are all that popular religion in the West has to offer with reference to
this transcendently important subject; and therefore a man who
understands this new world and can explain matters is distinctly a
friend in need.

In many other ways a man who fully possesses this faculty may be of use
to the living

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

as well as to the dead; but this side of the subject I have already
written in my little book on *Invisible Helpers*. In addition to astral
entities he will see astral corpses—shades and shells in all stages of
decay; but these need only be just mentioned here, as the reader
desiring a further account of them will find it in our third (*Death—and
After?*) and fifth (*The Astral Plane*) manuals.

Another wonderful result which the full enjoyment of astral clairvoyance
brings to a man is that he has no longer any break in consciousness.
When he lies down at night he leaves his physical body to the rest which
it requires, while he goes about his business in the far more
comfortable astral vehicle. In the morning he returns to and re-enters
his physical body, but without any loss of consciousness or memory
between the two states, and thus he is able to live, as it were, a
double life which yet is one, and to be usefully employed during the
whole of it, instead of losing one-third of his existence in blank
unconsciousness.

Another strange power of which he may find himself in possession (though
its full

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

control belongs rather to the still higher devachanic faculty) is that
of magnifying at will the minutest physical or astral particle to any
desired size, as though by a microscope—thou no microscope ever made or
ever likely to be made possesses eve a thousandth part f this psychic
magnifying power. By its means the hypothetical molecule and atom
postulated by science becomes visible and living realities to the occult
student, and on this closer examination he finds them to be much more
complex in their structure than the scientific man has yet realized them
to be. It also enables him to follow with the closest attention and the
most lively interest all kinds of electrical, magnetic, and other
etheric action; and when some of the specialists in these branches of
science are able to develop the power to see those things whereof they
write so facilely, some very wonderful and beautiful revelations may be
expected.

This is one of the *siddhis* or powers described in Oriental books as
accruing to the man who devotes himself to spiritual development, though
the name under which it is there mentioned might not be immediately

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

recognizable. It is referred to as "the power of making oneself large or
small at will," and the reason of a description which appears so oddly
to reverse the fact is that in reality the method by which this feat is
performed is precisely that indicate in these ancient books. It is by
the use of temporary visual machinery of inconceivable minuteness that
the world of the infinitely little is so clearly seen; and in the same
way (or rather in the opposite way) it is by temporarily enormously
increasing the size of the machinery used that it becomes possible to
increase the breadth of one's view—in the physical sense as well as, let
us hope, in the moral—far beyond anything that science has ever dreamt
of as possible for man. So that the alteration in size is really in the
vehicle of the student's consciousness, and not in anything outside of
himself; and the old Oriental book has, after al, put the case more
accurately than we.

Psychometry and second-sight *in excelsis* would also be among the
faculties which our friend would find at his command; but those will be
more fitly dealt with under a later heading, since in almost all their

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

manifestations they involve clairvoyance either in space or in time.

I have now indicated, though only in the roughest outlines, what a
trained student, possessed of full astral vision, would see in the
immensely wider world to which that vision introduced him; but I have
said nothing of the stupendous change in his mental attitude which comes
from the experiential certainty as to the existence of the soul, its
survival after death, the action of the law of karma, and other points
of equally paramount importance. The difference between even the
profoundest intellectual conviction and the precise knowledge gained by
direct personal experience must be felt in order to be appreciated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Simple Clairvoyance: Partial](clrv04.md)
