[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](clrv06) 
[Next](clrv08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0835670953/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Clairvoyance*, by C.W. Leadbeater, \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### CLAIRVOYANCE IN SPACE: UNINTENTIONAL

Under this heading we may group together all those cases in which
visions of some even which is taking place at a distance are seen quite
unexpectedly and without any kind of preparation. There are people who
are subject to such visions, while there are many others to whom such a
thing will happen only once in a life-time. The visions are of all kinds
and of all degrees of completeness, and apparently may be produced by
various causes. Sometimes the reason of the vision is obvious, and he
subject-matter of the gravest importance; at other times no reason at
all is discoverable, and the events shown seem of the most trivial
nature.

Sometimes these glimpses of the superphysical faculty come as waking
visions, and

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

sometimes they manifest during sleep as vivid or oft-repeated dreams. In
this latter case the sight employed is perhaps usually of kind assigned
to our fourth subdivision of clairvoyance in space, for the sleeping man
often travels in his astral body to some spot with which his affections
or interests are closely connected, and simply watches what takes place
there; in the former it seems probable that the second type of
clairvoyance, by means of the astral current, is called into
requisition. But in this case the current or tube is formed quite
unconsciously, and is often the automatic result of a strong thought or
emotion projected from one end or the other—either from the seer or the
person who is seen.

The simplest plan will be to give a few instances of the different
kinds, and to intersperse among them such further explanations as may
seem necessary. Mr. Stead has collected a large and varied assortment of
recent and well-authenticated cases in his *Real Ghost Stories*, and I
will select some of my examples from them, occasionally condensing
slightly to save space.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

There are cases in which it is at once obvious to any Theosophical
student that the exceptional instance of clairvoyance was specially
brought about by one of the band whom we have called "Invisible Helpers"
in order that aid might be rendered to some one in sore need. To this
class, undoubtedly, belongs the story told by Captain Yonnt, of the Napa
Valley in California, to Dr. Bushnell, who repeats it in his *Nature and
the Supernatural* (page 14).

"About six or seven years previous, in a midwinter's night, he had a
dream in which he saw what appeared to be a company of emigrants
arrested by the snows of the mountains, and perishing rapidly by cold
and hunger. He noted the very cast of the scenery, marked by a huge,
perpendicular front of white rock cliff; he saw the men cutting off what
appeared to be treetops rising out of deep gulfs of snow; he
distinguished the very features of the persons and the look of their
particular distress.

"He awake profoundly impressed by the distinctness and apparent reality
of the dream. He at length fell asleep, and dreamed exactly

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the same dream over again. In the morning he could not expel it from his
mind. Falling in, shortly after which an old hunter comrade, he told his
story, and was only the more deeply impressed by his recognizing without
hesitation the scenery of the dream. This comrade came over the Sierra
by the Carson Valley Pass, and declared that a spot in the Pass exactly
answered his description.

"By this the unsophistical patriarch was decided. He immediately
collected a company of men, with mules and blankets and all necessary
provisions. The neighbours were laughing meantime at this credulity. 'No
matter', he said, 'I am able to do this, and I will, for I verily
believe that the fact is according to my dream'. The men were sent into
the mountains one hundred and fifty miles distant direct to the Carson
Valley Pass. And there they found the company exactly in the condition
of the dream, and brought in the remnant alive."

Since it is not stated that Captain Yonnt was in the habit of seeing
visions, it seems clear that some helper, observing the forlorn
condition of the emigrant party, took the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

nearest impressionable and otherwise suitable person (who happened to be
the Captain) to the spot in the astral body, and aroused him
sufficiently to fix the scene firmly in his memory. The helper may
possibly have arranged an "astral current" for the Captain instead, but
the former suggestion is more probable. At any rate the motive, and
broadly the method, of the work are obvious enough in this case.

Sometimes the "astral current" may be set going by a strong emotional
thought at the other end of the line, and this may haven even though the
thinker has no such intention in his mind. In the rather striking story
which I am about to quote, it is evident that the link was formed by the
doctor's frequent thought about Mrs. Broughton, yet he had clearly no
especial wish that she should see what he was going at the time. That it
was this kind of clairvoyance that was employed is shown by the fixity
of her point of view—which, be it observed, is not the doctor's point of
view sympathetically transferred (as it might have been), since she sees
his back without recognizing him. The story is to be

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

found in the *Proceedings of the Psychical Research Society* (Volume II,
page 160).

"Mrs. Broughton awoke one night in 1844, and roused her husband, felling
him that something dreadful had happened in France. He begged her to go
to sleep again, and not trouble him. She assured him that she was not
asleep when she saw what she insisted on telling him—what she saw in
fact.

"First a carriage accident—which she did not actually see, but what she
saw was the result—a broken carriage, a crowd collected, a figure gently
raised and carried into the nearest house, then a figure lying on a bed
which she then recognized as the Duke of Orleans. Gradually friends
collecting round the bed—among them several members of the French royal
family—the queen, then the king, all silently, tearfully, watching the
evidently dying duke. One man (se could see his back, but did not know
who he was) was a doctor. He stood bending over the duke, feeling his
pulse, with his watch in the other hand. And then all passed away, and
she saw no more.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

"As soon as it was daylight she wrote down in her journal all that she
had seen. It was before the days of the electric telegraph, and two or
more days passed before the *Times* announced 'The Death of the Duke of
Orleans'. Visiting Paris a short time afterwards she saw and recognized
the place of the accident and received the explanation of her
impression. The doctor who attended the dying duke was an old friend of
hers, and as he watched by the bed his mind had been constantly occupied
with her and her family."

A commoner instance is that in which strong affection sets up the
necessary current; probably a fairly steady stream of mutual thought is
constantly flowing between the two parties in the case, and some sudden
need or dire extremity on the part of one of them endues this stream
temporarily with the polarizing power which is needful to create the
astral telescope. An illustrative example is quoted from the same
*Proceedings* (volume I, page 30).

"On September 9th, 1848, at the siege of Mooltan, Major-General R——,
C.B., then

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

adjutant of his regiment, was most severely and dangerously wounded;
and, supposing himself to be dying, asked one of the officers with him
to take the ring off his finger and send it to this wife, who at the
time was fully one hundred and fifty miles distant at Ferozepore.

"'On the night of September 9th, 1848', writes his wife, 'I was lying on
my bed, between sleeping and waking, when I distinctly saw my husband
being carried off the field seriously wounded, and heard his voice
saying, "Take this ring off my finger and send it to my wife." All the
next day I could not get the sight or the voice out of my mind.

"'In due time I heard of General R—— having been severely wounded in the
assault of Mooltan. He survived, however, and is still living. It was
not for some time after the siege that I heard from General L——, the
officer who helped to carry my husband off the field, that the request
as to the ring was actually made by him, just as I heard it at
Ferozepore at that very time.'"

Then there is the very large class of casual clairvoyant visions which
have no traceable

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

cause—which are apparently quite meaningless, and have no recognizable
relation to any events known to the seer. To this class belong many of
the landscapes seen by some people just before they fall asleep. I quote
a capital and very realistic account of an experience of this sort from
W. T. Stead's *Real Ghost Stories* (page 65).

"I got into bed but was not able to go to sleep, I shut my eyes and
waited for sleep to come; instead of sleep, however, there came to me a
succession of curiously vivid clairvoyant pictures. There was no light
in the room, and it was perfectly dark; I had my eyes shut also. But
notwithstanding the darkness I suddenly was conscious of looking at a
scene of singular beauty. It was as if I saw a living miniature about
the size of a magic-lantern slide. At this moment, I can recall the
scene as if I saw it again. It was a seaside piece. The moon was shining
upon the water, which rippled slowly on to the beach. Right before me a
long mole ran into the water.

"On either side of the mole irregular rocks stood up above the
sea-level. On the shore

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

stood several houses, square and rude, which resembled nothing that I
had ever seen in house architecture. No one was stirring, but the moon
was there and the sea and the gleam of the moonlight on the rippling
waters, just as if I had been looking on the actual scene.

"It was so beautiful that I remember thinking that if it continued I
should be so interested in looking at it that I should never go to
sleep. I was wide awake, and at the same time that I saw the scene I
distinctly heard the dripping of the rain outside the window. Then
suddenly, without any apparent object or reason, the scene changed.

"The moonlit sea vanished, and in its place I was looking right into the
interior of a reading-room. It seemed as if it had been used as a
schoolroom in the daytime, and was employed as a reading-room in the
evening. I remember seeing one reader who had a curious resemble to Tim
Harrington, although it was not he, hold up a magazine or book in his
hand and laugh. It was not a picture-—it was there.

"The scene was just as if you were looking through an opera-glass; you
saw the play of

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the muscles, the gleaming of the eye, every movement of the unknown
persons in the unnamed place into which you were gazing. I saw all that
without opening my eyes, nor did my eyes have anything to do with it.
You see such things as these as it were with another sense which is more
inside your head than in your eyes.

"This was a very poor and paltry experience, but it enabled me to
understand better how it is that clairvoyants see than any amount of
disquisition.

"The picture were *apropos* of nothing; they had been suggested by
nothing I had been reading or talking of; they simply came as if I had
been able to look through a glass at what was occurring somewhere else
in the world. I had my peep, and then it passed, nor have I had a
recurrence of a similar experience."

Mr. Stead regards that as a "poor and paltry experience", and it may
perhaps be considered so when compared with the greater possibilities,
yet I know many students who would be very thankful to have even so much
of direct personal experience to tell. Small

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

though it may be in itself, it at once gives the seer a clue to the
whole thing, and clairvoyance would be a living actuality to a man who
had seen even that much in a way that it could never have been without
that little touch with the unseen world.

These pictures were much too clear to have been mere reflections of the
thought of others, and besides, the description unmistakably shows that
they were views seen through an astral telescope; so either Mr. Stead
must quite unconsciously have set a current going for himself, or (which
is much more probable) some kindly astral entity set it in motion for
him, and gave him, to while away a tedious delay, any pictures that
happened to come handy at the end of the tube.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Clairvoyance in Time: The Past](clrv08)
