[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](clrv04.md) 
[Next](clrv06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0835670953/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Clairvoyance*, by C.W. Leadbeater, \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### CLAIRVOYANCE IN SPACE: INTENTIONAL

We have defined this as the capacity to see events or scenes removed
from the seer in space and too far distant for ordinary observation. The
instances of this are so numerous and so various that we shall find it
desirable to attempt a somewhat more detailed classification of them. It
does not much matter what particular arrangement we adopt, so long as it
is comprehensive enough to include all our cases; perhaps a convenient
one will be to group them under the broad divisions of intentional and
unintentional clairvoyance in space, with an intermediate class that
might be described as semi-intentional—a curious title, but I will
explain it later.

As before, I will begin by stating what is possible along this line for
the fully-trained

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

seer, and endeavouring to explain how his faculty works and under what
limitations it acts. After that we shall find ourselves in a better
position to try to understand the manifold examples of partial and
untrained sight. Let us then in the first place discuss intentional
clairvoyance.

It will be obvious from what has previously been said as to the power of
astral vision that any one possessing it in its fulness will be able to
see by its means practically anything in this world that he wishes to
see. The most secret places are open to his gaze, and intervening
obstacles have no existence for him, because of the change in his point
of view; so that if we grant him the power of moving about in the astral
body he can without difficulty go anywhere and see anything within the
limits of the planet. Indeed this is to a large extent possible to him
even without the necessity of moving the astral body at all, as we shall
presently see.

Let us consider a little more closely the methods by which this
super-physical sight may be used to observe events taking place at a
distance. When, for example, a man here

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

in England sees in minutest detail something which is happening at the
same moment in India or America, how is it done?

A very ingenious hypothesis has been offered to account for the
phenomenon. It has been suggested that every object is perpetually
throwing off radiations in all directions, similar in some respects to,
though infinitely finer than, rays of light, and that clairvoyance is
nothing but the power to see by means of these finer radiations.
Distance would in that case no bar to the sight, all intervening objects
would be penetrable by these rays, and they would be able to cross one
another to infinity in all directions without entanglement, precisely as
the vibrations of ordinary light do.

Now though this is not exactly the way in which clairvoyance works, the
theory is nevertheless quite true in most of its premises. Every object
undoubtedly is throwing off radiations in all directions, and it is
precisely in this way, though on a higher plane, that the ākāshic
records seem to be formed. Of them it will be necessary to say something
under our next heading, so we will do no

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

more than mention them for the moment. The phenomena of Psychometry are
also dependent upon these radiations, as will presently be explained.

There are however, certain practical difficulties in the way of using
these etheric vibrations (for that is, of course, what they are) as the
medium by means of which one may see anything taking place at a
distance. Intervening objects are not entirely transparent, and as the
actors in the scene which the experimenter tried to observe would
probably be at least equally transparent, it is obvious that serious
confusion would be quite likely to result.

The additional dimension which would come into play if astral radiations
were sensed instead of etheric would obviate some of the difficulties,
but would on the other hand introduce some fresh complications of its
own; so that for practical purposes, in endeavouring to understand
clairvoyance, we may dismiss this hypothesis of radiations from our
minds, and turn to the methods of seeing at a distance which are
actually at the disposal of the student. It will be found that there

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

are five, four of them being really varieties of clairvoyance, while the
fifth does not properly come under that head at all, but belongs to the
domain of magic. Let us take this last one first, and get it out of our
way.

1\. *By the assistance of a nature-spirit*. This method does not
necessarily involved the possession of any psychic faculty at all on the
part of the experimenter; he need only know how to induce some denizen
of the astral world to undertake the investigation for him. This may be
done either by invocation or by evocation: that is to say, the operator
may either persuade his astral coadjutor by prayers and offerings to
give him the help he desires, or he may compel his aid by the determined
exercise of a highly-developed will.

This method has been largely practised in the East (where the entity
employed is usually a nature-spirit) and in old Atlantis, where "the
lords of the dark face" used a highly-specialized and peculiarly
venomous variety of artificial elemental for this purpose. Information
is sometimes obtained in the same sort of way at the spiritualistic
seance of modern days, but in that case the messenger

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

employed is more likely to be a recently-deceased human being
functioning more or less freely on the astral plane—though even here
also it is sometimes an obliging nature-spirit, who is amusing himself
by posing as somebody's departed relative. In any case, as I have said,
this method is not clairvoyant at all, but magical; and it is mentioned
here only in order that the reader may not become confused in the
endeavour to classify cases of its use under some of the following
headings.

2\. *By means of an astral current*—This is a phrase frequently and
rather loosely employed in some of our Theosophical literature to cover
a considerable variety of phenomena, and among others that which I wish
to explain. What is really done by the student who adopts this method is
not so much the setting in motion of a current in astral matter as the
erection of a kind of temporary telephone through it.

It is impossible here to give an exhaustive disquisition on astral
physics, even had I the requisite knowledge to write it; all I need say
is that it is possible to make in astral matter a definite
connecting-line that shall

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

act as a telegraph-wire to convey vibrations by means of which all that
is going on at the other end of it may be seen. Such a line is
established, be it understood, not by a direct projection through space
of astral matter, but by such action upon a line (or rather many lines)
of particles of that matter as will render them capable of forming a
conductor for vibrations of the character required.

This preliminary action can be set up in two ways—either by the
transmission of energy from particle to particle until the line is
formed, or by the use of a force from a higher plane which is capable of
acting upon the whole line simultaneously. Of course this latter method
implies far greater development, since it involves the knowledge of (and
the power to use) forces of a considerably higher level; so that the man
who could make his line in this way would not, for his own use, need a
line at all, since he could see far more, easily and completely by means
of an altogether higher faculty.

Even the simpler and purely astral operation is a difficult one to
describe, though quite an easy one to perform. It may be said

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

to partake somewhat of the nature of the magnetization of a bar of
steel; for it consists in what we might call the polarization, by an
effort of the human will, of a number of parallel lines of astral atoms
reaching from the operator to the scene which he wishes to observe. All
the atoms thus affected are held for the time with their axes rigidly
parallel to one another, so that they form a kind of temporary tube
along which the clairvoyant may look. This method has the disadvantage
that the telegraph line is liable to disarrangement or even destruction
by any sufficiently strong astral current which happens to cross its
path; but if the original effort of will were fairly definite, this
would be a contingency of only infrequent occurrence.

The view of a distance scene obtained by means of this "astral current"
is in many ways not unlike that seen through a telescope. Human figures
usually appear very small, like those on a distance stage, but in spite
of heir diminutive size they are as clear as though they were close by.
Sometimes it is possible by this means to hear what is said as well as

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

to see what is done; but as in the majority of cases this does not
happen, we must consider in rather as the manifestation of an additional
power than as a necessary corollary of the faculty of sight.

It will be observed that in this case the seer does not usually leave
his physical body at all; there is no sort of projection of his astral
vehicle or of any part of himself towards that at which he is looking,
but he simply manufactures for himself a temporary astral telescope.
Consequently he has, to a certain extent, the use of his physical powers
even while he is examining the distance scene; for example, his voice
would usually still be under his control, so that he could describe what
he saw even while he was in the act of making his observations. This
consciousness of the man is, in fact, distinctly still at this end of
the line.

This fact, however, has its limitations as well as its advantages, and
these again largely resemble the limitations of the man using a
telescope on the physical plane. The experimenter, for example, has no
power to shift this point of view; his telescope,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

so to speak, has a particular field of view which cannot be enlarged or
altered; he is looking at his scene from a certain direction, and he
cannot suddenly turn it all round and see how it looks from the other
side. If he has sufficient psychic energy to spare, he may drop
altogether the telescope that he is using and manufacture an entirely
new one for himself which will approach his objective somewhat
differently; but this is not a course at all likely to be adopted in
practice.

But, it may be said, the mere fact that he is using astral sight ought
to enable him to see it from all sides at once. So it would if he were
using that sight in the normal way upon an object which was fairly near
him—within his astral reach, as it were; but at a distance of hundreds
or thousands of miles the case is very different. Astral sight gives us
the advantage of an additional dimension, but there is still such a
thing as position in that dimension, and it is naturally a potent factor
in limiting the use of the powers of its plane. Our ordinary
three-dimensional sight enables us to see at once every point of the
interior of a two-dimensional figure, such as

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

a square, but in order to do that the square must be within a reasonable
distance form our eyes; the mere additional dimension will avail a man
in London but little in his endeavour to examine a square in Calcutta.

Astral sight, when it is cramped by being directed along what is
practically a tube, is limited very much as physical sight would be
under similar circumstances; though if possessed in perfection it will
still continue to show, even at that distance, the auras, and therefore
all the emotions and most of the thoughts of the people under
observation.

There are many people for whom this type of clairvoyance is very much
facilitated if they have at hand some physical object which can be used
as a starting-point for their astral tube—a convenient focus for their
willpower. A ball of crystal is the commonest and most effectual of such
foci, since it has the additional advantage of possessing within itself
qualities which stimulate psychic faculty; but other objects are also
employed, to which we shall find it necessary to refer more particularly
when we come to consider semi-intentional clairvoyance.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

In connection with this astral-current form of clairvoyance, as with
others, we find that there are some psychics who are unable to use it
except when under the influence of mesmerism. The peculiarity in this
case is that among such psychics there are two varieties—one in which by
being thus set free the man is enabled to make a telescope for himself,
and another in which the magnetizer himself makes the telescope and the
subject is simply enabled to see through it. In this latter case
obviously the subject has not enough will to form a tube for himself,
and the operator, though possessed of the necessary willpower, is not
clairvoyant, or he could see through his own tube without needing help.

Occasionally, though rarely, the tube which is formed possesses another
of the attributes of a telescope—that of magnifying the objects at which
it is directed until they seem of life-size. Of course the objects must
always be magnified to some extent, or they would be absolutely
invisible, but usually the extent is determined by the size of the
astral tube and the whole thing is simply a tiny moving

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

picture. In the few cases where the figures are seen as a life-size by
this method, it is probable that an altogether new power is beginning to
dawn; but when this happens, careful observation is needed in order to
distinguish them from examples of our next class.

3\. *By the projection of a thought-form*—The ability to use this method
of clairvoyance implies a development somewhat more advanced than the
last, since it necessitates a certain amount of control upon the mental
plane. All students of Theosophy are aware that thought takes form, at
any rate upon its own plane, and in the vast majority of cases upon the
astral plane also; but it may not be quite so generally known that if a
man thinks strongly of himself as present at any given place, the form
assumed by that particular thought will be a likeness of the thinker
himself, which will appear at the place in question.

Essentially this form must be composed of the matter of the mental
plane, but in very many cases it would draw round itself matter of the
astral plane also, and so would

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

approach much nearer to visibility. There are, in fact, many instances
in which it has been seen by the person thought of—most probably by
means of the unconscious mesmeric influence emanating from the original
thinking. None of the consciousness of the thinker would, however, be
included within this thought-form. When once sent out from him, it would
normally be a quite separate entity—not indeed absolutely unconnected
with its maker, but practically so as far as the possibility of
receiving any impression through it is concerned.

This third type of clairvoyance consists, then, in the power to retain
so much connection with and so much hold over a newly-erected
thought-form as will render it possible to receive impressions by means
of it. Such impressions as were made upon the form would in this case be
transmitted to the thinker—not along an astral telegraph line, as
before, but by sympathetic vibration. In a perfect case of this kind of
clairvoyance it is almost as though the seer projected a part of his
consciousness into the thought-form, and used it as a kind of outpost,
from which

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

observation was possible. He sees almost as well as he would if he
himself stood in the place of his thought-form.

The figures at which he is looking will appear to him as of life-size
and close at hand, instead of tiny and at a distance, as in the previous
case; and he will find it possible to shift his point of view if he
wishes to do so. Clairaudience is perhaps less frequently associated
with this type of clairvoyance than with the last, but its place is to
some extent taken by a kind of mental perception of the thoughts and
intentions of those who are seen.

Since the man's consciousness is still in the physical body, he will be
able (even while exercising the faculty) to hear and to speak, insofar
as he can do this without any distraction of his attention. The moment
that the intentness of his thought fails the whole vision is gone, and
he will have to construct a fresh thought-form before he can resume it.
Instances in which this kind of sight is possessed with any degree of
perfection by untrained people are naturally rarer than in the case of
the previous type, because

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

of the capacity for mental control required, and the generally finer
nature of the forces employed.

4\. *By travelling in the astral body*—We enter here upon an entirely
new variety of clairvoyance, in which the consciousness of the seer no
longer remains in or closely connected with his physical body, but is
definitely transferred to the scene which he is examining. Though it has
no doubt greater dangers for the untrained seer than either of the
methods previously described, it is yet quite the most satisfactory form
of clairvoyance open to him, for the immensely superior variety which we
shall consider under our fifth head is not available except for
specially trained students.

In this case the man's body is either asleep or in trance, and its
organs are consequently not available for use which the vision is going
on, so that all description of what is seen, and all questioning as to
further particulars, must be postponed until the wanderer returns to
this plane. On the other hand the sight is much fuller and more perfect;
the man hears as well as sees everything which passes before him, and
can move

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

about freely at will within the very wide limits of the astral plane. He
can see and study at leisure all the other inhabitants of that plane, so
that the great world of the nature-spirits (of which the traditional
fairy-land is but a very small part) lies open before him, and even that
of some of the lower devas.

He has also the immense advantage of being able to take part, as it
were, in the scenes which come before his eyes—of conversing at will
with these various astral entities from whom so much information that is
curious and interesting may be obtained. If in addition he can learn how
to materialize himself (a matter of no great difficulty for him when
once the knack is acquired), he will be able to take part in physical
events or conversations at a distance, and to show himself to an absent
friend at will.

Again, he has the additional power of being able to hunt about for what
he wants. By means of the varieties of clairvoyance previously
described, for all practical purposes he could find a person or a place
only when he was already acquainted with it, or when he

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

was put *en rapport* with it by touching something physically connected
with it, as in Psychometry. It is true that by the third method a
certain amount of motion is possible, but the process is a tedious one
except for quite short distances.

By the use of the astral body, however, a man can move about quite
freely and rapidly in any direction, and can (for example) find without
difficulty any place pointed out upon a map, without either any previous
knowledge of the spot or any object to establish a connection with it.
He can also readily rise high into the air so as to gain a bird's-eye
view of the country which he is examining, so as to observe its extent,
the contour of its coastline, or its general character. Indeed, in every
way his power and freedom are far greater when he uses this method than
they have been in any of the previous cases.

A good example of the full possession of this power is given, on the
authority of the German writer Jung Stilling, by Mrs. Crowe in *The
Night Side of Nature* (page 127). The story is related of a seer who is
stated to have

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

resided in the neighbourhood of Philadelphia, in America. His habits
were retired, and he spoke little; he was gave, benevolent and pious,
and nothing was known against his character, except that he had the
reputation of possessing some secrets that were considered not
altogether *lawful*. Many extraordinary stories were told of him, and
amongst the rest the following:

"The wife of a ship captain (whose husband was on a voyage to Europe and
Africa, and from whom she had been long without tidings), being
overwhelmed with anxiety for his safety, was induced to address herself
to this person. Having listened to her story he begged her to excuse him
for a while when he would bring her the intelligence she required. He
then passed into an inner room and she sat herself down to wait; but his
absence continuing longer than she expected, she became impatient,
thinking he had forgotten her, and softly approaching the door she
peeped through some aperture, and to her surprise beheld him lying on a
sofa as motionless as if he were dead. She of course did not think it
advisable to disturb him, but

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

waited his return, when he told her that her husband had not been able
to write to her for such and such reasons, but that he was then in a
coffeehouse in London and would very shortly be home again.

"Accordingly he arrived, and as the lady learnt from him that the causes
of his unusual silence had been precisely those alleged by the man, she
felt extremely desirous of ascertaining the truth of the rest of the
information. In this she was gratified, for he no sooner set his eyes on
the magician than he said that he had seen him before on a certain day
in a coffeehouse in London, and that he told him that his wife was
extremely uneasy about him, and that he, the captain, had thereon
mentioned how he had been prevented from writing, adding that he was on
the eve of embarking for America. He had then lost sight of the stranger
amongst the throng, and knew nothing more about him.

We have of course no means now of knowing what evidence Jung Stilling
had of the truth of this story, though he declares himself to have been
quite satisfied with the authority on which he relates it; but so many

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

similar things have happened that there is no reason to doubt its
accuracy. The seer, however, must either have developed his faculty for
himself or learnt it in some school other than that from which most of
our Theosophical information is derived; for in our case there is a
well-understood regulation expressly forbidding the pupils to give any
manifestation of such power which can be definitely proved at both ends
in that way, and so constitute what is called a "phenomenon." That this
regulation is emphatically a wise one is proved to all who know anything
of the history of our Society by the disastrous results which followed
from a very slight temporary relaxation of it.

I will have given some quite modern cases almost exactly parallel to the
above in my little book on *Invisible Helpers*. An instance of a lady
well-known to myself, who frequently thus appears to friends at a
distance, is given by Mr. Stead in *Real Ghost Stories* (page 27); and
Mr. Andrew Lang gives, in his *Dreams and Ghosts* (page 89), an account
of how Mr. Cleave, then at Portsmouth, appeared, intentionally on two
occasions to a young

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

lady in London, and alarmed her considerably. There is any amount of
evidence to be had on the subject by any one who cares to study it
seriously.

This paying of intentional astral visits seems very often to become
possible when the principles are loosened at the approach of death for
people who were unable to perform such a feat at any other time. There
are even more examples of this class than of the other; I epitomize a
good one given by Mr. Andrew Lang on page 100 of the book last cited—one
of which he himself says, "Not many stories have such good evidence in
their favour."

"Mary, the wife of John Goffe of Rochester, being afflicted with a long
illness, removed to her father's house at West Malling, about nine miles
from her own.

"The day before her death she grew very impatiently desirous to see her
two children, who she had left at home to the care of a nurse. She was
too ill to be moved, and between one and two o'clock in the morning she
fell into a trance. One widow Turner, who watched with her that night,
says that

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

her eyes were open and fixed, and her jaw fallen. Mrs. Turner put her
hand upon her mouth, but could perceive no breath. She thought her to be
in a fit, and doubted whether she were dead or alive.

"The next morning the dying woman told her mother that she had been at
home with her children, saying, "I was with them last night when I was
asleep."

"The nurse at Rochester, widow Alexander by name, affirms that a little
before two o'clock that morning she saw the likeness of the said Mary
Goffe come out of the next chamber (where the elder child lay in a bed
by itself), the door being left open, and stand by her bedside for about
a quarter of an hour; the younger child was there lying by her. Her eyes
moved and her mouth went, but she said nothing. The nurse, moreover,
says that she was perfectly awake; it was then daylight, being one of
the longest days in the year. She sat up in bed and looked steadfastly
on the apparition. In that time she heard the bridge clock strike two,
and a while after said: "In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
what art thou?" Thereupon

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the apparition removed and went away; she slipped on her clothes and
followed, but what became on’t she cannot tell."

The nurse apparently was more frightened by its appearance than its
presence, for after this she was afraid to stay in the house, and so
spent the rest of the time until six o'clock in walking up and down
outside. When the neighbours were awake she told her tale to them, and
they of course said she had dreamt it all; she naturally enough warmly
repudiated that idea, but could obtain no credence until the news of the
other side of the story arrived from West Malling, when people had to
admit that there might have been something in it.

A noteworthy circumstance in this story is that the mother found it
necessary to pass from ordinary sleep into the profounder trance
condition before she could consciously visit her children; it can,
however, be paralleled her and there among the large number of similar
accounts which may be found in the literature of the subject.

Two other stories of precisely the same type—in which a dying mother,
earnestly

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

desiring to see her children, falls into a deep sleep, visits them and
returns to say that she has done so—are given by Dr. F. G. Lee. In one
of them the mother, when dying in Egypt, appears to her children at
Torquay, and is clearly seen in broad daylight by all five of the
children and also by the nurse-maid. (*Glimpses of the Supernatural*,
Vol. II, page 64). In the other a Quaker lady dying at Cockermouth is
clearly seen and recognized in daylight by her three children at Settle,
the remainder of the story being practically identical with the one
given above. (*Glimpses in the Twilight*, page 94) . Though these cases
appear to be less widely known than that of Mary Goffe, the evidence of
their authenticity seems to be quite as good, as will be seen by the
attestations obtained by the reverend author of the works from which
they are quoted.

The man who fully possesses this fourth type o clairvoyance has many and
great advantages at his disposal, even in addition to those already
mentioned. Not only can he visit without trouble or expense all the
beautiful and famous places of the earth, but

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

if he happens to be a scholar, think what it must mean to him that he
has access to all the libraries of the world! What must it be for the
scientifically-minded man to see taking place before his eyes so many of
the processes of the secret chemistry of nature, or for the philosopher
to have revealed to him so much more than ever before of the working of
the great mysteries of life and death? To him those who are gone from
this plane are dead no longer, but living and within reach for a long
time to come; for him many of the conceptions of religion are no longer
matters of faith, but of knowledge. Above all, he can join the army of
invisible helpers, and really be of use on a large scale. Undoubtedly
clairvoyance, even when confined to the astral plane, is a great boon to
the student.

Certainly it has its dangers also, especially for the untrained; danger
from evil entities of various kinds, which may terrify or injure those
who allow themselves to lose the courage to face them boldly; danger of
deception of all sorts, of misconceiving and misinterpreting what is
seen; greatest of all

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the danger of becoming conceited about the thing and of thinking it
impossible to make a mistake. But a little commonsense and a little
experience should easily guard a man against these.

5\. *By travelling the mental body*—This is simply a higher and, as it
were, glorified form of the last type. The vehicle employed is no longer
the astral body, but the mind-body—a vehicle, therefore, belonging to
the mental plane, and having within it all the potentialities of the
wonderful sense of that plane, so transcendent in its action yet so
impossible to describe. A man functioning in this leaves his astral body
behind him along with the physical, and if he wishes to show himself
upon the astral plane for any reason, he does not send for his own
astral vehicle, but just by a single action of his will materializes one
for his temporary need. Such an astral materialization is sometimes
called the māyāvi rūpa, and to form it for the first time usually needs
the assistance of a qualified Master.

The enormous advantages given by the possession of this power are the
capacity of

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

entering upon all the glory and the beauty of the higher land of bliss,
and the possession, even when working on the astral plane, of the far
more comprehensive mental sense which opens up to the student such
marvellous vistas of knowledge, and practically renders error all but
impossible. This higher flight, however, is possible for the trained man
only, since only under definite training can a man at this stage of
evolution learn to employ his mental body as a vehicle.

Before leaving the subject of full and intentional clairvoyance, it may
be well to devote a few words to answering one or two questions as to
its limitations, which constantly occur to students. Is it possible, we
are often asked, for the seer to find any person with whom he wishes to
communicate, anywhere in the world, whether he be living or dead?

To this the reply must be a conditional affirmative. Yet, it is possible
to find any person if the experimenter can, in some way or other, put
himself *en rapport* with that person. It would be hopeless to plunger
vaguely into space to find a total stranger among all the millions
around us without any kind of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

clue; but, on the other hand, a very slight clue would usually be
sufficient.

If the clairvoyant knows anything of the man who he seeks, he will have
no difficulty in finding him, for every man has what may be called a
kind of musical chord of his own—a chord which is the expression of him
as a whole, produced perhaps by a sort of average of the rates of
vibration of all his different vehicles on their respective planes. If
the operator knows how to discern that chord and to strike it, it will
by sympathetic vibration attract the attention of the man instantly
wherever he may be and will evoke an immediate response from him.

Whether the man were living or recently dead would make no difference at
all, and clairvoyance of the fifth class could at once find him even
among the countless millions in the heaven-world, though in that case
the man himself would be unconscious that he was under observation.
Naturally a seer whose consciousness did not range higher than the
astral plane—who employed therefore one of the earlier methods of
seeing—would not be able to find a person upon the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

mental plane at all; yet even he would at least be able to tell that the
man sought for *was* upon that plane, from the mere fact that the
striking of the chord as far up as the astral level produced no
response.

If the man sought be a stranger to the seeker, the latter will need
something connected with him to act as a clue—a photograph, a letter
written by him, an article which has belonged to him, and is impregnated
with his personal magnetism; any of these would do in the hands of a
practised seer.

Again I say, it must not therefore be supposed that pupils who have been
taught how to use this art are at liberty to set up a kind of
intelligence office through which communication can be had with missing
or dead relatives. A message given from this side to such an one might
or might not be handed on, according to circumstances, but even if it
were, no reply might be brought, lest the transaction should partake of
the nature of a phenomenon—something which could be proved on the
physical plane to have been an act of magic.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Another question often raised is as to whether, in the action of psychic
vision, there is any limitation as to distance. The reply would seem to
be that there should be no limit but that of the respective planes. It
must be remembered that the astral and mental planes of our earth are as
definitely its own as its atmosphere, though they extend considerably
further from it even in our three-dimensional space than does the
physical air. Consequently the passage to, or the detailed sight of,
other planets would not be possible for any system of clairvoyance
connected with these planes. It *is* quite possible and easy for the man
who can raise his consciousness to the buddhic plane to pass to any
other glove belonging to our chain of worlds, but that is outside our
present subject.

Still a good deal of additional information about other planets can be
obtained by the use of such clairvoyant faculties as we have been
describing. It is possible to make sight enormously clearer by passing
outside of the constant disturbances of the earth's atmosphere, and it
is also not difficult to learn how to put on an exceedingly high
magnifying

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

power, so that even by ordinary clairvoyance a good deal of very
interesting astronomical knowledge may be gained. But as far as this
earth and its immediate surroundings are concerned, there is practically
no limitation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Clairvoyance in Space: Semi-Intentional](clrv06.md)
