<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/019) 
[Pickthall](../pick/019)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/01901)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq019)  [Rodwell](../qr/019)   
[Previous](018)  [Next](020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### THE CHAPTER OF MARY.

### (XIX. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

K. H. Y. ‘*H*. Z. The mention of thy Lord's mercy to His servant
Zachariah, when he called on his Lord with a secret calling. Said he,
'My Lord! verily, my bones are weak, and my head flares with
hoariness;--and I never was unfortunate in my prayers to Thee, my Lord!
\[5\] But I fear my heirs after me, and my wife is barren; then grant me
from Thee a successor, to be my heir and the heir of the family of
Jacob, and make him, my Lord! acceptable.'

'O Zachariah! verily, we give thee glad tidings of a son, whose name
shall be John. We never made a namesake of his before <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41).'

Said he, 'My Lord! how can I have a son, when my wife is barren, and I
have reached through old age to decrepitude?'

\[10\] He said, 'Thus says thy Lord, It is easy for Me, for I created
thee at first when yet thou wast nothing.'

Said he, 'O my Lord! make for me a sign.' He said, 'Thy sign is that
thou shalt not speak to men for three nights (though) sound.'

Then he went forth unto his people from the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

chamber, and he made signs to them: 'Celebrate (God's) praises morning
and evening!'

'O John! take the Book with strength;' and we gave him judgment when a
boy, and grace from us, and purity; and he was pious and righteous to
his parents, and was not a rebellious tyrant.

\[15\] So peace upon him the day he was born, and the day he died, and
the day he shall be raised up alive.

And mention, in the Book, Mary; when she retired from her family into an
eastern place; and she took a veil (to screen herself) from them; and we
sent unto her our spirit; and he took for her the semblance of a
well-made man. Said she, 'Verily, I take refuge in the Merciful One from
thee, if thou art pious.' Said he, 'I am only a messenger of thy Lord to
bestow on thee a pure boy.'

\[20\] Said she, 'How can I have a boy when no man has touched me, and
when I am no harlot?' He said, 'Thus says thy Lord, It is easy for Me!
and we will make him a sign unto man, and a mercy from us; for it is a
decided matter.'

So she conceived him, and she retired with him into a remote place. And
the labour pains came upon her at the trunk of a palm tree, and she
said, 'O that I had died before this, and been forgotten out of mind!'
and he called <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) to her from beneath
her, 'Grieve not, for thy Lord has placed a stream beneath thy feet;
\[25\] and shake towards thee the trunk of the palm tree, it will drop
upon thee fresh dates fit to

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

gather; so eat, and drink, and cheer thine eye; and if thou shouldst see
any mortal say, "Verily, I have vowed to the Merciful One a fast, and I
will not speak to-day with a human being."'

Then she brought it to her people, carrying it; said they, 'O Mary! thou
hast done an extraordinary thing! O sister of Aaron <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)! thy father was not a bad man, nor was thy
mother a harlot!'

\[30\] And she pointed to him, and they said, 'How are we to speak with
one who is in the cradle a child?' He said, 'Verily, I am a servant of
God; He has brought me the Book, and He has made me a prophet, and He
has made me blessed wherever I be; and He has required of me prayer and
almsgiving so long as I live, and piety towards my mother, and has not
made me a miserable tyrant; and peace upon me the day I was born, and
the day I die, and the day I shall be raised up alive.'

\[35\] That is, Jesus the son of Mary,--by the word of truth whereon ye
do dispute!

God could not take to himself any son! celebrated be His praise! when He
decrees a matter He only says to it, 'BE,' and it is; and, verily, God
is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him; this is the right way.

And the parties have disagreed amongst themselves, but woe to those who
disbelieve, from the witnessing of the mighty day! they can hear and
they can see <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44), on the day when they
shall come to us; but the evildoers are to-day in obvious error!

\[40\] And warn them of the day of sighing, when

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the matter is decreed while they are heedless, and while they do not
believe.

Verily, we will inherit the earth and all who are upon it, and unto us
shall they return!

And mention, in the Book, Abraham; verily, he was a confessor,--a
prophet. When he said to his father, 'O my sire! why dost thou worship
what can neither hear nor see nor avail thee aught? O my sire! verily,
to me has come knowledge which has not come to thee; then follow me, and
I will guide thee to a level way.

\[45\] 'O my sire! serve not Satan; verily, Satan is ever a rebel
against the Merciful. O my sire! verily, I fear that there may touch
thee torment from the Merciful, and that thou mayest be a client of
Satan.'

Said he, 'What! art thou averse from my gods, O Abraham? verily, if thou
dost not desist I will certainly stone thee; but get thee gone from me
for a time!'

Said he, 'Peace be upon thee! I will ask forgiveness for thee from my
Lord; verily, He is very gracious to me: but I will part from you and
what ye call on beside God, and will pray my Lord that I be not
unfortunate in my prayer to my Lord.'

\[50\] And when he had parted from them and what they served beside God,
we granted him Isaac and Jacob, and each of them we made a prophet; and
we granted them of our mercy, and we made the tongue of truth lofty for
them <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45).

And mention, in the Book, Moses; verily, he was sincere, and was an
apostle,--a prophet. We called

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

him from the right side of the mountain; and we made him draw nigh unto
us to commune with him, and we granted him, of our mercy, his brother
Aaron as a prophet.

\[55\] And mention, in the Book, Ishmael; verily, he was true to his
promise, and was an apostle,--a prophet; and he used to bid his people
prayers and almsgiving, and was acceptable in the sight of his Lord.

And mention, in the Book, Idrîs <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46);
verily, he was a confessor,--a prophet; and we raised him to a lofty
place.

These are those to whom God has been gracious, of the prophets of the
seed of Adam, and of those whom we bore with Noah, and of the seed of
Abraham and Israel, and of those we guided and elected; when the signs
of the Merciful are read to them, they fall down adoring and weeping.

\[60\] And successors succeeded them, who lost sight of prayer and
followed lusts, but they shall at length find themselves going wrong,
except such as repent and believe and act aright; for these shall enter
Paradise, and shall not be wronged at all,--gardens of Eden, which the
Merciful has promised to His servants in the unseen; verily, His promise
ever comes to pass!

They shall hear no empty talk therein, but only 'peace;' and they shall
have their provision therein, morning and evening; that is Paradise
which we will give for an inheritance to those of our servants who are
pious!

\[65\] We do not descend <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) save at the
bidding

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

of thy Lord; His is what is before us, and what is behind us, and what
is between those; for thy Lord is never forgetful,--the Lord of the
heavens and the earth, and of what is between the two; then serve Him
and persevere in His service. Dost thou know a namesake of His?

Man will say, 'What! when I have died shall I then come forth alive?
Does not man then remember that we created him before when he was
naught?'

And by thy Lord! we will surely gather them together, and the devils
too; then we will surely bring them forward around hell, on their knees!

\[70\] Then we will drag off from every sect whichever of them has been
most bold against the Merciful.

Then we know best which of them deserves most to be broiled therein.

There is not one of you who will not go down to it,--that is settled and
decided by thy Lord <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48).

Then we will save those who fear us; but we will leave the evildoers
therein on their knees.

And when our signs are recited to them manifest, those who misbelieve
say to those who believe, Which of the two parties is best placed and in
the best company?'

\[75\] And how many generations before them

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

have we destroyed who were better off in property and appearance?

Say, 'Whosoever is in error, let the Merciful extend to him length of
days!--until they see what they are threatened with, whether it be the
torment or whether it be the Hour, then they shall know who is worse
placed and weakest in forces!'

And those who are guided God will increase in guidance.

And enduring good works are best with thy Lord for a reward, and best
for restoration.

\[80\] Hast thou seen him who disbelieves in our signs, and says, 'I
shall surely be given wealth and children <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)?'

Has he become acquainted with the unseen, or has he taken a compact with
the Merciful? Not so! We will write down what he says, and we will
extend to him a length of torment, and we will make him inherit what he
says, and he shall come to us alone. They take other gods besides God to
be their glory. \[85\] Not so! They <span id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50)
shall deny their worship and shall be opponents of theirs!

Dost thou not see that we have sent the devils against the misbelievers,
to drive them on to sin? but, be not thou hasty with them. Verily, we
will number them a number (of days),--the day when we will gather the
pious to the Merciful as ambassadors, and we will drive the sinners to
hell like

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (herds) to water!
\[90\] They shall not possess intercession, save he who has taken a
compact with the Merciful.

They say, 'The Merciful has taken to Himself a son:'--ye have brought a
monstrous thing! The heavens well-nigh burst asunder thereat, and the
earth is riven, and the mountains fall down broken, that they attribute
to the Merciful a son! but it becomes not the Merciful to take to
Himself a son! there is none in the heavens or the earth but comes to
the Merciful as a servant; He counts them and numbers them by number,
\[95\] and they are all coming to Him on the resurrection day singly.

Verily, those who believe and act aright, to them the Merciful will give
love.

We have only made it easy for thy tongue that thou mayest thereby give
glad tidings to the pious, and warn thereby a contentious people.

How many a generation before them have we destroyed? Canst thou find any
one of them, or hear a whisper of them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[27:1](019.htm#fr_41) Cf. Luke i. 61, where,
however, it is said that none of Zachariah's kindred was ever before
called by that name. Some commentators avoid the difficulty by
interpreting the word samîyyun to mean 'deserving of the name.'

<span id="fn_42"></span>[28:1](019.htm#fr_42) Either the infant himself
or the angel Gabriel; or the expression 'beneath her' may be rendered
'beneath it,' and may refer to the palm tree.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[29:1](019.htm#fr_43) See Part I, note 1, p. 50.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[29:2](019.htm#fr_44) See Part II, note 3, p.
16.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[30:1](019.htm#fr_45) That is, 'gave them great
renown.'

<span id="fn_46"></span>[31:1](019.htm#fr_46) Generally identified with
Enoch.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[31:2](019.htm#fr_47) Amongst various
conjectures the one most usually accepted <span id="page_32">p.
32</span> by the Mohammedan commentators is, that these are the words of
the angel Gabriel, in answer to Mohammed's complaint of long intervals
elapsing between the periods of revelation.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[32:1](019.htm#fr_48) This is interpreted by
some to mean that all souls, good and bad, must pass through hell, but
that the good will not be harmed. Others think it merely refers to the
passage of the bridge of el Aarâf.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[33:1](019.htm#fr_49) ’Hâsîy ibn Wâil, being
indebted to ’*H*abbâb, refused to pay him unless he renounced Mohammed.
This ’*H*abbâb said he would never do alive or dead, or when raised
again at the last day. El ’Hâsîy told him to call for his money on the
last day, as he should have wealth and children then.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[33:2](019.htm#fr_50) That is, the false gods.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. The Chapter of *T*. H.](020)

</div>
