<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/037) 
[Pickthall](../pick/037)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/03701)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq037)  [Rodwell](../qr/037)   
[Previous](036)  [Next](038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE 'RANGED.'

### (XXXVII. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

By the (angels) ranged in ranks, and the drivers driving <span
id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219), and the reciters of the reminder,
'Verily, your God is one, \[5\] the Lord of the heavens and the earth
and what is between the two, and the Lord of the sunrises!'

Verily, we have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the
stars, and to preserve it from every rebellious devil, that they may not
listen to the exalted chiefs; for they are hurled at from every
side <span id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_220), driven off, and for them is
lasting woe; \[10\] save such as snatches off a word, and there follows
him a darting flame!

Ask them <span id="fr_221"></span>[3](#fn_221) whether they are stronger
by nature or (the angels) whom we have created? We have created them of
sticky clay.

Nay, thou dost wonder and they jest! and when they are reminded they
will not remember; and when they see a sign they make a jest thereof,
\[15\] and say, 'This is naught but obvious sorcery. What! when we are
dead, and have become earth and bones, shall we then be raised? what!
and our fathers of yore?'

Say, 'Yes, and ye shall shrink up, and it shall only

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

be one scare, and, behold, they shall look on, \[20\] and they shall
say, 'O, woe is us! this is the day of judgment, this is the day of
decision, which ye did call a lie!' Gather ye together, ye who were
unjust, with their mates and what they used to serve beside God, and
guide them to the way of hell, and stop them; verily, they shall be
questioned. \[25\] 'Why do ye not help each other?' nay, on that day
they shall resign themselves, and some shall draw near to others, to
question each other, and they shall say, 'Verily, ye came to us from the
right <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_222).' They shall say, 'Nay, ye
were not believers, nor had we any authority over you; nay, ye were an
outrageous people. \[30\] And the sentence of our Lord shall be due for
us; verily, we shall surely taste thereof; we did seduce you--verily, we
were erring too!' therefore, verily, on that day they shall share the
torment: thus it is that we will do with the sinners.

Verily, when it is said to them, 'There is no god but God,' they get too
big with pride, and say, \[3j\] What! shall we leave our gods for an
infatuated poet?' Nay, he came with the truth, and verified the
apostles; verily, ye are going to taste of grievous woe, nor shall ye be
rewarded save for that which ye have done!

Except God's sincere servants,\[40\] these shall have a stated provision
of fruits, and they shall be honoured in the gardens of pleasure, upon
couches facing each other <span id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_223); they
shall be served all round with a cup from a spring, \[45\] white and
delicious to those who drink, wherein is no insidious spirit, nor shall
they

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

be drunk therewith; and with them damsels, restraining their looks,
large eyed; as though they were a sheltered egg; and some shall come
forward to ask others; and a speaker amongst them shall say, 'Verily, I
had a mate, \[50\] who used to say, "Art thou verily of those who
credit? What! when we are dead, and have become earth and bones, shall
we be surely judged?"' He will say, 'Are ye looking down?' and he shall
look down and see him in the midst of hell. He shall say, 'By God, thou
didst nearly ruin me! \[55\] And had it not been for the favour of my
Lord, I should have been among the arraigned.'--'What! shall we not die
save our first death? and shall we not be tormented?--Verily, this is
mighty bliss! for the like of this then let the workers work.'

\[60\] Is that better as an entertainment, or the tree of Ez
Zaqqûm <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224)? Verily, we have made it a
trial to the unjust <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_225). Verily, it is
a tree that comes forth from the bottom of hell; its spathe is as it
were the heads of devils; verily, they shall eat therefrom, and fill
their bellies therefrom. \[65\] Then shall they have upon it a mixture
of boiling water; then, verily, their return shall be to hell.

Verily, they found their fathers erring, and they hurried on in their
tracks; but there had erred before them most of those of yore, \[70\]
and we had sent warners amongst them. Behold, then, what was the end of
those who were warned, save God's sincere servants!

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Noah did call upon us, and a gracious answer did we give; and we saved
him and his people from a mighty trouble; \[75\] and we made his seed to
be the survivors; and we left for him amongst posterity 'peace upon Noah
in the worlds; verily; thus do we reward those who do well; verily, he
was of our believing servants.' \[80\] Then we drowned the others.

And, verily, of his sect was Abraham; when he came to his Lord with a
sound heart; when he said to his father and his people, 'What is it that
ye serve? with a lie do ye desire gods beside God? \[85\] What then is
your thought respecting the Lord of the worlds?'

And he looked a look at the stars and said, 'Verily, I am sick!' and
they turned their backs upon him fleeing <span
id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226). And he went aside unto their gods and
said, 'Will ye not eat? \[90\] What ails you that ye will not speak?'
And he went aside to them smiting with the right hand.

And they <span id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_227) rushed towards him. Said
he, 'Do ye serve what ye hew out, when God has created you, and what ye
make?'

\[95\] Said they, 'Build for him a pyre, and throw him into the flaming
hell!' They desired to plot against him, but we made them inferior. Said
he, 'Verily, I am going to my Lord, He will guide me. My Lord! grant me
(a son), one of the

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

righteous;' and we gave him glad tidings of a clement boy.

\[100\] And when he reached the age to work with him, he said, 'O my
boy! verily, I have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice thee <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228), look then what thou seest right.'

Said he, 'O my sire! do what thou art bidden; thou wilt find me, if it
please God, one of the patient!'

And when they were resigned, and Abraham had thrown him down upon his
forehead, we called to him, 'O Abraham! \[105\] thou hast verified the
vision; verily, thus do we reward those who do well. This is surely an
obvious trial.' And we ransomed him with a mighty victim; and we left
for him amongst posterity, 'Peace upon Abraham; \[110\] thus do we
reward those who do well; verily, he was of our servants who believe!'
And we gave him glad tidings of Isaac, a prophet among the righteous;
and we blessed him and Isaac;--of their seed is one who does well, and
one who obviously wrongs himself.

And we were gracious unto Moses and Aaron. \[115\] We saved them and
their people from mighty trouble, and we helped them and they had the
upper hand; and we gave them both the perspicuous Book; and we guided
them to the right way; and we left for them amongst posterity, \[120\]
'Peace upon Moses and Aaron; verily, thus do we reward those who do
well; verily, they were both of our servants who believe!'

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

And verily Elyâs <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229) was of the
apostles; when he said to his people, 'Will ye not fear? \[125\] do ye
call upon Baal and leave the best of Creators, God your Lord and the
Lord of your fathers of yore?'

But they called him liar; verily, they shall surely be arraigned, save
God's sincere servants. And we left for him amongst posterity, \[130\]
Peace upon Elyâsîn <span id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230); verily, thus
do we reward those who do well; verily, he was of our servants who
believe!'

And, verily, Lot was surely among the apostles; when we saved him and
his people altogether, \[135\] except an old woman amongst those who
lingered; then we destroyed the others; verily, ye pass by them in the
morning and at night; have ye then no sense?

And, verily, Jonah was amongst the apostles; \[140\] when he ran
away <span id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_231) into the laden ship; and he
cast lots and was of those who lost; and a fish swallowed him, for he
was to be blamed; and had it not been that he was of those who
celebrated

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God's praises he
would surely have tarried in the belly thereof to the day when men shall
be raised.

\[145\] But we cast him on to the barren shore; and he was sick; and we
made to grow over him a gourd tree; and we sent him to a hundred
thousand or more, and they believed; and we gave them enjoyment for a
season.

Ask them <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232), 'Has thy Lord daughters
while they have sons <span id="fr_233"></span>[2](#fn_233)? \[150\] or
have we created the angels females while they were witnesses?' is it not
of their lie that they say, 'God has begotten?' verily, they are liars.

Has he preferred daughters to sons? what ails you? how ye judge! \[155\]
will ye not be mindful, or have ye obvious authority? then bring your
Book if ye do speak the truth.

And they made him to be related to the *g*inns, while the *g*inns know
that they shall be arraigned; celebrated be God's praises from what they
attribute!--\[160\] save God's sincere servants.

'Verily, ye and what ye worship shall not try any one concerning him,
save hint who shall broil in hell; there is none amongst us but has his
appointed place, and, \[165\] verily, we are ranged, and, verily, we
celebrate His praises <span id="fr_234"></span>[3](#fn_234).'

And yet they say, '*H*ad we a reminder from those of yore we should
surely have been of God's sincere servants.'

\[170\] But they misbelieved in it <span
id="fr_235"></span>[4](#fn_235); but soon shall they know.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

But our word has been passed to our servants who were sent that they
should be helped; that, verily, our hosts should gain mastery for them.

Then turn thou thy back upon them for a time, \[175\] and look upon
them, for soon they too shall look.

Would they hasten on our torment? but when it descends in their court,
ill will the morning be of those who have been warned!

But turn thy back upon them for a time; and look, for soon they too
shall look.

\[180\] Celebrated be the praises of thy Lord, the Lord of glory, above
what they attribute! and peace be upon the apostles and praise be to
God, the Lord of the worlds!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[168:1](037.htm#fr_219) Driving the clouds or
'scaring the devils.'

<span id="fn_220"></span>[168:2](037.htm#fr_220) See Part I, p. 50, note
2.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[168:3](037.htm#fr_221) The people of Mecca.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[169:1](037.htm#fr_222) That is, with a good
omen.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[169:2](037.htm#fr_223) See Chapter XV, verse
47.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[170:1](037.htm#fr_224) Ez Zaqqûm is a foreign
tree with an exceedingly bitter fruit, the name of which is here used
for the infernal tree.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[170:2](037.htm#fr_225) The unbelievers
objected that the tree could not grow in hell, where the very stones
(see Part I, p. 4, note 1) were fuel for the fire.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[171:1](037.htm#fr_226) Mohammedan commentators
say that he pretended to a knowledge of astrology and made as though he
saw a presage of coming sickness for himself in the stars, whereupon the
others fled for fear of contagion, and Abraham took the opportunity of
absenting himself from the festival which was being held in honour of
the idols.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[171:2](037.htm#fr_227) The people of the city.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[172:1](037.htm#fr_228) The Mohammedan theory
is that it was Ishmael and not Isaac who was taken as a sacrifice.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[173:1](037.htm#fr_229) Supposed by the
Mohammedans to be the same as Al ‘*H*idhr and Idrîs.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[173:2](037.htm#fr_230) This is probably
another form of the word Elyâs, on the model of many Hebrew words which
have survived in the later Arabic dialect. The Mohammedan commentators
however conjecturally interpret it in various ways, some consider it to
be a plural form, including Elias and his followers; others divide the
word and read it Âl-ya-sîn, i.e. 'the family of Ya-sin,' namely, Elias
and his father. Others imagine it to mean Mohammed or the Qur’ân. Most
probably however the final syllable -în was nothing more than a
prolonged utterance of the case-ending, here improperly used in order to
preserve the rhyme or final cadence of the verse. The modern Bedawîn
frequently do the same, and I have heard them singing a song commencing
'Zaidûn, Zaidûn, Zaidûn,' when they should say, Zaidu, 'O Zaid!' &c.
Trans.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[173:3](037.htm#fr_231) The word used in the
text is always applied to runaway slaves.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[174:1](037.htm#fr_232) The Meccans.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[174:2](037.htm#fr_233) See Part I, p. 256,
note 2.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[174:3](037.htm#fr_234) This speech is supposed
to be the words of the angel Gabriel.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[174:4](037.htm#fr_235) I.e. in the Qur’ân.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVIII. The Chapter of S](038)

</div>
