<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/043) 
[Pickthall](../pick/043)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/04301)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq043)  [Rodwell](../qr/043)   
[Previous](042)  [Next](044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

### THE CHAPTER OF GILDING.

### (XLIII. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

‘H. M. By the perspicuous Book, verily, we have made it an Arabic
Qur’ân; haply ye will have some sense. And it is in the Mother of the
Book with us,--high and wise <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263).
Shall we then push aside from you the Reminder, because ye are a people
who are extravagant?

\[5\] How many prophets have we sent amongst those of yore? and there
never came to them a prophet but they did mock at him; then we destroyed
them--more valiant than these <span id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_264); and
the example of those of yore passed away.

And if thou shouldst ask them who created the heavens and the earth,
they will surely say, 'The mighty, the knowing One created them,' who
made for you the earth a couch and placed for you therein roads, haply
ye may be guided: \[10\] and who sent down from the heaven water in due
measure; and we raised up thereby a dead country; thus shall ye too be
brought forth; and who has created all species; and has made for you the
ships and the cattle whereon to ride that ye may settle yourselves on
their backs; then remember the favour of your Lord when ye settled
thereon, and say, 'Celebrated be the praises of Him who hath subjected
this to us! We could not have got this ourselves; and, verily, unto our
Lord shall we return!'

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

Yet they make for Him of His servants offspring; verily, man is surely
obviously ungrateful.

\[15\] Has He taken of what He creates daughters, and chosen sons for
you?

Yet when the tidings <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265) are given any
one of that which he strikes out as a similitude for the Merciful One,
his face grows black and he is choked. What! one brought up amongst
ornaments, and who is always in contention without obvious cause <span
id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_266)?

And have they made the angels, who are the servants of the Merciful One,
females? Were they witnesses of their creation? their witness shall be
written down, and they shall be questioned; and they say, 'Had the
Merciful pleased we should never have worshipped them.' They have no
knowledge of that, they only conjecture.

\[20\] Have we given them a book <span id="fr_267"></span>[3](#fn_267)
before it to which they might hold?

Nay; they say, 'We found our fathers (agreed) upon a religion, and,
verily, we are guided by their traces.'

Thus, too, did we never send before thee to a city any warner, but the
affluent ones thereof said, 'Verily, we found our fathers (agreed) upon
a religion, and, verily, we are led by their traces.'

Say, 'What! if I come to you with what is a better guide than what ye
found your fathers agreed upon?' and they will say, 'Verily, we in what
ye are sent with disbelieve!'

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

Then we took vengeance on them, and see how was the end of those who
called the (apostles) liars.

\[25\] When Abraham said to his father and his people, 'Verily, I am
clear of all that ye serve, except Him who created me; for, verily, He
will guide me:' and he made it a word remaining among his posterity,
that haply they might return.

Nay; but I let these (Meccans) and their fathers have enjoyment until
the truth came to them, and an apostle. And when the truth came to them
they said, 'This is magic, and we therein do disbelieve!' \[30\] And
they say, 'Unless this Qur’ân were sent down to a man great in the two
cities. . . . <span id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_268).'

Is it they who distribute the mercy of thy Lord? We distribute amongst
them their livelihood in the life of this world, and we exalt some of
them above others in degrees, that some may take others into subjection;
but the mercy of thy Lord is better than that which they amass.

And but that men would then have been one nation, we would have made for
those who misbelieve in the Merciful One roofs of silver for their
houses, and steps up thereto which they might mount; and to their houses
doors, and bedsteads on which they might recline; and gilding,--for,
verily, all that is a provision of the life of this world, but the
hereafter is better with thy Lord for those who fear!

\[15\] And whosoever turns from the reminder of the Merciful One, we
will chain to him a devil, who shall

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

be his mate; and, verily, these shall turn them from the path while they
reckon that they are guided; until when he comes to us he shall say, 'O,
would that between me and thee there were the distance of the two
orients <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269), for an evil mate (art
thou)!' But it shall not avail you on that day, since ye were unjust;
verily, in the torment shall ye share!

What! canst thou make the deaf to hear, or guide the blind, or him who
is in obvious error?

\[40\] Whether then we take thee off we will surely take vengeance on
them; or whether we show thee that which we have promised *th*em; for,
verily, we have power over them.

Say, 'Dost thou hold to what is inspired thee?' verily, thou art in the
right way, and, verily, it is a reminder to thee and to thy people, but
in the end they shall be asked.

And ask those whom we have sent before thee amongst the prophets, 'Did
we make gods beside the Merciful One for them to serve?'

\[45\] We did send Moses with our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, and
he said, 'Verily, I am the apostle of the Lord of the worlds; but when
he came to them with our signs, lo, they laughed at them!'

And we did not show them a sign, but it was greater than its fellow; and
we seized them with the torment, haply they might turn.

And they said, 'O thou magician! pray for us to thy Lord, as He has
engaged with thee: verily, we are guided.'

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

And when we removed from them the torment, behold they broke their word.

\[50\] And Pharaoh proclaimed amongst his people; said he, 'O my people!
is not the kingdom of Egypt mine? and these rivers that flow beneath me?
What! can ye then not see? Am I better than this fellow, who is
contemptible, who can hardly explain himself <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_270)? Unless then bracelets of gold be cast
upon him, or there come with him angels as his mates . . .!'

And he taught his people levity; and they obeyed him: verily, they were
an abominable people.

\[55\] And when they had annoyed us we took vengeance on them, and we
drowned them all together, and we made them a precedent and an example
to those after them.

And when the son of Mary was set forth as a parable, behold thy people
turned away from him and said, 'Are our gods better, or is he?' They did
not set it forth to thee save for wrangling. Nay, but they are a
contentious people <span id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_271).

He is but a servant whom we have been gracious to, and we have made him
an example for the children of Israel. \[60\] And if we please we can
make of you angels in the earth to succeed you <span
id="fr_272"></span>[3](#fn_272). And, verily, he is a sign of the
Hour <span id="fr_273"></span>[4](#fn_273). Doubt not then

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

concerning it, but follow this right way; and let not the devil turn you
away; verily, he is to you an open foe!

And when Jesus came with manifest signs he said, 'I am come to you with
wisdom, and I will explain to you something of that whereon ye did
dispute, then fear God, obey me; verily, God, He is my Lord and your
Lord, serve Him then, this is the right way.'

\[65\] But the confederates disputed amongst themselves; and woe to
those who are unjust from the torment of a grievous day!

Do they expect aught but that the Hour will come upon them suddenly
while they do not perceive? Friends on that day shall be foes to each
other, save those who fear.

O my servants! there is no fear for you on that day; nor shall ye be
grieved who believe in our signs and who are resigned. \[70\] Enter ye
into Paradise, ye and your wives, happy!

Dishes of gold and pitchers shall be sent round to them; therein is what
souls desire, and eyes shall be delighted, and ye therein shall dwell
for aye; for that is Paradise which ye are given as an inheritance for
that which ye have done. Therein shall ye have much fruit whereof to
eat.

Verily, the sinners are in the torment of hell to dwell for aye. \[75\]
It shall not be intermitted for them, and they therein shall be
confused. We have not wronged them, but it was themselves they wronged.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

And they shall cry out, 'O Mâlik <span id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_274)!
let thy lord make an end of us;' he shall say, 'Verily, ye are to tarry
here.'

We have brought you the truth, but most of you are averse from the
truth. Have they arranged the affair? then will we arrange it too <span
id="fr_275"></span>[2](#fn_275)!

\[80\] Or do they reckon that we did not hear their secrets and their
whispering? Nay, but our messengers are with them writing down <span
id="fr_276"></span>[3](#fn_276).

Say, 'If the Merciful One has a son then am I the first to worship him.
Celebrated be the praise of the Lord of the heavens and the earth! the
Lord of the throne, above all they attribute to Him!

But leave them to ponder and to play until they meet that day of theirs
which they are promised.

He it is who is in the heaven a God and in the earth a God! and He is
the wise, the knowing. \[85\] And blessed be he whose is the kingdom of
the heavens and the earth, and what is between both, and His is the
knowledge of the Hour, and unto Him shall ye be brought back!

And those they call on beside Him shall not possess intercession except
those only who bear witness for the truth and who do know.

And if thou shouldst ask them who created them they shall surely say,
'God!' How then can they lie?

And what he <span id="fr_277"></span>[4](#fn_277) says, 'O Lord, verily,
these are

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

a people who do not believe; shun them then and say, "Peace!" for they
at length shall know!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[211:1](043.htm#fr_263) See Part I, p. 2, note
2.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[211:2](043.htm#fr_264) I.e. the Meccans.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[212:1](043.htm#fr_265) I.e. of the birth of a
daughter, see Part I, p. 256, note 2.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[212:2](043.htm#fr_266) I.e. what! do they
assign children of this kind, viz. daughters, to God?

<span id="fn_267"></span>[212:3](043.htm#fr_267) I.e. a scripture
authorising the practice of their religion, such as the worship of
angels and the ascribing of daughters to God.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[213:1](043.htm#fr_268) I.e. had it been sent
down to some man of influence and importance in Mecca and *T*â’if we
would have received it.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[214:1](043.htm#fr_269) I.e. the east and west,
though some understand it between the two solstices.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[215:1](043.htm#fr_270) See [p.
36](020.htm#page_36), note 1.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[215:2](043.htm#fr_271) The Arabs objected that
Jesus was worshipped by Christians as a God, and that when Mohammed
cursed their false gods, the ban must apply equally to him.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[215:3](043.htm#fr_272) Just as Jesus was
miraculously conceived, so can miraculously conceived offspring be
produced among the Meccans themselves.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[215:4](043.htm#fr_273) Some read, 'a sign,'
which is perhaps better. The reference is to the predicted second advent
of the Messiah, which is to precede the end of the world. Some
commentators, however, read 'it,' instead of 'he,' referring to the
Qur’ân, instead of to Jesus.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[217:1](043.htm#fr_274) Mâlik is the keeper of
hell, and presides over the tortures of the damned.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[217:2](043.htm#fr_275) The word used signifies
twisting up the strands of a rope.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[217:3](043.htm#fr_276) I.e. the recording
angel.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[217:4](043.htm#fr_277) Mohammed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIV. The Chapter of Smoke](044)

</div>
