<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/047.md) 
[Pickthall](../pick/047)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/04701.md)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq047)  [Rodwell](../qr/047.md)   
[Previous](046)  [Next](048.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### THE CHAPTER OF MOHAMMED, ALSO CALLED FIGHT.

### (XLVII. Medînah.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

Those who misbelieve and turn folk from God's way, He will make their
works go wrong. But those who believe and do right and believe in what
is revealed to Mohammed,--and it is the truth from their Lord,--He will
cover for them their offences and set right their mind.

That is because those who misbelieve follow falsehood, and those who
believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus does God set forth for
men their parables.

And when ye meet those who misbelieve--then striking off heads until ye
have massacred them, and bind fast the bonds!

\[5\] Then either a free grant (of liberty) or a ransom until the war
shall have laid down its bur-dens. That!--but if God please He would
conquer them--but (it is) that He may try some of you by the others. And
those who are slain in God's cause, their works shall not go wrong; He
will guide them and set right their mind; and will make them enter into
Paradise which He has told them of.

O ye who believe! if ye help God, He will help you, and will make firm
your footsteps.

But as for those who misbelieve--confound them! and He will make their
works go wrong.

\[10\] That is because they were averse from what God has revealed; but
their works shall be void!

Have they not journeyed through the land and

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

seen how was the end of those before them? God destroyed them; and for
the misbelievers is the like thereof.

That is because God is the patron of those who believe, and because the
misbelievers have no patron.

Verily, God causes those who believe and do right to enter into gardens
beneath which rivers flow; but those who misbelieve enjoy themselves and
eat as the cattle eat; but the fire is the resort for them!

How many a city, stronger than thy city which has driven thee out, have
we destroyed, and there was none to help them!

\[15\] Is he who rests upon a manifest sign from his Lord like him, the
evil of whose works is made seemly to him, and who follow their lusts?

The similitude of Paradise which is promised to the pious,--in it are
rivers of water without corruption, and rivers of milk, the taste
whereof changes not, and rivers of wine delicious to those who drink;
and rivers of honey clarified; and there shall they have all kinds of
fruit and forgiveness from their Lord! (Is that) like him who dwells in
the fire for aye? and who are given to drink boiling water that shall
rend their bowels asunder?

Some of them there are who listen to thee, until when they go forth from
thee they say to those who have been given the knowledge <span
id="fr_291"></span>[1](#fn_291.md), 'What is this which he says now?' These
are those on whose hearts God has set a stamp and who follow their
lusts.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

But those who are guided, He guides them the more, and gives them the
due of their piety.

\[20\] Do they wait for aught but the Hour, that it should come to them
suddenly? The conditions thereof have come already; how, when it has
come on them, can they have their reminder?

Know thou that there is no god but God; and ask pardon for thy sin and
for the believers, men and women; for God knows your return and your
resort!

Those who misbelieve say, 'Why has not a sûrah been revealed?' but when
a decisive sûrah is revealed and fighting is mentioned therein, thou
mayest see those in whose heart is sickness <span
id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_292.md) looking towards thee with the look of
one fainting in death. Preferable for them were obedience and a
reasonable speech! But when the matter is determined on, then if they
believed God it were better for them.

Would ye perhaps, if ye had turned back, have done evil in the land and
severed the bonds of kinship?

\[25\] It is these whom God has cursed, and has made them deaf, and has
blinded their eyesight! Do they not peruse the Qur’ân? or are there
locks upon their hearts?

Verily, those who turn their backs after the guidance that has been
manifested to them--Satan induces them, but (God) lets them go on for a
time!

That is for that they say to those who are averse from what God has
revealed, 'We will obey you in

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

part of the affair!' but God knows their secrets! How will it be when
the angels <span id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_293.md) take their souls,
smiting their faces and their backs?

\[30\] This is because they follow what angers God and are averse from
His goodwill; and their works are void.

Do those in whose hearts is sickness reckon that God will not bring
their malice forth?

But did we please we would show thee them, and thou shouldst know them
by their cognisances. But thou shalt know them by their distorting their
speech, and God knows their works!

But we will try you until we know those among you who fight strenuously
and the patient; and we will try the reports concerning you.

Verily, those who misbelieve and turn folks off God's path, and break
with the Apostle after the guidance that has been manifested to them,
cannot harm God at all, and their works shall be void!

\[15\] O ye who believe! obey God, and obey the Apostle; and make not
your works vain.

Verily, those who misbelieve and turn folks off God's path, and then die
misbelievers, God will not pardon them.

Then faint not, nor cry for peace while ye have the upper hand; for God
is with you and will not cheat you of your works!

The life of this world is but a play and a sport; but if ye believe and
fear God, He will give you your hire.

He does not ask you for (all) your property; if

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He were to ask you
for it and to press you, ye would be niggardly, and he would bring your
malice out.

\[40\] Here are ye called upon to expend in God's cause, and among you
are some who are niggardly; and he who is niggardly is but niggardly
against his own soul: but God is rich and ye are poor, and if ye turn
your backs He will substitute another people in your stead, then they
will not be like you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_291"></span>[230:1](047.htm#fr_291.md) To the more learned
amongst the prophet's companions, such as Ibn ‘Abbâs.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[231:1](047.htm#fr_292.md) See Introduction, p.
lxiii.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[232:1](047.htm#fr_293.md) Munkir and Nakîr; see
Introduction, p. lxix.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVIII. The Chapter of Victory](048.md)

</div>
