<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/049) 
[Pickthall](../pick/049)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/04901)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq049)  [Rodwell](../qr/049)   
[Previous](048)  [Next](050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE INNER CHAMBERS.

### (XLIX. Medînah.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

O ye who believe! do not anticipate God and His Apostle, but fear God;
verily, God both hears and knows.

O ye who believe! raise not your voices above the voice of the prophet,
and do not speak loud to him as ye speak loud to one another <span
id="fr_309"></span>[2](#fn_309), lest your works become vain, while ye
do not perceive.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

Verily, those who lower their voice before the Apostle of God, they are
those whose hearts God has proved for piety, for them is forgiveness and
a mighty hire.

Verily, those who cry out to thee from behind the inner chambers <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_310), most of them have no sense; \[5\] but
did they wait until thou come out to them, it were better for them;--but
God is forgiving, merciful.

O ye who believe! if there come to you a sinner with an information,
then discriminate, lest ye fall upon a people in ignorance and on the
morrow repent of what ye have done <span
id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_311).

And know that among you is the Apostle of God; if he should obey you in
many a matter ye would commit a sin <span
id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_312); God has made faith beloved by you, and
has made it seemly in your hearts, and has made misbelief and iniquity
and rebellion hateful to you.--These are the rightly directed--grace
from God and favour! and God is knowing, wise.

And if the two parties of the believers quarrel <span
id="fr_313"></span>[4](#fn_313),

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

then make peace between them; and if one of the twain outrages the
other, then fight the party that has committed the outrage until it
return to God's bidding; and if it do return then make peace between
them with equity, and be just; verily, God loves the just.

\[10\] The believers are but brothers, so make peace between your two
brethren and fear God, haply ye may obtain mercy!

O ye who believe! let not one class ridicule another who are perchance
better than they; nor let women ridicule other women who are perchance
better than they; and do not defame each other, nor call each other bad
names--an ill name is iniquity after faith <span
id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_314)!

O ye who believe! carefully avoid suspicion; verily, some suspicion is a
sin. And do not play the spy, nor backbite each other; would one of you
like to eat his dead brother's flesh?--why! ye would abhor it! then fear
God; verily, God is relentant, compassionate.

O ye folk! verily, we have created you of male and female, and made you
races and tribes that ye may know each other.

Verily, the most honourable of you in the sight of God is the most pious
of you; verily, God is knowing, aware!

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

The desert Arabs say, 'We believe.' Say, 'Ye do not believe; but say,
"We have become Muslims;" for the faith has not entered into your
hearts: but if ye obey God and His Apostle He will not defraud you of
your works at all: verily, God is forgiving, compassionate!'

\[15\] The believers are only those who believe in God and His Apostle,
and then doubt not, but fight strenuously with their wealth and persons
in God's cause--these are the truth-tellers!

Say, 'Will ye teach God your religion?' when God knows what is in the
heavens and what is in the earth, and God all things doth know!

They deem that they oblige thee by becoming Muslims. Say, 'Nay! deem not
that ye oblige me by your becoming Muslims! God obliges you, by
directing you to the faith, if ye do speak the truth!'

Verily, God knows the unseen things of the heavens and the earth, and
God on what ye do doth look.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[238:2](049.htm#fr_309) Said to refer to a
dispute between Abu Bekr and ‘Omar, in the course of which they came to
high words in the presence of the prophet.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[239:1](049.htm#fr_310) Two of the Arabs
wishing to speak with Mohammed when he was sleeping at noon in his
harîm, cried out rudely to him, Mohammed, come out to us!' See [p.
82](024.htm#page_82).

<span id="fn_311"></span>[239:2](049.htm#fr_311) Al Walîd ibn ’Hugbâ was
sent by Mohammed to collect the zakât (see Introduction, p. lxxiii) from
the tribe of Mustaleq, with whom he had had a feud in the time preceding
Islâm. Seeing them coming out to meet him in large numbers, he grew
apprehensive, and returned hastily with the information that the tribe
had refused the tribute. Mohammed thereupon sent ‘Halîd ibn Walîd to
reduce them by force, when it was found that the former messenger's
fears had been quite groundless.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[239:3](049.htm#fr_312) I.e. ye would mislead
him.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[239:4](049.htm#fr_313) Alluding to one of the
frequent disputes between the tribes of Aus and ‘*H*azra*g* at Medînah.
See Introduction, p. xxxiv.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[240:1](049.htm#fr_314) I.e. it is defamation
to charge a person who has embraced the faith with iniquity. The passage
is said to have been revealed on account of Zafîyah bint ’Huyâi, one of
the prophet's wives, who complained to him that she had been taunted by
the other women with her Jewish origin. Mohammed answered her, 'Canst
thou not say, "Aaron is my father, Moses my uncle, and Mohammed my
husband?"'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L. The Chapter of Q](050)

</div>
