<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/057) 
[Pickthall](../pick/057)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/05701)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq057)  [Rodwell](../qr/057)   
[Previous](056)  [Next](058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF IRON.

### (LVII. Mecca.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

Whatever is in the heavens and the earth celebrates the praises of God,
for He is the mighty, the wise!

His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth: He quickens and He
kills, and He is mighty over all!

He is the first and the last; and the outer and the inner; and He all
things doth know!

He it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He made
for the throne; and He knows what goes into the earth and what goes
forth therefrom, and what comes down from the sky and what goes up
therein, and He is with you wheresoe’er ye be: for God on what ye do
doth look!

\[5\] His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and unto God
affairs return. He makes the night succeed the day, and makes the day
succeed the night; and He knows the nature of men's breasts.

Believe in God and His Apostle, and give alms of what He has made you
successors of. For those amongst you who believe and give alms--for them
is mighty hire.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

What ails you that ye do not believe in God and His Apostle? He calls on
you to believe in your Lord; and He has taken a compact from you, if ye
be believers.

He it is who sends down upon His servants manifest signs, to bring you
forth from the darkness into the light; for, verily, God to you is kind,
compassionate!

\[10\] What ails you that ye give not alms in God's cause? for God's is
the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. Not alike amongst you is
he who gives alms before the victory and fights,--they are grander in
rank than those who give alms afterwards and fight. But to all does God
promise good; and God of what ye do is well aware!

Who is there who will lend a good loan to God? for He will double it for
him, and for him is a generous reward.

On the day when thou shalt see believers, men and women, with their
light running on before them and on their right hand <span
id="fr_375"></span>[1](#fn_375),--'Glad tidings for you today.--Gardens
beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; that is the grand
bliss!'

On the day when the hypocrites, men and women, shall say to those who
believe, 'Wait for us that we may kindle at your light.' It will be
said, 'Get ye back, and beg a light.' And there shall be struck out
between them a wall with a door; within it shall be mercy, and outside
before it torment. They shall cry out to them, 'We were not with you!'
they shall say, 'Yea, but ye did tempt yourselves, and did wait, and did
doubt; and your vain hopes beguiled you; and the beguiler beguiled you
about God.

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

'Wherefore to-day there shall not be taken from you a ransom, nor from
those who misbelieved. Your resort is the fire; it is your sovereign,
and an ill journey will it be!'

\[15\] Is the time come to those who believe, for their hearts to be
humbled at the remembrance of God, and of what He has sent down in
truth? and for them not to be like those who were given the Scriptures
before, and over whom time was prolonged, but their hearts grew hard,
and many of them were workers of abomination?

Know that God quickens the earth after its death!--we have manifested to
you the signs; haply ye may have some sense!

Verily, those who give in charity, men and women, who have lent to God a
goodly loan,--it shall be doubled for them, and for them is a generous
hire.

And those who believe in God and His Apostle, they are the confessors
and the martyrs with their Lord; for them is their hire and their light!
But those who misbelieve and call our signs lies, they are the fellows
of hell!

Know that the life of this world is but a sport, and a play, and an
adornment, and something to boast of amongst yourselves; and the
multiplying of children is like a rain-growth, its vegetation pleases
the misbelievers; then they wither away, and thou mayest see them become
yellow; then they become but grit.

But in the hereafter is a severe woe, \[20\] and forgiveness from God
and His goodwill; but the life of this world is but a chattels of guile.

Race towards forgiveness from your Lord and

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paradise, whose
breadth is as the breadth of the heavens and the earth, prepared for
those who believe in God and His apostles! and God's grace, He gives it
to whom He pleases, for God is Lord of mighty grace!

No accident befalls in the earth, or in yourselves, but it was in the
Book, before we created them; verily, that is easy unto God.

That ye may not vex yourselves for what ye miss, nor be overjoyed at
what He gives you; for God loves no arrogant boaster, who are niggardly
and bid men be niggardly: but whoso turns his back <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_376), verily, God is rich, praiseworthy.

\[25\] We did send our apostles with manifest signs; and we did send
down among you the Book and the balance, that men might stand by
justice; and we sent down iron in which is both keen violence and
advantages to men; and that God might know who helps Him and His
apostles in secret; verily, God is strong and mighty!

And we sent Noah and Abraham; and placed in their seed prophecy and the
Book; and some of them are guided, though many of them are workers of
abomination!

Then we followed up their footsteps with our apostles; and we followed
them up with Jesus the son of Mary; and we gave him the gospel; and we
placed in the hearts of those who followed him kindness and
compassion.--But monkery, they invented it; we only prescribed to them
the craving after the goodwill of God, and they observed it not with due
observance. But we gave to those who

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

believe amongst them their hire; though many amongst them were workers
of abomination!

O ye who believe! fear God, and believe in His Apostle: He will give you
two portions of His mercy, and will make for you a light for you to walk
in, and will forgive you; for God is forgiving, compassionate.

That the people of the Book may know that they cannot control aught of
God's grace; and that grace is in God's hands, He gives it to whom He
will; for God is Lord of mighty grace!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[267:1](057.htm#fr_375) I.e. guiding them to
Paradise.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[269:1](057.htm#fr_376) I.e. from almsgiving.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LVIII. The Chapter of the Wrangler](058)

</div>
