<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/059) 
[Pickthall](../pick/059)  [Yusuf Ali/Arabic](../quran/05901)  [Yusuf Ali
English](../yaq/yaq059)  [Rodwell](../qr/059)   
[Previous](058)  [Next](060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, part II (Sacred Books of the East volume 9), Palmer edition
\[1880\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CHAPTER OF THE EMIGRATION.

### (LIX. Medînah.)

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

What is in the heavens and in the earth celebrates God's praises; He is
the mighty, the wise!

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

He it was who drove those of the people of the Book who misbelieved
forth from their houses, at the first emigration <span
id="fr_381"></span>[1](#fn_381); ye did not think that they would go
forth, and they thought that their fortresses would defend them against
God; but God came upon them from whence they did not reckon, and cast
dread into their hearts! They ruined their houses with their own hands
and the hands of the believers; wherefore take example, O ye who are
endowed with sight!

Had it not been that God had prescribed for them banishment, He would
have tormented them in this world <span id="fr_382"></span>[2](#fn_382);
but for them in the next shall be the torment of the Fire! that is
because they opposed God and His Apostle: and whoso op-poses God,
verily, God is keen to punish!

\[5\] What palm trees ye did cut down or what ye left standing upon
their roots was by God's permission, and to disgrace the workers of
abomination; and as for the spoils that God gave to His Apostle from
these (people) ye did not press forward after them with horse or riding
camel; but God gives His Apostle authority over whom He pleases, for God
is mighty over all <span id="fr_383"></span>[3](#fn_383)!

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

What God gave as spoils to His Apostle of the people of the cities is
God's, and the Apostle's, and for kinsfolk, orphans, and the poor, and
the wayfarer, so that it should not be circulated amongst the rich men
of you.

And what the Apostle gives you, take; and what he forbids you, desist
from; and fear God, verily, God is keen to punish!

And (it is) for the poor who fled <span id="fr_384"></span>[1](#fn_384),
who were driven forth from their houses and their wealth, who crave
grace from God and His goodwill, and help God and the Apostle; they are
the truthful.

And those who were settled in the abode <span
id="fr_385"></span>[2](#fn_385) and the faith before them, love those
who fled to them <span id="fr_386"></span>[3](#fn_386); and they do not
find in their breasts a need of what has been given to them; preferring
them to themselves, even though there be poverty amongst them; and whoso
is preserved from his own covetousness, these are the prosperous!

\[10\] And those who came after them say, 'Our Lord, forgive us and our
brethren who were beforehand with us in the faith, and place not in our
hearts ill-will towards those who believe--our Lord! verily, thou art
kind, compassionate!'

Dost thou not look on those who were hypocritical, saying to their
brethren who misbelieved amongst the people of the Book <span
id="fr_387"></span>[4](#fn_387), 'If ye be driven forth we will go forth
with you; and we will never obey any one concerning you; and if ye be
fought

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

against we will help you.' But God bears witness that they are surely
liars!

If they be driven forth, these will not go forth with them; and if they
be fought against, these will not help them; or if they do help them,
they will turn their backs in flight;--then shall they not be helped!

Ye indeed are a keener source of fear in their hearts than God; that is
because they are a people who do not understand! They will not fight
against you in a body save in fortified cities, or from behind walls;
their valour is great amongst themselves;--thou dost reckon them as one
body, but their hearts are separated. This is because they are a people
who have no sense!

\[15\] Like unto those before them, recently <span
id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_388); they tasted the evil result of their
affair, and for them is grievous woe.

Like unto the devil when he said to man, 'Disbelieve.' But when he
disbelieved, he said, 'Verily, I am clear of thee! Verily, I fear God
the Lord of the worlds!' And the end of them both shall be that they
shall both be in the Fire, to dwell therein for aye! for that is the
reward of the unjust!

O ye who believe! fear God; and let each soul look to what it sends on
for the morrow; and fear God; verily, God is well aware of what ye do!

And be ye not like those who forget God, and He makes them forget
themselves; they are the workers of abomination!

\[20\] Not deemed alike shall be the fellows of the

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fire and the
fellows of Paradise: the fellows of Paradise they are the blissful!

Had we sent down this Qur’ân upon a mountain, thou wouldst have seen it
humbling itself, splitting asunder from the fear of God! These parables
do we strike out for men; haply they may reflect!

He is God than whom there is no god; who knows the unseen and the
visible; He is the merciful, the compassionate! He is God than whom
there is no god; the King, the Holy, the Peace-Giver, the Faithful, the
Protector, the Mighty, the Repairer, the Great!--celebrated be the
praises of God above what they join with Him.

He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the excellent
names <span id="fr_389"></span>[1](060.htm#fn_389)! His praises,
whatever are in the heavens and the earth do celebrate; for God is the
mighty, the wise!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_381"></span>[274:1](059.htm#fr_381) The Jews of en Na.dhîr,
near Medînah, who at first promised to stand neuter between him and the
idolaters. After his success at Bedr they came over to his side, but
turned again after the defeat of Ohod. For this offence they were forced
to leave the country.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[274:2](059.htm#fr_382) Like those of
Qurâi.dhah, who were slaughtered. See Introduction, p. xxxix.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[274:3](059.htm#fr_383) The Muslims did not use
cavalry on the occasion, Mohammed himself being the only mounted member
of the expedition. For this reason the spoils were assigned to the
prophet alone, and not divided in the usual manner as prescribed in
Chapter VIII, verse 42, Part I, pp. 167, 168.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[275:1](059.htm#fr_384) The poorer Muhâ*g*erîn
were allowed to participate in the spoils, but not the Ansârs.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[275:2](059.htm#fr_385) The Ansârs at Medînah.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[275:3](059.htm#fr_386) The Muhâ*g*erîn.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[275:4](059.htm#fr_387) The Jews.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[276:1](059.htm#fr_388) Either the idolaters
slain at Bedr, or the Jews of Qâinuqâh, or those of Na.dhîr.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LX. The Chapter of the Tried](060)

</div>
