[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17176)  [Next](sbe17178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23.

1\. 'Now in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu have committed two
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences \[&c., as before, in the first paragraph of the
last chapter down to the end\]. And he asks the Sa*m*gha for a probation
of two months for that other offence concealed for two months. And the
Sa*m*gha imposes upon him a probation of two months for that other
offence

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

concealed for two months <span id="fr_738"></span>[1](#fn_717). That
Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, ought to continue on probation for two months from
that date.

2\. 'Now in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu have committed two
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences, which he has concealed for two months. And he
is aware of one offence, but of the other offence he is not aware. And
he asks the Sa*m*gha for a two months' probation for that offence of
which he is aware, concealed for two months. And the Sa*m*gha gives him
a probation of two months for an offence concealed for two months. And
whilst he is undergoing that probation he becomes aware of the other
offence. Then it occurs to him,

Lo! I have committed two Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences (&c., as in the last
paragraph, down to) I became aware of the other offence. Let me now ask
the Sa*m*gha for a probation of two months for that other offence
concealed for two months."

And he asks the Sa*m*gha for a probation of two months for that other
offence concealed for two months. And the Sa*m*gha imposes upon him a
probation of &c. . . . for &c. . . . That Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, ought to
continue on probation for two months from that date.

3\. 'Now in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu commit two Sa*m*ghâdisesa
offences, which he conceals for two months; and one offence he
recollects, but the other offence he does not recollect. And he asks the
Sa*m*gha (&c., as in the last section, down to the end, reading
"recollect" for "be aware of").

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

4\. 'Now in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu commit two Sa*m*ghâdisesa
offences, which he conceals for two months; and of one offence he is not
doubtful <span id="fr_739"></span>[1](#fn_718), but of the other offence
he is doubtful. And he asks the Sa*m*gha (&c., as in the last section,
reading "is doubtful" for "does not recollect").

5\. 'Now in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu commit two Sa*m*ghâdisesa
offences, which he conceals for two months; and one offence he conceals
wittingly, but the other offence he conceals unwittingly. And he asks
the Sa*m*gha for a probation of two months for those two offences
concealed for two months. And the Sa*m*gha imposes upon him a probation
of two months for those, two offences concealed for two months. And
whilst he is undergoing that probation there arrives a Bhikkhu who is
versed in the traditions, acquainted with the tradition, a custodian of
the Dhamma, of the Vinaya, and of the Mâtikâs <span
id="fr_740"></span>[2](#fn_719), clever, discreet, wise, modest,
sensitive, willing to learn. And he speaks thus:

"What has this Bhikkhu, O friends, been guilty of, and why is he on
probation?"

'And they reply: "This Bhikkhu, O friend, has committed two
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences, which he concealed for two months; and one
offence he concealed wittingly, and one offence he concealed
unwittingly, He asked the Sa*m*gha for a probation of two months for
those two offences concealed for two months. And the Sa*m*gha imposed
upon him a probation of two months for those two offences concealed

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

for two months. Therein, O friend, is this Bhikkhu guilty, and therefore
is he on probation."

'And he rejoins: "The offence which he wittingly concealed, O friends,
for that the imposition of a probation is valid, and by reason of its
validity it takes effect <span id="fr_741"></span>[1](#fn_720). But the
offence which he unwittingly concealed, O friends, for that the
imposition of a probation is invalid, and by reason of its invalidity it
does not take effect. For this offence, O friends, the Bhikkhu is liable
to a Mânatta."

6\. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu commit two Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences,
which he conceals for two months. And one offence he conceals
recollecting it, but the other offence he conceals without recollecting
it.'

\[Here follow the same remarks as in the last section, down to the end,
reading 'recollecting it' for 'wittingly.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_717"></span>[412:1](sbe17177.htm#fr_738) This is merely
repeated to lay a basis for the following variations. See below, chapter
25.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[413:1](sbe17177.htm#fr_739) In chapter 34, §
1, di*tth*î, instead of nibbematiko, is put in opposition to vematiko.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[413:2](sbe17177.htm#fr_740) See our note
above, on Mahâvagga II, 21, 2, and compare VII, 1, 7; VIII, 32, 1; X, 1,
2; *K*ullavagga I, 11, 1.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[414:1](sbe17177.htm#fr_741) This expression
recurs below, chaps. 25, 27, &c. Compare the use of rûhati at Mahâvagga
VI, 14, 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](sbe17178)
