[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17070)  [Next](sbe17072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.

1\. At that time a number of Bhikkhus were travelling on the road in the
Kosala country. Some of these Bhikkhus went off (the road) to a cemetery
in order to get themselves pa*m*sukûla robes; some (other) Bhikkhus did
not wait. Those Bhikkhus who had gone to the cemetery for pa*m*sukûla
robes, got themselves pa*m*sukûlas; those Bhikkhus who had not waited,
said to them: 'Friends, give us also a part (of your pa*m*sukûlas).'
They replied, 'We will not give you a part, friends; why have you not
waited?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you are not obliged to give a part
against your will to Bhikkhus who have not waited.'

2\. At that time a number of Bhikkhus were travelling on the road in the
Kosala country. Some

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

of these Bhikkhus went off (the road) to a cemetery in order to get
themselves pa*m*sukûla robes; some (other) Bhikkhus waited for them.
Those Bhikkhus who had gone to the cemetery for pa*m*sukûla robes, got
themselves pa*m*sukûlas; those Bhikkhus who had waited, said to them:
'Friends, give us also a part (of your pa*m*sukûlas).' They replied, 'We
will not give you a part, friends; why did you not also go off (to the
cemetery)?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give a part (even) against your will
to Bhikkhus who have waited.'

3\. At that time a number of Bhikkhus were travelling on the road in the
Kosala country. Some of these Bhikkhus went aside first from (the road)
to a cemetery in order to get themselves pa*m*sukûla robes; some (other)
Bhikkhus went aside later. Those Bhikkhus who had gone first to the
cemetery for pa*m*sukûla robes, got themselves pa*m*sukûlas; those
Bhikkhus who had got off later, did not get any, and said (to the other
ones): 'Friends, give us also a part.' They replied, 'We will not give
you a part, friends; why did you get off (to the cemetery) after us?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you are not obliged to give a part
against your will to Bhikkhus who have gone (to the cemetery) later
(than yourselves).'

4\. At that time a number of Bhikkhus were travelling on the road in the
Kosala country. They went altogether off (the road) to a cemetery in
order to get themselves pa*m*sukûla robes; some of the Bhikkhus got
pa*m*sukûlas, other Bhikkhus did not

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

get any. The Bhikkhus who had got nothing, said: 'Friends, give us also
a part (of your pa*m*sukûlas).' They replied, 'We will not give you a
part, friends; why did you not get (them yourselves)?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give a part (even) against your will
to Bhikkhus who have gone (to the cemetery) together with yourselves.'

5\. At that time a number of Bhikkhus were travelling on the road in the
Kosala country. They went off (the road) to a cemetery in order to get
themselves pa*m*sukûla robes, after having made an agreement (about the
distribution of what they were to find). Some of the Bhikkhus got
themselves pa*m*sukûlas, other Bhikkhus did not get any. The Bhikkhus
who had got nothing, said: 'Friends, give us also a part (of the
pa*m*sukûlas).' They replied, 'We will not give you a part, friends; why
did you not get (them yourselves)?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give a part, (even) against your
will, to Bhikkhus who have gone (with you to the cemetery) after having
made with you an agreement (about the distribution of the
pa*m*sukûlas).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sbe17072.md)
