[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17096)  [Next](sbe17098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 30.

1\. Now at that time Bhikkhus, after having spent the rainy season, but
before a gift of robes had fallen to the Sa*m*gha, went away (from the
place); left the Order; died; admitted that they were Sâma*n*eras; or
that they had abandoned the precepts; or that they had become guilty of
an extreme

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

offence; or that they were mad; or that their minds were unhinged; or
that they suffered bodily pain; or that suspension had been pronounced
against them for their refusal to acknowledge an offence they had
committed, or to atone for such an offence, or to renounce a false
doctrine; or that they were eunuchs; or that they had furtively attached
themselves (to the Sa*m*gha); or that they had gone over to the
Titthiyas; or that they were an animal; or that they had been guilty of
matricide, or of parricide; or that they had murdered an A rah at; or
that they had violated a Bhikkhunî; or that they had caused a schism in
the Sa*m*gha; or that they had shed (a Buddha's) blood; or that they
were hermaphrodites <span id="fr_483"></span>[1](#fn_475).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

2\. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, after having spent the rainy
season, goes away before a gift of robes has fallen to the
Sa*m*gha--then they are nevertheless to be allotted to him if there be
any person present proper to receive them on his behalf.

'Moreover in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, after having spent the rainy
season, and before a gift of robes has fallen to the Sa*m*gha, leaves
the Order, or dies, or acknowledges that he has become a Sâma*n*era, or
that he has abandoned the precepts, or lastly that he has become guilty
of an extreme offence,--then the Sa*m*gha becomes the owner (of the
portion of robes that would have fallen to him).

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

'Moreover in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, after having spent the rainy
season, and before a gift of robes has fallen to the Sa*m*gha,
acknowledges that he has become mad, or unhinged in his mind, or in
bodily pain, or that he has been suspended for refusal to acknowledge an
offence he had committed, or to atone for such an offence, or to
renounce a false doctrine--then (his portion of robes is nevertheless)
to be allotted to him if there be any person present proper to receive
them on his behalf.

'Moreover in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, after having spent the rainy
season, and before a gift of robes has fallen to the Sa*m*gha,
acknowledges that he is a eunuch, or that he had furtively attached
himself to the Sa*m*gha, or that he had gone over to the Titthiyas, or
that he is an animal, or that he had been guilty of matricide, or of
parricide, or that he had murdered an Arahat, or that he had violated a
Bhikkhunî, or that he had raised a schism in the Sa*m*gha, .or that he
had shed a Buddha's blood, or that he is a hermaphrodite--then the
Sa*m*gha becomes the owner (of the portion of robes that would have
fallen to him).

3\. '\[The same rules as in § 2, if he had gone away,. &c., after the
gift of robes had been made to the Sa*m*gha, but before the robes had
been divided among the individual members of the Sa*m*gha belonging to
the place where he had spent the rainy season.\]

4\. 'Moreover in case, O Bhikkhus, after the Bhikkhus have spent the
rainy season, divisions arise among the Sa*m*gha before any robes have
fallen to them, and the people there give the water (of

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

presentation <span id="fr_484"></span>[1](#fn_476)) to one party, and
the robes to the other party, thinking, "We are giving to the
Sa*m*gha"--then those (robes are the property) of the (whole) Sa*m*gha.

The people there give the water of presentation to one party, and the
robes to the same party, thinking, "We are giving to the Sa*m*gha"--then
those robes are the property of the whole Sa*m*gha.

5\. '\[In the same two cases, if the people intend to give to the one
party only, the robes are to be the property of that party.\]

6\. 'Moreover in case, O Bhikkhus, after the Bhikkhus have spent the
rainy season, divisions arise among the Sa*m*gha after the gift of robes
has been made to the Sa*m*gha, but before the division (of the robes to
the individual members) has taken place--then at the division an equal
share is to be given to all.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_475"></span>[249:1](sbe17097.htm#fr_483) The above list of
disqualifications has already occurred at II, 36; IV, 14.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[251:1](sbe17097.htm#fr_484) There is no doubt
that this is the meaning here of udaka. Compare above, Mahâvagga I, 22,
18, and *G*âtaka I, 93; III, 286; Dîpava*m*sa XIII, 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](sbe17098)
