[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17036)  [Next](sbe17038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23.

1\. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at Râ*g*agaha as long as he
thought fit, went forth to Benares. Wandering from place to place he
came to Benares. There the Blessed One dwelt near Benares, in the
deer-park Isipatana.

At that time there were at Benares a devout layman Suppiya and a devout
laywoman Suppiyâ who showed their faith in both ways: they were givers
and doers, and devoted themselves to the service of the fraternity. And
Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, went to the Ârâma, and going around from
Vihâra to Vihâra, and from cell to cell, she asked

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the Bhikkhus: 'Who is sick, venerable Sirs? For whom, and what shall I
procure?'

2\. At that time a certain Bhikkhu had taken a purgative. And that
Bhikkhu said to Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee: 'I have taken a purgative,
sister, and I want some broth <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_182.md).'

(She replied): 'Well, reverend Sir, it shall be procured for you,'--and
went to her house and gave order to a pupil <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_183.md): 'Go, my good sir, and see if there is
any meat to be had <span id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_184.md).'

That man accepted this order of Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee (by saying),
'Yes, Madam,' and searched through the whole of Benares, but did not
find any meat on hand <span id="fr_187"></span>[3](#fn_184.md). Then that
man went to Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee; having approached her he said to
Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee: 'There is no meat to be had, Madam; the
killing of cattle is interdicted to-day.'

3\. Then Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, thought: 'If that sick Bhikkhu does
not get the broth his sickness will increase, or he will die. It would
be unbecoming indeed for me to promise something, and not to procure
it;'--(thinking thus) she took a knife, cut a piece of flesh from her
thigh, and gave it to her maid-servant (saying), 'Go, my girl,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

and get the strength out of this. meat. In such and such a Vihâra is a
sick Bhikkhu; give it to that (Bhikkhu). And should anybody call for me,
tell him that I am sick;'--(speaking thus), she veiled her thigh with
her upper garment, went into her inner room, and lay down on her bed.

4\. And Suppiya, the lay-devotee, came to his house and asked the
maid-servant: 'Where is Suppiyâ?'

'She lies in the inner room, Sir.' Then Suppiya, the lay-devotee, went
to the place where Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, was; having approached her
he said to Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee: 'Why are you lying down?'

'I am sick.'

'What is the matter with you?'

Then Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, told the whole matter to Suppiya, the
lay-devotee. And Suppiya, the lay-devotee, said: 'Oh wonderful! oh
astonishing! How believing and how pious is this Suppiyâ who gives even
her own flesh (to the indigent). What else can there be which she would
not give?' (Speaking thus), joyful and elated he went to the place where
the Blessed One. was; having approached him, and respectfully saluted
the Blessed One, he sat down near him.

5\. Sitting near him, Suppiya, the lay-devotee, said to the Blessed One:
'Might the Blessed One, Lord, consent to take his meal with me
to-morrow, together with the fraternity of Bhikkhus.'

The Blessed One expressed his consent by remaining silent. Then Suppiya,
the lay-devotee, when he understood that the Blessed One had accepted
his invitation, rose from his seat, respectfully saluted

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

the Blessed One, and passing round him with his right side towards him,
went away.

And when the night had elapsed, Suppiya, the lay-devotee, ordered
excellent food, both hard and soft, to be prepared, and had the
meal-time announced to the Blessed One in the words: 'It is time, Lord,
the meal is ready.' And in the fore-noon the Blessed One, having put on
his under-robes, took his alms-bowl, and, with his *k*îvara on, went to
the house of Suppiya, the lay-devotee. When he had arrived there, he sat
down with the Bhikkhus who followed him, on seats laid out for them.

6\. And Suppiya, the lay-devotee, went to the place where the Blessed
One was; having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One,
he stationed himself near him. When he was standing near him, the.
Blessed One said to Suppiya, the lay-devotee: 'Where is Suppiyâ?'

'She is sick, Lord.'

'Well, let her come here.'

'She is not able to do so, Lord.'

'Well then you must take her and carry her (to me).'

Then Suppiya, the lay-devotee, took Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, and
carried her (to the Buddha). And in the moment the Blessed One saw her,
that great wound was healed; and there was good skin there, with the
tiny hairs thereon.

7\. And Suppiya, the lay-devotee, and Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee
(thought): 'Oh wonderful! oh astonishing! What high power and great
faculties the Tathâgata possesses, in that in the moment the Blessed One
has seen (Suppiyâ), that great wound has been healed; and there is good
skin there.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

with the tiny hairs thereon;'--(thinking thus) joyful and elated they
served and offered with their own hands excellent food, both hard and
soft, to the fraternity of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head. And
when the Blessed One had finished his meal, and cleansed his bowl and
his hands, they sat down near him. And the Blessed One, after having
taught, incited, animated, and gladdened Suppiya, the lay-devotee, and
Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, by religious discourse, rose from his seat and
went away.

8\. In consequence of that, and on this occasion, the Blessed One,
having ordered the fraternity of Bhikkhus to assemble, questioned the
Bhikkhus: 'Who was it, O Bhikkhus, who asked Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee,
for meat?'

When he had spoken thus, that Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'It is I,
Lord, who asked Suppiyâ, the lay-devotee, for meat.'

'Has it been brought to you, O Bhikkhu?'

'It has been brought, Lord.'

'Have you eaten it, O Bhikkhu?'

'I have eaten it, Lord.'

'And did you enquire, O Bhikkhus, (what) meat it was?'

'Lord! I did not enquire about that.'

9\. Then the blessed Buddha rebuked him: 'How can you, O foolish one,
eat meat without having enquired (what it is)? It is man's flesh, O
foolish one, which you have eaten. This will not do, O foolish one, for
converting the unconverted,' (&c.)

Having rebuked him and delivered a religious discourse, he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus: 'There are, O Bhikkhus, believing, pious people
who give

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

up even their own flesh. Let no one, O Bhikkhus, eat man's flesh. He who
does, commits a thulla*kk*aya (or, grave) offence. And let no one, O
Bhikkhus, eat meat without having enquired (what it is). He. who does,
commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

10\. At that time the king's elephants died. During a famine the people
ate that elephants' flesh, and when the Bhikkhus came and asked for
alms, they gave them elephants' flesh. The Bhikkhus ate that elephants'
flesh. People were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'How can the
Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as eat elephants' flesh? Elephants are an attribute
of royalty. If the king knew that, they would not be in his favour.'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, eat elephants' flesh. He who does, commits a
dukka*t*a offence.'

11\. At that time the king's horses died. During a famine (&c., as in 5
10, down to:)

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, eat horse-flesh. He who does, commits a
dukka*t*a offence.'

12\. At that time the people, during a famine, ate dogs' flesh, and when
the Bhikkhus came and asked for alms, they gave them dogs' flesh. The
Bhikkhus ate that dogs' flesh. People were annoyed, murmured, and became
angry: 'How can the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as eat dogs' flesh? Dogs are
disgusting and loathsome animals.'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, eat dogs' flesh. He who does, commits a
dukka*t*a offence.'

13\. At that time the people, during a famine, ate serpents' flesh (&c.,
as in § 12, down to:) 'How can

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as eat serpents' flesh? Serpents are disgusting
and loathsome animals.'

And the serpent king Supassa went to the place where the Blessed One
was; having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he
stationed himself near him. Standing near him the serpent king Supassa
said to the Blessed One: 'There are, Lord, unbelieving serpents who are
disinclined (to the faith); these might do harm to the Bhikkhus even on
trifling occasions. Pray, Lord, let their reverences not eat serpents'
flesh. Then the Blessed One taught, incited, animated, and gladdened the
serpent king Supassa by religious discourse (&c., down to:), and passing
round him with his right side towards him, went away.'

In consequence of that the Blessed One, after having delivered a
religious discourse, thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Let no one, O
Bhikkhus, eat serpents' flesh. He who does, commits a dukka*t*a
offence.'

14\. At that time hunters had killed a lion and eaten his flesh, and
when the Bhikkhus came and asked for alms, they gave them lions' flesh.
The Bhikkhus, having eaten that lions' flesh, sojourned in the forest.
Then the lions, (attracted) by the smell of lions' flesh, fell upon the
Bhikkhus.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, eat lions' flesh. He who does, commits a
dukka*t*a offence.'

1 5. At that time hunters had killed a tiger, &c., a panther, &c., a
bear, &c., a hyena (&c., as in § 14, down to:)

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, eat a hyena's flesh. He who does, commits a
dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[81:1](sbe17037.htm#fr_184.md) Pa*t*i*kkh*âdaniya.
See Abhidhânappadîpikâ, verse 468, and above, chap. 14. 7, at the end.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[81:2](sbe17037.htm#fr_185.md) Of her husband's?

<span id="fn_184"></span>[81:3](sbe17037.htm#fr_187.md) Pavattama*m*sa,
which Buddhaghosa explains, 'matassa ma*m*sa*m*.' Pavatta means 'already
existing,' opposed to what is brought into existence for a special
purpose, and pavattama*m*sa is said here, therefore, in order to exclude
uddissa-kata-ma*m*sa (meat of animals killed especially for them), which
Bhikkhus were not allowed to partake of (see chap. 3,1. 14). Compare
also pavattaphala-bhoga*n*a at *G*âtaka I, p. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](sbe17038.md)
