[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17123)  [Next](sbe17125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

#### III. THE PABBÂ*G*ANIYA-KAMMA (ACT OF BANISHMENT).

### 13 <span id="fr_633"></span>[1](#fn_620).

1\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus who were followers of Assa*g*i and
Punabbasu were dwelling on the Ki*t*â Hill, wicked Bhikkhus, and
shameless. Such as these were the evil practices they followed: they
used to plant cuttings of flowers, and have them planted; they used to
water flowers, and have them watered; they used to gather them, and have
them gathered; they used to make them up into nosegays, and have them so
made up; they used to make them up, and to have them made up, into
wreaths, of the kind with the stalks together, and of the kind with the
stalks separate <span id="fr_634"></span>[2](#fn_621), of the kind
called ma*ñg*arikâ <span id="fr_635"></span>[3](#fn_622), of the kind
called vidhutikâ <span id="fr_636"></span>[4](#fn_623), of the kind
called va*t*a*ms*aka <span id="fr_637"></span>[5](#fn_624), of the kind

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

called âve*l*a <span id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_625), of the kind called
ura*kkh*ada <span id="fr_639"></span>[2](#fn_626);--and they then used
to take or send wreaths of each of these various kinds to the wives and
daughters and young women and sisters-in-law and female slaves in
respectable families;--and they used to eat out of one dish, to drink
out of one vessel, to sit on one seat, to lie on one bed, one mat, one
coverlet, with the wives and daughters and young women and
sisters-in-law and female slaves in respectable families;--and they used
to eat food at the wrong time, and to drink strong drink, and to make
use of garlands, and scents, and unguents;--and they used to dance, and
sing, and play music, and wanton, and all these together in every
combination.

2\. And they used to amuse themselves at games <span
id="fr_640"></span>[3](#fn_627) with eight pieces and ten pieces, and
with tossing up, hopping over diagrams formed on the ground, and
removing substances from a heap without shaking the remainder; and with
games at dice, and trap-ball; and with sketching rude figures, tossing
balls, blowing trumpets, having matches at ploughing with mimic ploughs,
tumbling, forming mimic wind-mills, guessing at measures, having

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

chariot races, and archery matches, shooting marbles with the fingers,
guessing other people's thoughts, and mimicking other people's
acts;--and they used to practise elephant riding, and horse riding, and
carriage driving, and archery, and swordsmanship;--and they used to run
to and fro in front of elephants, and in front of horses, and in front
of carriages and they used to exhibit signs of anger <span
id="fr_641"></span>[1](#fn_628), and to wring their hands <span
id="fr_642"></span>[2](#fn_629), and to wrestle <span
id="fr_643"></span>[3](#fn_630), and to box with their fists;--and
spreading their robes out as a stage they used to invite dancing girls,
saying, 'Here you may dance, sister!' and greet her with applause <span
id="fr_644"></span>[4](#fn_631). Thus manifold were the evil lives which
they practised.

3\. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu who had spent the rainy season in
the country of Kâsi, and was on his way to visit the Blessed One,
arrived at the Ki*t*â Hill. And that Bhikkhu in the early morning put on
his under garment, and went, duly bowled and robed, to the Ki*t*â Hill
for alms. And he was perfect in dignity, with his eyes cast down, and
pleasing in appearance, whether in going in or

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

in coming out, in looking or in watching, in bending in his arm or in
stretching it forth <span id="fr_645"></span>[1](#fn_632).

Then the people on beholding that Bhikkhu, said, 'Who is this fellow
like a fool of fools, or like an idiot of idiots, or like a simpleton of
simpletons <span id="fr_646"></span>[2](#fn_633)? Who would give an alms
when this fellow comes near! Now our own masters, the followers of
Assa*g*i and Punabbasu, are gentle, friendly, pleasant in speech,
radiant with smiles, by no means fools, but open in countenance, and the
first to speak. To such now it is fit to give an alms!'

And a certain lay-disciple saw that Bhikkhu as he was going along the
Ki*t*â Hill for alms. And on seeing him, he went up to the place where
he was; and on coming there he said to that Bhikkhu:

'Has your reverence received an alms?'

'No, my friend, I have received no alms!'

'Come, your reverence! Let us go to my house!' 4. So the lay-disciple
took the Bhikkhu to his house, and gave him to eat, and asked him:
'Whither then is your reverence going?'

'I am on my way to Sâvatthi, my friend, to visit the Blessed One.'

'Then let your reverence bow down at the feet of the Blessed One in my
name, and say, "The residence on the Ki*t*â Hill, Lord, has been
spoiled. The Bhikkhus who are followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu are
dwelling on the Ki*t*â Hill, wicked Bhikkhus, and shameless. Such as
these are the

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

evil practices they follow (&c., as in §§ 1, 2, down to the end). And
people, Lord, who were formerly believers and full of faith, are now
become non-believers and void of faith; the opportunities of alms that
were formerly open to the Sa*m*gha are now destroyed; worthy Bhikkhus
forsake, and wicked Bhikkhus dwell in the place. Let, Lord, the Blessed
One be pleased to send (other) Bhikkhus to the Ki*t*â Hill in order that
the residence there may be re-established."'

5\. 'Very well, my friend,' said the Bhikkhu, in assent, to that
lay-disciple. And rising from his seat, he set out for Sâvatthi, and
went straight on to Anâtha-pi*nd*ika's grove, to the *G*etavana in
Sâvatthi, to the place where the Blessed One was staying. And on
arriving there he saluted the Blessed One, and took his seat on one
side.

Now it is the custom for the Blessed Buddhas to exchange words of
greeting with in-coming Bhikkhus. And the Blessed One said to that
Bhikkhu, 'Do things go well with you, O Bhikkhu? Have you enough for
your support? Have you accomplished your journey without too much
fatigue? And whence, O Bhikkhu, have you come?'

'Things go well with me, Lord. I have enough for my support. And I have
accomplished my journey without too much fatigue. I have spent the rainy
season, Lord, in the land of Kâsi; and on my way to Sâvatthi to visit
the Blessed One I arrived at the Ki*t*â Hill. And after having dressed
early in the morning, I went, Lord, duly bowled and robed, on to the
Ki*t*â Hill for alms. And a certain lay-disciple saw me (&c., as above,
down to the end of § 4, with the alterations necessary to

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

the narrative form of speech). Thence, Lord, am I come.'

6\. Then the Blessed One on that occasion, and in that connection,
convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-Sa*m*gha, and asked the Bhikkhus:

'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say, that those Bhikkhus who are
followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu, and are dwelling on the Ki*t*â
Hill, are wicked Bhikkhus, and shameless; and that such are the evil
practices they follow (&c., as in § 4, down to the end)?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying, 'How can they, O Bhikkhus,
foolish persons that they are, follow such practices as these (&c., as
in §§ 1, 2, down to the end)? This will not conduce, O Bhikkhus, to the
conversion of the unconverted (&c., as usual. Compare chap. 1, § 2, down
to the end).'

And when the Blessed Buddha had rebuked them, and had delivered a
religious discourse, he addressed the venerable Sâriputta and
Moggallâna, and said, 'Go now, Sâriputta and Moggallâna <span
id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_634), to the Ki*t*â Hill. And on arriving
there carry out the Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma (Act of Banishment <span
id="fr_648"></span>[2](#fn_635)) against those Bhikkhus who are
followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu, to the effect that they may become
your Saddhi-vihârikas <span id="fr_649"></span>[3](#fn_636).'

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

'How, Lord, can we carry out the Pabbâ*g*aniyakamma against those
Bhikkhus who are followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu; for they are
passionate men and violent?'

'Then do you go, Sâriputta and Moggallâna, together with a number of
Bhikkhus.'

'So be it, Lord!' said Sâriputta and Moggallâna, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

7 <span id="fr_650"></span>[1](#fn_637). 'Now thus, O Bhikkhus, should
it be carried out. In the first place the Bhikkhus who are followers of
Assa*g*i and Punabbasu ought to be warned: when they have been warned,
they ought to be reminded (of the Rule in the Pâtimokkha against which
they have offended); when they have been reminded they ought to be
charged with the offence; when they have been charged some discreet and
able Bhikkhu ought to lay the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying,

"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. These Bhikkhus who are followers of
Assa*g*i and Punabbasu are wicked Bhikkhus and shameless. Their evil
practices are both seen and heard, and also that respectable families
have been led astray by them is seen, too, and heard <span
id="fr_651"></span>[2](#fn_638). If the time is fit for the Sa*m*gha to
do so, let the Sa*m*gha carry out the Pabbâ*g*aniyakamma against those
Bhikkhus who are followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu, to the effect that
the Bhikkhus who are followers

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu are not to dwell on the Ki*t*â Hill'.

'"This is the motion (ñatti).

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. These Bhikkhus who are followers
of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu are wicked Bhikkhus and shameless. Their evil
practices (&c., as before, down to) is seen, too, and heard. The
Sa*m*gha hereby carries out the Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma against them, to the
effect that the Bhikkhus who are followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu are
not to dwell on the Ki*t*â Hill <span id="fr_652"></span>[1](#fn_639).
Whosoever of the venerable ones approves of the carrying out of the
Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma against the followers (&c., as before) to the effect
(&c., as before <span id="fr_653"></span>[1](#fn_639)) let him remain
silent. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak.

'"A second time I say the same thing. Let the venerable Sa*m*gha (&c.,
as before). A third time I say the same thing. Let the venerable
Sa*m*gha (&c., as before).

'"The Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma has been carried out by the Sa*m*gha against
those Bhikkhus who are followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu to the effect
that those Bhikkhus who are followers of Assa*g*i and Punabbasu are not
to dwell on the Ki*t*â Hill'. The Sa*m*gha approves of it. Therefore is
it silent. Thus do I understand."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_620"></span>[347:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_633) The whole of this
chapter recurs in the Sutta Vibhaṅga on the 13th Sa*m*ghâdisesa. The
proceeding here laid down is really only a later method of acting under
the circumstances similar to those for which that rule had previously
been the authorised dealing.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[347:2](sbe17124.htm#fr_634) The Samanta
Pâsâdikâ says, Ekatova*nt*ikan ti pupphâna*m* va*nt*e ekato katvâ
kata-mâla*m*. Ubhatova*nt*ikan ti ubhohi passehi puppha-va*nt*e katvâ
kata-mâla*m*.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[347:3](sbe17124.htm#fr_635) Perhaps 'like an
anklet.' The Sam. Pâs. says, Ma*ñg*arî viya katâ puppha-vikati
ma*ñg*arikâ ti.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[347:4](sbe17124.htm#fr_636) Perhaps 'like a
fan.' The Sam. Pâs. says, Vidhutikâ ti sû*k*iyâ vâ salâkâya vâ
sinduvâra-pupphâdîni vi*ggh*itvâ katâ (mâlâ).

<span id="fn_624"></span>[347:5](sbe17124.htm#fr_637) Perhaps 'like a
crest.' The Sam. Pâs. says, va*t*a*m*sako ti<span id="page_348">p.
348</span> avata*m*sako. Compare the close of Rh. D.'s note on vegha for
avegha, 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 37.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[348:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_638) Perhaps 'like an
earring.' The Sam. Pâs. says, a*k*elo (sic) ti ka*nn*ikâ. Compare
Sanskrit âpî*d*a, and *G*âtaka, vol. i, pp. 12, 95, 269.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[348:2](sbe17124.htm#fr_639) The Sam. Pâs.
says, Ura*kkh*ado ti hâra-sadisa*m* ure-*th*apanaka-puppha dâma*m*.
'Like mail-armour.'

<span id="fn_627"></span>[348:3](sbe17124.htm#fr_640) All these games
are forbidden seriatim in paragraph 4 of the Ma*ggh*ima Sîla, and the
whole list of offences recurs in the Suttavibhaṅga, Sa*m*ghâdisesa XIII,
1, 2. See Rh. D., 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,' p. 193. We adhere to
the translations there given and based on the Sumaṅgala Vilâsinî.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[349:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_641) Usse*lh*enti. We
are quite uncertain how to render this word. One might be tempted to
think that a denominative verb from usso*lh*i may have acquired a
technical sense appropriate to this passage. But we do not favour any
such conjectural alteration of the clear reading of the MSS., at all
events at present.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[349:2](sbe17124.htm#fr_642) Appo*th*enti. See
Buddhaghosa's note quoted by Rh. D. in his note on the Book of the Great
Decease, II, 19.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[349:3](sbe17124.htm#fr_643) Nibbu*ggh*anti,
which Buddhaghosa explains by malla-yuddha*m* karonti. Compare
ubbu*ggh*ati at *K*ullavagga VIII, lo, and Sutra-vibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*ika I,
10, 26.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[349:4](sbe17124.htm#fr_644) The Sam. Pâs.
says, Nalâ*t*ika*m* pi denti sâdhu sâdhu bhaginîti attano nalâ*t*e
aṅguli*m* *th*apetvâ tassâ nalâ*t*e *th*apenti.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[350:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_645) Compare
Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta II, 15.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[350:2](sbe17124.htm#fr_646) The Sam. Pâs.
says, Sa*m*ku*t*ita-mukhatâya bhâku*t*ika-bhâku*t*ikâ viya.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[352:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_647) On this meaning of
Sâriputta, see the note on Mahâvagga X, 4, 3.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[352:2](sbe17124.htm#fr_648) That is, out of
the particular place where they have caused the scandal, not of the
Order. When they in anger left the Order, their conduct in doing so is
blamed. See chap. 16, § 1.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[352:3](sbe17124.htm#fr_649) See Mahâvagga I,
25, 6, and following, and *K*ullavagga VIII, 11, 12, and compare above
9, 1.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[353:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_650) On this section
compare chap. 1, § 4, chap. 9, § 2.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[353:2](sbe17124.htm#fr_651) Buddhaghosa points
out that whereas the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma is directed against
quarrelsomeness, and the nissaya-kamma against foolishness, it is
scandal to the community against which the Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma is
directed.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[354:1](sbe17124.htm#fr_653) The corresponding
clause to the words 'to the effect,' &c., is wanting in chap. 1, § 4,
but occurs in chap. 9, § 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](sbe17125)
