[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17186)  [Next](sbe17188.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

### 34.

1\. 'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, and as
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence they are of opinion that it is a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence <span id="fr_765"></span>[1](#fn_743.md). One of
them conceals, the other does not conceal it. He who has concealed it
should be compelled to confess himself guilty of a dukka*t*a offence,
and a probation corresponding to the period during which he has
concealed it having been imposed upon him, a Mânatta should be imposed
upon them both.

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, and as
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence they are in doubt. One of them
conceals, the other does not conceal it. \[The penalty is the
same.\] <span id="fr_766"></span>[2](#fn_744.md)

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, and as
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence they are of opinion that it is a
mixed offence <span id="fr_767"></span>[3](#fn_745.md). One of them
conceals, the other does not conceal it. \[The penalty is the
same.\] <span id="fr_768"></span>[2](#fn_744.md)

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a mixed offence, and as touching that
mixed offence they are of opinion that it is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence.
One of

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

them conceals, the other does not conceal it. \[The penalty is the
same.\] <span id="fr_769"></span>[1](#fn_746.md)

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a mixed offence, and as touching that
mixed offence they are of opinion that it is a mixed offence. One of
them conceals, the other does not conceal it. \[The penalty is the
same.\]

Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a minor offence <span
id="fr_770"></span>[2](#fn_747.md); and as regarding that minor offence
they are of opinion that it is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence. One of them
conceals, the other does not conceal it. He who has concealed it should
be compelled to confess himself guilty of a dukka*t*a offence, and both
of them should be dealt with according to law.

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a minor offence, and as touching that
minor offence they are of opinion that it is a minor offence. One of
them conceals, the other does not conceal it. He who has concealed it
should be compelled to confess himself guilty of a dukka*t*a offence,
and both of them should be dealt with according to law.

2\. 'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, and as
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence they are of opinion that it is a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa. One of them thinks: "I will tell (the Sa*m*gha of it)."
The other thinks: "I will not tell (the Sa*m*gha of it);" and during the
first watch of the night he conceals it, and during the second watch of
the night he conceals

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

it, and during the third watch of the night he conceals it. After the
sun has arisen the offence is a concealed one. He who has concealed it
\[&c.; the penalty is the same as in section 1, paragraph 1\].

Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, and as
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence they are of opinion that it is a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence. They set out, intending to tell (the Sa*m*gha of
it). On the way there springs up in one of them a desire to conceal it;
and during the first watch of the night he conceals it, and during the
second watch of the night he conceals it, and during the third watch of
the night he conceals it. After the sun has arisen the offence is a
concealed one. He who has concealed it \[&c.; the penalty is the same as
before\].

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, and as
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence they are of opinion that it is a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence. They go out of their mind; and afterwards when
they have recovered their senses one of them conceals, the other does
not conceal it. He who has concealed it \[&c.; the penalty is the same
as before\] <span id="fr_771"></span>[1](#fn_748.md).

'Two Bhikkhus have been guilty of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence. When the
Pâtimokkha is being recited they say thus: "Now do we come to perceive
it; for this rule they say has been handed down in the Suttas, is
contained in the Suttas, and comes into recitation every half month." As
touching that Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, they (thus) come to be of

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

opinion that it is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence. One of them conceals, the
other does not conceal it. He who has concealed it \[&c.; the penalty is
the same as before\].'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_743"></span>[432:1](sbe17187.htm#fr_765.md) Compare chap. 23,
§ 4.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[432:2](sbe17187.htm#fr_768.md) The concluding
words of the last paragraph are here repeated.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[432:3](sbe17187.htm#fr_767.md) The Samanta
Pâsâdikâ says, Missakan ti thulla*kk*ayâdîhi missita*m*; that is an act
which involves not only a Sa*m*ghâdisesa, but also some one or other of
the lesser offences. Compare the use of missaka at *G*âtaka II, 420,
433, and at Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta, ed. Childers, p. 22.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[433:1](sbe17187.htm#fr_769.md) The concluding
words of the last paragraph are here repeated.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[433:2](sbe17187.htm#fr_770.md) That is, any
offence less than a Sa*m*ghâdisesa. The Samanta Pâsâdikâ says, Suddhakan
ti Sa*m*ghâdisesa*m* vinâ lahukâpattikkhandham eva.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[434:1](sbe17187.htm#fr_771.md) It is probably to
be understood that a like rule is to apply in the other similar cases
mentioned in the last paragraph of chap. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](sbe17188.md)
