[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17109)  [Next](sbe17111.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5.

1\. And the Blessed One, having dwelt at Pârileyyaka as long as he
thought fit, went forth to Sâvatthi. Wandering from place to place he
came to Sâvatthi. There the Blessed One dwelt at Sâvatthi, in the
*G*etavana, the garden of Anâtha-pi*nd*ika. And the lay-devotees of
Kosambî thought: 'These venerable Bhikkhus of Kosambî have brought much
misfortune to us; worried <span id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_566.md) by them
the Blessed One is gone. Well, let us neither salute the venerable
Bhikkhus of Kosambî, nor rise from our seats before them, nor raise our
hands before them, nor perform the proper duties towards them, nor
honour and esteem and revere and sup-port them, nor give them food when
they come on their walks for alms; thus, when they are not honoured,
esteemed, revered, supported, and hospitably received by us, they will
go away, or return to the world, or propitiate the Blessed One.'

2\. Thus the lay-devotees of Kosambî did not salute any more the
Bhikkhus of Kosambî, nor did they rise from their seats before. them
(&c., down to:) nor gave them food when they came on their walks for
alms.

Then the Bhikkhus of Kosambî, when they were no more honoured (&c., down
to:) and hospitably

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

received by the lay-devotees of Kosambî, said to each other: 'Well,
friends, let us go to Sâvatthi and let us settle there that question
before the Blessed One.' And the Bhikkhus of Kosambî put their
resting-places in order, took up their alms-bowls and their robes, and
went forth to Sâvatthi.

3\. And the venerable Sâriputta heard: Those litigious, contentious,
quarrelsome, disputatious Bhikkhus of Kosambî, the constant raisers of
questions before the Sa*m*gha, are coming to Sâvatthi.' And the
venerable Sâriputta went to the place where the Blessed One was; having
approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat down
near him. Sitting near him the venerable Sâriputta said to the Blessed
One: 'Lord, those litigious, contentious (&c., down to:) are coming to
Sâvatthi. How am I to behave, Lord, towards those Bhikkhus?'

'Well, Sâriputta, you must side with those who are right according to
the Dhamma.'

'But how shall I discern, Lord, what is right and what is wrong?'

4\. 'There are eighteen things, Sâriputta, by which you may conclude
that a Bhikkhu is wrong according to the Dhamma. In case, Sâriputta, a
Bhikkhu declares what is not Dhamma to be Dhamma, or declares what is
Dhamma not to be Dhamma, or declares what is not Vinaya to be Vinaya, or
declares what is Vinaya not to be Vinaya, or declares what has not been
taught and spoken by the Tathâgata to have been taught and spoken by the
Tathâgata, or declares something taught and spoken by the Tathâgata not
to have been taught and spoken by the Tathâgata, or declares what has
not been

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

practised by the Tathâgata to have been practised by the Tathâgata, or
declares something practised by the Tathâgata not to have been practised
by the Tathâgata, or declares what has not been ordained by the
Tathâgata to have been ordained by the Tathâgata, or declares something
ordained by the Tathâgata not to have been ordained by the Tathâgata, or
declares what is no offence to be an offence, or declares an offence to
be no offence, or declares a slight offence to be a grievous offence, or
declares a grievous offence to be a slight offence, or declares (a rule
regarding) an offence to which there is an exception to be without an
exception, or declares (a rule regarding) an offence to which there is
no exception to admit of exceptions <span
id="fr_578"></span>[1](#fn_567.md), or declares a grave offence  <span
id="fr_579"></span>[2](#fn_568.md) to be a not grave offence, or declares
an offence that is not grave to be a grave offence,--these are the
eighteen things, Sâriputta, by which you may conclude that a Bhikkhu is
wrong according to the Dhamma.

5\. 'And there are eighteen things, Sâriputta, by which you may conclude
that a Bhikkhu is right according to the Dhamma. In case, Sâriputta, a
Bhikkhu declares what is not Dhamma to be not

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dhamma, or
declares what is Dhamma to be Dhamma (&c., down to:), or declares a
grave offence to be a grave offence, or declares an offence that is not
grave to be not grave,--these are the eighteen things, Sâriputta, by
which you may conclude that a Bhikkhu is right according to the Dhamma.'

6\. And the venerable Mahâmoggallâna heard (&c., as in § 3--5)--and the
venerable Mahâkassapa heard, &c.--and the venerable Mahâka*kk*âna heard,
&c.--and the venerable Mahâko*tth*ita <span
id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_569.md) heard, &c.--and the venerable
Mahâkappina heard, &c.--and the venerable Mahâ*k*unda heard, &c.--and
the venerable Anuruddha heard, &c.--and the venerable Revata heard,
&c.--and the venerable Upâli heard, &c.--and the venerable Ânanda heard,
&c.--and the venerable Râhula heard (&c., as above).

7\. And Mahâpa*g*âpati Gotamî heard: 'Those litigious, contentious,
quarrelsome, disputatious Bhikkhus of Kosambî, the constant raisers of
questions before the Sa*m*gha, are coming to Sâvatthi.' And
Mahâpa*g*âpati Gotamî went to the place where the Blessed One was;
having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, she
stationed herself near him. Standing near him Mahâpa*g*âpati Gotamî said
to the Blessed One: 'Lord, those litigious, contentious (&c., down to:)
are coming to Sâvatthi. How am I to behave, Lord, towards those
Bhikkhus?'

'Well, Gotamî, hear the Dhamma on both sides. When you have heard the
Dhamma on both sides,

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

then accept the opinion and the belief and the doctrine and the cause of
those Bhikkhus who are right according to the Dhamma; and whatever the
Bhikkhunîsa*m*gha has to apply for to the Bhikkhusa*m*gha <span
id="fr_581"></span>[1](#fn_570.md), for all that you must apply to the
party of those who are right.'

8\. And Anâtha-pi*nd*ika the householder heard (&c., as in 3, down to:).
'How am I to behave, Lord, towards those Bhikkhus?'

'Well, householder, bestow gifts on both sides; having bestowed gifts on
both sides, hear the Dhamma on both sides. When you have heard the
Dhamma on both sides, then accept the opinion and the belief and the
doctrine and the cause of those Bhikkhus who are right according to the
Dhamma.'

9\. And Visâkhâ Migâramâtâ heard, &c. <span
id="fr_582"></span>[2](#fn_571.md)

10\. And the Bhikkhus of Kosambî in due course came to Sâvatthi. And the
venerable Sâriputta went to the place where the Blessed One was; having
approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat down
near him. Sitting near him the venerable Sâriputta said to the Blessed
One: 'Lord, those litigious, contentious, quarrelsome, disputatious
Bhikkhus of Kosambî, the constant raisers of questions before the
Sa*m*gha, have arrived at Sâvatthi. How are we, Lord, to arrange the
dwelling-places of those Bhikkhus?'

'Well, Sâriputta, assign separate dwelling-places to them.'

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

'And if there be no separate dwelling-places, what are we to do then,
Lord?'

'Then, Sâriputta, you must separate (some dwelling-places from the rest)
and then assign them (to those Bhikkhus). But in no wise, Sâriputta, do
I say that the dwelling-place of a senior Bhikkhu must be taken from
him. He who does that, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

'And how are we to act, Lord, regarding (the distribution of) material
gifts <span id="fr_583"></span>[1](#fn_572.md)?'

'Material gifts, Sâriputta, must be distributed among all in equal
parts.'

11\. And that Bhikkhu against whom expulsion had been pronounced,
pondering over both Dhamma and Vinaya, came to the following conclusion:
'This is an offence; this is not no offence. I am an offender; I am not
offenceless. I am expelled; I am not un-expelled. The sentence by which
I have been expelled is lawful, unobjectionable, and valid.' Then that
expelled Bhikkhu went to the expelled Bhikkhu's partisans; having
approached them, he said to the partisans of the expelled Bhikkhu: 'This
is an offence, friends; this is not no offence, &c. Come now, my
venerable brethren, and restore me.'

12\. Then the partisans of that expelled Bhikkhu took with them the
expelled Bhikkhu, and went to the place where the Blessed One was;
having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, they sat
down near him. Sitting near him those Bhikkhus said to the Blessed One:
'Lord, this Bhikkhu, against whom expulsion has been pronounced, says,
"This is an offence, friends (&c.,

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

down to:) and restore me." What are we to do here, Lord?'

This is an offence, O Bhikkhus; this is not no offence. This Bhikkhu is
an offender; this Bhikkhu is not offenceless. This Bhikkhu is expelled;
he is not unexpelled; the sentence by which he has been expelled is
lawful, unobjectionable, and valid. But since this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus,
having committed an offence, and having been sentenced to expulsion,
sees (his offence), restore now that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus.'

13\. And the partisans of that expelled Bhikkhu, having restored that
expelled Bhikkhu, went to the Bhikkhus who had sentenced him to
expulsion; having approached them, they said to the Bhikkhus who had
pronounced that sentence: 'As regards that matter, friends, which gave
origin to altercations among the Sa*m*gha, to contentions, discord,
quarrels, divisions among the Sa*m*gha, to disunion among the Sa*m*gha,
to separations among the Sa*m*gha, to schisms among the Sa*m*gha,--that
Bhikkhu (who was concerned in that matter), having committed an offence,
and having been sentenced to expulsion, has seen (his offence) and has
been restored. Come, friends, let us declare now the re-establishment of
concord among the Sa*m*gha in order to bring that matter to an end.'

Then the Bhikkhus who had pronounced that sentence of expulsion, went to
the place where the Blessed One was; having approached him and
respectfully saluted the Blessed One, they sat down near him; sitting
near him those Bhikkhus said to the Blessed One: 'Lord, those partisans
of the expelled Bhikkhu have said to us: "As regards

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

that matter (&c., down to:) in order to bring that matter to an end."
What are we to do here, Lord?'

14\. 'Since this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, having committed an offence, and
having been sentenced to expulsion, has seen (his offence) and has been
re-stored, let the Sa*m*gha, O Bhikkhus, declare the re-establishment of
concord in order to bring that matter to an end. And this declaration is
to be performed in this way: Let all brethren assemble together, both
the sick and the healthy; no one is allowed to send his declaration of
kha*nd*a <span id="fr_584"></span>[1](#fn_573) (and to stay away.md). When
you have assembled, let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the
following *ñ*atti before the Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs,
hear me. As regards that matter which gave origin to altercations among
the Sa*m*gha, to contentions, discord, quarrels, divisions among the
Sa*m*gha, to disunion among the Sa*m*gha, to separations among the
Sa*m*gha, to schisms among the Sa*m*gha,--that Bhikkhu (concerned in
that matter), having committed an offence, and having been sentenced to
expulsion, has seen (his offence) and has been restored. If the Sa*m*gha
is ready, let the Sa*m*gha declare the re-establishment of concord in
order to bring that matter to an end. This is the *ñ*atti. Let the
Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs, hear me (&c. <span
id="fr_585"></span>[2](#fn_574), down to:.md) the re-establishment of
concord, in order to bring that matter to an end, has been declared by
the Sa*m*gha; the division that existed among the Sa*m*gha has been
settled; the disunion that existed

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

among the Sa*m*gha has been settled. The Sa*m*gha is in favour (of this
declaration); therefore you are silent; thus I understand." Then let the
Sa*m*gha hold Uposatha and proclaim the Pâtimokkha.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_566"></span>[314:1](sbe17110.htm#fr_577.md) Ubbâ*lh*a; see
*G*âtaka I, 300, and Mahâvagga III, 9, 1.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[316:1](sbe17110.htm#fr_578.md) Our translation of
sâvasesa and anavasesa is entirely conjectural. By the exceptions
alluded to here we believe that such clauses must be understood as, for
instance, in the sixth Nissaggiya Rule the words: 'Except at the right
season;--here the right season means when the Bhikkhu has been robbed of
his robe, or when his robe has been destroyed. This is the right season
in this connection.'

<span id="fn_568"></span>[316:2](sbe17110.htm#fr_579.md) The term
'Du*tth*ullâ âpatti' is used also in the ninth Pâ*k*ittiya Rule, and the
Old Commentary there states that by 'grave offences' those belonging to
the Pârâ*g*ika and Sa*m*ghâdisesa classes are understood.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[317:1](sbe17110.htm#fr_580.md) The name of this
Thera is spelt in the MSS. Mahâko*tth*ita and Mahâko*tth*ita. In the
Northern Buddhist works he is called Mahâkaush*th*ilya. In the Lalita
Vistara (p. 1, ed. Calc.) Kau*nd*ilya is a misprint.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[318:1](sbe17110.htm#fr_581.md) See *K*ullavagga
X, 1, 4, and the 59th Pâ*k*ittiya Rule in the Bhikkhunî-pâtimokkha.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[318:2](sbe17110.htm#fr_582.md) As in § 8. Instead
of 'Well, householder,' read 'Well, Visâkhâ.'

<span id="fn_572"></span>[319:1](sbe17110.htm#fr_583.md) Such as food,
robes, &c.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[321:1](sbe17110.htm#fr_584.md) See II, 23.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[321:2](sbe17110.htm#fr_585.md) Here follows the
repetition of the *ñ*atti and the other solemn formulas belonging to a
*ñ*attidutiya kamma in the usual way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](sbe17111.md)
