[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17031)  [Next](sbe17033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18.

1\. Now at that time a certain Brâhman had received some fresh tila
seeds, and some fresh honey. Now it occurred to that Brâhman: 'What if I
were to give these fresh tila seeds, and this

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

fresh honey to the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha with the Buddha at their head.' And
that Brâhman went to the place where the Blessed One was, and when he
had come there, he exchanged courteous greetings with the Blessed One.
And after he had exchanged with the Blessed One the greetings and
compliments of friendship and civility, he stood on one side. And, so
standing, that Brâhman said to the Blessed One:

'May the venerable Gotama grant me that the venerable Gotama shall take
his morrow's meal at my home to-morrow with the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha.'

The Blessed One consented by remaining silent. And when that Brâhman
perceived that the Blessed One had consented he. went away.

2\. And that Brâhman, at the end of that night, when he had made ready
sweet food, both hard and soft, had the time announced to the Blessed
One (in the words), 'It is time, O Gotama, and the meal is prepared.'

And the Blessed One, early in the morning, having put on his under robe,
went duly bowled and robed to that Brâhman's residence. And when he had
come there, he sat down on a seat prepared for him, and with him the
Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha.

And that Brâhman satisfied with the sweet food, hard and soft, the
Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha with the Buddha at their head, and waited on them with
his own hand. And when the Blessed One had finished his meal, and had
washed his hands and his howl, the Brâhman took his seat on one side.
And as he so sat the Blessed One instructed, and roused, and incited,
and gladdened that Brâhman with religious discourse, and rose from his
seat, and went away.

3\. Now not long after the Blessed One had gone

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

it occurred to that Brâhman: 'The things for the sake of which I invited
the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha with the Buddha at their head, thinking, "I will
give them the fresh tila seeds and the fresh honey,"--those I have
neglected to give. What if I were now to have the fresh tila seeds and
the fresh honey taken, in pots and vessels, to the Ârâma!'

And that Brâhman had the fresh tila seeds and the fresh honey taken in
pots and vessels, and went to the place where the Blessed One was. 'And
when he had come there, he stood on one side; and so standing that
Brâhman said to the Blessed One:

4\. 'The things for the sake of which I invited the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha
with the Buddha at their head, thinking, "I will give them the fresh
tila seeds and the fresh honey,"--those I have neglected to give. May
the venerable Gotama receive of me the fresh tila seeds and the fresh
honey.'

'Very well then, Brâhman; give them to the Bhikkhus.'

Now at that time, during the scarcity, people invited Bhikkhus to a
slender meal, and they, counting the number (of those invited), refused
(the invitation). And the whole Sa*m*gha was (once) invited; but the
Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, did not accept the invitation <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_172).

'Accept it, O Bhikkhus, and eat. I allow, O Bhikkhus, that a Bhikkhu who
has eaten and who has refused food still offered may nevertheless eat
food, if it be brought from within, even if it has not been left
over <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_173).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[74:1](sbe17032.htm#fr_174) Compare Pâtimokkha,
Pâ*k*ittiya 32.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[74:2](sbe17032.htm#fr_175) This is an
exception to Pâ*k*ittiya 35. A Bhikkhu who has <span id="page_75">p.
75</span> finished, and has declared himself to have done so by
declining further food, can still take 'leavings' without offending. By
this rule he is also allowed to take food tato nîhata*m*, literally,
'brought out thence,' which seems to mean 'out of the store of the
giver.' The expression recurs in VI, 32, I, and again in VI, 32, 2 (at
the end), where the exceptions to Pâ*k*ittiya 35 laid down in this and
the following rules are again, the scarcity having passed away, put
aside by 'the Blessed One.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](sbe17033)
