[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17001)  [Next](sbe17003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PÂTIMOKKHA

# MAHÂVAGGA.

### FIFTH KHANDHAKA.

#### (RULES FOR FOOT-CLOTHING, SEATS, VEHICLES, ETC.)

### 1.

1\. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at Râ*g*agaha at the Vulture's
Peak.

Now at that time Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, held rule and
sovranty over eighty thousand townships <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0). And at that time there was at *K*ampâ a
Se*tth*i's son named So*n*a Ko*li*visa <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1), delicately nurtured, on the soles of whose
feet hair had grown.

Now when Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, was holding an
assembly of the eighty thousand overseers over those townships, he sent
a message to So*n*a Ko*li*visa on some matter of business, saying, 'Let
So*n*a come hither. I desire So*n*a's presence!'

2\. Then spake the parents of So*n*a Ko*li*visa to him thus: 'The king,
dear So*n*a, wishes to see thy feet. But stretch not out thy feet, dear
So*n*a, towards the

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

king. Take thy seat cross-legged before the king, that the king may see
thy feet as thou sittest there.' And they carried So*n*a Ko*li*visa in a
palankeen (to Râ*g*agaha).

And So*n*a Ko*li*visa went to the place where Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, the
king of Magadha, was. And when he had come there, and had bowed down
before Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, he took his seat
cross-legged before the king. And Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, the king of
Magadha, saw that hair had grown on the soles of the feet of So*n*a
Ko*li*visa.

3\. Now after Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, had instructed
the eighty thousand overseers over those townships in the things of this
world he exhorted them, saying, 'Ye have now received from me
instruction in the things of this world. Go now, and wait upon the
Blessed One. The Blessed One himself shall instruct you in the things of
eternity.'

Then the eighty thousand overseers over those townships went on to the
Vulture's Peak.

4\. Now at that time the venerable Sâgata was the attendant on the
Blessed One. And the eighty thousand overseers over those townships went
to the place where the venerable Sâgata was. And when they were come
there they spake thus to the venerable Sâgata:

The eighty thousand overseers over the townships are come here, Sir, to
visit the Blessed One. It were well, Sir, that we should be granted an
audience of the Blessed One.'

Then do you, Sirs, stay here yet a moment, while I let the Blessed One
know.'

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

5\. Then the venerable Sâgata disappeared down the steps <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) from before the very eyes of the eighty
thousand overseers over those townships, and appeared before the Blessed
One, and spake to the Blessed One, and said:

'Lord, the eighty thousand overseers over the townships are come here to
visit the Blessed One. Let the Blessed One do as seemeth to him fit.'

Do thou then, Sâgata, make a seat ready in the shade of the house <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3).'

6\. 'Even so, Lord!' said the venerable Sâgata, in assent, to the
Blessed One. And taking a chair, he disappeared from before the Blessed
One, and reappeared up the steps before the very eyes of those eighty
thousand overseers over those townships, and made ready a seat in the
shade of the house.

And the Blessed One came out of the house and sat down on the seat made
ready in the shade thereof.

7\. Then those eighty thousand overseers over the townships went up to
the place where the Blessed One was. And when they had come there they
bowed down before the Blessed One and took their seats on one side. But
those eighty thousand overseers over the townships paid more respect in
their hearts to the venerable Sâgata than to the Blessed One <span
id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4).

And the Blessed One perceived by his mind the thoughts of the minds of
those eighty thousand

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>.

overseers over the townships; and he addressed the venerable Sâgata, and
said: 'Show them now, Sâgata, a still greater wonder, beyond the power
of men.'

'Even so, Lord!' said the venerable Sâgata, in assent, to the Blessed
One. And rising up into the air he walked, and stood, and sat, and lay
down, and gave forth smoke and fire, and disappeared in the sky.

8\. Then the venerable Sâgata, when he had shown in the open sky wonders
of various kinds beyond the power of men, fell down with his head at the
feet of the Blessed One, and said to the Blessed One:

My teacher, Lord, is the Blessed One; and I am the disciple. My teacher,
Lord, is the Blessed One; and I am the disciple.'

Then those eighty thousand overseers over the townships thinking,
'Wonderful is it, most marvellous! If even the pupil be so mighty and so
powerful, how much more then the master!' paid more respect in their
hearts to the Blessed One than to the venerable Sâgata.

9\. Then the Blessed One perceived by his mind the thoughts of the minds
of those eighty thousand overseers over the townships, and held to them
a discourse in due order; that is to say, he spake to them of giving, of
righteousness, of heaven, of the danger, the worthlessness, the
depravity of lusts, and of the advantages of renunciation. And when the
Blessed One perceived that they had become pliant, softened,
unprejudiced, upraised and believing in heart, then he proclaimed that
which is the special doctrine of the Buddhas; (that is to say),
Suffering, its Origin, its Cessation, and the Path.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Just as a clean cloth, from which all stain has been washed away, would
readily take the dye, just even so did those eighty thousand overseers
over the townships obtain, even while sitting there, the pure and
spotless Eye of the Truth; (that is to say, the knowledge that)
whatsoever has a beginning, in that is inherent also the necessity of
dissolution.

10\. And having seen the Truth, having mastered the Truth, having
understood the Truth, having penetrated the Truth, having overcome
uncertainty, having dispelled all doubts, having gained full knowledge,
dependent on nobody else for the knowledge of the doctrine of the
Teacher, they said to the Blessed One: 'Glorious, Lord! glorious, Lord!
Just as if one should set up, Lord, what had been overturned, or should
reveal what had been hidden, or should point out the way to one who had
lost his way, or should bring a lamp into the darkness, in order that
those who had eyes might see visible things, thus has the Blessed One
preached the doctrine in many ways. We take our refuge, Lord, in the
Blessed One, and in the Dhamma, and in the fraternity of Bhikkhus; may
the Blessed One receive us from this day forth while our life lasts as
his disciples who have taken their refuge in Him.'

11\. And So*n*a Ko*li*visa thought: As I understand the Dhamma
proclaimed by the Blessed One, it is not easy to a person living as a
layman to lead a wholly perfect and pure and altogether consummate <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) life of holiness. What if I were to cut off
my hair and beard, and to put on yellow robes, and give up the world,
and go forth into the houseless state.'

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

And those eighty thousand overseers over the townships, having expressed
their joy and delight at the words of the Blessed One, rose from their
seats, respectfully saluted the Blessed One, and passing round him with
their right sides towards him, went away.

12\. And So*n*a Ko*li*visa, soon after those eighty thousand overseers
over the townships had departed, went to the place where the Blessed One
was. And when he had come there he bowed down before the Blessed One and
took his seat on one side. Sitting on one side So*n*a Ko*li*visa said to
the Blessed One: 'As I understand the Dhamma proclaimed by the Blessed
One (&c., as in § 11, down to:) and go forth into the houseless state. I
desire, Lord, to cut off my hair and beard, and to put on yellow robes,
and to give up the world, and to go forth into the houseless state. May
the Blessed One, Lord, ordain me.'

Thus So*n*a Ko*li*visa received from the Blessed One the pabba*gg*â and
upasampadâ ordinations. And the venerable So*n*a, soon after his
upasampadâ, dwelt in the Sîtavana grove.

13\. As he, with eager determination, was walking up and down there, his
feet were injured, and the place in which he walked became covered with
blood, like a slaughter-house for oxen. Then in the mind of the
venerable So*n*a, who had gone apart and was plunged in meditation,
there sprung up this thought:

'Though I have become one of those disciples of the Blessed One who live
in the exercise of strenuous determination, yet my heart has not been
set free from the Âsavas through absence of craving. And there is much
wealth laid up for me at home. It is possible both to enjoy that wealth,
and to do good

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

deeds. Let me now, then, returning to the lower state <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6), enjoy my wealth and do good deeds.'

14\. Now the Blessed One perceived in his mind the thought of the heart
of the venerable So*n*a; and as quickly as a strong man can stretch
forth his arm, or can draw it back again when it has been stretched
forth, he disappeared from the hill of the Vulture's Peak, and appeared
in the Sîtavana grove. And the Blessed One, as he was passing through
the sleeping-places (of the Bhikkhus), came up, with a multitude of
Bhikkhus, to the place where the venerable So*n*a had walked up and
down.

When the Blessed One saw that the place where the venerable So*n*a had
walked up and down was covered with blood, he addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said: 'Whose walking-place <span id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7) is
this, O Bhikkhus, which is covered with blood, like a slaughter-house
for oxen?'

'As the venerable So*n*a, Lord, was walking up and down here with eager
determination, his feet were injured; and so this place has become
covered with blood, like a slaughter-house for oxen.'

15\. Then the Blessed One went on to the house in which the venerable
So*n*a was living, and sat down there on a seat made ready for him. And
the venerable So*n*a bowed down before the Blessed

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One, and took his
seat on one side. And when he was thus seated, the Blessed One addressed
the venerable Soma, and said: 'Is it not true, So*n*a, that in your
mind, when you had gone apart and were plunged in meditation, there
sprung up this thought: "Though I have become (&c., as in § 13, down to
the end)?"'

'Even so, Lord!'

'Now what think you, So*n*a,--you were skilled, were you not, when you
formerly lived in the world, in the music of the lute?'

'That was so, Lord!'

'Now what think you, So*n*a,--when the strings of your lute <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) were too much stretched, had your lute then
any sound, was it in a fit state to be played upon?'

'Not so, Lord!'

16\. 'Now what think you, So*n*a,--when the strings of your lute were
too loose, had your lute then any sound <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9), was it in a fit state to be played upon?'
'Not so, Lord!'

Now what think you, So*n*a,--when the strings of your lute were neither
too much stretched nor too loose, but fixed in even proportion, had your
lute sound then, was it then in a fit state to be played upon?'

Yes, Lord!'

'And just so, So*n*a, does too eager a determination conduce to
self-righteousness, and too weak a determination

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

to sloth. \[17.\] Do thou, therefore, O So*n*a, be steadfast in evenness
of determination, press through to harmony of your mental powers. Let
that be the object of your thought <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)!'

Even so, Lord!' said the venerable So*n*a, and hearkened to the word of
the Blessed One.

And when the Blessed One had exhorted the venerable So*n*a with this
exhortation, then, as quickly as a strong man can stretch forth his arm,
or can draw it back again when it has been stretched forth, he vanished
from the presence of the venerable So*n*a in the Sîtavana grove, and
reappeared on the hill of the Vulture's Peak.

18\. Thenceforward the venerable So*n*a was stead-fast in evenness of
determination, he pressed through to harmony of his mental powers, that
did he take as the object of his thought. And the venerable So*n*a
remaining alone and separate, earnest, zealous, and resolved, attained
ere long to that supreme goal of the higher life for the sake of which
noble youths go out from all and every household gain and comfort to
become houseless wanderers--yea, that supreme goal did he, by himself,
and while yet in this visible world, bring himself to the knowledge of,
and continue to realise, and to see face to face! And he became
conscious that rebirth was at an end, that the higher life had been
fulfilled, that all that should be done had been accomplished, and that
after this present life there would be no beyond!

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

So the venerable So*n*a became yet another among the Arahats.

19\. Now when the venerable So*n*a had attained to Arahatship there
occurred to him the thought: 'Let me now make known my Insight in the
presence of the Blessed One <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)!'

Then the venerable So*n*a went to the place where the Blessed One was,
and bowed down before the Blessed One, and took his seat on one side.
And when he was thus seated, the venerable So*n*a said to the Blessed
One:

20\. 'Whatsoever Bhikkhu, Lord, is an Arahat whose Âsavas are rooted
out, who has lived the life, who has accomplished the task, who has laid
aside every burden, who has gained the end he had in view, who has quite
broken the fetter of a craving for (future) existence, who is completely
set free by insight, six things doth he reach up unto <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12)--unto renunciation, unto the love of
solitude, unto kindness of heart, unto the destruction of craving, unto
the destruction of thirst, unto the getting free from delusions.

21\. 'Now it may be, Lord, that it might occur, regarding this matter,
to some brother, thus: "For the sake of faith merely <span
id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13) hath this brother attained

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

unto renunciation." But not thus, Lord, should this matter be regarded.
For the Bhikkhu in whom the Âsavas are rooted out, who has lived the
life, who has accomplished the task, he looks not upon himself as one
who has anything yet to do, or to gather up, of (the fruit of his past)
labour; but he attaineth to renunciation by the destruction of lust, by
the very condition of the absence of lust; he attaineth to renunciation
by the destruction of ill-will, by the very condition of the absence of
ill-will; he attaineth to renunciation by the destruction of delusions,
by the very condition of the absence of delusions.

22\. 'Now it may, be, Lord, that it might occur, regarding this matter,
to some brother, thus: "Seeking after gain, hospitality, and fame bath
this brother attained to the love of solitude." But not thus (&c., as in
§ 21, down to the end, substituting "love of solitude" for
"renunciation").

23\. 'Now it may be, Lord, that it might occur, regarding this matter,
to some brother, thus: "Returning, verily, to the dependence upon works,
as if that were the true essence (of spiritual welfare), hath this
brother attained to kindness of heart." But not thus (&c., as in § 21,
down to the end, substituting "kindness of heart" for "renunciation").

24\. 'He attaineth to the destruction of craving by the destruction of
lust (&c., as in § 21, down to the end, substituting "absence of
craving" for "renunciation"). He attaineth to the absence of thirst
(&c., as in § 21). He attaineth to the absence of delusions (&c., as in
§ 21, down to the end).

25\. 'When a Bhikkhu, Lord, has thus become fully emancipated in heart,
even though many objects

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

visible to the sight should enter the path of his eye <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14), yet they take not possession of his mind:
undefiled is his mind, firm, immovable; and he sees into the (manner
which that impression) passes away <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15)--even though many objects audible to the
ear, smellable to the nostrils, tastable to the tongue, feelable by the
body, sensible to the intellect should enter the path of the ear, the
nose, the tongue, the skin, the intellect, yet they take not possession
of his mind: undefiled is his mind, firm, immovable, and he sees into
the (manner in which that impression) passes away.

26\. 'Just, Lord, as if there be a mountain of rock, undivided, solid,
one mass, and much wind and rain should fall upon it from the direction
of the East, or of the West, or of the North, or of the South, yet they
would not make it shake, or tremble, or quake; just so, Lord, when a
Bhikkhu has thus become fully emancipated in heart (&c., as in § 25,
down to the end).

27\. 'He who has attained to renunciation, to solitude of heart, who has
attained to kindness, and to the rooting out of craving,

'He who has attained to the rooting out of thirst, to the absence of
delusions from the mind, he sees the source of sensations, his mind is
quite set free.

'To such a Bhikkhu, so emancipated, and with calmness in his heart,
there is no gathering up of what is done, nothing to be done still
remains.

'As a rock, all of one mass, is not shaken by

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the breezes <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16), just so never can
shapes and tastes, and sounds, and smells, and touch--the whole of them

Things wished for, things unwished--make tremble such a one. Firm is his
mind, set free. He sees into the end thereof.'

28\. And the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus, and said: 'Thus,
brethren, do young men of worth make their insight known. The truth is
spoken, and the self is not obtruded. But herein some foolish ones,
methinks, make known their insight to be a thing ridiculous, and they,
thereafter, fall into defeat!'

29\. Then the Blessed One said to the venerable So*n*a, 'You, So*n*a,
have been delicately nurtured. I enjoin upon you, So*n*a, the use of
shoes with one lining <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17).'

I have gone out from the world, Lord, into the houseless state,
abandoning eighty cart-loads of gold <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18), and a retinue of seven elephants <span
id="fr_19"></span>[4](#fn_19). It will be said against me for this
matter: "So*n*a Ko*li*visa went out from the world into the houseless
state, abandoning eighty cart-loads of gold, and a retinue of seven
elephants; but the very same man now accustoms himself to the use of
shoes with a lining

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

to them." \[30.\] If the Blessed One will enjoin their use upon the
Order of Bhikkhus, I will also use them. If the Blessed One will not
enjoin their use upon the Order of Bhikkhus, neither will I use them.'

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion, having delivered a religious
discourse, thus addressed the Bhikkhus:

'I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, the use of shoes with one lining to
them. Doubly lined shoes, Bhikkhus, are not to be worn, nor trebly lined
ones, nor shoes with many linings <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20).
Whosoever shall wear such, is guilty of a dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_0) Gâma, which should be
understood in the sense of parishes, not of villages.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_1) This So*n*a is the
reputed author of one of the Theragâthâs. It is interesting to notice
that *K*ampâ, the capital of Aṅga, is here included under Magadha.
Compare Aṅga-magadhesu in Mahâvagga I, 29, and the beginning sentences
of the So*n*ada*nd*a Sutta (Digha Nikâya), in which it is said that the
revenues of the town of *K*ampâ had been bestowed by king Bimbisâra on
the Brâhma*n*a So*n*ada*nd*a.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_2) Pâ*t*ikâya nimu*gg*itvâ
’ti sopâ*n*assa he*tth*â addha*k*andapâsâ*n*ena nimu*gg*itvâ (Comm.).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_3) Vihârapa*kkh*âyâyan ti
vihârapa*kk*ante *kh*âyâya*m*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3:3](sbe17002.htm#fr_4) Samannâharantiti
pasâdavasena punappuna*m* manasikaronti (Buddhaghosa).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_5) Saṅkhalikhita. See
Boehtlingk-Roth s.v. Likhita.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_6) That is to say, the
state of a layman (Hînây’ âvattitvâ).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_7) *K*aṅkama, for which
there is no real equivalent in English. In speaking of later periods the
word 'cloister' is sometimes a correct rendering, for the places in
which the recluses walked up and down, thinking, were then in some cases
paved and even roofed. The Chinese pilgrim I-tsing has a description of
such a stone *k*aṅkama, which he saw at the great monastery at Nâlanda
(Indian Antiquary, X, 192). In this passage it only means a narrow,
open, space of ground, levelled and cleared for the purpose.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_8) Vî*n*â. On the
construction of the ancient Indian lute, see Milinda Pa*ñ*ha (p. 53, ed.
Trenckner), where all the various parts are mentioned. Compare also the
Guttila *G*âtaka (No. 243, ed. Fausböll).

<span id="fn_9"></span>[8:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_9) There is a misprint here
in the text, savaratî for saravati.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[9:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_10) Buddhaghosa says:
Tattha *k*a nimitta*m* ga*n*hâhîti: tasmi*m* samathe sati yena âdâse
mukhabimben’ eva nimittena uppa*gg*itabba*m*, ta*m* samatha-nimitta*m*
vipassanâ-nimitta*m* magga-nimitta*m* phala-nimitta*ñ* *k*a ga*n*hâhi
nipattetîti (? nipphâdehîti, nibbattehîti) attho.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[10:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_11) It is often
represented in the Pâli Pi.itakas to have been a customary thing for any
one who thought he had attained to Arahatship to deliver a discourse in
the presence of Gotama, as a kind of proof, or test, of his
emancipation; and to receive the decision of Gotama thereupon.
Buddhaghosa says: A*ññ*a*m* vyâkareyyan ti: arahâ ahan ti
*g*ânâpeyya*m*. Compare *G*âtaka I, 140; II, 333.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[10:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_12) Adhimutto hotîti:
pa*t*ivi*ggh*itvâ pa*kk*akkha*m* katvâ *th*ito hoti (B.).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[10:3](sbe17002.htm#fr_13) Kevala*m*
saddhâmattakan ti: pa*t*ivedha-rahita*m* kevala*m* pa*t*ivedha-pa*ññ*âya
asammissa*m* saddhâmattaka*m* (B.). On the lower position here assigned
to faith, compare Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta VI, 9.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[12:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_14) *K*akkhussa âpâtha*m*
âga*kkh*anti; that is, should come within reach of his vision.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[12:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_15) Vaya*ñ* *k*’
assânupassatîti: tassa *k*ittassa uppâda*m* pi vaya*m* pi passati B.).

<span id="fn_16"></span>[13:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_16) This half *s*loka
recurs in Dhammapada, verse 81.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[13:2](sbe17002.htm#fr_17) Ekapalâsikan ti
eka-pa*t*ala*m* (B.).

<span id="fn_18"></span>[13:3](sbe17002.htm#fr_18) Asîti-saka*t*a-vâhe
hira*ññ*a*m* (so correct the misprint in the text). Buddhaghosa says:
ettha dve saka*t*abhârâ eko vâho ’ti veditabbo; but compare Rh. D.,
'Ancient Coins and Measures,' &c., p. 18, § 32, and p. 14, § 23. Vâha
occurs also in the Mahâva*m*sa, p. 22.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[13:4](sbe17002.htm#fr_19) Sattahatthika*ñ* ka
a*n*îkan ti: ettha *kh*a hatthiniyo eko *k*a hatthîti, ida*m* eka*m*
a*n*îka*m*, îdisani satta a*n*îkâni sattahatthika*m* nâma (B.).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[14:1](sbe17002.htm#fr_20) Dvi-gu*n*â ’ti
dvi-pa*t*alâ. Ti-gu*n*â ’ti ti-pa*t*alâ. Ga*n*a*m*ganûpâhanâ ’ti
*k*atu-pa*t*alato pa*tth*âya vu*kk*ati (B.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17003)
