[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17143)  [Next](sbe17145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 34.

1\. So the Sa*m*gha carried out against Ari*tth*a the Bhikkhu, who had
formerly been a vulture tormentor, the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not
renouncing a sinful doctrine, to the intent that he should not eat nor
dwell with the Sa*m*gha. And when he had been thus subjected by the
Sa*m*gha to the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not renouncing a sinful doctrine,
he left the Order.

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were annoyed, murmured, and became
indignant, saying, 'How can Ari*tth*a the Bhikkhu, having been subjected
by the Sa*m*gha to the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

renouncing a sinful doctrine, leave the Order?' And those Bhikkhus told
the matter to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One on that occasion, and in that connection, convened
a meeting of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and asked the Bhikkhus, 'Is it true,
O Bhikkhus, as they say, that Ari*tth*a the Bhikkhu, having been
subjected (&c., as before, down to) left the Order?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked him, saying, 'How can Ari*tth*a the Bhikkhu
(&c., as before, down to) leave the Order? This will not conduce either
to the conversion of the unconverted, nor to the increase of the
converted; but rather to those who have not been converted not being
converted, and to the turning back of those who have been converted.'

And when he had rebuked him, and delivered a religious discourse, the
Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus, and said: 'Let then the Sa*m*gha, O
Bhikkhus, revoke the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not renouncing a sinful
doctrine, which has been carried out against Ari*tth*a the Bhikkhu.

'There are five things, O Bhikkhus, \[&c., as before, in chapters 6 and
7, down to the end.\]'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here end the eighteen cases in which a revocation of the
Ukkhepaniya-kamma on not renouncing a sinful doctrine should be carried
out.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](sbe17145)
