[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17100)  [Next](sbe17102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3.

1\. At that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus performed official acts in
the following ways: they performed unlawful acts before an incomplete
congregation (&c., as in chap. 2, § 1, down to:) they performed
seemingly lawful acts before a complete congregation; they performed
acts without a *ñ*atti <span id="fr_501"></span>[2](#fn_493.md) and with
the proclamation (of the kammavâ*k*â <span
id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_493).md) they performed acts without a
proclamation (of the kammavâ*k*â) and with the *ñ*atti; they performed
acts without a *ñ*atti and without a proclamation (of the kammavâ*k*â);
they performed acts contrary to the Dhamma; they performed acts contrary
to the Vinaya; they performed acts contrary to the doctrine of the
Teacher; and they performed acts against which (the Bhikkhus present)
protested, which were unlawful, objectionable, and invalid.

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate, were annoyed,

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> &c. These Bhikkhus
told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Is it true, as they say, O Bhikkhus, that the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus,
&c.?'

It is true, Lord, &c.'

Having thus rebuked them and delivered a religious discourse, he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus:

2\. 'If an official act, O Bhikkhus, is performed unlawfully by an
incomplete congregation, it is no real act and ought not to be performed
(&c. <span id="fr_503"></span>[1](#fn_494), down to:.md). If an official
act, O Bhikkhus, is performed against which (the Bhikkhus present)
protest, which is unlawful, objectionable, and invalid, this is no real
act and ought not to be performed.

3\. 'There are, O Bhikkhus, six kinds of official acts (which a Sa*m*gha
can perform): an unlawful act, an act performed by an incomplete
congregation, an act performed by a complete congregation, a seemingly
lawful act performed by an incomplete congregation, a seemingly lawful
act performed by a complete congregation, a lawful act performed by a
complete congregation.

'And which, O Bhikkhus, is an unlawful act? If one performs, O Bhikkhus,
a *ñ*attidutiya act <span id="fr_504"></span>[2](#fn_495.md) with one
*ñ*atti, and does not proclaim a kammavâ*k*â, such an act is unlawful.
If one performs, O Bhikkhus, a *ñ*attidutiya act with two *ñ*atti and
does not proclaim a kammavâ*k*â . . . . with one kammavâ*k*â and does
not propose a *ñ*atti . . . . with two

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

kammavâ*k*âs and does not propose a *ñ*atti, such an act is unlawful.

4\. 'If one performs, O Bhikkhus, a *ñ*atti*k*atuttha act with one
*ñ*atti and does not proclaim a kammavâ*k*â, such an act is unlawful. If
one performs, O Bhikkhus, a ñatti*k*atuttha act with two (. . three, . .
. . four) *ñ*attis and does not proclaim a kammavâ*k*â, such an act is
unlawful. If one performs, O Bhikkhus, a *ñ*atti*k*atuttha act with one
kammavâ*k*â ( . . . . with two, . . . . three, . . . . four
kammavâ*k*âs) and does not propose a *ñ*atti, such an act is unlawful.
Such acts, O Bhikkhus, are called unlawful acts.

5\. 'And which, O Bhikkhus, is an act of an incomplete congregation?

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act not all Bhikkhus, as many as are
entitled to vote, are present, if the *kh*anda <span
id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_496.md) of those who have to declare their
*kh*anda has not been conveyed (to the assembly), and if the Bhikkhus
present protest, such an act is performed by an incomplete congregation.

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act as many Bhikkhus as are entitled
to vote, are present, but if the *kh*anda of those who have to declare
their *kh*anda has not been conveyed (to the assembly), and if the
Bhikkhus present protest, such an act is performed by an incomplete
congregation.

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act as many Bhikkhus as are entitled
to vote, are present, if the *kh*anda of those who have to declare their
*kh*anda has been conveyed, but if the Bhikkhus present protest, such an
act is performed by an incomplete congregation.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*atti*k*atuttha act, &c. <span
id="fr_506"></span>[1](#fn_497.md)

'Such acts, O Bhikkhus, are called acts performed by incomplete
congregations.

6\. 'And which, O Bhikkhus, is an act of a complete congregation?

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act as many Bhikkhus as are entitled
to vote, are present, if the *kh*anda of those who have to declare their
*kh*anda has been conveyed (to the assembly), and if the Bhikkhus
present do not protest, such an act is performed by a complete
congregation.

If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*atti*k*atuttha act (&c., as in last section).

Such acts, O Bhikkhus, are called acts performed by complete
congregations.

7\. 'And which, O Bhikkhus, is a seemingly lawful act performed by an
incomplete congregation?

If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act the kammavâ*k*â is proclaimed
first and the *ñ*atti is proposed afterwards, if not all Bhikkhus, as
many as are entitled to vote, are present, &c. <span
id="fr_507"></span>[2](#fn_498.md)

8\. 'And which, O Bhikkhus, is a seemingly lawful act performed by a
complete congregation?

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act the kammavâ*k*â is proclaimed
first and the *ñ*atti is proposed afterwards, if as many Bhikkhus as are
entitled to vote, are present, &c. <span id="fr_508"></span>[3](#fn_499.md)

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

9\. 'And which, O Bhikkhus, is a lawful act performed by a complete
congregation?

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*attidutiya act the *ñ*atti is proposed first
and afterwards the act is performed with one kammavâ*k*â, if as many
Bhikkhus as are entitled to vote, are present, if the *kh*anda of those
who have to declare their *kh*anda has been conveyed (to the assembly),
and if the Bhikkhus present do not protest, such an act is lawful and
performed by a complete congregation.

'If, O Bhikkhus, at a *ñ*atti*k*atuttha act the *ñ*atti is proposed
first and afterwards the act is performed with three kammavâ*k*âs, if as
many Bhikkhus as are entitled to vote, &c., such an act is lawful and
performed by a complete congregation.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_493"></span>[264:2](sbe17101.htm#fr_502.md) See I, 28, &c.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[265:1](sbe17101.htm#fr_503.md) Here the different
categories of forbidden acts are enumerated one after the other, as in §
1.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[265:2](sbe17101.htm#fr_504.md) About *ñ*atti,
kammavâ*k*â, *ñ*attidutiya, and *ñ*atti*k*atuttha acts, see our note at
I, 28, 3. 'Proposing a *ñ*atti' and 'proclaiming a kammavâ*k*â' mean
proposing a motion and putting a resolution to the assembled brethren.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[266:1](sbe17101.htm#fr_505.md) See II, 23.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[267:1](sbe17101.htm#fr_506.md) The identical
three cases given before with regard to the *ñ*attidutiya act are
repeated here.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[267:2](sbe17101.htm#fr_507.md) The six cases
given in this paragraph, of which three refer to *ñ*attidutiya acts and
three to *ñ*atti*k*atuttha acts, differ from those specified in § 5 only
by the statement added in each of these cases regarding the inverted
order of *ñ*atti and kammavâ*k*â.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[267:3](sbe17101.htm#fr_508.md) This paragraph
stands precisely in the same relation to § 6 in which the preceding one
stands to § 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](sbe17102.md)
