[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17046)  [Next](sbe17048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### 33.

1\. Now at that time the country people loaded much salt, and oil, and
rice, and hard food on their carts, and making a laager in the outer
enclosure of the Ârâma, they waited there, saying, 'When it comes to our
turn, we will provide a meal.' And a great storm-cloud arose. Then those
people went to the place where the venerable Ânanda was; and when they
had come there they said to the venerable Ânanda: 'We loaded a quantity
of salt, and oil, and rice, and hard food on to our carts; and they
stand there. Now a great storm-cloud has arisen. What are we now,
Ânanda, Sir, to do with them?'

Then the venerable Ânanda told this thing to the Blessed One.

2\. 'In that case, Ânanda, let the Sa*m*gha decide upon some outside
building as a kappiyabhûmi (that is to say, a site, outside the actual
dwelling, in which provisions can be kept or cooked without breaking the
rule laid down in the last chapter) and keep the stores there (in a
building) of any shape the Sa*m*gha chooses, such as vihâra,
a*ddh*ayoga, pâsâda, hammiya, guhâ <span
id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_218.md).

'And thus, O Bhikkhus, should it be resolved upon. A discreet and able
Bhikkhu should proclaim the following *ñ*atti before the Sa*m*gha: "Let
the Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the
Sa*m*gha appoint the Vihâra called N. N. to be our kappiya-bhûmi. This
is the *ñ*atti. Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs, hear me.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Sa*m*gha
appoints the Vihâra called N. N. to be our kappiya-bhûmi. Let any one of
the venerable brethren who is in favour of appointing the Vihâra (&c.,
down to:) thus I understand."'

3\. Now at that time men in that place--the kappiya-bhûmi duly chosen by
resolution (of the Sa*m*gha)--boiled congey, and boiled rice, and mixed
curries, and cut up meat, and split fire-wood. And when the Blessed One,
as the night was passing away, rose up, he heard a great and loud noise,
as of the cawing of crows. On hearing this he asked the venerable
Ânanda: 'What now, Ânanda, may be this great and loud noise, as of the
cawing of crows?'

4\. 'In that place, Lord,--the kappiya-bhûmi duly chosen by resolution
(of the Sa*m*gha),--men are now boiling congey, and boiling rice, and
mixing curries, and cutting up meat, and splitting fire-wood. Thence,
Lord, comes that great and loud noise, as of the cawing of crows.'

Then the Blessed One, in that connection, and on that account, after he
had delivered a religious discourse, said to the Bhikkhus

'A kappiya-bhûmi, O Bhikkhus, duly chosen, is not to be made use of.
Whosoever shall so use it, is guilty of a dukka*t*a offence. I allow
you, O Bhikkhus, a kappiya-bhûmi of three kinds, one that has become so
by means of a proclamation <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_219.md),

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

an ox-stall <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_220.md), and a building
belonging to laymen <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_221.md).'

5\. Now at that time the venerable Yaso*g*a was sick, and drugs were
brought for his use, and these the Bhikkhus put out of doors. Vermin ate
them, and thieves carried them away <span
id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_222.md).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use a duly chosen kappiya-bhûmi (to keep
drugs in). I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a kappiya-bhûmi of four kinds, one
that has become so by means of a proclamation, an ox-stall, a building
belonging to laymen, and a duly chosen one.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the twenty-fourth Bhâ*n*avâra.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_218"></span>[119:1](sbe17047.htm#fr_222.md) On these five
kinds of buildings, see above, I, 30, 4; II, 8, 1.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[120:1](sbe17047.htm#fr_223.md) Buddhaghosa says
on this word: 'When a Vihâra is to be erected on piles, or the
foundations of its walls are to be dug out, and the stones on which it
is to rest are already laid, then when the first pile or the first stone
of the walls is put upon them, the men standing round in a body
proclaim, "Let us make a kappiyaku*t*î."' The proclamation cannot be
made after the building has got further than the actual stage here
described. Ussâvanâ is <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> therefore from
ussâveti, 'to proclaim;' and antika is used here, as below in VII, 1, 7.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[121:1](sbe17047.htm#fr_224.md) Gonisâdika.
Compare Buddhaghosa's explanation of gonisâdi-nivi*tth*o gâmo at
Sutta-vibhaṅga, Pâr. II, 3, as given by Minayeff, 'Prâtimoksha,' p. 66,
lines 7, 8. Here Buddhaghosa says simply, 'There are two kinds of
ox-stalls; ârâma ox-stalls and vihâra ox-stalls. Of these, when neither
the ârâma nor the dwellings are fenced in (parikkhittâni honti), that is
an ârâma ox-stall; when all or some of the dwellings are fenced in, and
not the ârâma, that is a vihâra ox-stall. So both kinds depend upon the
fencing in of the ârâma.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[121:2](sbe17047.htm#fr_225.md) This seems to mean
that stores could be kept for the Sa*m*gha on laymen's premises.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[121:3](sbe17047.htm#fr_226.md) Compare above, VI,
17, 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](sbe17048.md)
