[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17116)  [Next](sbe17118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6 <span id="fr_617"></span>[1](#fn_605).

1\. So the Sa*m*gha carried out the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma against the
Bhikkhus who were followers of Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka. And when they had
been subjected by the Sa*m*gha to the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma and were
conducting themselves aright in accordance thereto, they became
subdued <span id="fr_618"></span>[2](#fn_606), and they sought for
release <span id="fr_619"></span>[3](#fn_607); and going up to the
Bhikkhus they spake as follows: 'We, Sirs, have been subjected by the
Sa*m*gha to the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma (&c., down to) release. What now
should. we do?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Then, O Bhikkhus, let the Sa*m*gha revoke the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma carried
out against the followers of Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka.

2\. 'There are five things, O Bhikkhus, by which,

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

when a Bhikkhu is characterised, a Ta*gg*aniya-kamma ought not to be
revoked for him; (that is to say), when he confers the upasampadâ--when
he gives a nissaya--when he provides himself with a sâma*n*era--when he
accepts the office of giving exhortation to the nuns--and when, having
accepted that office, he exhorts the nuns. These are the five things, O
Bhikkhus (&c., as before, down to) revoked for him.

'There are other five things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a Bhikkhu is
characterised, a Ta*gg*aniya-kamma ought not to be revoked for him;
(that is to say), when he commits the offence for which the
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma has been carried out by the Sa*m*gha against him--or
any other offence of a similar kind--or any worse offence--when he finds
fault with the proceeding that has been carried out against him--or with
the Bhikkhus who have carried it out. These are five things, O Bhikkhus
(&c., as before, down to) revoked for him.

There are eight things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a Bhikkhu is
characterised, a Ta*gg*aniya-kamma ought not to be revoked for him;
(that is to say), when he raises objections against a regular <span
id="fr_620"></span>[1](#fn_608) Bhikkhu's taking part in the Uposatha
ceremony--or in the Pavâra*n*â ceremony--when he inhibits a junior from
going beyond the bounds--when he sets on foot a censure against any
other Bhikkhu--when he asks another Bhikkhu to give

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

him leave to rebuke that Bhikkhu--when he warns another Bhikkhu whom he
supposes to be offending--when he reminds another Bhikkhu of a rule
against which he supposes that Bhikkhu to be offending--when he
associates with the Bhikkhus. These are the eight things, O Bhikkhus
(&c., as before, down to) revoked for him.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here end the eighteen cases in which there ought to be no revocation (of
the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_605"></span>[339:1](sbe17117.htm#fr_617) Compare below,
chapters ii, 16, 23, 28, 34.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[339:2](sbe17117.htm#fr_618) Loma*m* pâtenti.
See the commentary as given by H. Oldenberg at p. 309 of his edition of
the text. That our translation is correct is evident from the use of
panna-lomo (at *K*ullavagga VII, 1, 6), that being simply the opposite
of ha*tth*a-lomo, which signifies 'having the hair of the body erect in
consequence of the excitement produced by fear, joy, or amazement;' and
hence simply 'troubled, excited.' The opposite of this is 'pacified,
subdued.'

<span id="fn_607"></span>[339:3](sbe17117.htm#fr_619) Netthâram
vattanti. See the commentary in the edition of the text loco citato.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[340:1](sbe17117.htm#fr_620) Pakatattassa, that
is a Bhikkhu who has not made himself liable to any disciplinary
proceeding, has committed no irregularity. It is one of the expressions
unknown to the Pâtimokkha, but occurs in the much later Introduction to
that work (Dickson, p. 11). See below, III, 1,1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](sbe17118)
