[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17112)  [Next](sbe17114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 <span id="fr_596"></span>[2](#fn_585).

1\. 'There are three things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma is characterised, it is against the Dhamma, and
against the Vinaya, and difficult to be settled; (that is to say), when
it has not been carried out in a full assembly of properly qualified
persons, 'according to law and justice, and in the presence of the
litigant parties <span id="fr_597"></span>[3](#fn_586)--when it has been
carried out without the accused person having been heard--when it has
been carried out without the accused person having confessed himself
guilty. A Ta*gg*aniya-kamma, O Bhikkhus, characterised

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

by these three things is against the Dhamma, and against the Vinaya, and
difficult to be settled.

'There are other three things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma has been characterised, it is against the Dhamma, and
against the Vinaya, and difficult to be settled; (that is to say), when
it has been carried out though no fault has been committed--when it has
been carried out for a Pârâ*g*ika or a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence <span
id="fr_598"></span>[1](#fn_587)--when it has been carried out though the
fault has been confessed. A Ta*gg*aniya-kamma, O Bhikkhus, characterised
(&c., as before, down to) settled.

There are other three things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma has been characterised, it is against the Dhamma, and
against the Vinaya, and difficult to be settled; (that is to say), when
it has been carried out without the accused person having been
warned--when it has been carried out without the accused person having
been called upon to remember (whether he has or has not committed the
offence)--when it has been carried out without the accused person having
been convicted. A Ta*gg*aniya-kamma, O Bhikkhus, characterised (&c., as
before, down to) settled.

'There are other three things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma has been characterised, it is against the Dhamma, and
against the Vinaya, and difficult to be settled; (that is to say), when
it has not been carried out in a properly constituted meeting properly
conducted <span id="fr_599"></span>[2](#fn_588)--when it has

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

been carried out without justice <span
id="fr_600"></span>[1](#fn_589)--when it has been carried out without
the presence and approval of all the Bhikkhus belonging to the
particular circuit <span id="fr_601"></span>[2](#fn_590). A
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma, O Bhikkhus, characterised by these three things is
(&c., as before, down to) settled.

There are other three things, O Bhikkhus, by which, when a
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma has been characterised, it is against the Dhamma, and
against the Vinaya, and difficult to be settled; (that is to say), when
it has been carried out without the accused person having been
heard--when it has been carried out without justice--when it has been
carried out without the presence and approval of all the Bhikkhus
belonging to the circuit. A Ta*gg*aniya-kamma, O Bhikkhus, characterised
by these three things is (&c., as before, down to) settled.

'There are other three things (&c., as before, down to) that is to say,
when it has been carried out without the accused person having been
convicted--when it has been carried out without justice--when it has
been carried out without the presence and approval of all the Bhikkhus
belonging to the circuit.'

\[And in a similar way each of the three things in paragraphs 2 and 3 of
this section are united with the two things just repeated in each of
paragraphs 4, 5, and 6, to make six further cases in which a
Ta*gg*aniya-kamma is declared to be against the Dhamma, and against the
Vinaya, and difficult to be revoked.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here end the twelve cases of a proceeding (Kamma) which is against the
law.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_585"></span>[332:2](sbe17113.htm#fr_596) Repeated below,
chapters Io, 14, and 19.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[332:3](sbe17113.htm#fr_597) All these details
are involved in the meaning of the technical term asammukhatâ, which is
fully explained in *K*ullavagga IV, 14, 16, and following.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[333:1](sbe17113.htm#fr_598) Buddhaghosa says,
Adesanâgâminiyâ ti Pârâ*g*ikâpattiyâ vâ Sa*m*ghâdisesâpattiyâ vâ.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[333:2](sbe17113.htm#fr_599) As in the first
paragraph of this section more fully described, The word here used is
the same.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[334:1](sbe17113.htm#fr_600) Adhammena; perhaps
'contrary to the Rules.'

<span id="fn_590"></span>[334:2](sbe17113.htm#fr_601) Vaggena for vi +
aggena, the opposite of samaggena. See our note on the 21st Pâ*k*ittiya,
and Mahâvagga IX, 3, 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe17114)
