[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17179)  [Next](sbe17181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26.

1\. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu had committed numerous
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences; but he was not aware of the degree of the
offences <span id="fr_744"></span>[2](#fn_723.md), and was not aware of the
duration of the times <span id="fr_745"></span>[2](#fn_723.md); or he did
not recollect the degree of the offences, and did not recollect the
duration of the times; or he was uncertain as to the degree of the
offences, and was uncertain as to the duration of the times.

He told the Bhikkhus, saying, 'I have committed, &c. . . . but I am not
aware, &c. . . . I do not recollect, &c. . . . I am uncertain, &c. . . .
What now shall I do?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

Then let the Sa*m*gha, O Bhikkhus, impose upon that Bhikkhu a probation
of complete purification

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (that is to say, a
probation for as many days as have elapsed since the date of his
upasampadâ) <span id="fr_746"></span>[1](#fn_724.md).

2\. Now thus, O Bhikkhus, should it be imposed.'. . .

\[Here follows the kammavâ*k*â in the same form as is given in chapter
1.\]

3\. 'In the following cases, O Bhikkhus, is the probation of complete
purification to be imposed; and in the following cases is the (ordinary)
probation to be imposed. Now in what cases is the probation of complete
purification to be imposed? When he is not aware of the degree of the
offences, nor of the duration of the times; when he does not recollect
the degree of the offences, nor the duration of the times; and when he
is not certain as to the degree of the offences, nor as to the duration
of the times--then is the probation of complete purification to be
imposed.

'When he is aware of the degree of the offences, but not of the duration
of the times; when he does recollect the degree of the offences, but not
the duration of the times; when he is certain as to the degree of the
offences, but not as to the duration of the times--then is the probation
of complete purification to be imposed.

'When he is aware . . . . recollects . . . . is certain . . . . of the
degree of some, but not of others of the offences, and is not aware of .
. . . does not recollect. . . . is not certain of the duration of the
times <span id="fr_747"></span>[2](#fn_725.md)--then &c.

'When he is not aware . . . . does not recollect . . . .

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

is not certain . . . . of the degree of the offences, and is aware . . .
. recollects . . . . is certain . . . . of the times of some, but not of
the times of the others--then, &c.

'When he is aware . . . . recollects . . . . is certain of the degree of
the offences, and is aware . . . . recollects . . . . is certain of the
times of some, but not of the times of others--then, &c.

'When he is aware . . . . recollects . . . . is certain of the degrees
of some of the offences, but not of others; and is aware . . . .
recollects . . . . is certain of the times of some, but not of the times
of others--then, &c.

'In these cases, O Bhikkhus, is the probation of complete purification
to be imposed.

4\. 'And in what cases, O Bhikkhus, is the (ordinary) probation to be
imposed? When he is aware . . . recollects . . . . is certain of the
degree of the offences, but is not aware . . . . does not recollect . .
. . is not certain of the duration of the times--then is the (ordinary)
probation to be imposed.

When he is not aware . . . . does not recollect . . . . is not certain
of the degree of the offences, but is aware . . . . recollects . . . .
is certain of the duration of the times--then &c. . .

'When he is aware . . . . recollects . . . . is certain of the degree of
some of the offences, but not of others; and is aware . . . . recollects
. . . . is certain of the duration of the times--then &c. . . .

'In these cases, O Bhikkhus, is the (ordinary) probation to be
imposed <span id="fr_748"></span>[1](#fn_726.md).'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the probation.

 

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

27\.

1\. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, whilst he was under probation,
threw off the robes. After-wards he came back again, and asked the
Bhikkhus for upasampadâ. They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu throws off the robes whilst he is under
probation, there can follow no probation to him, O Bhikkhus, so long as
he is out of the Order. If he afterwards receive the upasampadâ, the
original probation (previously imposed upon him, still remains
obligatory) upon him. A probation once imposed, is imposed for good; a
probation once undergone, is undergone for good; if any (portion of the
time) remain over, the probation must be again undergone (from the
beginning).

'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, whilst he is undergoing probation,
becomes a Sâma*n*era. There can happen no probation to him, O Bhikkhus,
so long as he is a Sâma*n*era. If he afterwards receives the upasampadâ
(&c., as in the last paragraph, down to the end).

'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, whilst he is undergoing probation, goes
out of his mind . . . . be-comes weak in his mind . . . . diseased in
his sensations . . . . is suspended for not acknowledging an

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

offence . . . . for not atoning for an offence . . . . for not recanting
a sinful doctrine <span id="fr_749"></span>[1](#fn_727.md)--there can
happen no probation to him, O Bhikkhus, so long as he is out of his mind
. . . . weak in his mind . . . . suspended, &c. If he afterwards becomes
not out of his mind . . . . becomes not weak in his mind . . . . is
restored from the suspension, the original probation is still obligatory
upon him. A probation once imposed (&c., as in the first paragraph, down
to the end).

2\. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu, whilst he is liable to be thrown
back to the commencement of his probation, throws off the robes (&c., as
in all the paragraphs of section 1, reading "liable to be thrown back,"
for "undergoing probation").'

3\. \[The same for a Bhikkhu who throws off the robes, or becomes any of
the seven things specified, whilst he is liable to be subjected to the
Mânatta discipline;

4\. Or is undergoing the Mânatta discipline;

5\. Or is fit to be rehabilitated.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here end the forty <span id="fr_750"></span>[2](#fn_728.md) cases (of
interruption to a major disciplinary proceeding from a change of state
in the person undergoing that discipline).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_723"></span>[416:2](sbe17180.htm#fr_745.md) That these are
plurals, and not singulars, is clear from § 3, below.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[417:1](sbe17180.htm#fr_746.md)
Suddhanta-parivâso. The Samanta Pâsâdika says, Ta*m* gahetvâ
gahita-divasato yâva upasampadâ-divaso tâva rattiyo ga*n*etvâ
parivasitabba*m*.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[417:2](sbe17180.htm#fr_747.md) This and the
following sentences are given in the text in full, as in the last
paragraph.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[418:1](sbe17180.htm#fr_748.md) That is to say,
shortly; if the guilty Bhikkhu can determine the time during which the
offence has been concealed (on which the length of the probation
depends), then he is to undergo the <span id="page_419">p. 419</span>
corresponding probation. If not, he is to undergo the so-called
'probation of complete purification,' which, as it is computed from the
date of his ordination, is quite certain to be as long as the time of
the longest concealment of any offence.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[420:1](sbe17180.htm#fr_749.md) The text has a
separate paragraph for each of these cases.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[420:2](sbe17180.htm#fr_750.md) That is, on any of
the above eight events occurring in any of the above five cases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](sbe17181.md)
