[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17075)  [Next](sbe17077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 9.

1\. At that time the Sa*m*gha's store-room was over-full of clothes.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that they should be distributed by the
assembled Sa*m*gha.'

At that time the whole Sa*m*gha, when distributing the clothes, made a
bustle.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you appoint a Bhikkhu possessed of the
following five qualities, to distribute the clothes: (a person) who does
not go in the evil course of lust . . . and who knows what is
distributed and what is not.

'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to appoint (&c. see chap. 5, § 2).'

2\. Now the Bhikkhus appointed to distribute the clothes thought: 'In
what way are we to distribute the clothes?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you first assort the clothes, estimate
them, share them according to their higher or lower value <span
id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_354), then count the Bhikkhus, divide them
into troops <span id="fr_360"></span>[2](#fn_355), and divide the
portions of cloth (accordingly).'

Now the Bhikkhus, who were to distribute the clothes, thought: 'What
portion of cloth shall be given to the Sâma*n*eras?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give to the Sâma*n*eras half a
portion.'

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

3\. At that time a certain Bhikkhu wished to go across (a river or a
desert) with the portion that should come to him.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give to a Bhikkhu who is going across
(a river or a desert), the portion that should come to him.'

At that time a certain Bhikkhu wished to go across (a river or a desert)
with a greater portion (of cloth than fell to his share).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give more than the due portion (to a
Bhikkhu who desires it), if-he gives a compensation.'

4\. Now the Bhikkhus, who were to distribute the clothes, thought: 'How
are we to assign the portions of cloth (to the single Bhikkhus), by
turns as they arrive (and ask for cloth), or according to their age
(i.e. the time elapsed since their ordination)?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you cast lots, made of grass-blades,
after having made every defective portion even.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_354"></span>[203:1](sbe17076.htm#fr_359) Buddhaghosa: 'If
there are robes of the same quality, for instance, each worth ten
(kâhâpa*n*as), for all Bhikkhus, it is all right; if they are not, they
must take together the robes which are worth nine or eight, with those
which are worth one or two, and thus they must make equal portions.'

<span id="fn_355"></span>[203:2](sbe17076.htm#fr_360) 'In case the day
should not suffice for distributing the robes to the Bhikkhus one by
one' (Buddhaghosa).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](sbe17077)
