[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17038)  [Next](sbe17040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25.

1\. Now the people heard: 'The Blessed One has allowed (to the Bhikkhus
to partake of) rice-milk and honey-lumps.' They prepared early in the
morning solid rice-milk <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_185.md) and
honey-lumps. The Bhikkhus, having satiated themselves in the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

morning with solid rice-milk and with honey-lumps, (afterwards) did not
dine in the dining-hall with good appetite. At that time a certain
minister, who was but newly converted, had invited the fraternity of
Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head for the next day. Now this newly
converted minister thought: 'What if I were to prepare for these twelve
hundred and fifty Bhikkhus twelve hundred and fifty dishes of meat, and
offer to each Bhikkhu one dish of meat!'

2\. And when that night had elapsed, that newly converted minister
ordered excellent food, both hard and soft, and twelve hundred and fifty
dishes of meat to be prepared, and had meal-time announced to the
Blessed One in the words: 'It is time, Lord, the meal is ready.' And in
the forenoon the Blessed One, having put on his under-robes, took his
alms-bowl, and, with his *k*îvara on, went to the house of that newly
converted minister. When he had arrived there, he sat down with the
Bhikkhus who followed him, on seats laid out for them.

3\. Then that newly converted minister in his dining-hall waited on the
Bhikkhus. The Bhikkhus said to him: 'Give us little, friend; give us
little, friend.'

'Do not take little, reverend Sirs, because you think: "This minister is
but newly converted." Much food, both hard and soft, has been prepared
by me, and twelve hundred and fifty dishes of meat; I will offer to each
Bhikkhu one dish of meat. Take, reverend Sirs, as much as you want.'

'This is not the reason, friend, for which we take little. But we have
satiated ourselves in the morning with solid rice-milk and with
honey-lumps; therefore we take little.'

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

4\. And that newly converted minister was annoyed, murmured, and became
angry: 'How can their reverences, when I have invited them, partake of
solid rice-milk with other people, as if I were unable to give them as
much as they want.' (Thinking thus), he went around angry, displeased,
and in an offensive temper, filling the bowls of the Bhikkhus (and
saying), 'Eat or take it away!' And that newly converted minister served
and offered with his own hands excellent food, both hard and soft, to
the fraternity of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head; and when the
Blessed One had finished his meal and cleansed his bowl and his hands,
he sat down near him. And the Blessed One, after having taught, incited,
animated, and gladdened that newly converted minister, who was sitting
near him, by religious discourse, rose from his seat and went away.

5\. And soon after the Blessed One was gone, scruples and remorse befell
that newly converted minister: 'Alas, it is evil to me, it is not good
to me! Alas, it is loss to me, it is not gain to me that I went around
(among the Bhikkhus) angry, displeased, and in an offensive temper,
filling their bowls (and saying), "Eat or take it away!" What have I
produced thereby, more merit or more demerit?'

And that newly converted minister went to the place where the Blessed
One was; having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One,
he sat down near him. Sitting near him, that newly converted minister
said to the Blessed One: 'Lord, soon after the Blessed One was gone,
scruples and remorse have befallen me: "Alas, it is evil to me

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (&c., down to)
more merit or more demerit?" Lord, what have I produced thereby, more
merit or more demerit?'

6\. 'The moment, friend, in which you invited the fraternity of Bhikkhus
with the Buddha at its head for the next day, that moment you acquired
much merit. And the moment in which each Bhikkhu received one lump of
rice from you, that moment you acquired much merit. You gained the
inheritance of heaven.'

Then that newly converted minister thought: 'Oh, it is good to me! Oh,
it is gain to me! I have acquired much merit! I have gained the
inheritance of heaven!'--and glad and joyful he rose from his seat,
respectfully saluted the Blessed One, and passing round him with his
right side towards him, went away.

7\. In consequence of that, and on this occasion, the Blessed One,
having ordered the fraternity of Bhikkhus to assemble, questioned the
Bhikkhus: Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the Bhikkhus, having been invited
to one place, partake of solid rice-milk with other persons?'

'It is true, Lord.'

Then the blessed Buddha rebuked those Bhikkhus: 'How can these foolish
persons, O Bhikkhus, having been invited to one place, partake of solid
rice-milk with other persons? This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for
converting the unconverted,' &c. Having rebuked them and delivered a
religious discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Let no one, O
Bhikkhus, when he is invited to one place, partake of solid rice-milk
with other persons. He who does, is to be treated according to the law.'

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[89:1](sbe17039.htm#fr_188.md) Bho*gg*a-yâgu,
literally, eatable rice-milk, which seems opposed to the ordinary
rice-milk which was drunk. Yâgu is the Pâli word for what is called in
Anglo-Indian terminology 'congey.' Bho*gg*a-yâgu is 'rice pudding made
with milk.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](sbe17040.md)
