[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17137)  [Next](sbe17139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28.

1\. So the Sa*m*gha carried out against *Kh*anna the Bhikkhu the
Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not acknowledging a fault to the effect that he
should not at or dwell together with the Sa*m*gha. And after he had been
subjected by the Sa*m*gha to the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not acknowledging
his fault he went from that residence to another residence. And the
Bhikkhus there did no reverence to him, rose not from their seats to
welcome him, rendered him not service, offered him not salutation, paid
not respect to him, offered him not hospitality, nor esteemed him, nor
honoured him, nor supported him. And when he received from the Bhikkhus
neither hospitality, nor welcome, nor esteem, nor honour, nor

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

support, he went from that residence to another residence. And the
Bhikkhus there did no reverence to him, rose not from their seats to
welcome him, rendered him not service (&c., as before, down to:) he went
from that residence to another residence. And when he received no
hospitality he returned back again even to Kosambî. Then he conducted
himself aright, and he became subdued, and he sought for release, and
going up to the Bhikkhus he spake as follows: 'I, Sirs, having been
subjected by the Sa*m*gha to the Ukkhepaniyakamma am conducting myself
aright in accordance thereto, and I am become subdued, and I seek for
release. What now should I do?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Then, O Bhikkhus, let the Sa*m*gha revoke the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not
acknowledging his fault carried out against *Kh*anna the Bhikkhu.

2\. 'There are five things, O Bhikkhus, \[&c., the rest of this section
bearing the same relation to the last, which chapter 6, § 2, does to
chapter 5.\]'

Here end the forty-three cases \[in which an Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not
acknowledging a fault is not to be revoked\].

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](sbe17139)
