[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17105)  [Next](sbe17107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

# TENTH KHANDHAKA.

#### (SCHISMS AMONG THE SA*M*GHA.)

### 1.

1\. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at Kosambî in the Ghositârâma.

At that time a certain Bhikkhu had committed an offence which he
considered as an offence, while the other Bhikkhus considered that
offence as no offence. Afterwards he began to consider that offence as
no offence, and the other Bhikkhus began to consider that offence as an
offence.

Now those Bhikkhus said to that Bhikkhu: 'You have committed an offence,
friend; do you see that offence?'

(He replied): 'There is no offence, friends, which I should see.'

Then those Bhikkhus, bringing about unanimity (of the fraternity for
their sentence) pronounced expulsion against that Bhikkhu for his
refusal to see that offence.

2\. Now that Bhikkhu was erudite; he had studied the Agamas; he knew the
Dhamma, the Vinaya, the Mâtikâ <span id="fr_557"></span>[1](#fn_547.md); he
was wise, learned, intelligent, modest, conscientious, anxious for
training.

And that Bhikkhu went to his companions and friends among the Bhikkhus,
and said to them: 'This is no offence, friends; this is not an offence.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am offenceless;
I am not guilty of an offence; I am unexpelled and, have not been
expelled; the sentence by which I have been expelled is unlawful,
objectionable, and invalid. May the venerable ones be my partisans
according to Dhamma and Vinaya.'

Thus that Bhikkhu got his companions and friends among the Bhikkhus on
his side.

And he sent also a messenger to his companions and friends among the
Bhikkhus of the whole country (with the following message): 'This is no
offence, friends; this is not an offence (&c., down to:). May the
venerable ones be my partisans according to Dhamma and Vinaya.'

Thus that Bhikkhu got also his companions and friends among the Bhikkhus
of the whole country on his side.

3\. Now those Bhikkhus who were partisans of the expelled Bhikkhu, went
to the place where those who had expelled him, were. Having approached
them, they said to the Bhikkhus who had expelled him: This is no
offence, friends; this is not an offence. This Bhikkhu is offenceless;
this Bhikkhu is not guilty of an offence. This Bhikkhu is unexpelled;
this Bhikkhu has not been expelled. The sentence by which he has been
expelled is unlawful, objectionable, and invalid.'

When they had spoken thus, the Bhikkhus who had expelled that Bhikkhu,
said to the partisans of the expelled one: 'This is an offence, friends;
this is not no offence. This Bhikkhu is an offender; this Bhikkhu is not
offenceless. This Bhikkhu is expelled; this Bhikkhu is not unexpelled.
The sentence by which he has been expelled is lawful,

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

unobjectionable, and valid. Do not stand, O venerable ones, on the side
of this expelled Bhikkhu; do not follow him.'

But the partisans of the expelled Bhikkhu, though they were spoken to
thus by the Bhikkhus who had expelled him, persevered nevertheless on
the side of that expelled Bhikkhu and followed him.

4\. And a certain Bhikkhu went to the place where the Blessed One was.
Having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat
down near him. Sitting near him that Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'A
certain Bhikkhu, Lord, had committed an offence which he considered as
an offence (&c., as in §§ 1-3, down to:). But the partisans, Lord, of
the expelled Bhikkhu, though they were spoken to thus by the Bhikkhus
who had expelled him, persevered nevertheless on the side of that
expelled Bhikkhu and followed him.'

5\. Then the Blessed One (exclaimed): 'The Bhikkhu Sa*m*gha is divided!
The Bhikkhu Sa*m*gha is divided!'--and he rose from his seat and went to
the place where the Bhikkhus were who had pronounced that sentence of
expulsion. Having approached them, he sat down on the seat they had
prepared. Sitting there the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus who had
pronounced expulsion against that Bhikkhu: 'Do not think, O Bhikkhus,
that you are to pronounce expulsion against a Bhikkhu whatever be the
facts of the case, saying, "It occurs to us to do so; it occurs to us to
do so."

6\. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has committed an offence which he
considers as no offence, while the other Bhikkhus consider it as an
offence--if, O Bhikkhus, those Bhikkhus know with regard

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

to that Bhikkhu: "This venerable brother is erudite; he has studied the
Âgamas; he knows the Dhamma, the Vinaya, the Mâtikâ; he is wise,
learned, intelligent, modest, conscientious, anxious for training.
Should we pronounce expulsion against this Bhikkhu for his refusal to
see that offence, and should we not hold Uposatha with that Bhikkhu, but
hold Uposatha without that Bhikkhu, this matter will cause among the
Sa*m*gha altercations, contentions, discord, quarrels, divisions among
the Sa*m*gha, disunion among the Sa*m*gha, separations among the
Sa*m*gha, schisms among the Sa*m*gha,"--in that case, O Bhikkhus, let
those Bhikkhus, standing in awe of causing divisions, not pronounce
expulsion against that Bhikkhu for his refusal to see his offence.

7\. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has committed (&c., as above, down
to:). "Should we pronounce expulsion against this Bhikkhu for his
refusal to see that offence, and should we not hold Pavâra*n*â with that
Bhikkhu, but hold Pavâra*n*â without that Bhikkhu, and not perform
official acts with that Bhikkhu, but perform official acts without that
Bhikkhu, and not sit down on our seats with that Bhikkhu, but sit down
on our seats without that Bhikkhu, and not sit down to drink rice-milk
with that Bhikkhu, but sit down to drink rice-milk without that Bhikkhu,
and not sit down in the dining-hall with that Bhikkhu, but sit down in
the dining-hall without that Bhikkhu, and not dwell under one roof with
that Bhikkhu, but dwell under one roof without that Bhikkhu, and not
perform with that Bhikkhu, according to seniority, the duties of
respectfully saluting each other, rising from our seats, raising the
joined hands before each other, and all

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

proper duties, but perform without that Bhikkhu, according to seniority,
the duties, &c.,--this matter will cause among the Sa*m*gha (&c., as in
§ 6, down to the end).'

8\. And the Blessed One, having spoken thus to the Bhikkhus who had
pronounced that sentence of expulsion, rose from his seat, and went to
the place where the partisans of the expelled Bhikkhu were. Having
approached them, he sat down on the seat they had prepared. Sitting
there the Blessed One said to the partisans of the expelled Bhikkhu: 'Do
not think, O Bhikkhus, if you have committed an offence, that you need
not atone for that offence, (saying to yourselves): "We are without
offence." In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has committed an offence which
he considers as no offence, while the other Bhikkhus consider it as an
offence--if, O Bhikkhus, that Bhikkhu knows with regard to those
Bhikkhus: "These venerable brethren are erudite (&c., down to:) anxious
for training. It is impossible that they should, on my account, or on
account of anybody else, abandon themselves to walking in longing, in
malice, in delusion, in fear. Should these Bhikkhus pronounce expulsion
against me for my refusal to see that offence, and should they not hold
Uposatha with me, but hold Uposatha without me, and should they not hold
Pavâra*n*â with me, but hold Pavâra*n*â without me (&c., as in § 7),
this matter will cause, &c., schisms among the Sa*m*gha,"--in that case,
O Bhikkhus, let that Bhikkhu, standing in awe of causing divisions,
acknowledge that offence on the authority of his brethren <span
id="fr_558"></span>[1](#fn_548.md).' And the

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Blessed One,
having spoken thus to the partisans of the expelled Bhikkhu, rose from
his seat and went away.

9\. At that time the Bhikkhus who were partisans of that expelled
Bhikkhu, held Uposatha and performed official acts at that same place,
within the boundary. On the other hand the Bhikkhus who had pronounced
expulsion against him, went outside the boundary and there held
Uposatha, and performed official acts.

Now a certain Bhikkhu of those who had expelled that Bhikkhu, went to
the place where the Blessed One was; having approached him and having
respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat down near him. Sitting near
him that Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'Lord, those Bhikkhus who are
partisans of that expelled Bhikkhu, hold Uposatha, and perform official
acts, at that same place, within the boundary. On the other hand, we who
have pronounced expulsion against him, have gone outside the boundary
and there hold Uposatha and perform official acts.'

(Buddha replied): 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhu, who are partisans of
that expelled Bhikkhu, will hold Uposatha, and perform official acts, at
that same place, within the boundary, according to the rules laid down
by me about *ñ*atti and anussâvanâ, these official acts which they
perform will be lawful, unobjectionable, and valid. And if you, O
Bhikkhus, who have expelled that Bhikkhu, will hold Uposatha, and
perform official acts, at that same place, within the boundary (&c.,
down to:) and valid.

10\. 'And why is this so? These Bhikkhus belong to another communion
than that to which you

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

belong, and you belong to another communion than that to which they
belong.

'There are two cases, O Bhikkhu, in which a Bhikkhu (though he dwell
within the same boundary) is considered as belonging to another
communion:--either he himself makes himself belong to another
communion <span id="fr_559"></span>[1](#fn_549.md), or the Sa*m*gha in a
complete congregation pronounces expulsion against him for his refusal
to see (an offence committed by himself), or to atone (for such an
offence), or to renounce (a false doctrine). These, O Bhikkhu, are the
two cases in which a Bhikkhu is considered as belonging to another
communion.

'There are two cases, O Bhikkhu, in which a Bhikkhu (belonging to either
of the categories mentioned) reacquires the belonging to the same
communion (with his brethren within the same boundary); either he
himself makes himself belong (again) to that same communion <span
id="fr_560"></span>[2](#fn_550.md), or the Sa*m*gha, having expelled him
for his refusal to see (an offence), or to atone (for an offence), or to
renounce (a false doctrine), restores him in a complete congregation.
These, O Bhikkhu, are the two cases in which a Bhikkhu reacquires the
belonging to the same communion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_547"></span>[285:1](sbe17106.htm#fr_557.md) See *K*ullavagga
I, t I, I, with our note.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[289:1](sbe17106.htm#fr_558.md) In the text
sandhâya must be corrected into saddhâya; see *K*ullavagga XI, 1, 10.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[291:1](sbe17106.htm#fr_559.md) By associating
with expelled Bhikkhus.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[291:2](sbe17106.htm#fr_560.md) By giving up his
connection with expelled Bhikkhus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17107.md)
