[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17124)  [Next](sbe17126.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14.

1\. \[Here follow the twelve cases in which a Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma is
declared to be against

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

the law, and according to law respectively, in the precise wording of
chapters 2 and 3, reading Pabbâ*g*aniya for Ta*gg*aniya. Then follow the
six cases of permissive suspension in the precise wording of chapter 4,
but in addition to the cases there given for the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma, §§ 1
and 2 of this chapter are respectively added at the end of §§ 1 and 2 of
that chapter.\]

1\. 'There are three things, O Bhikkhus, which when they characterise a
Bhikkhu, the Sa*m*gha, if it likes, should carry out the
Pabbâ*g*aniyakamma against him; (that is to say), when he is
characterised by frivolity <span id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_640.md) of
action--when he is characterised by frivolity of speech--when he is
characterised by frivolity both of action and of speech. These are the
three things, O Bhikkhus (&c., as before, down to) against him.

'There are other three things, O Bhikkhus, which when they characterise
a Bhikkhu, the Sa*m*gha, if it likes, should carry out the
Pabbâ*g*aniyakamma against him; (that is to say), when he is
characterised by absence of right-doing in action--when he is
characterised by absence of right-doing in speech--when he is
characterised by absence of right-doing both in action and in speech.
These are the other three things, O Bhikkhus (&c., as before, down to)
against him.

'There are other three things (&c., as in each of the last paragraphs;
the three things here being injury <span id="fr_655"></span>[2](#fn_641.md)
done by him to others in action, in speech, and both in action and in
speech, owing to his own

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

want of training in the precepts and practices of the order).

'There are other three things (&c., as in each of the last paragraphs,
the three things here being evilness of life in action, in speech, and
both in action and in speech).

2\. 'There are three kinds of Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, against whom, when
the Sa*m*gha likes (to do so), it should carry out the
Pabbâ*g*aniyakamma; (that is to say), one who is frivolous in
action--one who is frivolous in speech--one who is frivolous both in
action and in speech. These are the three kinds of Bhikkhus (&c., as
above, down to) the Pabbâ*g*aniya-kamma.

There are other three kinds of Bhikkhus (&c., as in the last paragraph,
substituting first, absence of right-doing--secondly, injury to
others--and thirdly, evilness of life respectively in action, in speech,
and both in action and in speech).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_640"></span>[355:1](sbe17125.htm#fr_654.md) The Sam. Pâs.
says, Kâyiko davo nâma kâya-ki*l*â vu*kk*ati.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[355:2](sbe17125.htm#fr_655.md) The Sam. Pâs.
says, Kâyika*m* upaghâtita*m* nâma kâya-dvâre pa*ññ*atti-sikkhâpadassa
asikkhana-bhâvena upahanana*m* vu*kk*ati.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](sbe17126.md)
