[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17054)  [Next](sbe17056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

# SEVENTH KHANDHAKA.

#### (THE KA*TH*INA CEREMONIES.)

### 1.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed One was staying at Sâvatthi, in the
*G*etavana, Anâthapi*nd*ika's Grove. And at that time about thirty
Pâ*th*eyyaka Bhikkhus <span id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_267),

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

who were all dwellers in the forest, all living on alms, all dressed in
rags from the dust heap, all having only three robes each, when they
were on the way to Sâvatthi to visit the Blessed One, at the time when
the period for entering upon Vassa was at hand, were unable to reach
Sâvatthi in time to spend the Vassa there, and stayed at Sâketa on the
way for the Vassa. And they spent the period of Vassa in discomfort,
thinking, 'Our Blessed One is staying near us, six leagues from here,
and we are not able to visit the Blessed One.'

And when, after three months, those Bhikkhus had completed their Vassa
residence, and had held their Pavâra*n*â, they went on to the place
where the Blessed One was, at Sâvatthi, in the *G*etavana,
Anâthapi*nd*ika's Grove, while the rain was falling, and the waters were
gathering <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_268), and the swamps were
forming, and their robes were all drenched, and they were weary. And
when they had arrived, they saluted the Blessed One, and took their
seats on one side.

2\. Now it is the custom of the blessed Buddhas to greet kindly Bhikkhus
who have just arrived. And the Blessed One said to those Bhikkhus <span
id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_269):

Do things go well with you, O Bhikkhus? Do

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

you get enough to support yourselves with? Have you kept Vassa well, in
unity, and in concord, and without quarrel, and have you not suffered
from want of food?'

'Things go well with us, Lord; we get enough to support ourselves with,
Lord; we have kept Vassa, Lord, in unity, and in concord, and without
quarrel, and have not suffered from want of food. When we were on our
way, Lord, about thirty Pâ*th*eyyaka Bhikkhus, to Sâvatthi to visit the
Blessed One, we were unable to reach Sâvatthi in time (&c., as in § 1,
down to:). And when, after three months, Lord, we had completed our
Vassa residence, and had held our Pavâra*n*â, we have made our way,
while the rain was falling, and the waters were gathering, and the
swamps were forming; and our robes were all drenched; and we have become
weary.'

3\. Then the Blessed One in that connection, having delivered a
religious discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said <span
id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_270):

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Ka*th*ina ceremony shall be performed
by Bhikkhus when

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

they have completed their Vassa. And five things are allowable to you, O
Bhikkhus, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held--going for alms to
the houses of people who have not invited you <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_271), going

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

for alms without wearing the usual set of three robes <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_272), going for alms in a body of four or
more <span id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_273), possessing as many robes as
are wanted <span id="fr_278"></span>[3](#fn_274), and whatever number of
robes shall have come to hand, that shall belong to them (that is, to
the Bhikkhus entitled, by residence and otherwise, to share in the
distribution  <span id="fr_279"></span>[4](#fn_275)).

'And thus, O Bhikkhus, is the Ka*th*ina to be dedicated.

4\. 'Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

the following *ñ*atti before the Sa*m*gha: "This Ka*th*ina-cloth has
become the property of the Sa*m*gha. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the
Sa*m*gha hand over the Ka*th*ina-cloth to such and such a Bhikkhu to
spread out the Ka*th*ina. This is the *ñ*atti. Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. This Ka*th*ina-cloth has become the property of
the Sa*m*gha. The Sa*m*gha hands it over to such and such a Bhikkhu to
spread out the Ka*th*ina. If the Sa*m*gha approves of the handing over
of the Ka*th*ina to such and such a Bhikkhu for spreading it out, let it
remain silent. The Sa*m*gha approves thereof. Therefore does it remain
silent. Thus I understand <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_276)."

5\. 'Now thus, O Bhikkhus, has the Ka*th*ina ceremony been duly held;
and thus has it not been duly held <span
id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_277).

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

When, O Bhikkhus, has it not been duly held?'

The Ka*th*ina ceremony has not been duly held when the stuff has only
been marked (for the purposes of measurement) <span
id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_278): when it has only been washed: when it
has only been calculated (to see how many robes it will make): when it
has only been cut out: when it has only been pieced together <span
id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_279): when it has only been sewn in
lengths <span id="fr_284"></span>[3](#fn_280): when it has only been
marked <span id="fr_285"></span>[4](#fn_281):when it has only been made
strong (in the seams) <span id="fr_286"></span>[5](#fn_282): when it has
only

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

been strengthened by a braid <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_283) or by
a binding <span id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_284) along the back, or by
being doubled in parts <span id="fr_289"></span>[3](#fn_285): when it
has only been put into the dye <span id="fr_290"></span>[4](#fn_286):
when the decision (by the presiding Bhikkhu, as to which robes he will
take for himself) has been made (but not been carried out <span
id="fr_291"></span>[5](#fn_287)): when there has been talk (about the
merit acquired by presenting the Sa*m*gha with cloth, and the donor has
been induced thereby to show his liberality <span
id="fr_292"></span>[6](#fn_288)): when the gift is only a temporary
one <span id="fr_293"></span>[7](#fn_289): when the ceremony has been
postponed <span id="fr_294"></span>[8](#fn_290):

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

when the ceremony has had to be abandoned (because it has lasted through
the night) <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_291): when the ceremony has
fallen through (from other causes) <span
id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_292): when (in the formal choice by the
presiding Bhikkhu) the upper robes have been left out, or the under
robes, or the waist-cloths: when any one of the five parts of the robe
have been omitted in the cutting out <span
id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_293): when the ceremony has been presided
over by more than one Bhikkhu <span id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_294). And
even when the Ka*th*ina ceremony has (otherwise) been normally
performed, if (the Sa*m*gha) ratifying the distribution, be other than
the (whole Sa*m*gha) dwelling within the boundary, then also the
Ka*th*ina ceremony has not been duly held <span
id="fr_299"></span>[5](#fn_295).

'In these cases, O Bhikkhus, the Ka*th*ina ceremony has not been duly
held.

6\. 'And when, O Bhikkhus, has the Ka*th*ina ceremony been duly held?'

'When the robes have been made out of new

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

cotton-cloth, or as good as new, or out of cloth <span
id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_296), or out of (rags) taken from the
dust-heap <span id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_297), or out of odd bits
picked up in the bazaar <span id="fr_302"></span>[3](#fn_298): when the
decision (by the presiding Bhikkhu as to which robes he will take for
himself) has not (merely) been made (but carried out): when there has
been no talk about (the merit acquired by offering a Ka*th*ina): when
the gift is not merely a temporary one: when the ceremony has not been
postponed: when it has not been necessary to abandon the ceremony: when
the ceremony has not fallen through: when (in the choice made by the
presiding Bhikkhu) the upper robes have not been left out, nor the under
robes, nor the waist-cloths: when not one of the five parts of the robe
have been omitted in the cutting out: when (the ceremony has been
presided over) by one Bhikkhu. And also when, after the Ka*th*ina
ceremony has been (otherwise) normally performed, the ratification has
been given by the (whole Sa*m*gha) dwelling within the boundary.

'In these cases, O Bhikkhus, the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been duly held.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_267"></span>[146:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_271) Buddhaghosa says,
Pâ*th*eyya (the Berlin MS. reads Pâveyya) is the name of a kingdom
situated to the west of the Kosala country. This passage refers to
Bhikkhus who dwelt there. The Bhattavaggiya Theras (so the Berlin MS.;
query Satta-vaggiya), who were brothers of the Kosala king, sons of the
same father, are here alluded to.'

But with which of the many kingdoms 'to the west of the Kosala country'
are we to identify Pâ*th*eyya? The word does not occur in the stock
list, found in different parts of the Pâli Pi.itakas, of the sixteen
Mahâ-*g*anapadâ; that is to say, Aṅga, Magadha, Kâsi, Kosala, Va*gg*i,
Malla, *K*etiya, Va*ms*a, Kuru, Pa*ñk*âla, Ma*kkh*a, Sûrasena, Assaka,
Avanti, Gandhâra, Kambo*g*a. The account of the Council at Vesâlî gives
us a hint as to the right answer to the above question; for the Thera
Sambhûta, who took part in that Council, is called a Pâ*th*eyyaka in
*K*ullavagga XII, 2, 7, and is also said at *K*ullavagga XII, 1, 8 to
have lived Ahogaṅge Pabbate. The position of this hill is further
described in the Mahâva*m*sa as being on the upper Ganges--uddhagaṅgâya
. . . . Ahogaṅgamhi pabbate (p. 39, ed. Turnour). Then again in
*K*ullavagga XII, 1, 7 the Thera Yasa, when wishing to put himself in
communication with the Bhikkhus in Pâ*th*eyya and in other places, goes
to Kosambî as the most convenient meeting-place for Bhikkhus coming from
the East. The other places mentioned in that passage in juxta-position
with Pâ*th*eyya would seem to show that Pâ*th*eyya, with Pâ*k*îna,
Avanti, and Dakkhi*n*âpatha, is one of the principal divisions into
which India, as then known, was divided; and that it includes most, if
not all, of the great westerly kingdoms of <span id="page_147">p.
147</span> Kuru, Pa*ñk*âla, &c., which are the last eight of the sixteen
kingdoms in the stock list above referred to. Probably the literal
meaning of Pâ*th*eyya is 'western' (Sans. pratya*ñk*). In the
Suttavibhaṅga (Pâ*k*ittiya 34) merchants are mentioned who are
travelling from Râ*g*agaha to the Pa*t*iyâloka, which must mean 'the
western country,' just as Pa*t*iyârâma (Dîpav. 17, 11) means 'the
western Ârâma.'

<span id="fn_268"></span>[147:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_272) Udaka-sa*m*gahe
’ti udakena sa*m*gahite gha*t*ite sa*m*sa*tth*e thale *k*a ninne *k*a
ekodakibhûte ’ti attho (B.).

<span id="fn_269"></span>[147:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_273) Compare IV, I, 8,
and foll.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[148:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_274) As has been
remarked in a previous note (to the first Nissaggiya Pâ*k*ittiya Rule)
some of the details of these Ka*th*ina ordinances are at present
difficult to understand. But the general meaning of them is already
clear. Immediately after the Pavâra*n*â, the ceremony by which the Vassa
residence is closed, there follows a distribution of the robes belonging
to the local Sa*m*gha, (that is, the portion of the Order dwelling
within one boundary,) to the particular Bhikkhus composing the Sa*m*gha.
This distribution commences with the ka*th*in-atthâra, atthâra,
'spreading out,' not being used here literally for spreading out on the
ground or otherwise, but in a secondary, juristic sense. And the act
performed receives the technical name atthâra by a process of putting a
part for the whole, the spreading out in the sun (see our note, [p.
18](sbe17005.htm#page_18)) for the whole ceremony. We translate the term
according to the context, sometimes by 'spreading out,' sometimes by
'ceremony,' sometimes by 'dedication.'

<span id="page_`49">p. \`49</span>

The Ka*th*ina, literally 'hard,' is the stock of cotton cloth provided
by the faithful to be made up into robes for the use of the Sa*m*gha
during the ensuing year. The whole of this cotton cloth must be dyed,
sewn together, and made into robes, and then formally declared to be
(not only common property, Sa*m*ghika, but) available for immediate
distribution--all on one and the same day. The object of this was that
the Sa*m*gha, or at least a quorum of the Sa*m*gha, being able to be
present throughout, there would be less chance of any mistake by which
what was intended equally for all might come to be unequally divided
among a few. All the Brethren who have kept their Vassa within the
limits of the district within which the particular Sa*m*gha lives (and
therefore technically called an âvâsa, 'residence'), and who have taken
part in the Pavâra*n*â, are entitled to share in the distribution.

(Buddhaghosa says, 'Ettha kathinatthâra*m* ke labhanti ke na labhanti.
Ga*n*avasena tâva pa*kkh*ima-ko*t*iyâ pa*ñk*a *g*anâ (for at least five
must be present to make a Pavâra*n*â legal, Mahâvagga IX, 4, r) . . . .
vu*tth*avassavasena purimikâya vassa*m* upagantvâ pa*th*ama-pavâra*n*âya
pavâritâ labhanti.')

There can of course be no ka*th*in-atthâra if there is no ka*th*ina;
and, under certain restrictions laid down in the Nissaggiya Pâ*k*ittiya
Rules, laymen were allowed to give robes for the special use of a
particular Bhikkhu. If, however, a layman was desirous of giving the
much more meritorious gift of a Ka*th*ina to the whole community, then
he is to present the cloth in the early morning to a properly
constituted meeting of the Sa*m*gha, and the Ka*th*ina ceremony has to
be gone through. All the Brethren living within the boundary have to be
present, and to take part in the work of making the cotton cloth up into
robes; and if there is any danger of the work not being concluded before
the day is over, even the most senior Bhikkhus, or the most revered for
their learning or insight, must lend a hand. Then follows the
distribution so far only as is set forth in the next section (§ 4) and
in the note to it.

Now it would often happen that, at the end of the rainy season of Vassa,
the last year's robes of some of the Bhikkhus would be worn out. And yet
no laymen would come forward to give a Ka*th*ina until some time after
the Vassa residence had closed. But <span id="page_150">p. 150</span> if
any one did offer a Ka*th*ina, and the ceremony was duly performed, then
each Bhikkhu had a right to supply his actual needs from the robes made
out of the Ka*th*ina. He need not do so at once. His want might not be
pressing, or might not even arise till afterwards. During such an
interval the five privileges (Anisa*m*sâ) mentioned in this section (§
3) are accorded to the Bhikkhus, though they would be against the rules
in force during the rest of the year.

But if the Bhikkhu kept on postponing his choice would the privileges
accorded by this section hold good even during the whole year? Could the
Bhikkhu, by his mere abstention, thus bring about a practical abrogation
of the general rules? Not so, for the five privileges are in their turn
suspended by any one of the eight things mentioned below in § 7.

We may add that at the present time in Burma and Ceylon, the robes for
the Bhikkhus are usually provided in accordance with the rules
regulating gifts to particular Bhikkhus. But the gift of a Ka*th*ina is
still by no means uncommon. See Spence Hardy's 'Eastern Monachism,' pp.
121 and foll. There is probably, however, very seldom any necessity for
the Bhikkhus to avail themselves of any of the five privileges, except
the last.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[150:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_275) This privilege is
one of the exceptions allowed, in the Pâtimokkha, to the 46th
Pâ*k*ittiya. Bhikkhus were allowed, as a general rule, to pass through a
village, with their alms-bowls in their hands, in order to give any
disciple who wished to do so the opportunity of giving them food. (To
describe this procedure by our word 'begging,' as is so often done, is,
to say the least, misleading.) The 46th Pâ*k*ittiya lays down, in
certain circumstances, a restriction on this general rule. The present
section removes that restriction during the period of Ka*th*in-atthâra;
in order, according to Buddhaghosa (see the note on Pâ*k*. 46), to
prevent the stock of robes falling short. That is, apparently, with the
hope that a freer intercourse than usual between Bhikkhus and laity
might lead to a gift of a Ka*th*ina when it was urgently required.

Here Buddhaghosa says simply, 'Anâmanta-*k*âro ’ti yâva ka*th*ina*m* na
uddhariyati tâva anâmantetvâ: Âmanteti must be equal to âpu*kkh*ati.
Compare Böhtlingk-Roth under âmantra*n*a.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[151:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_276) This privilege is
granted as a relaxation of the 2nd Nissaggiya. Buddhaghosa says,
'Asamâdâna-*k*âro ’ti ti-*k*ivara*m* asamâdâya *k*ara*n*a*m*
*k*îvara-vippavâso kappissatîti attho.' Compare Mahâvagga VIII, 23, 3.
It will be seen that the wording of the Pâtimokkha Rule is not
inconsistent with the rule laid down here.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[151:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_277) This is a
relaxation of the 32nd Pâ*k*ittiya, and is mentioned in that rule.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[151:3](sbe17055.htm#fr_278) This would seem to
be a relaxation of the 1st Pâ*k*ittiya. Though it is not referred to
there in terms, it is implied in the clause by which the operation of
the rule is postponed till after the Ka*th*ina has been 'taken up,' i.e.
till each Bhikkhu has actually received his share, or otherwise lost his
claim to it. Till that has taken place, a Bhikkhu may use (temporarily,
and without actually appropriating them) as many robes as he likes. B.
says, 'Yâvadattha-*k*îvaran ti yâvatâ *k*ivarena attho tâvataka*m*
anadhi*tth*ita*m* avikappita*m* (compare Sutta-vibhaṅga Niss. I, 3, 1)
kappissatîti attho:

<span id="fn_275"></span>[151:4](sbe17055.htm#fr_279) That is, according
to Buddhaghosa, either those belonging to a Bhikkhu who has died, or
those belonging to the Sa*m*gha in any way. This shows that at the
division not only the robes made out of the gift of a Ka*th*ina were to
be included, but whatever robes had not been given as intended specially
for some one Bhikkhu. As to the actual practice now in Ceylon, compare
Spence Hardy, loc. cit. Buddhaghosa says here: 'Yo *k*a tattha
*k*îvar-uppâdo tattha ka*th*inatthata-sîmâya mataka-*k*îvara*m* vâ hotu
sa*m*gha*m* uddissa dinna*m* vâ sa*m*ghikena tatr’ uppâdena âbhata*m* vâ
yena kena*k*i âkârena yam sa*m*ghika*m* *k*îvara*m* uppa*gg*ati ta*m*
tesa*m* bhavissatîti attho.' The use of the pronoun nesa*m* at the end
of the rule is awkward, following after vo; but the meaning as
translated is not open to doubt.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[152:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_280) This formula is
one of those included in the collection entitled Kammavâ*k*a*m*. It
appears from Minayeff (Prâtimoksha, pp. 75, 76) that the Bhikkhu so
appointed superintends the processes of dyeing, sewing, &c. When the new
robes are ready for wear, he lays aside one of his old robes which has
been worn out (pa*k*.uddharitvâ), and chooses for himself one of the new
ones (nava*m* adhi*tth*ahitvâ), saying as he does so, 'imâya
sa*m*ghâ*t*iyâ (or, as the case may be, uttarâsaṅgena, antaravâsakena)
ka*th*ina*m* attharâmi.' This speech shows the technical application of
the verb attharati in this connection. He then points out the remaining
robes to the Bhikkhus there present, specifying which he thinks fit for
the elder, and which for the younger members of the Order (Theras and
Navakas); but not assigning further any particular robes to particular
Bhikkhus. Finally he calls upon the Sa*m*gha for their formal approval
of his procedure (compare the closing words of §§5, 6). But when they
have given it, the distribution is not at an end. The time has only come
when each of the Bhikkhus can transmute his claim to an undivided share
into the actual possession of a divided share. Until he does so, the
Ka*th*ina privileges set out in § 3 are allowed to him.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[152:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_281) The formal
permission to each Bhikkhu to take his share is <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> not completed by any one of the following acts having been
performed. The technical terms of the tailor's craft are, as will be
seen, by no means easy to follow.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[153:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_282) Ullikhita-mattenâ
’ti dîghato *k*a puthulato *k*a pamâ*n*a-gaha*n*a-mattena. Pamâ*n*a*m*
hi ga*n*hanto tassa tassa padesassa sa*ñg*ânanattha*m* nakhâdîhi vâ
pari*kkh*eda*m* dassento ullikhati, nalâ*t*âdîsu vâ gha*m*sati. Tasmâ
ta*m* pamâ*n*a-gaha*n*a*m* ullikhita-mattan ti vu*kk*ati (B.).

<span id="fn_279"></span>[153:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_283) Bandhana-mattenâ
’ti mogha-suttak-âropana-mattena (B.). Mogha-suttakâni, 'false threads,'
are threads put in the cloth to show where it is to be cut or sewn. See
Buddhaghosa on *K*ullavagga V, II, 3 (p. 317 of H. O.'s edition). Our
clause therefore means temporarily pieced together as the commencement
of the tailoring work.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[153:3](sbe17055.htm#fr_284) Ova*tt*iya (sic)
-kara*n*a-mattenâ ’ti mogha-suttakânusârena dîgha-sibbita-mattena (B.).
Sewn in lengths along the lines of the false threads mentioned in the
last note. The word occurs also in Mahâvagga VIII, 14, 2; and in
*K*ullavagga V, 1, 2 we are told that the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus
ova*tt*ika*m* dhârenti. Buddhaghosa says there vi*ggh*ita-kara*n*a*m*
ova*tt*ikâ.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[153:4](sbe17055.htm#fr_285) By joining on a
little piece of cloth. Ka*nd*usa-kara*n*a-mattenâ ’ti
muddiya-pa*tt*a-bandhana-mattena, says Buddhaghosa.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[153:5](sbe17055.htm#fr_286)
Da*lh*i-kara*n*a-mattenâ ’ti dve *k*imilikâyo (MS. *k*ilimikâyo) ekato
katvâ sibbita-mattena: athavâ pat*h*ama-*k*imilikâ gha*tt*etvâ *th*apitâ
hoti, ka*th*ina-sâ*t*aka*m* tassâ ku*kkh*i-*k*imilika*m* katvâ
sappita-(read sibbita-) mattenâ ’ti pi attho. Mahâ-pa*kk*ariya*m*
pakati*k*îvarassa upassaya-dânenâ ’ti vutta*m*. Kurundiya*m*
pakatipa*tt*a *k*îvara*m* dupa*tt*a*m* kâtum ku*kkh*i-*k*imilika*m*
alliyâpana-mattenâ ’t vutta*m* (B.). On *k*imilikâ compare Minayeff's
'Prâtimoksha,' p. 87.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[154:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_287)
Anuvâta-kara*n*a-mattenâ ’ti pi*tth*i-anuvâta-âropana-mattena (B.).
Compare VIII, 2 1, I.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[154:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_288)
Paribha*nd*a-kara*n*a-mattenâ ’ti ku*kkh*i-anuvâta-âropana-mattena (B.).
Compare VIII, 21, I.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[154:3](sbe17055.htm#fr_289) Ova*tth*eyya (sic)
-kara*n*a-mattenâ ’ti âgantuka-pa*tt*’-âropana-mattena:
ka*th*ina-*k*îvarato vâ pa*tt*am gahetvâ a*ññ*asmi*m*
aka*th*ina-*k*îvare pa*tt*’-âropana-mattena (B.).

<span id="fn_286"></span>[154:4](sbe17055.htm#fr_290)
Kambala-maddana-mattenâ ’ti ekavâra*m* yeva ra*g*ane pakkhittena
danta-va*nn*ena pan*d*u-palâsa-van*n*ena vâ: sa*k*e pana saki*m* vâ
dvikkhattu*m* vâ ratta*m* (MS. ra*tth*u*m*) pi saruppa*m* hoti va*tt*ati
(B.).

<span id="fn_287"></span>[154:5](sbe17055.htm#fr_291) Or perhaps,
according to some commentators, when it has been decided to accept the
gift as a Ka*th*ina, that is, when it has been decided that the cloth is
of a suitable kind to make robes out of. Buddhaghosa says:
Nimitta-katenâ ’ti iminâ dussena ka*th*ina*m* attharissâmîti eva*m*
nimittakatena. Ettakam eva Parivâre vutta*m*. A*tth*akathâsu pana aya*m*
sâ*t*ako sundaro, sakkâ iminâ ka*th*ina*m* attharitun ti eva*m*
nimittakata*m* katvâ laddhenâ ’ti attho. Compare below, § 6, for this
and the two following words, the meaning of which is very doubtful.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[154:6](sbe17055.htm#fr_292) Buddhaghosa:
Parikathâ-katenâ ’ti ka*th*ina*m* nâma dâtum va*tt*ati, ka*th*ina-dâyako
bahu-pu*ññ*a*m* pasavatîti eva*m* parikathâya uppâditena. Ka*th*ina*m*
nâma ati-ukka*tth*a*m* va*tt*ati: mâtaram pi na vi*ñn*âpetu*m*
va*tt*ati: âkâsato oti*nn*a-sadisam eva va*tt*ati.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[154:7](sbe17055.htm#fr_293) Buddhaghosa simply
says: kukku-katenâ ’ti tâvakâlikena. The last word means 'only for a
time, temporary, on loan;' see *G*âtaka I, 121, 393, and *K*ullavagga X,
16, 1; but the explanation is not clear. According to the
Abhidhâna-ppadîpikâ kukku is a measure of length.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[154:8](sbe17055.htm#fr_294) Sannidhi-katenâ
’ti ettha duvidho sannidhi; kara*n*a-sannidhi <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> *k*a ni*k*aya-sannidhi ha. Tattha tadah’ eva akatvâ
*th*apetvâ karana*m* karana-sannidhi; sa*m*gho a*gg*a ka*th*ina-dussa*m*
labhitvâ puna-divase deti aya*m* ni*k*aya-sannidhi (B.).

<span id="fn_291"></span>[155:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_295) Nissaggiyenâ ’ti
ratti-nissaggiyena. Parivâre pi vutta*m* nissaggiya*m* nâma kayiramâne
aruna*m* udriyatîti (B.).

<span id="fn_292"></span>[155:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_296) Akappa-katenâ ’ti
anâdinna-kappa-bindhunâ (B.), which we do not understand. Perhaps we
should read bindunâ.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[155:3](sbe17055.htm#fr_297) A*ññ*atra
pa*ñk*akena vâ atireka-pa*ñk*akena vâ ’ti pa*ñk*a vâ atirekâni vâ
kha*nd*âni katvâ mahâ-ma*nd*ala-a*ddh*a-ma*nd*alâni dassetvâ katen’ eva
va*tt*ati. Eva*m* hi sama*nd*ali-kata*m* hoti. Ta*m* *th*apetvâ a*ññ*ena
a*kkh*innakena vâ dvi-tti-*k*atu-kha*nd*ena vâ na va*tt*ati (B.). On
these five parts of the robe compare below, Mahâvagga VIII, 12,2.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[155:4](sbe17055.htm#fr_298) A*ññ*atra
puggalassa atthârâ ’ti puggalassa atthâra*m* *th*apetvâ na a*ññ*ena
sa*m*ghassa vâ ga*n*assa vâ atthârena atthata*m* hoti (B.). The official
'distributor' (atthâraka) must be a single person, not a ga*n*a, or the
Sa*m*gha.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[155:5](sbe17055.htm#fr_299) See the note on §
4, and below, VIII, 23.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[156:1](sbe17055.htm#fr_300) Pilo*t*ikâyâ ’ti
hata-vatthaka-sâ*t*akena(B.).

<span id="fn_297"></span>[156:2](sbe17055.htm#fr_301) Pa*m*sukulenâ ’ti
te-vîsatiyâ khettesu uppanna-pa*m*sukulena.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[156:3](sbe17055.htm#fr_302) Pâpa*n*ikenâ ’'ti
âpana-dvâre patita-pilo*t*ika*m* gahetvâ ka*th*inatthâya deti, tenâpi
va*tt*atîti attho (B.). Compare VIII, 14, 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17056)
