[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17039)  [Next](sbe17041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26 <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_186).

1\. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at Andhakavinda as long as
he thought fit, went forth to Râ*g*agaha, accompanied by a great number
of Bhikkhus, by twelve hundred and fifty Bhikkhus. At that time
Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna was travelling on the road from Râ*g*agaha to
Andhakavinda with five hundred carts all full of pots of sugar. And the
Blessed One saw Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna coming from afar; when he saw him,
he left the road, and sat down at the foot of a tree.

2\. And Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna went to the place where the Blessed One
was; having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he
stationed himself near him. Standing near him, Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna said
to the Blessed One: 'I wish, Lord, to give to each Bhikkhu one pot of
sugar.'

'Well, Ka*kk*âna, bring here one pot of sugar.'

Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna accepted this order of the Blessed One (by saying),
'Yes, Lord,' took one pot of sugar and went to the place where the
Blessed One was; having approached him, he said to the Blessed One: 'I
have brought here, Lord, the pot of sugar; what shall I do with it,
Lord?'

'Well, Ka*kk*âna, give the sugar to the Bhikkhus.'

3\. Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna accepted this order of the Blessed One (by
saying), 'Yes, Lord,' gave the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

sugar to the Bhikkhus, and said to the Blessed One: 'I have given the
sugar to the Bhikkhus, Lord, but there is much sugar left over; what
shall I do with it, Lord?'

'Well, Ka*kk*âna, give the Bhikkhus as much sugar as they want.'

Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna accepted this order of the Blessed One (by saying),
'Yes, Lord,' gave the Bhikkhus as much sugar as they wanted, and said to
the Blessed One: '1 have given, Lord, the Bhikkhus as much sugar as they
want, but there is much sugar left over; what shall I do with it, Lord?'

'Well, Ka*kk*âna, let the Bhikkhus eat their fill with sugar.'

Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna accepted this order of the Blessed One (by saying),
'Yes, Lord,' and let the Bhikkhus eat their fill with sugar; some
Bhikkhus filled their bowls and filled their water strainers and bags
with it.

4\. And Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna, having let the Bhikkhus eat their fill
with sugar, said to the Blessed One: 'The Bhikkhus, Lord, have eaten
their fill with sugar, but there is much sugar left over; what shall I
do with it, Lord?'

'Well, Ka*kk*âna, give the sugar to the people who eat the remains of
(the Bhikkhus') food,' &c.

'Well, Ka*kk*âna, give the people who eat the remains of (the Bhikkhus')
food as much sugar as they want,' &c.

5\. 'Well, Ka*kk*âna, let the people who eat the remains of (the
Bhikkhus') food, eat their fill with sugar' (&c., down to:); some of the
people who ate the remains of (the Bhikkhus') food, filled their

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

pots and jars, and filled their baskets and the folds of their dress
with it.

6\. And Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna, having let the people who ate the remains
of (the Bhikkhus') food, eat their fill with sugar, said to the Blessed
One: 'The people, Lord, who eat the remains of (the Bhikkhus') food,
have eaten their fill with sugar, but there is much sugar left over;
what shall I do with it, Lord?'

I see no one, Ka*kk*âna, in the world of men and gods, in Mâra's and
Brahma's world, among all beings, Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, gods and
men, by whom that sugar, when he has eaten it, can be fully assimilated,
save by the Tathâgata or by a disciple of the Tathâgata. Therefore,
Ka*kk*âna, throw that sugar away at a place free from grass, or sink it
into water in which there are no living things.'

Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna accepted this order of the Blessed One (by saying),
'Yes, Lord,' and sunk that sugar into water in which there were no
living things.

7\. And that sugar, when thrown into the water, hissed and bubbled, and
steamed, and sent forth smoke. As a ploughshare, which has been heated
through the whole day and is thrown into water, hisses and bubbles, and
steams, and sends forth smoke, so that sugar, when thrown into the
water, hissed and bubbled, steamed, and sent forth smoke. And Bela*tth*a
Ka*kk*âna, terrified and having his hair erect with fear, went to the
place where the Blessed One was; having approached him and respectfully
saluted the Blessed One, he sat down near him.

8\. When Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna was sitting near him,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the Blessed One preached to him in due course; that is to say, he talked
about the merits obtained by alms-giving, about the duties of morality,
about heaven, about the evils, the vanity, and the defilement of lusts,
and about the blessings of the abandonment of lusts. When the Blessed
One saw that the mind of Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna was prepared, impressible,
free from obstacles (to understanding the Truth), elated, and believing,
then he preached what is the principal doctrine of the Buddhas, namely,
Suffering, the Cause of suffering, the Cessation of suffering, the Path.
Just as a clean cloth free from black specks properly takes the dye,
thus Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna, even while sitting there, obtained the pure
and spotless Eye of the Truth (that is, the knowledge): 'Whatsoever is
subject to the condition of origination is subject also to the condition
of cessation.'

9\. And Bela*tth*a Ka*kk*âna, having seen the Truth, having mastered the
Truth, having understood the Truth, having penetrated the Truth, having
overcome uncertainty, having dispelled all doubts, having gained full
knowledge, dependent on nobody else for the knowledge of the doctrine of
the Teacher, said to the Blessed One: 'Glorious, Lord! glorious, Lord!
Just as if one should set up, Lord, what had been overturned, or should
reveal what had been hidden, or should point out the way to one who had
lost his way, or should bring a lamp into the darkness, in order that
those who had eyes might see visible things, thus has the Blessed One
preached the doctrine in many ways. I take my refuge, Lord, in the
Blessed One, and in the Dhamma, and in the fraternity of Bhikkhus; may

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the Blessed One receive me from this day forth while my life lasts as a
disciple who has taken his refuge in him.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[93:1](sbe17040.htm#fr_189) See the 33rd
Pâ*k*ittiya Rule about parampara-bho*g*ana (taking food in turn).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](sbe17041)
