[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17028)  [Next](sbe17030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15.

1\. Now at that time the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a had a mountain cave
at Râ*g*agaha cleared out, with the object of making it into a cave
dwelling-place. And the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra went to the
place where the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a was; and when he had come
there, he saluted the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, and took his seat on
one side.

And when he was so seated the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra said to
the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, 'What is it that my Lord, the Thera, is
having done?'

'I am having a cave cleared out, with the object of making it into a
cave dwelling-place.'

'Do you then, Sir, require an ârâmika (a park-keeper)?'

'Not so, great king! A park-keeper has not been prescribed by the
Blessed One.'

'Then, Sir, enquire, of the Blessed One (concerning this matter), and
let me then know.'

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

'Very well, O King!' said the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a in assent to the
Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra.

2\. Then the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a taught and incited and roused and
gladdened the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra with religious discourse.
And the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, when he had been taught &c. by
the religious discourse, rose from his seat, and bowed down before the
venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, and passing round him with his right side
towards him, departed thence.

Then the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a sent a message to the Blessed One,
saying, 'Lord! the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra desires to present me
with a park-keeper. What am I, therefore, Lord, to do?'

Then the Blessed One, in that connection, after delivering a religious
discourse, said to the Bhikkhus:

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the accepting of a park-keeper.'

3\. And a second time the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra went to the
place where the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a was; and when he had come
there he saluted the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, and took his seat on one
side.

And when he was so seated the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra said to
the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, 'Has the Blessed One allowed a
park-keeper?'

'Yes, O King!'

Then, Sir, I will present a park-keeper to you.'

Now the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, after he had (thus) promised a
park-keeper to the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, forgot it. And after a
time he

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

recovered recollection of it, and addressed a certain minister who had
charge of general affairs, and said: 'The park-keeper whom I promised to
the venerable one, has he been given to him?'

'No, your Majesty!'

'How long is it then, good Sir, since that was determined?'

4\. Then that minister, counting up the nights, said to the Mâgadha king
Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, 'Five hundred nights, your Majesty.'

'Give then, my good Sir, five hundred park-keepers to the venerable
one!'

'As your Majesty commands,' said that minister in assent to the Mâgadha
king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra; and he gave over to the venerable
Pilindava*kkh*a five hundred park-keepers, and (for their use) a
distinct village grew up. And they called it Arâmika-gâma, and they
called it also Pilinda-gâma. Thenceforward the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a
depended upon the families living in that village (for alms, &c.). And
the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a robed himself early in the morning, and
entered into Pilinda-gâma, duly bowled and robed for alms.

5\. Now at that time there was a feast in that village, and the children
were celebrating it, with their ornaments on, and decked with garlands.
And the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, when he was going his rounds for
alms, straight on from house to house, came to the dwelling-place of a
certain park-keeper; and when he had come there he sat down on a seat
prepared for him.

And at that time the daughter of that park-keeper's wife, seeing the
other children with their ornaments on, and decked with garlands, began
to

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

cry (saying), 'Give me too a garland, give me an ornament!'

And the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a said to that park-keeper's wife: 'Why
does that girl cry?'

'This girl, venerable Sir, seeing the other children with their
ornaments on, and decked with garlands, is crying (and saying), "Give me
too a garland, give me too an ornament!" But whence should we, who have
become so poor, get garlands or ornaments?'

6\. Then the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a took a grass chumbat <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_163.md), and said to the park-keeper's wife:
'Bind, I pray you, this grass chumbat round the child's head.'

And the park-keeper's wife took the grass chumbat, and bound it round
the girl's head. And that became a chaplet of gold, beautiful, lovely,
and pleasing, such that there was no chaplet of gold in the king's
seraglio like it.

And people told the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, 'There is a chaplet
of gold, your Majesty, in the house of such and such a park-keeper, such
that there is no chaplet of gold in the king's seraglio like it. How
could he, poor as he is, have got (such a thing)? For a certainty he
must have procured it by theft.'

Then the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra had (the whole of) that
park-keeper's family thrown into bonds.

7\. Now the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a robed himself again early in the
morning, and went, duly bowled and robed, into Pilinda-gâma for alms.
And going his round for alms straight on from house to house he came to
the dwelling-place of that park-keeper; and

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

when he had come there he asked the neighbours, 'Where is the family of
this park-keeper gone to?'

'The king, Sir, has had them thrown into bonds on account of that
chaplet of gold.'

Then the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a went on to the residence of the
Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra: and when he had come there he sat down
on the seat prepared for him. And the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra
went to the place where the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a was; and when he
had come there, he bowed down before the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a, and
took his seat on one side. And when he was so seated the venerable
Pilindava*kkh*a said to the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra:

8\. 'Why, O King, has the park-keeper's family been thrown into bonds?'

'That park-keeper, Sir, has in his house a chaplet of gold, such that
there is no chaplet of gold in the king's seraglio like it. Whence
should he, poor as he is, have got (such a thing)? For a certainty he
has procured it by theft.'

Then the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a determined that the palace of the
Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra should be gold. And it became all of
gold.

'Now, your Majesty, whence have you this so great quantity of gold?'

'I understand, Lord. This is your miraculous power' (said the king. And
so saying) he set that park-keeper's family free.

9\. When the people, glad at heart and full of satisfaction, saw that so
great a miracle had been shown by the venerable Pilindava*kkh*a to the
king and his royal retinue, they brought to the venerable
Pilindava*kkh*a the five kinds of medicine,--that is to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

say, ghee, butter, oil, honey, and molasses. Now (besides this) the
venerable Pilindava*kkh*a was accustomed to receive the five kinds of
medicine; and whatever he received he distributed among his attendant
(Bhikkhus). So the retinue became abounding therein, and as they
received it they laid it aside, filling vessels and pots; and filling
water-strainers and bags with it they laid them in the windows, and they
remained there clinging and adhering together, and the Vihâras became
sprinkled and scattered all over with them through the (gnawing of)
rats. People who saw this, when they went round the Vihâras, were
annoyed, murmured, and became indignant (saying), 'These Sakyaputtiya
Sama*n*as are becoming storers up of goods like the Mâgadha king
Se*n*iya Bimbisâra.'

To. The Bhikkhus heard the people thus murmuring, &c. And those Bhikkhus
who were moderate were indignant, &c., saying,

'How can Bhikkhus think (of possessing) such abundance?'

And those Bhikkhus told the matter to the Blessed One.

'Is it true, Bhikkhus, as they say, that Bhikkhus think (of possessing)
such abundance?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed One rebuked them, and after delivering a religious
discourse, he addressed the Bhikkhus:

'Whatsoever kinds of medicine are meet for the use of sick
Bhikkhus,--that is to say, ghee, butter, oil, honey, and molasses,--when
such are received they must be used within a period of seven days during
which they may be stored up. Whosoever

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

goes beyond that limit shall be dealt with according to law <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](sbe17030.htm#fn_164.md).'

End of the first Bhâ*n*avâra on the law of medicines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[64:1](sbe17029.htm#fr_165.md) A circular roll of
grass, or cloth, to be placed on the head when a pot of oil or water was
being carried on the head. Compare *k*umba*t*aka, and Rh. L.'s 'Buddhist
Birth Stories,' p. 295.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](sbe17030.md)
