[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17189) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

# NOTE ON ABHIHA*TTH*UM.

In the 7th Nissaggiya, in the 34th Pâ*k*ittiya, and in the 36th
Pâ*k*ittiya there occurs the phrase abhiha*tth*u*m* pavâreyya, regarding
the correct translation of which, as will be seen from the note on the
first passage, we were in doubt. The connection is always 'if A should
offer B,' &c.; and the only difficulty is the force of the word
abhiha*tth*u*m* which precedes the 'should offer,' and in some way
qualifies it. In all three passages the Old Commentary preserved in the
Sutta-Vibhaṅga explains the two words abhiha*tth*u*m* pavâreyya by 'Take
just as much as you want' (yâvataka*m* i*kkh*asi tâvataka*m* ga*n*hâhi),
which does not solve the difficulty. On the following words of the third
passage, however, the Old Commentary (see H. O., 'Vinaya Pitaka*m*,'
vol. iv, p. 84) uses the word abhiharati in its usual sense of 'he
brings up to, offers to, hands over to,' as practically equivalent to
abhiha*tth*u*m* pavâreti; and Buddhaghosa, in the Samanta Pâsâdikâ on
the 7th Nissaggiya, uses abhiharitvâ as directly equivalent to
abhiha*tth*u*m*.

Now in a passage quoted from the Thera-gâthâ in H. O.'s 'Buddha, sein
Leben, seine Lehre, and seine Gemeinde' (p. 425, note 1),
nikkhamitu*m*na occurs as the gerund of nikkhamati instead of
nikkhamitvâna. The existence in Prâkrit of corresponding gerunds in -tu,
-tu*m* for -tvâ, and in -tû*n*a, -tuâ*n*a for -tvâna, is laid down in
Hema*k*andra II, 146 (Pischel, vol. i, p. 62). And Professor Weber has
given corresponding forms (âha*tt*u, ka*tt*u, &c.) from the *G*ain
dialect in his Bhagavatî I, p. 433.

What we have in the phrase in question is therefore simply a gerund in
-tu*m*, and the two words taken together mean, 'if A should lay before
and offer to B,' &c. The thing offered in one case is robes, in the
other two cases food; and abhiharati is the usual word in Pâli for
serving food, laying it before another person. Compare thâli-pâka-satâni
abhihari at *G*âtaka I, 186; and the phrase bhattâbhihâro abhihâriyittha
constantly repeated in the Mahâ-sudassana Sutta (Rh. D., 'Buddhist
Suttas,' in the last paragraph of chap. II, § 12, 29, 31, 33, 37).
