[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17013)  [Next](sbe17015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

### 13 <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64).

1\. Now at that time the venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana was staying in
Avanti on the hill called the Precipice, near Kuraraghara <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_65). And at that time the lay-disciple named
So*n*a Ku*t*ika*nn*a <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_66) was the
personal attendant upon the venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana.

And the disciple So*n*a Ku*t*ika*nn*a went to the place where the
venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana was, and saluted him, and took his seat
beside him. And when he was thus seated, he said to the venerable Mahâ
Ka*kk*âyana:

'As I understand the doctrine laid down by the venerable Mahâ
Ka*kk*âyana, it is difficult for the man who dwells at home to live the
higher life in all its fulness, in all its purity, in all its bright
perfection. I wish therefore to cut off my hair and beard, to clothe
myself in the orange-coloured robes, and to go forth from the household
life into the houseless state <span id="fr_68"></span>[4](#fn_67). May
the venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana receive me into the Order of those who
have renounced the world!'

2\. 'Hard is it, So*n*a, your life long to live the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

higher life using only one bed, and with but one meal a day. Do you,
therefore, So*n*a, remain in the state of a householder, and practise
only for a time the higher life, the precepts of the Buddhas, using only
one bed, and with but one meal a day.'

Then the desire for renunciation <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68)
which had arisen in the disciple So*n*a Ku*t*ika*nn*a abated in him.

A second time the disciple So*n*a Ku*t*ika*nn*a \[made the same request,
and received the same reply with the same result\].

And a third time So*n*a Ku*t*ika*nn*a made the same request. Then the
venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana conferred the pabba*gg*â (ordination) on the
disciple So*n*a Ku*t*ika*nn*a.

Now at that time in the Southern country and in Avanti there were but
few Bhikkhus. And it was only after the lapse of three years that the
venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana was able, with difficulty, and with trouble,
to get together a meeting of the Order in which ten Bhikkhus were
present <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_69). And then he admitted the
venerable So*n*a into the higher rank of the Order.

3\. Now when the venerable So*n*a had passed the rainy season there
sprang up in his mind, when he was meditating alone, this thought:

'I have heard indeed that the Blessed One is such and such a one. But I
have not as yet seen him face to face. I should like to go and visit the
Blessed One, the Arahat Buddha, if my superior would allow me.'

And in the evening the venerable So*n*a, leaving his solitude, went to
the place where the venerable

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana
was, and saluted him, and took his seat beside him. And when he was thus
seated, he said to the venerable Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana:

4\. 'When I was meditating alone, venerable Sir, the following thought
occurred to my mind, "I have heard (&c., as above)." Now I would go and
visit the Blessed One, the Arahat Buddha, if you, as my superior, allow
it.'

'That is good, that is good, So*n*a! Go then, So*n*a, to visit the
Blessed One, the Arahat Buddha. \[5.\] You shall see, So*n*a, how the
Blessed One arouses faith, is worthy of faith, calm in his senses, calm
in his mind, gifted with the highest self-control and quietude, an
elephant among men, subdued, guarded, with his senses in subjection to
himself. Do you therefore, Soma, bow down in my name at the feet of the
Blessed One, and say, "Lord! my superior, the venerable Mahâ
Ka*kk*âyana, bows down in salutation at the feet of the Blessed One!"
and add, "In the Southern country and in Avanti there are, Lord, but few
Bhikkhus. And it was only after the lapse of three years that with
difficulty and with trouble an assembly of the Order was got together,
in which ten members were present, and I could be received into the
higher rank of the Order. May the Blessed One be pleased, therefore, to
allow the higher ordination in the Southern country and in Avanti before
a meeting of a lesser number. \[6.\] In the Southern country and in
Avanti, Lord, the soil is black on the surface <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70), rough, and trampled by the feet of
cattle <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_71).

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> May the Blessed
One be pleased, therefore, to allow the use, in the Southern country and
in Avanti, of shoes with thick linings. In the Southern country and in
Avanti, Lord, men attach great importance to bathing, and are pure by
use of water. May the Blessed One be pleased to allow, in the Southern
country and in Avanti, the constant use of the bath <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72). In the Southern country and in Avanti,
Lord, skins, such as sheep-skins, goat-skins, and deer-skins, are used
as coverlets. Just as in the Middle country <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_73) the eragu, moragu, ma*ggh*âru, and *g*antu
grasses <span id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_74) are used for coverlets, so
are sheep-skins, goat-skins, and deer-skins in the Southern country and
in Avanti. May the Blessed One be pleased to allow the use of such
coverlets there. \[7.\] At present, Lord, people are in the habit of
giving a set of robes to Bhikkhus, who have left the district, saying,
'We give this set of robes to (a Bhikkhu) of such and such a name.' When
they return, the Bhikkhus tell them, 'A set of robes has been given to
you by a person of such and such a name.' But they, fearing to offend,
do not accept it, saying, 'Let us not be guilty of a Nissaggiya.' May
the Blessed One be pleased to make a detailed statement in the matter of
robes."

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

'Even so, Lord,' said the venerable So*n*a in assent to the venerable
Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana, and, rising from his seat, he departed thence, keeping
his right side towards him. And taking up his bed, he went on with his
robe on, and his bowl in his hand to Sâvatthi.

8\. And wandering from place to place he arrived at the place where the
Blessed One was, at Sâvatthi in the *G*etavana, Anâtha-pi*nd*ika's park.
And when he had come there he saluted the Blessed One, and took his seat
beside him.

Then the Blessed One said to the venerable Ânanda: 'Make ready a
sleeping-place, Ânanda, for this Bhikkhu who has just arrived.' And the
venerable Ânanda thought:

'Inasmuch as the Blessed One commands me to make ready a sleeping-place
for the Bhikkhu who has just arrived, the Blessed One evidently desires
to dwell in the same Vihâra with that Bhikkhu, he desires to dwell in
the same Vihâra with the venerable So*n*a.' And he made ready a
sleeping-place for the .venerable So*n*a at the place where the Blessed
One was staying.

9\. Then the Blessed One, after spending the greater part of the night
in the open air, entered the Vihâra. And also the venerable So*n*a,
having spent the greater part of the night in the open air, entered the
Vihâra. And the Blessed One rose up, early in the morning, towards dawn,
and requested the venerable So*n*a, saying,

'May the Dhamma so become clear to you that you may speak <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75).'

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

.Even so, Lord!' said the venerable So*n*a in assent to the Blessed One;
and he intoned all the verses in the Book of the Eights
(A*tth*aka-vaggikâni <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76)).

And the Blessed One, at the conclusion of the venerable So*n*a's
recitation, expressed his pleasure, saying,

'Excellent, most excellent, O Bhikkhu! Well have the Eights been grasped
by thee, well thought over, well learnt by heart: and with a fine voice
art thou gifted, distinct, pleasant <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_77),
able to make things understood. How many years is it since thou hast
been ordained?'

'One year, my Lord!'

10\. 'But why have you postponed it so long?'

'’Tis long, Lord, since I saw into the danger of the passions, but life
in a household is crowded with business and with cares.'

And the Blessed One, when he heard that matter, gave utterance at that
time to the expression of emotion:

'When he has seen the danger of the world, when he has understood the
Truth, when he has become free from Upadhi <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_78),

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

'The pilgrim finds in sin no pleasure, his delight is in the word, the
pure.'

11\. Then thought the venerable So*n*a: 'The Blessed One is pleased with
me. This then is the time which my superior spoke of.' And rising from
his seat, and arranging his robe on one shoulder, he bowed down with his
head at the feet of the Blessed One, and said:

'Lord! my superior Mahâ Ka*kk*âyana bows down in salutation at the feet
of the Blessed One. In the Southern country and in Avanti there are
(&c., as in §§ 4-7, down to the end of the message).'

Then the Blessed One on that occasion and in that connection, having
delivered a religious discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus and said:

'The Southern country and Avanti has but few Bhikkhus. I allow the
upasampadâ (ordination) in border countries to be held in a meeting of
only four Bhikkhus, beside the chairman, who must be a Vinaya-dhara.'

12\. 'In this passage the following are the border countries referred
to <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_79). To the East is the town
Ka*g*aṅgala, and beyond it Mahâsâlâ. Beyond that is border country; this
side of it is the Middle country. To the South-east is the river
Salalavatî. Beyond that is border country; this side of it is the Middle
country. To the South is the town Setaka*nn*ika. Beyond that is border
country; this side of it is the Middle country. To the West is the
Brâhman district of Thûna. Beyond that is

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

border country; this side of it is the Middle country. To the North is
the mountain range called Usîradha*g*a. Beyond that is border country;
this side of it is the Middle country. In such border countries, I
allow, O Bhikkhus, the upasampadâ (ordination) to be held in a meeting
of only four Bhikkhus, beside the chairman, who must be a Vinaya-dhara.

13\. 'In the Southern country and in Avanti, O Bhikkhus, the soil is
black on the surface and rough, and trampled by the feet of cattle. I
allow the use, in all the border countries, O Bhikkhus, of shoes with
thick linings.

'In the Southern country and in Avanti, O Bhikkhus, men attach great
importance to bathing, and are pure by use of water. I allow the
constant use of the bath, O Bhikkhus, in all the border countries.

'In the Southern country and in Avanti, O Bhikkhus, skins, such as
sheep-skins, goat-skins, and deer-skins, are used as coverlets. Just as
in the Middle country, Bhikkhus, the eragu, moragu, ma*ggh*âru, and
*g*antu grasses are used for coverlets, so in the Southern country and
in Avanti are used skins, such as sheep-skins, goat-skins, and
deer-skins. I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of skins, such as sheep-skins,
goat-skins, and deer-skins, as coverlets, in all the border countries.

'There also, O Bhikkhus, people are in the habit of giving a set of
robes to Bhikkhus who have left the district, saying, "We give this set
of robes to (a Bhikkhu) with such and such a name." I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to accept such robes. The set of robes does not become subject
to the ten-days'

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

rule, before it reaches the hand (of the person for whom it was
intended) <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_80).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[32:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_65) Sections 1-6 of this
chapter were published and translated by Alwis in his 'Ka*kk*âyana's
Pali Grammar,' pp. 92 and following.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[32:2](sbe17014.htm#fr_66) Buddhaghosa spells
this name Kuduraghara, and says it was there that Ka*kk*âyana had been
accustomed to go for alms, and that he dwelt on the precipice itself.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[32:3](sbe17014.htm#fr_67) Buddhaghosa has a
curious explanation of this name, Ko*t*iagghanaka*m* pana
ka*nn*a-pilandhanaka*m* dhâreti, tasmâ Ku*t*ika*nn*o ’ti vu*kk*ati. This
is evidently merely drawn from the word itself, which may just as well
have meant 'with pointed ears.'

<span id="fn_67"></span>[32:4](sbe17014.htm#fr_68) This is a common
phrase. Compare Tevi*gg*a Sutta (Rh. D., 'Buddhist Suttas from the
Pâli,' pp. 187, 188).

<span id="fn_68"></span>[33:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_69) Compare
gamikâbhisa*m*khâra, Mahâvagga VI, 31, 2.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[33:2](sbe17014.htm#fr_70) On the necessity of
this, see Mahâvagga IX, 4, I.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[34:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_71) Ka*n*huttarâ ’ti
ka*n*ha-mattik-uttarâ upari-vaddhitâ ka*n*ha-mattikâ (B.). Alwis
translates, 'overrun with thorns.'

<span id="fn_71"></span>[34:2](sbe17014.htm#fr_72) Goka*nt*aka-hatâ ’ti
gunna*m* khurehi akkanta-bhumito samu*tth*ehi go-ka*nt*akehi upahatâ. Te
kira goka*nt*ake ekapa*t*alikâ upâhanâ <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
rakkhitu*m* na sakkonti, eva*m* kharâ honti (B.). Alwis takes
goka*nt*aka as a plant (Ruellia Longifolia).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[35:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_73) Compare the 57th
Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[35:2](sbe17014.htm#fr_74) See below, § 12; and
compare Rh. D., 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 61.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[35:3](sbe17014.htm#fr_75) Imâ *k*atasso pi
ti*n*a-*g*âtiyo. Etehi kata-sâ*t*ake ka ta*tt*ikâyo *k*a karonti. Ettha
eragû ’ti ekaraka-ti*n*a*m*, tam o*l*ârika*m*. Moraguti*n*a*m*
tamba-sisa*m* sukhuma*m* muduka*m* sukha-samphassa*m*; tena katâ
ta*tt*ikâ nipa*gg*itvâ vu*tth*itamatte pana uddhumâtâ hutvâ ti*tth*ati.
Ma*gg*ârunâ (sic, and so Alwis) kata-sâ*t*ake pi karonti. *G*antussa
ma*n*i-sadiso va*nn*o hoti, Ta*tt*ikâ is a mat; see *G*âtaka I, 142.
Compare Sanskrit Eraka, and Mayûraka.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[36:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_76) Pa*t*ibhâtu ta*m*
bhikkhu dhammo bhâsitu*m*. Compare Buddhaghosa's commentary on the
similar idiom used in the Mahâ-parinibbâna <span id="page_37">p.
37</span> Sutta II, 31 as given by Rh. D. ('Buddhist Suttas from the
Pâli,' p. 36).

<span id="fn_76"></span>[37:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_77) A*tth*aka-vagga is
the name of the fourth book in the Sutta Nipâta. See Professor
Fausböll's translation, p. viii. It may also be the name of divisions of
other books, but probably that portion of the Sutta Nipâta is here
referred to.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[37:2](sbe17014.htm#fr_78) On Ane*l*agalâya
compare ne*l*â vâ*k*â in § 6 of the *K*ûla-sîla.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[37:3](sbe17014.htm#fr_79) Ariyo is the man who
has entered the Path, Su*k*i is locative. Nirûpadhi, he in whom there
remains no longer the cause of the renewal of existence as a separate
individual (the cause referred to being thirst or excitement and
craving, Ta*n*hâ, Upâdâna).

<span id="fn_79"></span>[38:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_80) Compare Cunningham,
'Ancient Geography of India,' I, 440; Childers, Khuddaka Pâ*th*a, p. 20;
Alwis, 'Introduction to Pali Grammar,' XXIX; Lassen, Indische
Alterthumskunde, I, 119 (2nd ed.); Rhys Davids, 'Buddhist Birth
Stories,' p, 61.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[40:1](sbe17014.htm#fr_81) On this last clause
compare the first Nissaggiya, and our note there. The clause here means
that the ten days of the rule in the Pâtimokkha are not to begin to run,
under the circumstances specified, till the set of robes has actually
reached the hand of the Bhikkhu for whom they were intended.

Buddhaghosa says here: Yâva âharitvâ vâ na dinna*m* tumhâka*m* bhante
*k*îvara*m* uppannan ti pahinitva vâ nâro*k*ita*m*, tâva ga*n*ana*m* na
upeti, anadhi*tth*ita*m* na va*tt*ati. Yadâ pana ânetvâ vâ dinna*m*
hoti, uppannan ti vâ suta*m*, tato pa*tth*âya dasâham eva parihâra*m*
labhati.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](sbe17015)
