[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17033)  [Next](sbe17035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 20.

1\. Nov the Blessed One having remained at Râ*g*agaha as long as he
thought fit, proceeded on his way to Sâvatthi. And wandering straight on
from place to place he arrived at Sâvatthi. And there, at Sâvatthi, the
Blessed One stayed at the *G*etavana, Anâtha-pi*nd*ika's Grove.

Now at that time the venerable Sâriputta suffered from fever. And the
venerable Mahâ Moggallâna went to the place where the venerable
Sâriputta was; and when he had come there he said to the venerable
Sâriputta:

You have lately had fever, friend Sâriputta. By what means has it got
well?'

'By lotus stalks, my friend, of various kinds.'

Then the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna, as quickly as a strong man would
stretch forth his arm, or draw it in again when it had been stretched
forth, vanished from the *G*etavana and appeared on the bank of the
Mandâkinî lake.

2\. And a certain Nâga saw the venerable Mahâ

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moggallâna coming
from afar: and on seeing him he said to the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna:

'May my lord, the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna, approach. Welcome to my
lord, the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna. What may my lord have need of? What
shall I give to him?'

'I want the edible stalks of the various lotuses.'

Then that Nâga gave command to another Nâga, saying, 'Very well then,
good friend, give the venerable one edible stalks of the lotuses.'

And that Nâga plunged into the Mandâkinî lake, and plucked with his
trunk edible stalks of the lotuses, and washed them thoroughly, and
bound them in a bundle, and went to the place where the venerable Mahâ
Moggallâna was.

3\. Then the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna as quickly (&c., as in § 1)
vanished from the bank of the Mandâkinî lake, and appeared in
*G*etavana. Then that Nâga also vanished from the bank of the Mandâkinî
lake, and appeared in the *G*etavana. And when that Nâga had caused the
venerable Mahâ Moggallâna to receive those edible stalks of the lotuses
he vanished from the *G*etavana, and appeared on the shore of the
Mandâkinî lake.

Then the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna presented those edible stalks of the
lotuses to the venerable Sâriputta. And the fever abated on the
venerable Sâriputta when he had eaten the edible stalks of the lotuses.
And many of them remained over.

4\. Now at that time, during the scarcity (&c., as above, in chap. 18.
4, down to:) did not accept the invitation.

'Accept it, O Bhikkhus, and eat. I allow a Bhikkhu who has eaten, and
has refused food still

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

offered, to eat things growing in woods and ponds even if they are not
the leavings of the meal of one who has eaten <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_175).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[78:1](sbe17034.htm#fr_177) See the note above,
on VI, 18, 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](sbe17035)
