[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17154)  [Next](sbe17156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

# THIRD KHANDHAKA.

#### PROBATION AND PENANCE (CONTINUED).

### 1.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was staying at Sâvatthi, in the
*G*etavana, Anâthapi*nd*ika's Grove. And at that time the venerable
Udâyi committed an offence, to wit, the first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence,
and did not conceal it. He told the Bhikkhus, saying, 'I have committed
an offence--the first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence--and do not conceal it.
What now shall I do?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Then, O Bhikkhus, let the Sa*m*gha lay the Mânatta penalty on Udâyi the
Bhikkhu for the space of six days on account of that offence--the first
Sa*m*ghâdisesa--which he has not concealed.

2\. 'Now thus, O Bhikkhus, ought it to be laid upon him. Udâyi the
Bhikkhu ought to go up, O Bhikkhus, before the Sa*m*gha; and, arranging
his robe on one shoulder, he ought to bow down at the feet of the elder
Bhikkhus, and squatting down on his heels, and stretching forth his
hands with the palms together, he ought to say as follows:

'"I, venerable Sirs, have committed an offence--the first
Sa*m*ghâdisesa--which I have not concealed. I ask the Sa*m*gha (to
impose upon me) the Mânatta penalty for six days on account of this
offence--the

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence--which I have not concealed."'

\[This speech is repeated three times.\]

3\. 'Some discreet and able Bhikkhu should then lay the matter before
the Sa*m*gha, as follows:

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. Udâyi the Bhikkhu has committed an
offence--the first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence--which he has not concealed.
And he asks the Sa*m*gha for the Mânatta penalty for six days on account
of that offence-the first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence--which he has not
concealed.

'"If the time seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha impose a
Mânatta of six days' duration on Udâyi the Bhikkhu for that one
offence--the first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence--which he has not concealed.

'"This is the motion (*ñ*atti).

'"The Sa*m*gha hereby imposes a Mânatta of six days on Udâyi the Bhikkhu
for that one offence--the first Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence--which he has not
concealed.

'"Whosoever of the venerable ones approves of the imposition of a
Mânatta (&c., as in the last paragraph, down to) not concealed, let him
remain silent. Whosoever approves not, let him speak.

'"A second time I say the same thing (&c., as before in the last two
paragraphs). A third time I say the same thing (&c., as before).

'"The Sa*m*gha has imposed a Mânatta of six days' duration (&c., as
before, in the words of the motion, down to) not concealed. The Sa*m*gha
approves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I understand."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17156.md)
