[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17108)  [Next](sbe17110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.

1\. And the Blessed One, having pronounced these stanzas standing in the
midst of the assembly, went forth to Bâlakalo*n*akâra-gâma (or, to
Bâlaka, the salt-maker's village).

At that time the venerable Bhagu dwelt at Bâlakalo*n*akâra-gâma. And the
venerable Bhagu saw the Blessed One coming from afar; seeing him he
prepared a seat, brought water for the washing of his feet, a
foot-stool, and a towel, went forth to meet him, and took his bowl and
his robe. The Blessed One sat down on the seat he had prepared; and

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

when he was seated, the Blessed One washed his feet. And also the
venerable Bhagu, having respect-fully saluted the Blessed One, sat down
near him. When he was sitting near him, the Blessed One said to the
venerable Bhagu: 'Is it all well with you, O Bhikkhu? Do you find your
living? Do you get food without too much trouble?'

'It is all well with me, Lord; I find my living, Lord; I get food, Lord,
without too much trouble.'

And the Blessed One, having taught, incited, animated, and gladdened the
venerable Bhagu by religious discourse, rose from his seat and went
forth to the Eastern Bambû Park (Pâ*k*îna-va*m*sa-dâya).

2\. At that time the venerable Anuruddha and the venerable Nandiya and
the venerable Kimbila dwelt at Pâ*k*îna-va*m*sa-dâya. And the
park-keeper saw the Blessed One coming from afar; seeing him he said to
the Blessed One: 'Do not enter this park, O Sama*n*a; here dwell three
noble youths accustomed to comfort and ease; you must not annoy them.'
And the venerable Anuruddha heard what the park-keeper was saying to the
Blessed One; hearing that he said to the park-keeper: 'Do not keep off
the Blessed One, my good park-keeper; our teacher, the Blessed One, has
arrived.' And the venerable Anuruddha went to the place where the
venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila were; having approached
them, he said to the venerable Nandiya and to the venerable Kimbila:
'Come here, my venerable friends! Come here, my venerable friends! Our
teacher, the Blessed One, has arrived.'

3\. And the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the
venerable Kimbila went forth to meet the Blessed One; one took the bowl
and the

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

robe of the Blessed One, the other one prepared a seat, the third one
brought water for the washing of his feet, a foot-stool, and a towel.
Then the Blessed One sat down on the seat they had pre-pared; and when
he was seated, the Blessed One washed his feet. And also those venerable
persons, having respectfully saluted the Blessed One, sat down near him.
When the venerable Anuruddha was sitting near him, the Blessed One said
to him:

'Is it all well with you, O Anuruddhas <span
id="fr_572"></span>[1](#fn_561)? Do you find your living? Do you get
food without too much trouble?'

'It is all well with us, Lord; we find our living, Lord; we get food,
Lord, without too much trouble.'

'And do you live, O Anuruddhas, in unity and concord, without quarrels,
like milk and water (mixed together) <span
id="fr_573"></span>[2](#fn_562), and looking at each other with friendly
eyes?'

'Certainly, Lord, do we live in unity and concord (&c., down to:) and
looking at each other with friendly eyes.'

'And in what way, O Anuruddhas, do you live in unity and concord, &c.?'

4\. 'I think, Lord: "It is all gain to me indeed, it is high bliss for
me indeed, that I live in the companionship of brethren like these."
Thus, Lord, do I exercise towards these venerable brethren friendliness
in my actions, both openly and in secret; I

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

exercise (towards them) friendliness in my words, and friendliness in my
thoughts, both openly and in secret. And I think thus, Lord: "What if I
were to give up my own will and to live only according to the will of
these venerable brethren." Thus, Lord, I give up my own will and live
only according to the will of these venerable brethren. Our bodies,
Lord, are different, but our minds, I think, have become one <span
id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_563).'

And also the venerable Nandiya . . . . and also the venerable Kimbila .
. . . said to the Blessed One: 'I think also, Lord: "It is all gain to
me" (&c., down to:) have become one.

'In this way, Lord, do we live in unity and concord, without quarrels,
like milk and water (mixed together), and looking at each other with
friendly eyes.'

5\. 'And do you live, O Anuruddhas, in earnestness, zeal, and
resolvedness?'

'Certainly, Lord, do we live in earnestness, zeal, and resolvedness.'

'And in what way, O Anuruddhas, do you live in earnestness, zeal, and
resolvedness?'

'He <span id="fr_575"></span>[2](#fn_564) who first of us comes back,
Lord, from the village, from his alms-pilgrimage, prepares seats, gets
water for washing feet, a foot-stool, and a towel, cleans the
slop-basin, and gets it ready, and puts there (water to) drink and food.
He who comes back last from the village, from his alms-pilgrimage, eats,
if there is any food left (from the dinner of the others) and if he
desires to do so; and if he does

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

not desire (to eat), he throws it away at a place free from grass, or
pours it away into water in which no living things are; takes away the
seat, puts away the water for washing the feet, the foot-stool, and the
towel, cleans the slop-basin and puts it away, puts the water and the
food away, and sweeps the dining-room. He who sees a water-pot, or a
bowl for food, or an easing-chair, empty and void, puts it (into its
proper place), and if he is not able to do so single-handed, he calls
some one else, and thus we put it (into its place) with our united
effort, but we do not utter a word, Lord, on that account. And every
five days, Lord, we spend a whole night, sitting together, in religious
discourse. In this way, Lord, do we live in earnestness, zeal, and
resolvedness.'

6\. And the Blessed One, having taught, incited, animated, and gladdened
the venerable Anuruddha and the venerable Nandiya and the venerable
Kimbila by religious discourse, rose from his seat, and went forth to
Pârileyyaka. Wandering from place to place he came to Pârileyyaka. There
the Blessed One dwelt at Pârileyyaka, in the Rakkhita grove, at the foot
of the Bhaddasâla tree. Then in the mind of the Blessed One, who was
alone, and had retired into solitude, the following thought arose:
'Formerly I did not live at ease, being troubled by those litigious,
contentious, quarrelsome, disputatious Bhikkhus of Kosambî, the constant
raisers of questions before the Sa*m*gha. But now, being alone and
without a companion, I live pleasantly and at ease, remote from those
litigious, contentious, quarrelsome, disputatious Bhikkhus of Kosambî,
the constant raisers of questions before the Sa*m*gha.' And there

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

dwelt also a noble elephant, who was surrounded by a crowd of elephants,
she-elephants, elephant-calves, and young elephants; the grass blades he
ate had their tips broken; the branches he broke down (the other
elephants) ate; the water he drank was turbid; and when he waded into
the river and plunged down, the she-elephants came and rubbed up their
bodies against him. Now that noble elephant thought: 'I am surrounded by
a crowd of elephants (&c., down to:) and rub up their bodies against me.
What if I were to live alone, far away from those crowds.'

7\. And that noble elephant left the herd behind, and went to
Pârileyyaka, to the Rakkhita grove, to the foot of the Bhaddasâla tree,
to the place where the Blessed One was. Having approached him, he
administered with his trunk to the Blessed One (water to) drink and
food, and removed the grass from that place. And that noble elephant
thought:

Formerly I did not live at ease, surrounded by that crowd of elephants
(&c., down to:) and rubbed up their bodies against me. But now, being
alone and without a companion, I live pleasantly and at ease, remote
from those elephants, she-elephants, elephant-calves, and young
elephants.'

Then the Blessed One, both regarding his own retirement, and
understanding by the power of his mind the thoughts which had arisen in
the mind of that noble elephant, on this occasion pronounced this solemn
utterance:

'Thus the noble one and the noble, the elephant tusked with tusks like
cart poles <span id="fr_576"></span>[1](#fn_565) (and the noble

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One among
men)--the mind of the one and the mind of the other harmonise in this,
that they take delight in dwelling alone in the forest.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_561"></span>[310:1](sbe17109.htm#fr_572) We have here the
plural Anuruddhâ, meaning Anuruddha and his friends. So in *K*ullavagga
I, 13, 6 Sâriputtâ means Sâriputta and Moggallâna.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[310:2](sbe17109.htm#fr_573) Khîrodakibhûtâ can
scarcely contain an allusion to the Milk Ocean (see Childers, s.v.
khîrodaka). Milk and water is frequently chosen by the Indian poets as a
type of the most perfect union.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[311:1](sbe17109.htm#fr_574) Compare the last
poem in the Sutta Nipâta, and especially v. 1143.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[311:2](sbe17109.htm#fr_575) Compare IV, 1.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[313:1](sbe17109.htm#fr_576) Îsâdanta; see
Böhtlingk-Roth, sub voce îshâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sbe17110)
