[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17111)  [Next](sbe17113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span id="page_327">p. 327</span>
<span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

# *K*ULLAVAGGA.

# FIRST KHANDHAKA.

#### THE MINOR DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS.

### I. THE TA*GG*ANIYA KAMMA (ACT OF REBUKE).

### 1.

1\. At that time the Blessed One was staying at *G*etavana, in the grove
of Anâtha-pi*nd*ika.

Now at that time the Bhikkhus who were followers of Pa*nd*uka and of
Lohitaka <span id="fr_590"></span>[1](#fn_579),--who themselves were
makers of strife, quarrelsome <span id="fr_591"></span>[2](#fn_580),
makers of disputes <span id="fr_592"></span>[3](#fn_581), given to idle
talk, and raisers of legal questions in the Sa*m*gha <span
id="fr_593"></span>[4](#fn_582),--used to go up to such other Bhikkhus
as were the same, and say, 'Do not allow such a one, venerable Sirs, to
turn you back. Discuss loud and long. You are indeed cleverer, more
wise, more well informed, more able at that (than

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

your adversaries are) and do not you be afraid of them. We too will be
on your side.' Thereby both disputes arose which had not arisen before;
and disputes which had arisen grew hotter.

2\. Those Bhikkhus who were modest were annoyed, murmured, and became
indignant, saying, How can the Bhikkhus who are followers of Pa*nd*uka
and of Lohitaka act thus.' And those Bhikkhus told the matter to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One on that occasion, and in that connection, convened
an assembly of the Order of Bhikkhus, and inquired of the Bhikkhus: 'Is
it true, as they say, Bhikkhus, that those Bhikkhus who are followers of
Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka,--who themselves (&c., as in § 1, down to the
end)?'

'It is true, Lord!'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying, 'This is improper, O Bhikkhus,
for those foolish persons, not according to rule, unsuitable, unworthy
of a Sama*n*a, unbecoming, and ought not to be done. How can these
foolish persons, O Bhikkhus, who themselves (&c., as in § 1, down to the
end). This will not conduce, O Bhikkhus, either to the conversion of the
unconverted, or to the increase of the converted; but rather to those
who have not been converted being not converted, and to the turning back
of those who have been converted.'

3\. And when the Blessed One had rebuked those Bhikkhus in various
ways,--speaking of the evils of being hard to satisfy in the matter of
support or nourishment, of wishing for much, of discontent, of love of
society, and of sloth; and speaking in praise of being easy to satisfy
in the matter of support and nourishment, of wishing for little, of the

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

contented man who has eradicated (evils from his mind), has quelled his
passions <span id="fr_594"></span>[1](#fn_583), and is full of faith, of
reverence, and of the exercise of zeal,--when he had thus held a
religious discourse to the Bhikkhus as to what was fit and suitable in
that respect, he addressed the Bhikkhus, and said: 'Let the Sa*m*gha,
therefore, O Bhikkhus, carry out the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma (Act of Rebuke)
against those Bhikkhus.

4\. 'Now thus, O Bhikkhus, should it be carried out. In the first place
the Bhikkhus who are followers of Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka ought to be
warned; when they have been warned, they ought to be reminded (of the
Rule in the Pâtimokkha against which they have offended); when they have
been reminded, they ought to be charged with the (particular) offence;
when they have been charged with the offence, some discreet and able
Bhikkhu ought to lay the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying,

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. These Bhikkhus who are followers
of Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka, who themselves (&c., as in § 1, down to the
end). If the time is fit for the Sa*m*gha (to do so) let the Sa*m*gha
carry out the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma against the Bhikkhus who are followers
of Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka.

'"Such is the motion (*ñ*atti).

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. The Bhikkhus who are followers of
Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

who themselves (&c., as in § 1, down to the end). The Sa*m*gha hereby
carries out the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma against them. Whosoever of the
venerable ones approves of the carrying out of the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma
against the Bhikkhus who are followers of Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka, let
him remain silent. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak.

'"A second time I say the same thing. Let the venerable Sa*m*gha (&c.,
as before <span id="fr_595"></span>[1](#fn_584)). A third time I say the
same thing. Let the venerable Sa*m*gha (&c., as before r).

'"The Ta*gg*aniya-kamma against the Bhikkhus who are followers of
Pa*nd*uka and Lohitaka has been carried by the Sa*m*gha. The Sa*m*gha
approves (the motion). Therefore is it silent. Thus do I understand."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_579"></span>[329:1](sbe17112.htm#fr_590) These were two out
of the six notorious *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus, who are so frequently
mentioned elsewhere. Buddhaghosa says, tesa*m* nissitakâ pi
Pa*nd*ukalohitakâ tv’ eva pa*ññ*âyanti.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[329:2](sbe17112.htm#fr_591) In addition to the
passages referred to in the two following notes, compare the closing
words of the Pâtimokkha, and the 2nd, 3rd, 12th, 13th, 17th, 54th, 74th,
and 75th Pâ*k*ittiyas.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[329:3](sbe17112.htm#fr_592) Such persons were
formerly dealt with according to the 10th, 11th, and 12th
Sa*m*ghâdisesas.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[329:4](sbe17112.htm#fr_593) Such persons were
formerly dealt with according to the 8th and 9th Sa*m*ghâdisesas and the
76th Pâ*k*ittiya. Compare also below, IV, 14, and the 63rd and 79th
Pâ*k*ittiyas.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[331:1](sbe17112.htm#fr_594) We have here the
substance of that 'religious discourse' (dhammi*m* katha*m*) which the
Buddha is so frequently stated to have held before he laid down the rule
for the guidance of the Bhikkhus in the particular matter which had been
brought before him. It recurs in the Mahâvagga (I, 25, 6), and is
constantly to be supplied both there and below.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[332:1](sbe17112.htm#fr_595) The motion just
proposed is repeated down to the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17113)
