[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Classical
Paganism](../index)  [Sacred Sexuality](../../sex/index.md)  [1st
Lines](1stline)  [Index](index)  [Previous](prp101)  [Next](prp103.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Erotic Classical Writers

Elephantis (see Epigram 3, page 35) was a licentious Greek poetess who
wrote on the different modes of coition. In her work (which has
perished) it is supposed that she enumerated nine postures of
venery.\[1\] Astyanassa, the maid of Helen of Troy, was, according to
Suidas, the first writer on erotic postures, and Philaenis and
Elephantis (both Greek maidens) followed up the subject. Aeschrion
however ascribes the work attributed to Philaenis to Polycrates, the
Athenian sophist, who, it is said, placed the name of Philaenis on his
volume for the purpose of blasting her reputation. This subject occupied
the pens of many Greek and Latin authors, amongst whom may be mentioned:
Aedituus, an erotic poet noticed by Apuleius in his *Apology*: Annianus
(in Ausonius); Anser, an erotic poet cited by Ovid; Aristides, the
Milesian poet; Astyanassa, above mentioned; Bassus; Callistrate, a
Lesbian poetess, noted for obscene verses; Cicero, in his amorous
letters to Cerellia; Cinna (Helvius), a Latin amatory poet; Cyrene, the
artist of amatory tabellae or ex-votos offered to Priapus, and who
enumerated twelve postures; Elephantis, the writer on *Varia concubitis
genera*, above mentioned; Eubius, the doubtful author of a work on
Pleasure; Everemus, a Messenian writer, whose works were translated

\[1. From Martial--

Quales nec Didymi sciunt puellae,  
Nec molles Elephantidos libelli,  
Sunt illic Veneris novae figurae.

'Such verses as neither the daughters of Didymus know, nor the
lubricious books of Elephantis, wherein are set out new modes of
venery.' In place of *novae figurae*, Scriverius reads *novem
figurae*--nine modes. Forberg in De Figuris Veneris, suggests with
respect to these 'daughters of Didymus' that among the four thousand
works written, according to Seneca, by the grammarian Didymus, there was
one descriptive of the postures assumed in congress by women.\]

into Latin by Ennius; Hemitheon of Sybaris, author of the Sybaritic
books cited by Martial and Lucian for their lubricity: Hortensius, a
lascivious writer; Laevius, who composed the poem *Io*, and wrote
several books on love bearing the title of *Erotopaegnia*; Memmius, of
whom Pliny the Younger speaks; Mimnermus, a Smyrnian erotic poet who
flourished about the time of Solon; Musaeus; Myonia, an Aelian author;
Naevius, a licentious poet; Nico, a Samian maiden, said by Xenophon to
be the writer of lewd books; Paxamus, who wrote the *Dodecatechnon*, a
volume treating of twelve erotic postures; Philaenis, cited above; Pliny
the Younger, whose amatory work is not extant, but which he mentions in
his letters; Proculus, the writer of amorous elegies; Protagorides,
*Amatory Conversations*, Sabellus, contemporary with Martial, whose poem
on the various modes of congress is lost; Sappho, the celebrated Greek
poetess, equally renowned as the queen of tribades; Sisenna, who
translated the works of Aristides into Latin; Sotades,\[1\] the
Mantinean poet; Sphodrias, who composed an *Art of Love*; Sulpitia, an
erotic, but modest, poetess, who wrote on conjugal love; Sulpitius
(Servius), an author of amatory songs; Ticida; and Trepsicles, Amatory
Pleasures.

\[1. Sotades was the first to treat of Greek love or dishonest and
unnatural love. He wrote in the Ionian dialect and according to Suidas
he was the author of a poem entitled *Cinaedica*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of agricultural and horticultural terms used tropically in a
venereal sense](prp103.md)
