[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Classical
Paganism](../index)  [Sacred Sexuality](../../sex/index.md)  [1st
Lines](1stline)  [Index](index)  [Previous](prp103)  [Next](prp105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Sodomy

Paedico means to pedicate, to sodomise, to indulge in unnatural lewdness
with a woman often in the sense of to abuse. In Epigrams 10, 16 and 31
jesting allusion is made to the injury done to the buttocks of the
catamite by the introduction of the 'twelve-inch pole' of Priapus, and
Ausonius speaks of the battered clazomenes (*incusas clazomenas*), or
buttocks of a passive. By calling the clazomenes hammered (battered)
Ausonius implies that they have become polished by having served as an
anvil. Martial directs an epigram against Carinus, whose anus was split
and lacerated by his excessive indulgence in these practices. Orpheus is
supposed to have introduced the vice of sodomy upon the earth. In Ovid's
Metamorphoses--

Ille etiam Thracum populis fuit auctor, amorem  
In teneros transferre mares...

He also was the first adviser of the Thracian people  
to transfer their love to tender youths ...

presumably in consequence of the death of Eurydice, his wife, and his
unsuccessful attempt to bring her to earth again from the infernal
regions. But he paid dearly for his contempt of women. The Thracian
dames whilst celebrating their bacchanal rites tore him to pieces.
François Noël, however, states that Laius, father of Oedipus, was the
first to make this vice known on earth. In imitation of Jupiter with
Ganymede, he used Chrysippus, the son of Pelops, as a catamite; an
example which speedily found many followers. Amongst famous sodomists of
antiquity may be mentioned: Jupiter with Ganymede; Phoebus with
Hyacinthus; Hercules with Hylas; Orestes with Pylades; Achilles with
Patrodes, and also with Bryseis; Theseus with Pirithous; Pisistratus
with Charmus; Demosthenes with Cnosion; Gracchus with Cornelia; Pompeius
with Julia; Brutus with Portia; the Bithynian king Nicomedes with
Caesar,\[1\] &c., &c. An account of famous sodomists in history is given
in the privately printed volumes of 'Pisanus Fraxi', the *Index Librorum
Prohibitorum* (1877), the *Centuria Librorum Absconditorum* (1879) and
the *Catena Librorum Tacendorum* (1885), the lists there presented
including such names as Alexander of Macedon, Napoleon Bonaparte, Henri
III of France, Peter the Great, &c. For a most admirable article on
sodomy, see The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night and the works
there cited. Those interested in the subject are referred to the
*Thesaurus Eroticus Linguae Latinae*, under articles 'Aversa Venus' and
'Paedicare', and will find the following brochures worthy of reading:
'*Un Point Curieux des Moeurs Privées de la Grèce*' (an essay by M.
Octave Delepierre on sodomy amongst the ancients), Gay, Paris, 1861, and
*Socrates sanctus Paiderastes*, by Gesner (translated into French under
the title of *Socrate et l'amour Grec*, by Alcide Bonneau), Liseux,
Paris, 1877.

\[1. Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem;  
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat, qui subegit Gallias.  
Nicomedes non triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem.

The Gauls to Caesar yield, Caesar to Nicomede,  
Lo! Caesar triumphs for his glorious deed,  
But Caesar's conqueror gains no victor's meed.

--L. Pomponius\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irrumation](prp105.md)
