[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classical
Paganism](../index)  [Sacred Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [1st
Lines](1stline)  [Index](index)  [Previous](prpc)  [Next](prp00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A Word to the Reader

In the *Priapieia sive diversorum poetarum in Priapum Lusus*, the friend
with whom I have the pleasure to collaborate has come upon 'treasure
trove', in the shape of a sprightly Latin cento of humour peculiarly
Italic, most interesting to anthropologists and humanists and--rarer
merit--undeflowered by the translator. He has made the most of his
*trouvaille* providing the booklet with a history and a bibliography and
illustrating, in copious notes and excursus, the Priapic cult and the
manners and customs of the Roman days so quaintly depicted in these old
(monkish?) pages. In brief, he has monopolised the learned and literary
side of the epigrams, and he has assumed the whole responsibility
thereof.

My share of the labour is on a scale much humbler. A 'cute French
publisher lately remarked to me that, as a rule, versions in verse are
as enjoyable to the writer as they are unenjoyed by the reader, who
vehemently doubts their truth and trustworthiness. These pages hold in
view one object sole and simple, namely to prove that a translation,
metrical and literal, may be true and may be trustworthy.

As Captain Burton has told the public (*Camoëns: Life and Lusiads*; ii,
185-98), it has ever been his ambition to reverse the late Mr Matthew
Arnold's peremptory dictum: 'In a verse translation no original work is
any longer recognisable.' And here I may be allowed to borrow from the
same writer's Supplemental Arabian Nights, vol vi, appendix pages 411-12
(a book known to few and never to be reprinted), his vision of the ideal
translation which should not be relegated to the Limbus of Intentions.

My estimate of a translator's office has never been of the low level
generally assigned to it, even in the days when Englishmen were in the
habit of translating every work, interesting or important, published out
of England, and of thus giving a continental and cosmopolitan flavour to
their literature. We cannot at this period expect much from a 'man of
letters' who must produce a monthly volume for a pittance of £20; of him
we need not speak. But the translator at his best, works, when
reproducing the matter and the manner of his original, upon two distinct
lines. His prime and primary object is to please his reader, edifying
him and gratifying his taste; the second is to produce an honest and
faithful copy, adding naught to the sense or abating aught of its
especial *cachet*. He has, however, or should have, another aim wherein
is displayed the acme of hermeneutic art. Every language can profitably
lend something to and take somewhat from its neighbours--an epithet, a
metaphor, a naive idiom, a turn of phrase. And the translator of
original mind who notes the innumerable shades of tone, manner and
complexion will not neglect the frequent opportunities of enriching his
mother-tongue with novel and alien ornaments which shall justly be
accounted barbarisms until formally naturalised and adopted. Nor will
any modern versionist relegate to a footnote, as is the malpractice of
his banal brotherhood, the striking and often startling phases of the
foreign author's phraseology and dull the text with well-worn and
commonplace English equivalents, thus doing the clean reverse of what he
should do. It was this *beau idéal* of a translator's success which made
Eustache Deschamps write of his contemporary and brother bard, 'Grand
Translateur, noble Geoffrey Chaucier'. Here 'the firste finder of our
fair language' is styled 'a Socrates in philosophy, a Seneca in morals,
an Angel in conduct and a great Translator'--a seeming anti-climax which
has scandalised not a little sundry inditers of 'Lives' and 'Memoirs'.
The title is no bathos; it is given simply because Chaucer *translated*
(using the term in its best and highest sense) into his pure, simple and
strong English tongue, with all its linguistic peculiarities, the
thoughts and fancies of his foreign models, the very letter and spirit
of Petrarch and Boccaccio.

For the humble literary status of translation in modern England and for
the shortcomings of the average English translator, public taste or
rather caprice is mainly to be blamed. The 'general reader', the man not
in the street but the man who makes up the educated mass, greatly
relishes a novelty in the way of 'plot' or story or catastrophe, while
he has a natural dislike of novelties of style and diction, demanding a
certain dilution of the unfamiliar with the familiar. Hence our
translations in verse, especially when rhymed, become for the most part
deflorations or excerpts, adaptations or periphrases, more or less
meritorious, and the 'translator' has been justly enough dubbed
'traitor' by critics of the severer sort. And he amply deserves the
injurious name when ignorance of his original's language perforce makes
him pander to popular prescription.

But the good time which has long been coming seems now to have come. The
home reader will no longer put up with the careless caricatures of
classical *chefs d'oeuvre* which satisfied his old-fashioned
predecessor. Our youngers, in most points our seniors, now expect the
translation not only to interpret the sense of the original but also,
when the text lends itself to such treatment, to render it verbatim et
literatim, nothing being increased or diminished, curtailed or expanded.
More over, in the choicer passages, they so far require an echo of the
original music that its melody and harmony should be suggested to their
mind. Welcomed also are the mannerisms of the translator's model, as far
as these aid in preserving, under the disguise of another dialect, the
individuality of the foreigner and his peculiar costume.

'Mat this high ideal of translation Is at length becoming popular now
appears in our literature. The Villon Society, when advertising the
novels of Matteo Bandello, Bishop of Agen, justly remarks of the
translator, Mr John Payne, that his previous works have proved him to
possess special qualifications for 'the delicate and difficult task of
transferring into his own language at once the savour and the substance,
the matter and the manner of works of the highest individuality,
conceived and executed in a foreign language'.

In my version of hexameters and pentameters I have not shirked the
metre, although it is strangely out of favour in English literature,
while we read it and enjoy it in German. There is little valid reason
for our aversion; the rhythm has been made familiar to our ears by long
courses of Greek and Latin and the rarity of spondaic feet is assuredly
to be supplied by art and artifice.

And now it is time for farewelling my friends.  
We may no longer (alas!) address them with the  
ingenuous ancient imperative, *Nunc plaudite*!

OUTIDANOS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Reader](prp00)
