[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf00)  [Next](taf02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PUBLISHER'S PREFACE.

AÇVAGHOSHA is the philosopher of Buddhism. His treatise on *The
Awakening of Faith* is recognised by all Northern schools and sects as
orthodox and used even to-day in Chinese translations as a text-book for
the instruction of Buddhist priests.

The original Sanskrit text has not been found as yet, and if it should
not be discovered somewhere in India or in one of the numerous libraries
of the Buddhist vihâras, it would be a great loss; for then our
knowledge of Açvaghosha's philosophy would remain limited to its Chinese
translation.

Açvaghosha's treatise on *The Awakening of Faith* is a small booklet, a
monograph of the usual size of Chinese fascicles, comprising in its
Chinese dress no more than about 10,800 characters, and may be read
through in a few hours. But the importance of this monograph stands in
no relation to its brevity,

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

and it is very strange that no translation of it has appeared as yet in
any European language. I was therefore exceedingly glad that Mr. Teitaro
Suzuki, a Japanese Buddhist and a disciple of the Rev. Shaku Soyen, the
distinguished Abbot of Kamakura, who was one of the delegates of the
Parliament of Religions at Chicago in 1893, undertook the work of
rendering Açvaghosha's monograph into English form. I watched the
progress of his translation and my interest in the work increased the
more I became familiar with the thoughts of the great philosopher of
Buddhism. Not only is my own interpretation of Buddhism, as stated in
the *Gospel of Buddha* and elsewhere, here fully justified, but there
are striking similarities between the very terms of Açvaghosha's system
and expressions which I have used in my own philosophical writings. The
main coincidence is the idea of Suchness, which is pure form, or the
purely formal aspect of things, determining their nature according to
mathematical and mechanical laws. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

Suchness, according to Açvaghosha, is the cosmic order or
*Gesetzmässigkeit* of the world; it is the sum total of all those
factors which shape the universe and determine the destinies of its
creatures. It is the norm of existence and is compared to a womb in
which all things take shape and from which they are born. It is Plato's
realm of ideas and Goethe's "Mothers" of the second part of *Faust*.

Suchness which in its absolute sense means the total system of the
abstractly formal laws, including the moral order of the universe, is
contrasted with the realm of Birth and Death. This realm of Birth and
Death, is the material world of concrete objects. While Suchness is the
domain of the universal, the realm of Birth and Death is the domain of
the particular; and it is characteristic of the Mahayana school that the
bodily, the particular, the concrete is not rejected as a state of sin,
but only characterised as impure or defiled, imperfect, and implicated
with sorrow and pain, on account of its limitedness and the illusions
which naturally attach to it.

Suchness and the realm of Birth and Death

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

are not two hostile empires but two names of the same thing. There is
but one world with two aspects describing two opposed phases of one and
the same existence. These two aspects form a contrast, not a
contradiction. Suchness (or the good law, the normative factor)
dominates the realm of Birth and Death, which latter therefore, in a
certain sense, belongs to Suchness throughout in its entirety as well as
in its details.

But sentient beings are apt to overlook the significance of the
universal, for the senses depict only the particular. Thus to a
superficial consideration of sensual beings, the world presents itself
as a conglomeration of isolated objects and beings, and the unity that
consists in the oneness of law which dominates all, is lost sight of. It
is the mind (or spiritual insight into the nature of things) which
traces the unity of being and learns to appreciate the significance of
the universal.

Universals, i.e., those factors which constitute the suchness of things
are not substances, not entities, but relations, pure forms, or
determinants, i.e., general laws. Thus

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

they are not things, but ideas; and the most important one among them,
the suchness of man or his soul, is not a concrete self, an âtman, but
"name and form."

It is well known what an important role the denial of the existence of
the âtman plays in the Abhidharma, and we need not repeat here that it
is the least understood and most misrepresented doctrine of Buddhism.

Thus the essential feature of existence, of that which presents itself
to the senses, is not the material, but the formal; not that which makes
it concrete and particular, but that which constitutes its nature and
applies generally; not that which happens to be here, so that it is
this, but that which makes it to be thus; not its Thisness, but its
Suchness.

Particularity is not denounced as evil, but it is set forth as limited;
and we might add (an idea which is not expressed in the Mahâyâna, but
implied) that the universal would be unmeaning if it were not realised
in the particular. Absolute Suchness without reference to the world of
concrete Particularity is like a Pratyekabuddha, and the Pratyekabuddha,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

a sage whose wisdom does not go out into the world to seek and to save,
is regarded an inferior to the Bodhisattvas, who with inferior knowledge
combine a greater love and do practical work that is of help to their
fellow beings.

How highly Particularity is considered appears from the Mahayana picture
in which it stands contrasted to Universality on perfectly equal
terms. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

The world-process starts in ignorance, perhaps through ignorance or at
least through some commotion void of enlightenment, but from the start
it is enveloped by the good law of cosmic order. Suchness, the norm of
being, guides its steps. It is shaped in the womb of the Tathâgata and
is in the progress of evolution more and more tinged, or, as Açvaghosha
says, perfumed, with the cognition of Suchness. Thus life will
necessarily march onward to Buddhahood, actualising in the course of its
development the eternal in the transient, the omnipresent in the
special, the universal in the concrete and particular, and unchangeable

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

perfection in the imperfect haphazards of the kaleidoscopic world of
changes, in which things originate by being compounded, and perish
according to the law that all compounds are doomed to dissolution. Hence
it becomes apparent that the realm of Birth and Death is the realisation
only of that which in itself is immortal; it is the appearance in time
and space, the actualisation, the materialisation, the incarnation, of
that which is everlasting and permanent in the absolute sense. Says
Goethe:

"Alles Vergängliche  
Ist nur ein Gleichniss,  
Das Unzulängliche  
Hier wird's Ereigniss."

The reading of Açvaghosha's treatise may in some of its parts present
difficulties, and Western thinkers would undoubtedly express themselves
in other terms than this thinker of India who lived almost two thousand
years ago; but the underlying ideas of his philosophy will be found
simple enough, if the reader will take the trouble patiently to consider
the significance of every sentence in its relation to the whole system.

PAUL CARUS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[iv:1](taf01.htm#fr_0) This coincidence of some
salient points need of course not exclude disagreements in other
important matters.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[viii:1](taf01.htm#fr_1) See the inside front
cover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translator's Preface](taf02)
