[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf07)  [Next](taf09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### APPELLATIONS.

The author of the *Mahâyânaçraddhotpâdaçâstra* (*Discourse on the
Awakening of Faith in the Mahâyâna*) is most commonly known in the
Chinese Buddhist literature by the name of Açvaghosha. But according

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

to his *Life* he was also called Kung-tê-jih <span
id="img_02100"></span> ![](img/02100.jpg) (i.e., merit-sun; in Sanskrit,
Puṇyaditya?). For he was not only a philosopher, but a preacher and an
organiser, for "while in North India he widely propagated the doctrine
of Buddha, led and benefited the masses, and through good and excellent
\[missionary\] methods perfected the merits of the people." *The Record
of Buddha and the Patriarchs* (*Fo tsou t‘ung tsai*), where it is stated
that his other name was Kung-chang <span id="img_02101"></span>
![](img/02101.jpg) (Puṇyaçrîka?), can be said almost to agree with the
above. While thus no other name or appellation of his is known in China,
Târanâtha mentions nine more names: Kâla (Time), Durdarsha
(Hard-to-be-seen), Durdarshakâla (Hard-to-be-seen-time), Mâtṛceta
(Mother-child), Pitṛceta (Father-child), Çûra (Hero), Dharmika-Subhûti
(Virtuous-mighty), and Maticitra (Intelligence-bright). <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md)

In I-tsing's *Correspondence from the South Sea* (*Nan hai chi kuei
ch‘uan*,  <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) Chap. 32, "On chanting".md),
the name Mâtṛceta is mentioned, but I-tsing does not identify him with
Açvaghosha, though the legend attached to the former closely resembles
that of the latter told in Târanâtha. Târanâtha states that when
Açvaghosha became a sthavira and advocate of the

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tripitaka, he had a dream one night in which the
venerable Tara gave him the instruction to write hymns on Buddha for the
expiation of his former sinful deeds; that according to this admonition
he wrote many hymns praising the virtues of Buddha, amongst which one
containing one hundred and fifty çlokas <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) is the best of all; that the hymns
composed by him are full of benediction like the very words of Buddha,
because he was predicted by the Blessed One to be a hymnist. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40.md)

Compare the above with this from I-tsing:

"The venerable Mâtṛceṭa (Mother-child) was a man of great intellect, of
excellent virtue, eminently standing above all sages in India. A
tradition says that when Buddha was taking a walk one time with his
kinsmen, disciples, and many other people, a nightingale (?), observing
his personal feature as elegant and majestic as a gold mountain, uttered
in the wood some pleasant, harmonious notes that sounded like praising
the virtues of Buddha. Buddha then turning towards the disciples said:
'The bird overcome by the joy of seeing me utters a pitiful cry. By this
merit it will after my death obtain a human form, Mâtṛceṭa <span
id="img_02200"></span> ![](img/02200.jpg) by name, and praise and adore
my intrinsic virtues with a number of hymns.' This man first followed
the doctrine of a tîrthaka worshipping

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Maheçvara <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md)
and composed many hymns to adore him. But in the meantime he came across
his own name recorded \[in a Buddhist writing\]; inspired by this, he
took refuge in Buddha, changed his garb, abandoned his laymanship, and
in many ways praised, honored and adored Buddha. Regretting his
misbehavior in the past and desiring to perform good deeds in the future
and also lamenting the unfortunate fate that prevented him from having a
personal interview with the Great Teacher rather than bowing before his
bequeathed image, he at last decided with all his rhetorical talent and
in solemn fulfilment of the Lord's prophecy, to praise his virtues and
merits \[in hymns\]. He first composed four hundred çlokas and then one
hundred and fifty çlokas; <span id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42.md) all of
which describe the six Pâramitâs \[Perfections\] and state the excellent
virtues possessed by the World-Honored-One," etc.

At the end of the same Chapter (i.e., Chap. 32) in I-tsing's
*Correspondence* he refers to Açvaghosha and Nâgârjuna both of whom
composed some beautiful and popular hymns that were sung by Buddhists
throughout India at the time of his pilgrimage. But if the Tibetan
statement is reliable, I-tsing may have

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

been mistaken in recording Açvaghosha and Mâtṛceṭa as different
characters. The Tibetan and Chinese version of the one hundred and fifty
çloka hymn being still existent, the comparison of which, however, I
have not yet been able to make, will furnish an interesting testimony
for the identification.

Many legendary explanations have been invented about the name of
Açvaghosha, as might be expected of the imaginative Indian mind, but not
being worth while quoting from the materials at my command, no reference
will be made to them here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[21:1](taf08.htm#fr_37.md) Geschichte des
Buddhismus, p. 90.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[21:2](taf08.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="img_02102"></span> ![](img/02102.jpg) by I-tsing <span
id="img_02103"></span> ![](img/02103.jpg) who left China A. D. 671 for a
pilgrimage to India and came back A. D. 695. The book is a work on the
vinaya as observed by the Sarvâstivâdin, which the pilgrim witnessed in
India as well as in Ceylon. An English [translation](errata.htm#4.md) by J.
Takakusu, London.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[22:1](taf08.htm#fr_39.md) Schiefner notes:
Çatapantschâçatika nâma stotra, Tandjur B. I, unter den Stotra's.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[22:2](taf08.htm#fr_40.md) *Geschichte des
Buddhismus*, p. 91.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[23:1](taf08.htm#fr_41.md) Cf. the following
statement in Târanâtha, p. 90: "Als er (Açvaghosha) in den Mantra-und
Tantra-Formeln und in der Dialektik sehr bewandert wurde, gab ihm
Maheçvara selbst Anleitung."

<span id="fn_42"></span>[23:2](taf08.htm#fr_42.md) "Hymn of One Hundred and
Fifty Çlokas" (Çatapañacâshadbuddhastotra), translated into Chinese by
I-tsing during his stay in the Nâlanda-vihâra, Central India. At the
time of the compilation of the *Chêng yüan catalogue* the original is
said to have existed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conversions](taf09.md)
