[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf01)  [Next](taf03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

# TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

THE study of Buddhism has recently made gigantic strides, on this side
of the Atlantic as well as on the other. Not only is the importance of
the science of comparative religion making itself felt, but the advance
of our Pali and Sanskrit knowledge has greatly contributed to a better
understanding of things Oriental. Even Christians who were without
sympathy for "heathen" religions have now taken up the study of Buddhism
in earnest. Nevertheless, it appears to me that the teachings of
Sakyamuni are not yet known in their full significance and that they do
not yet command just appreciation. Though intolerant critics lose no
chance of vigorously and often wrongly attacking the weak points of
Buddhism, which are naturally seen at the surface, clear-sighted people
have been very slow to perceive its innermost truth. This is especially
the case with the Mahayana school.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

The main reasons for this are, in my opinion, evident. While the
canonical books of the Hînayâna Buddhism have been systematically
preserved in the Pali language, those of the Mahayana Buddhism are
scattered promiscuously all over the fields and valleys of Asia and in
half a dozen different languages. Further, while most of the Sanskrit
originals have been destroyed, their translations in Tibetan, Mongolian,
and Chinese have never been thoroughly studied. And, lastly, the
Mahayana system is so intricate, so perplexingly abstruse, that scholars
not accustomed to this form of thought and expression are entirely at a
loss to find their way through it.

Among the false charges which have been constantly poured upon the
Mahayana Buddhism, we find the following: Some say, "It is a nihilism,
denying God, the soul, the world and all"; some say, "It is a
polytheism: Avalokiteçvâra, Târa, Vajrapâni, Mañjuçrî, Amitâbha, and
what not, are all worshipped by its followers"; still others declare,
"It is nothing but sophistry, quibbling, hair-splitting subtlety, and a
mocking of the innermost

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

yearnings of humanity"; while those who attack it from the historical
side proclaim, "It is not the genuine teaching of Buddha; it is on the
contrary the pure invention of Nâgârjuna, who devised the system by
ingeniously mixing up his negative philosophy with the non-âtman theory
of his predecessor or, "The Mahayana is a queer mixture of the Indian
mythology that grew most freely in the Tantric period, with a
degenerated form of the noble ethical teachings of primitive Buddhism."
Though no one who is familiar with Mahayanistic ideas will admit these
one-sided and superficial judgments, the majority of people are so
credulous as to lend their ear to these falsified reports and to believe
them.

The present English translation of Açvaghosha's principal work is
therefore dedicated to the Western public by a Buddhist from Japan, with
a view to dispelling the denunciations so ungraciously heaped upon the
Mahayana Buddhism. The name of Açvaghosha is not very well known to the
readers of this country, but there is no doubt that he was the first
champion, promulgator, and expounder

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

of this doctrine, so far as we can judge from all our available
historical records. Besides, in this book almost all the Mahayanistic
thoughts, as distinguished from the other religious systems in India,
are traceable, so that we can take it as the representative text of this
school. If the reader will carefully and patiently go through the entire
book, unmindful of its peculiar terminology and occasional obscureness,
I believe he will be amply and satisfactorily repaid for his labor, and
will find that the underlying ideas are quite simple, showing
occasionally a strong resemblance to the Upanishad philosophy as well as
to the Samkhya system, though of course retaining its own independent
thought throughout.

In conclusion let me say a word about the difficulty of translating such
an abstruse religio-philosophic discourse as the present text. It is
comparatively easy to translate works of travels or of historical events
or to make abstracts from philosophical works. But a translator of the
Mahayanistic writings, which are full of specific phraseology and highly
abstruse speculations, will find himself like a

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

wanderer in some unknown region, not knowing how to obtain any
communicable means to express what he perceives and feels. To reproduce
the original as faithfully as possible and at the same time to make it
intelligible enough to the outside reader, who has perhaps never come in
contact with this form of thought, the translator must be perfectly
acquainted with the Mahayanistic doctrine as it is understood in the
Fast, while he must not be lacking in adequate knowledge of Western
philosophy and mode of thinking. The present translator has done his
best to make the Mahayanistic thoughts of Açvaghosha as clear and
intelligible as his limited knowledge and lack of philosophic training
allow him. He is confident, however, that he has interpreted the Chinese
text correctly. In spite of this, some errors may have crept into the
present translation, and the translator will gladly avail himself of the
criticisms of the Mahayana scholars to make corrections in case a second
edition of the work is needed.

TEITARO SUZUKI.

LA SALLE, ILL., May, 1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](taf03.md)
