[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf16)  [Next](taf18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. INTRODUCTORY.

There are eight inducements \[to write this Discourse\]:

1\. A general object, i.e., that the author might induce all beings to
liberate themselves from misery and to enjoy blessing, and not that he
might gain thereby some worldly advantages, etc.

2\. That he might unfold the fundamental truth of the Tathâgata and let
all beings have a right comprehension of it.

3\. That he might enable those who have brought their root of merit
(*kuçalamûla*) to maturity and obtained immovable faith, to have a
philosophical grasp of the doctrine of the Mahâyâna.

4\. That he might enable those whose root of merit is weak and
insignificant, to acquire faith and to advance to the stage of immovable
firmness (*avaivartikatva*). <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md)

5\. That he might induce all beings to obliterate

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the previously acquired evils (*durgati* or *karmâvarana*), to restrain
their own thoughts, and to free themselves from the three venomous
passions. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)

6\. That he might induce all beings to practise the orthodox method of
cessation \[or tranquilisation *çamatha*\] and of intellectual insight
(vidarçana) <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) to be fortified against
the commission of mental trespasses due to inferiority of mind.

7\. That he might induce all beings in the right way to ponder on the
doctrine of the Mahâyâna, for thus they will be born in the presence of
Buddhas, <span id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64.md) and acquire the absolutely
immovable Mahâyâna faith.

8\. That he might, by disclosing those benefits which are produced by
joyfully believing in the Mahâyâna, let sentient beings become
acquainted with the final aim of their efforts.

Though all these doctrines are sufficiently set forth

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

in the Mahâyâna Sûtras, <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) yet as the
predispositions and inclinations of the people <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) are not the same, and the conditions for
obtaining enlightenment vary, I now write this Discourse.

There is another reason for doing so. At the time of the Tathâgata the
people were unusually gifted, and the Buddha's presence, majestic both
in mind and body, served to unfold the infinite significances of the
Dharma with simplicity and yet in perfection. Accordingly there was no
need for a philosophical discourse (*çâstra*).

After the Nirvâna of the Buddha there were men who possessed in
themselves the intellectual power to understand the many-sided meanings
of the Sûtras, <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67.md)

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

even if they read only a few of them. There were others who by their own
intellectual powers could understand the meanings of the Sûtras only
after an extensive reading of many of them. Still others lacking in
intellectual powers of their own could understand the meanings of the
Sûtras only through the assistance of elaborate commentaries. But there
are some who, lacking in intellectual powers of their own, shun the
perusal of elaborate commentaries and take delight in studying and
cultivating enquiries which present the many-sidedness and universality
of the doctrine in a concise form.

For the sake of the people of the last class I write this Discourse, in
which the most excellent, the deepest, and the most inexhaustible
Doctrine of the Tathâgata will be treated in comprehensive brevity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[49:1](taf17.htm#fr_61.md) *Avaivartikatva* means
literally "never retreat." Faith is said to become immovably firm when
one enters into the group of those who cannot be shaken in the
possession of absolute truth (*samyaktvaniyataraçi*). For a further
explanation see the reference in the Index to *samyaktvaniyataraçi*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[50:1](taf17.htm#fr_62) They are: (1.md)
covetousness (*lobha*); (2) malice (*dvesha*); (3) ignorance (*moha*).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[50:2](taf17.htm#fr_63.md) *Camatha* and
*Vidarçana* or *Vipaçyana* constitute one of the five methods of
discipline, for whose full explanation see the reference in the Index to
these terms.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[50:3](taf17.htm#fr_64.md) This passage, which is
considered to be a reference to the Sukhâvatî Sutras, such as the Larger
and the Smaller *Sukhâvatî-vyûha*, or the *Amitâyur-dhyâna*, seems to
prove that some of the Mahâyâna texts of the Pure Land Sect had been in
existence before the time of Açvaghosha who gives towards the end of his
Discourse a quotation apparently taken from one of the above-mentioned
Sûtras. The Sûtras therefore must be at least one or two hundred years
older than Açvaghosha, in order that they might be quoted as an
authentic teaching of Buddha.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[51:1](taf17.htm#fr_65.md) The view here proposed
by Açvaghosha, which is called by Chinese Buddhists the theory of the
evolution of the Tathâgata-garbha, is considered to be an elucidation of
the doctrine taught by Buddha in such Mahâyâna Sûtras as the
*Lankâvatâra*, *Ghanavyûha*, *Crîmâlâ*, etc.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[51:2](taf17.htm#fr_66.md) Literally, those who are
to be converted.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[51:3](taf17.htm#fr_67.md) There are twelve
divisions called *Angas* in the Mahâyânist writings, while in the Pâli
only nine are counted. The twelve *angas* are: (1) *sûtra* (aphorisms);
(2) *geya* (verses in which the same thing is repeated as in the prose
part); (3) *vyâkarana* (Buddha's prophecy about Bodhisattva's attainment
of Buddhahood in the future); (4) *gâthâ* (independent verses); (5)
*udâna* (sermons on Buddha's own account); (6) *nidâna* (sermons as the
occasion required); (7) *avadâna* (legends, but according to Chinese
interpretation parables); (8) *ityukta* (speeches relating to the former
deeds of Bodhisattvas); (9) *jâtaka* (accounts of Buddha's own former
lives); (10) *vaipulya* (doctrines of deep significance); (11)
*adbhutadharma* (extraordinary phenomena); (12) *upadeça* (expositions).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. General Statement](taf18.md)
