[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf10)  [Next](taf12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AS AN ARTIST.

We cannot conclude the accounts concerning Açvaghosha without mentioning
an anecdote from a Chinese source. <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52)
The *Çraddhotpâdaçâstra* (*The Awakening* 

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

*of Faith*,) proves he was a philosopher of a high grade; the
*Buddhacaritakâvya* (*The life of Buddha*) and the *Mahâlamkâraçâstra*
(*The Book of Great Glory*) reveal his poetical genius; and the
following story indicates that he was a musician: <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

He \[Açvaghosha\] then went to Pâtaliputra for his propaganda-tour,
where he composed an excellent tune called Lai cha huo lo (<span
id="img_03500"></span> ![](img/03500.jpg) *Râstavara*?), that he might
by this means convert the people of the city. Its melody was classical,
mournful, and melodious, inducing the audience to ponder on the misery,
emptiness, and non-âtman-ness of life. That is to say, the music roused
in the mind of the hearer the thought that all aggregates are visionary
and subject to transformation; that the triple world is a jail and a
bondage, with nothing enjoyable in it; that since royalty, nobility, and
the exercise of supreme power, are all characterised with
transitoriness, nothing can prevent their decline, which will be as sure
as the dispersion of the clouds in the sky; that this corporeal
existence is a sham, is as hollow as a plantain tree, is an enemy, a
foe, one not to be intimately related with; and again that like a box in
which a cobra is kept, it should

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

never be cherished by anybody; that therefore all Buddhas denounce
persons clinging to a corporeal existence. Thus explaining in detail the
doctrine of the non-âtman and the *çûnyatâ*, Açvaghosha had the melody
played by musicians, who, however, not being able to grasp the
significance of the piece, failed to produce the intended tune and
harmony. He then donned a white woolen dress, joined the band of
musicians, beating the drum, ringing the bell, and tuning the lyre, and
this done, the melody in full perfection gave a note at once mournful
and soothing, so as to arouse in the mind of the audience the idea of
the misery, emptiness, and non-âtman-ness of all things. The five
hundred royal princes in the city thus moved all at once were fully
awakened, and abhorring the curse of the five evil passions abandoned
their worldly life and took refuge in the Bodhi. The king of Pâtaliputra
was very much terrified by the event, thinking that if the people who
listen to this music would abandon their homes \[like the princes\], his
country would be depopulated and his royal business ruined. So he warned
the people never to play this music hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[34:2](taf11.htm#fr_52) The Transmission of the
*Dharmapitaka* (*Fu fa tsang chuan*, *fas*. 5).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[35:1](taf11.htm#fr_53) The fact agrees well
with Târanâtha's statement which in its German translation reads as
follows: "Die von ihm verfassten Loblieder sind auch in allen Ländern
verbreitet; da zuletzt Sänger und Possenreisser dieselben vortrugen und
bei allen Menschen des Landes mit Macht Glauben an den Buddha entstand,
erwuchs durch die Loblieder grösserer Nutzen zur Verbreitung der Lehre.
*Geschichte des Buddhismus*, German translation, p. 91.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Works in Chinese Translations](taf12)
