[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf24)  [Next](taf26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### *a. Five False Views Held by Those Who Believe in a Personal Atman.*

There are five different views springing from it \[belief in the ego\],
which are held by common people (*prthagjana*).

First, hearing that it is said in the Sûtra <span
id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_157) that the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Dharmakâya of the Tathâgata is perfectly
tranquil and may be likened unto space (*âkâsa*), yet not understanding
its purport, ignorant people cling to the view that the nature of the
Tathâgata is eternal and omnipresent in the same sense as space is.

In order that this clinging to the false doctrine may be eliminated, be
it clearly understood that space is nothing but a mode of
particularisation and that it has no real existence of its own. Where
there is a perception of space, there is side by side a perception of a
variety of things, in contradistinction to which space is spoken of as
if existing independently. Space therefore exists only in relation to
our particularising consciousness.

Further since matter (*rûpa*) as stated before, is merely a
particularisation of the confused mind, it is clear enough that space
cannot have any independent existence. In a word all modes of relative
existence, our phenomenal world as a whole, are created simply by the
particularisation of the confused mind. If we become dissociated from
the latter, then all modes of relative existence vanish away by
themselves; while the soul alone, in its truth and suchness, pervades
the whole universe. The soul, therefore, that constitutes the essential
nature of the Tathâgata, cannot be compared with space, though the
latter may be said to be in a certain limited sense eternal and real.

Secondly, hearing that it is said in the Sûtras that all things in the
world without exception are perfect

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

emptiness (*atyantaçûnyatâ*), that even Nirvâna <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) or suchness is also perfect emptiness,
is devoid in its true nature of all characteristics (*lakshanâ*), yet
not understanding its purport, ignorant people cling to the view that
Nirvâna or suchness is a nothing, devoid of contents.

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be it clearly understood
that suchness or Dharmakâya in its self-nature (*svabhâva*) is not a
nothing (*çûnyatâ*) but envelopes in full immeasurable merits (*guna*)
which make up its true nature.

Thirdly, hearing that it is said in the Sûtras <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159) that the Tathâgata's womb
(*tathâgatagarbha*) envelopes in full all kinds of merits which
constituting its true nature do neither suffer augmentation nor
diminution, yet not understanding its purport, ignorant people cling to
the view that there is in the Tathâgata's womb itself an inherent and
fundamental distinction between the two objects, matter (*rûpa*) and
mind (*citta*).

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

it clearly understood that suchness (*bhûtatathatâ*) has nothing to do
with any form of distinction produced by defilement, and that even in
case we speak of its possessing innumerable meritorious characteristics,
they are free from the traces of defilement.

Fourthly, hearing that it is said in the Sûtras <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160) that even all impure and defiled things
in the world are produced through the Tathâgata's womb
(*tathâgatagarbha*), and that all things in the world are not at
variance with suchness, yet not understanding its purport, ignorant
people imagine that the Tathâgata's womb all-containingly envelopes all
objects of defilement in the world.

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be it clearly understood
that the Tathâgata's womb all-containingly envelopes pure and spotless
merits (guna) which, outnumbering the sands of the Ganges, are not at
variance with suchness; that the prejudices (*âçrava* or *kleça*) and
defiled objects, which also outnumber the sands of the Ganges are
nothing but non-entity, have from the first no self-existence
(*svabhâva*), have never been in correspondence with the Tathâgata's
womb; that there is no reason to suppose that the Tathâgata's womb had
been corresponding with defiled objects, but has now by virtue of
intellectual intuition been freed from falsity and defilement.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Fifthly, hearing that it is said in the Sûtras <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) that depending on the Tathâgata's womb,
there is birth-and-death (*samsâra*) as well as the attainment of
Nirvâna, yet not understanding its purport, ignorant people imagine that
depending on the Tathâgata's womb there is a beginning for
birth-and-death, and that since there is the beginning, Nirvâna is in
turn subject to extinction.

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be it clearly understood
that as the Tathâgata's womb has no beginning, ignorance and
birth-and-death depending on it have also no beginning; that it is a
view held by the tîrthaka <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162) \[i.e.,
the followers of the Vaiçesika\]

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and not taught by the Buddha, to say that there are outside of the three
worlds <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163) (*triloka*) some other
beings coming into existence; that the Tathâgata's womb has no future
\[i.e., time of extinction\]; and that those who have an insight into
it, will eternally destroy the seeds of birth-and-death and attain to
Nirvâna which has also no future \[i.e., time of extinction\].

These four <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164) erroneous views have
thus arisen from the conception of a personal âtman, and so we have laid
down the four refutations as above mentioned. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_165)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[106:2](taf25.htm#fr_157) It is not exactly
known to what Sûtra or Sûtras this refers, but the analogy of this kind
is frequently met with in most of the Mahâyâna texts.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[108:1](taf25.htm#fr_158) Fa-tsang, a
commentator of the present Discourse, quotes the
[*Mahâprajñâ-pâramitâ-Sûtra*](errata.htm#11) as here referred to. The
Sûtra says: "Even Nirvâna is like a mirage, like a dream. Nay, if there
be something superior to Nirvâna, I declare it is also like a mirage,
like a dream."

<span id="fn_159"></span>[108:2](taf25.htm#fr_159) For instance, we read
in the second volume of the *Lankâvatara Sûtra* (translated into Chinese
by Çiksânanda): "The Tathâgatagarbha is in its intrinsic nature pure,
clean, eternal, permanent, unintermittent, and immutable; it embraces
the thirty-two excellent qualities, and abides within the body of all
sentient beings," etc.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[109:1](taf25.htm#fr_160) Though not exactly
known to what Sûtra or Sûtras the reference is made here, we can easily
find similar passages in the Mahâyâna texts, such as the *Lankâvatara*,
the *Çrîmâlâ*, etc.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[110:1](taf25.htm#fr_161) These are not also
exactly known.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[110:2](taf25.htm#fr_162) It is not precisely
known bow many philosophical schools, called tîrthakas by Buddhists,
were flourishing just at the time of Açvaghosha. The *Nirvâna Sûtra* and
the *Vimalakîrtinirdeça Sûtra* mention six of them which were existing
at the time of Buddha: (1) Pûrana Kâçyapa; (2) Maskarin Goçâliputra; (3)
Sañjayin Vairaṭṭîputra; (4) Ajita Keçakambala; (5) Kakuda Kâtyâyana; (6)
Nirgrantha Jñâtiputra. In a commentary on the
[*Vimânamâtrâ-çâstra*](errata.htm#12), however, which is a later
production than this Discourse, twelve different tîrthaka schools are
enumerated. They are: (1) the Samkhya school; (2) the Vaiçesika school;
(3) the school which believes in Maheçvara as the creator; (4) the
school which believes in Mahâbrahma as the creator; (5) the school which
maintains that Time is the creator; (6) the school which maintains that
Space is the creator; (7) the school which maintains that Water is the
creator; (8) the school which says that the world exists by itself; (9)
the school which says that the creation comes from Quarters; (10) the
school which maintains that the Ego is the principle of existence; (11)
the school which maintains the immortality of articulate sounds, i.e.,
the Mîmamsâ school; (12) the Lokâyatika school, an Indian materialism.
For further references <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> see Dr. Enryô
Inouye's *Gedô Tetsugaku* (*Philosophical Systems of the Tîrthakas*),
1897, Tokyo, Japan.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[111:1](taf25.htm#fr_163) They are the world of
desire (*kâmaloka*), the world of form (*rûpaloka*), the world of
formlessness (*arûpaloka*). (See also p. 77). The *kâmaloka* is divided
into hells (*naraka*), region of ghosts (*preta*), animal life
(*tiryagyoni*), human life (*manushyaloka*), and region of gods
(*deva*); the *rûpaloka* into 17 heavenly abodes corresponding to the
three stages of Dhyâna; the *arûpaloka* into four heavenly abodes. For
details see the second chapter of the *Abhidharmakoça-Çâstra*, by
Vasubandhu.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[111:2](taf25.htm#fr_164) The number "four" in
this paragraph should be "five," for the author enumerates five
misunderstandings and their refutations, as we have seen.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[111:3](taf25.htm#fr_165) The whole passage is
missing in the older translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: B. Belief in the Existence of Atman in Things](taf26)
