[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf26)  [Next](taf28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### *3. Ways of Practising the Right Path.*

By this we mean that all Bodhisattvas, by their aspiration
(*cittotpâda*) <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168) and discipline
(*caryâcarana*), will be able to attain to the reason that made all
Tathâgatas perceive the path (*mârga*).

Briefly stated, there are three kinds of aspiration: (1) Aspiration
through the perfection of faith; (2) Aspiration through knowledge and
practice; (3) Aspiration through intellectual intuition.

By whom, and by which deeds, can faith (*çraddhâ*) be perfected and can
the aspiration be awakened?

Now the people who belong to the group of inconstancy

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (*aniyatarâçi*), <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169) by virtue of their root of merit
(*kuçalamûla*), which has a perfuming power, firmly believe in the
retribution of karma, practise the ten virtues (*daçakuçalâni*), <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170) loathe the sufferings of birth and
death, seek after the most excellent enlightenment (*Samyaksambodhi*),
and seeing Buddhas and Bodhisattvas they wait on them, make offerings to
them, discipline themselves in many \[meritorious\] deeds; and after the
lapse of ten thousand kalpas (eons), their faith will finally be
perfected.

Since then either by virtue of the instruction received from Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, or on account of their deep compassion (*mahâkarunâ*), or
from their desire to preserve the right doctrine (*saddharma*) against
its corruption, their aspiration \[to the highest truth\] will be
awakened.

After having awakened the aspiration they will

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

enter into the group of constant truth (*samyaktvaniyata-râçi*) and
never relapse, always abiding in the essence of the Buddha-seed and
identifying themselves with its excellent principle.

There is, however, a certain class of people whose root of merit
(*kuçalamûla*) from time immemorial is poor, and whose prejudices
(*kleça* or *âçrava*) are intense, deeply veiling their minds. Such
people, even if they see Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, wait on them, and
make offerings to them, will sow merely the seeds of men (*manushya*)
and gods (*deva*) \[i.e., they will be born in the future as men or
gods\], or the seeds of the enlightenment of Çrâvakas and
Pratyekabuddhas \[i.e., their attainment would not be higher than that
of Çrâvakas or Pratyekabuddhas\].

Some of them may even aspire to seek after the Mahâbodhi, <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171) but owing to the instability of their
character, they will ever [oscillate](errata.htm#14) between progress
and retrogression.

Some of them, happening to see Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, may make
offerings to them, wait on them, practise many \[meritorious\] deeds,
and, while ten thousand mahâkalpas (æons) are not yet elapsed, may
meantime come into some favorable circumstances and thereby awake
aspiration. What are those favorable circumstances? For instance, they
may witness the personal figure of a Buddha, or may make some offerings
to the congregation of priests

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (*samgha*), or may be instructed by Çrâvakas or
Pratyekabuddhas, or may be moved by seeing others aspire \[to the
highest truth\].

But this kind of aspiration as a rule is not constant. In case they come
into unfavorable circumstances, they may happen to fall down to the
stage of Çrâvakahood or Pratyekabuddhahood.

Now, briefly speaking, three faculties of the soul will be awakened by
the perfection of faith: (1) rightness of comprehension \[lit., right,
straight mind\], for it truthfully and intuitively contemplates suchness
(*bhûtalathatâ*); (2) profundity of virtue \[lit., deep, heavy mind\],
for it rejoices in accumulating all good deeds; (3) greatness of
compassion (*mahâkarunâ*), for it desires to uproot the miseries
(*duhkha*) of all beings.

It may be asked whether there is ever any need for one to discipline
oneself in all good deeds and to try to save mankind, since all sentient
beings (*sarvasattva*) as well as all things (*sarvadharma*) in the
world, abiding in the oneness of the universe (*dharmadhâtu*) that has
no second, will, as can be logically inferred, have nothing to do but
calmly to contemplate suchness.

In reply we say, yes. Because the mind may be likened unto a precious
jewel which is pure and bright in its essence but buried in a gross
veinstone. Now there is no reason to suppose that one can make it clean
and pure only by contemplating it, and without

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

applying any means \[of purification\] or a degree of workmanship.

It is even the same with suchness. Though it is pure and bright in its
essence and sufficiently envelopes all merits (*guna*), yet it is deeply
buried in infinite external defilements. And there is no reason to
suppose that a man can make it pure and clean only by earnest
contemplation on it, and without trying any means \[of emancipation\] or
of discipline.

It is therefore an urgent necessity that all good deeds should be
accumulated, that all beings should be delivered, that those infinite
external defilements and impurities should be cast off, that the true
doctrine should be revealed.

With regard to "means" \[or "skilfulness," *upâya*\] there are, briefly
stated, four kinds.

The first one is called the means of practising the fundamental \[truth,
*mûla*\]. That is to say, by contemplating the true essence of all
dharmas, which, being uncreate and free from imagination, is not
concerned with the metempsychosis of birth and death, and by
contemplating the truth that all things originate from the co-operation
of the principle (*hetu*) and the causes (*pratyaya*), and that the
retribution of karma is irrevocable, one will evoke deep compassion,
discipline oneself in all good deeds, embrace and convert all beings,
and not dwell in Nirvâna, since suchness \[in its absolute aspect\] has
nothing to do with Nirvâna or with birth-and-death. As this attitude

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[towards all objects\] is in accord \[with the
nature of suchness\], it is called the means of practising the
\[fundamental\] truth.

The second one is called the means of abeyance. That is, by feeling
shame and remorse, one may put an end to all evils and not let them
grow, since suchness is free from all marks of imperfection. Thus to be
in accord with suchness and to put an end to all evils is called the
means of abeyance.

The third one is called the means of strengthening the root of merits
(*kuçalamûla*). By raising reverential feelings toward the Triple
Treasure (*triratna*), one will revere, make offerings to, pay homage
to, praise, rejoice in, and beseech the Triple Treasure; and there upon
one's orthodox faith being strengthened, one will at last awake a desire
for the most excellent knowledge (*bodhiparinishpatti*). Through the
protection of the majestic power of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sam gha,
one's karma-hindrances (*karmâvarana*) will now get purified and one's
root of merit firmly established; because suchness is free from all
hindrances and envelopes all merits. Thus to be in accord with such ness
and to practise good deeds is called the means of strengthening the root
of merits.

The fourth one is called the universal means of great vows
(*mahâpranidhâna*). That is, one may make the vow that in ages to come
all beings should universally be delivered and take refuge at ease in
the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Anupadhiçesa Nirvâna, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172) because the true nature of all objects
is free from relativity, is one and the same, making no distinction
between this and that, and is absolutely calm and tranquil. Thus to be
in accord with the three attributes \[i.e., non-relativity, sameness,
tranquillity\] of suchness and to make such a great vow is called the
universal means of great vows.

\[Now to return to the former subject\], when the Bodhisattva thus
aspires to the highest truth, he is able to have a partial insight into
the Dharmakâya of the Buddha; and according to the power of the vow
(*pranâdhânavaça*), he performs eight things, to wit, his descent from
the palace in the Tushita heaven <span id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_173)

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

\[to this world\], his entrance into the human womb, his stay therein,
his birth, his renunciation, his attainment of Buddhahood, his
revolution of the Dharma-wheel (*dharmacakra*), and lastly his
Parinirvâna.

He is not, however, as yet to be called absolute Dharmakâya, for he has
not yet completely destroyed the impure <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174) karma that has been accumulated during
his numberless existences in the past; perchance by the influence of the
evil karma he may suffer a little amount of misery. But he suffers it
only for a short time, and this not because of his being fettered by the
evil karma, but because of his own vow-power (*pranidhânavaça*) \[which
he made for the universal emancipation of mankind\].

It is sometimes said in the Sûtra <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175)
that even those Bodhisattvas who aspired \[to the highest truth\]
through the perfection of their faith might relapse and fall down to the
evil creation (*apâyagati*). <span id="fr_176"></span>[3](#fn_176) But
this was

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

only said to encourage those novices who are apt to give themselves up
to indulgence and so may fail to enter into the right order \[i.e.,
*samyaktvaniyata*\], though they may not really fall down \[into the
evil path\].

Further the Bodhisattva has since his first aspiration disciplined
himself in those deeds which are beneficial both to himself and others,
and thereby his heart has become free from timidity, inasmuch as he
would not shudder even at the thought of falling down to the stage of
Çrâvakahood or [Pratyekabuddhahood](errata.htm#17), any more than to the
evil creation (*apâyagati*).

If he learn that he is able to attain to Buddhahood only after an
assiduous observance of various rules of austerity and mortification
during immeasurable asamkheya-kalpas, <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_177) he will never be frightened nor will he
falter. How then could he ever raise such thoughts as cherished by
Çrâvakas or Pratyekabuddhas? How then could be fall down to the evil
creation (*apâyagati*)? He has a firm faith in the truth that all things
(*sarvadharma*) from. the beginning are in their nature Nirvâna
itself. <span id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_178)

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

This sort of aspiration (*cittotpâda*) is more excellent than the
former, because the first asamkheyakalpa of Bodhisattvas of this class
is approaching to an end, because they have attained a thorough
knowledge of suchness, because all their acts are performed without any
stain of attachment.

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being free from the trace of
covetousness, is the perfection of pure and stainless charity
(*dânapâramitâ*), they in conformity to it practise charity
(*dânapâramitâ*).

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being free from the
influence of the five sensual passions, and, having nothing. to do with
immorality, is the perfection of pure and stainless morality
(*çilapâramitâ*), they in conformity to it practise morality
(*çilapâramitâ*).

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, having nothing to do with
grievance and being free from malice, is the perfection of pure and
stainless patience (*kshântipâramitâ*), they in conformity to it
practise patience (*kshântipâramitâ*).

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being free from physical and
mental limitations and having nothing to do with indolence, is the
perfection of pure and stainless energy (*vîryapâramitâ*), they in
conformity to it practise energy (*vîryapâramitâ*).

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, having nothing to do with
disturbance or confusion, is the perfection of pure and stainless
tranquilisation

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (*dhyânapâramitâ*), they in conformity to it
practise tranquilisation (*dhyânapâramitâ*).

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being free from the darkness
of ignorance, is the perfection of pure and stainless wisdom
(*prajñâpâramitâ*), they in conformity to it practise wisdom
(*prajñâpâramitâ*).

What is the object of which the Bodhisattva from the stage of
pure-heartedness up to the height of Bodhisattvahood has attained an
intellectual intuition? The object is no less than suchness itself. We
call it an object on account of the evolving-consciousness
(*pravrtti-vijñâna*). But in truth there is no object in perfect
intellectual intuition, neither is there a subject in it; because the
Bodhisattva by means of his wisdom of non-particularisation intuitively
perceives suchness (*bhûtatathatâ*) or Dharmakâya, which is beyond the
range of demonstration and argumentation.

Thus he is able in a moment to go over all the worlds in the ten
quarters and to make offerings to all Buddhas and to beseech them to
revolve the Wheel of the Dharma (*darmacakrapravartana*). His sole
desire being to benefit all beings, he does not care for any melodious
sounds or words \[which he can enjoy in his heavenly abode\]. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_179) In order to encourage weak-hearted
people, he shows great energy and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

attains to perfect enlightenment (*anuttarasamyaksambodhi*), all at once
annihilating the lapse of immeasurable asamkheyakalpas. Or in order to
instigate indolent people, he sometimes attains to Buddhahood only after
long discipline and mortification through the period of immeasurable
asamkheyakalpas. The reason why he achieves in this wise infinite
methods (*upâya*) \[of salvation\] is that he wishes thereby to benefit
all beings. <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180)

But in fact the intrinsic nature, the faculties, the aspiration, and the
intellectual attainment of all Bodhisattvas are equal \[in value\] and
there is not any scale of gradation in them. Because they will all
equally and assuredly attain to the most perfect enlightenment, only
after the elapsing of three asamkheyakalpas. Yet as there are
differences in various states of existence regarding their objects of
seeing, hearing, etc., as well as regarding their faculties, their
desires, and their character; so there are correspondingly many
different forms of religious discipline \[[destined](errata.htm#18) to\]
them.

Three different operations of the mind are revealed in this aspiration
by means of intellectual intuition: (1) Pure consciousness originating
in the mind as it becomes free from particularisation; (2) moral
consciousness \[lit., *upâya-citta*?\] originating in the mind

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

as it spontaneously performs those deeds which are beneficent to others;
(3) unconscious activity (*karma-vijñânacitta*) originating in the mind
as it achieves a most hidden mode of activity.

Again the Bodhisattva, having attained to the perfection of bliss and
wisdom, which are his two marks of adornment, has in reaching the height
of evolution (*akanishtha*) also obtained the most venerable and
excellent body in the whole universe. By means of that knowledge which
intuitively identifies itself \[with enlightenment *a priori*\], he has
all at once uprooted ignorance; and thus obtaining omniscience
(*sarvâkârajñâna*), <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181) he
spontaneously achieves incomprehensible \[or divine\] deeds
(*acintyakarma*), reveals himself in immeasurable worlds in the ten
quarters, and works out the universal emancipation of mankind.

A question arises here. As space is infinite, worlds are infinite. As
worlds are infinite, beings are infinite. As beings are infinite, the
modes of mentation are also infinitely diversified. And as all these
objects and conditions (*vishaya*) have no limits, they can hardly be
known or understood \[in all their multitudinousness\]. If, now,
ignorance being destroyed, all modes

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

of mentation are entirely annihilated as well, how can the Bodhisattva
understand all things and complete his omniscience (*sarvâkârajñâna*)?

In reply we say: All so-called illusory phenomena are in truth from the
beginning what they are; and their essence is nothing but the one soul
\[or mind\]. Though ignorant minds that cling to illusory objects cannot
understand that all things are in their nature the highest reality
(*paramârtha*), all Buddha-Tathâgatas being free from clinging \[or
particularising\] are able to have an insight into the true nature of
things. And by virtue of their great wisdom they illuminate all
distinctions between the defiled and the pure-through their immeasurable
and inexhaustible sources of expediency (*upâyakauçalya*), which is good
and excellent, they benefit and gladden all beings according to the
[latter's](errata.htm#19) various necessities and capabilities.
Therefore the mind that is saturated with subjectivity is annihilated,
while all things are understood and omniscience (*sarvâkârajñâna*) is
attained. <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182)

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

Another question presents itself here: If all Buddhas who are in
possession of infinite expediencies (*upâya*) can spontaneously benefit
all beings in the ten quarters, why is it that the latter cannot always
see Buddhas in person, or witness their divine transformations, or hear
their instructions in the Doctrine?

The reply is: Tathâgatas are really in possession of those expediencies,
and they are only waiting to reveal themselves to all beings as soon as
the latter can purify their own minds. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183)

When a mirror is covered with dust, it cannot reflect images. It can do
so only when it is free from stain. It is even the same with all beings.
If their minds are not clear of stain, the Dharmakâya cannot reveal
itself in them. But if they be freed from stain, then it will reveal
itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[113:1](taf27.htm#fr_168) Aspiration which does
not exactly correspond to the Chinese *fah hsin* and Sanskrit
*cittotpâda*, has been retained for lack of a fitter term. It has a
technical sense in Buddhism. Literally, *fah* or *utpâda* means
producing, raising, or awakening, while *hsin* or *citta* as noticed
elsewhere is mind, thought, or consciousness.
[*Cittotpâda*](errata.htm#13), however, is more than the raising of
one's thought to a higher religious life; it means the recognition of
the truth that one is in possession within oneself of the highest
perfect knowledge (*samyaksambodhi*); it is the birth within oneself of
a higher ethical impulse constituting the essence of religion. A fuller
form of *fah hsin* is *fah bodhi hsin* or *fah anuttarasamyaksambodhi
hsin*. See the Mahâyâna Sûtras such as the *Saddharma Pundarîka*,
*Vajracchedikâ*, *Sukhâvati Vyuha*, *Lankâvatara*, *Avatamsaka*, etc.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[114:1](taf27.htm#fr_169) There are three
groups of people: (1) Those who are constantly abiding in absolute truth
(*samyaktvaniyata-râçi*); (2) Those who are constantly abiding in
falsehood (*mithyâtvaniyatarâçi*); (3) Those who are inconstant
(*aniyata-râçi*).

<span id="fn_170"></span>[114:2](taf27.htm#fr_170) The ten virtues
(*daçakuçalâni*) consist in not committing the ten evils (daçâkuçalâni)
which are as follows: (1) Killing a living being (*prânâtipâda*); (2)
Stealing (*adattâdâna*); (3) Committing adultery (*kâmamithyâçâra*); (4)
Lying (*mrshâvâda*); (5) Slander (*paiçunya*); (6) Insulting speech
(*pârushya*); (7) Frivolous talk (*sambhinnapralâpa*); (8) Avarice
(*abhidhya*); (9) Evil intent (*vyâpâda*); (10) False view
(*mithyâdrshthi*). The ten evils here enumerated should be avoided by
the lay members of Buddhism. For the Çramaneras there is a different set
of precepts specially intended for them, called the *Daçaçikshapada*,
with which the ten virtues must not be confused as they are by some.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[115:1](taf27.htm#fr_171) The older translation
reads "Mahâyâna."

<span id="fn_172"></span>[119:1](taf27.htm#fr_172) Mahâyânists in
general distinguish four aspects of Nirvâna; (1) Nirvâna that is pure
and spotless in its self-nature, i.e., absolute suchness, possessed
equally by all beings; (2) Nirvâna that has remnant (*upadhiçesa*),
i.e., a state of relative suchness, which, though freed from the
affectional hindrance (*kleçâvarana*), is still under the fetter of
materiality, which causes suffering and misery; (3) Nirvâna that has no
remnant ([*anupadhiçesha*](errata.htm#15)) and full of love and wisdom,
believes neither in birth-and-death nor in Nirvâna, but eternally
abiding in the suchness of things benefits all sentient beings. Çrâvakas
and Pratyekabuddhas can recognise the first three aspects of Nirvâna,
but the last one is known only to Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. For further
details see the tenth volume of the
[*Vijñânamâtrasiddhi*](errata.htm#16) *Çâstra*, translated into Chinese
by Hüan-tsang.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[119:2](taf27.htm#fr_173) One of the six
heavenly abodes of the *Kâmaloka* (world of desire). The heavenly abodes
are: (1) Region of the four kings of the cardinal points
(*mahârâjakâyika*); (2) that of the thirty <span id="page_120">p.
120</span> three gods (*trâyastrinça*); (3) the *Yâmâ*; (4) the
*Tushita*; (5) the *Nirmânatis*: (6) the *Paranirmita-vaçavatins*. See
also the note to Triloka, p. 77.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[120:1](taf27.htm#fr_174) The term *impure*
does not mean immoral, but relative, conditional, dualistic or material,
in contradistinction to pure, absolute, unconditional, spiritual, etc.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[120:2](taf27.htm#fr_175) For instance, it is
stated in the second fasciculus of the
*Bodhisattva-kusumamâlâ-pûrvakarma Sûtra* (*? P‘u-sa ying-lo, pên-yeh
Ching*, in Chinese, translated by Fo-nien towards the end of the third
century) that those Bodhisattvas who have not yet entered on the eighth
stage (there are ten stages) of Bodhisattvahood may happen to relapse in
his religious course, if not be able to receive instruction in the
Dharma from some fully enlightened teachers.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[120:3](taf27.htm#fr_176) Three of the six
*gatis* are the *apâyagati* (evil path): Hell <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> (*nâraka*); ghost (*preta*); and animal life (*tiryagyoni*).
Sometimes demon (*asura*) is added to make the fourth.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[121:1](taf27.htm#fr_177) For an explanation
see [p. 87](taf22.htm#page_87), footnote.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[121:2](taf27.htm#fr_178) The same monistic
idea is expressed also in the following famous phrases: "Âçrâvas
(desires or prejudices) are nothing but Bodhi (enlightenment), and
birth-and-death (or this world of transformation) is nothing but
Nirvâna." Individuation is the product of subjectivity; the universe in
reality is one great whole.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[123:1](taf27.htm#fr_179) In the older
translation we read: "Having in view only the emancipation and
beneficence of all beings, he \[Bodhisattva\] does not rely on words and
characters."

<span id="fn_180"></span>[124:1](taf27.htm#fr_180) The older translation
reads: "It is out of \[human\] comprehension that he \[Bodhisattva\] can
achieve such innumerable methods \[of salvation\]."

<span id="fn_181"></span>[125:1](taf27.htm#fr_181) A distinction is
sometimes made between *Sarvâkârajñâna*, *Sarvajnâna* and *Mârgajnâna*:
*Sarvâkârajñâna* is the knowledge by which we are enabled to know all
forms and manifestations in their fundamental oneness; *Sarvajnâna* is
simply the knowledge of all things, or omniscience; *Mârgajnâna* is the
knowledge by which we can recognise the path leading to final
emancipation. But they are practically the same.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[126:1](taf27.htm#fr_182) The older translation
reads: "In reply we say: All phenomenal [objects](errata.htm#20)
(*vishaya*) are from the beginning for in their metaphysical origin\] of
the one mind which is free from imagination and subjectivity. As all
beings illusively perceive the existence of the phenomenal world
(*vishaya*), they impose limitations on the mind. As they thus
illusively cherish imagination and subjectivity, which are not in
accordance with the nature of the Dharma, they cannot thoroughly
understand it. All Buddha-Tathâgatas are, however, free from illusive
perception, and \[therefore their knowledge is\] omniscient, because the
mind constituting the principle of all things is true and valid. The
self-essence \[of all Buddhas\] illuminates all illusive phenomena,
possesses a great wisdom-activity and innumerable <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> means \[of salvation\], whereby, according to the
intellectual capacity of all beings, they can reveal to them various
significances of the Doctrine. Therefore it is called the
[*Sarvâkârajñâna*](errata.htm#21)."

<span id="fn_183"></span>[127:1](taf27.htm#fr_183) In the older
translation we read: The Dharmakâya of all Buddha-Tathâgatas is
universal (*samatâ*) and pervades every thing; it is free from
compulsion and therefore spontaneous, manifesting itself through the
minds of all beings."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Practice of Faith](taf28)
