[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob06.md) 
[Next](sob08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662006/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Science of Breath*, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson,
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### Chapter VI

### NOSTRIL-BREATHING

### Vs.

### MOUTH-BREATHING

One of the first lessons in the Yogi Science of Breath, is to learn how
to breathe through the nostrils, and to overcome the common practice of
mouth-breathing.

The breathing mechanism of Man is so constructed that he may breathe
either through the mouth or nasal tubes, but it is a matter of vital
importance to him which method he follows, as one brings health and
strength and the other disease and weakness.

It should not be necessary to state to the student that the proper
method of breathing is to take the breath through the nostrils, but
alas! the ignorance among civilized people regarding this simple matter
is astounding. We find people in all walks of life habitually breathing
through their mouths, and allowing their children to follow their
horrible and disgusting example.

Many of the diseases to which civilized man is subject are undoubtedly
caused by this common habit of mouth-breathing. Children permitted to
breathe in this way grow up with impaired vitality and weakened
constitutions, and in manhood and womanhood break down and become
chronic invalids. The mother of the savage race does better, being
evidently guided by her intuition. She seems to instinctively recognize
that the nostrils are the proper channels for the conveyal of air to the
lungs, and she trains her infant to close its little lips and breathe
through the nose. She

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

tips its head forward when it is asleep, which attitude closes the lips
and makes nostril-breathing imperative. If our civilized mothers were to
adopt the same plan, it would work a great good for the race.

Many contagious diseases are contracted by the disgusting habit of
mouth-breathing, and many cases of cold and catarrhal affections are
also attributable to the same cause. Many persons who, for the sake of
appearances, keep their mouth closed during the day, persist in
mouth-breathing at night and often contract disease in this way.
Carefully conducted scientific experiments have shown that soldiers and
sailors who sleep with their mouths open are much more liable to
contract contagious diseases than those who breathe properly through the
nostrils. An instance is related in which small-pox became epidemic on a
man of-war in foreign parts, and every death which resulted was that of
some sailor or marine who was a mouth-breather, not a single
nostril-breather succumbing.

The organs of respiration have their only protective apparatus, filter,
or oust-catcher, in the nostrils. When the breath is taken through the
mouth, there is nothing from mouth to lungs to strain the air, or to
catch the dust and other foreign matter in the air. From mouth to lungs
the dirt or impure substance has a clear track, and the entire
respiratory system is unprotected. And, moreover, such incorrect
breathing admits cold air to the organs, thereby injuring them.
Inflammation of the respiratory organs often results from the inhalation
of cold air through the mouth. The man who breathes through the mouth at
night, always awakens with a parched feeling in the mouth and a dryness
in the throat. He is violating one of nature's laws, and is sowing the
seeds of disease.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

[Once](errata.htm#4.md) more, remember that the mouth affords no protection
to the respiratory organs, and cold air, dust and impurities and germs
readily enter by that door. On the other hand, the nostrils and nasal
passages show evidence of the careful design of nature in this respect.
The nostrils are two narrow, tortuous channels, containing numerous
bristly hairs which serve the purpose of a filter or sieve to strain the
air of its impurities, etc., which are expelled when the breath is
exhaled. Not only do the nostrils serve this important purpose, but they
also perform an important function in warming the air inhaled. The long
narrow winding nostrils are filled with warm mucous membrane, which
coming in contact with the inhaled air warms it so that it can do no
damage to the delicate organs of the throat, or to the lungs.

No animal, excepting man, sleeps with the mouth open or breathes through
the mouth, and in fact it is believed that it is only civilized man who
so perverts nature's functions, as the savage and barbarian races almost
invariably breathe correctly. It is probable that this unnatural habit
among civilized men has been acquired through unnatural methods of
living, enervating luxuries and excessive warmth.

The refining, filtering and straining apparatus of the nostrils renders
the air fit to reach the delicate organs of the throat and the lungs,
and the air is not fit to so reach these organs until it has passed
through nature's refining process. The impurities which are stopped and
retained by the sieves and mucous membrane of the nostrils, are thrown
out again by the expelled breath, in exhalation, and in case they have
accumulated too rapidly or have managed to escape through the sieves and
have penetrated forbidden

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

regions, nature protects us by producing a sneeze which violently ejects
the intruder.

The air, when it enters the lungs is as different from the outside air,
as is distilled water different from the water of the cistern. The
intricate purifying organization of the nostrils, arresting and holding
the impure particles in the air, is as important as is the action of the
mouth in stopping cherry-stones and fish-bones and preventing them from
being carried on to the stomach. Man should no more breathe through his
mouth than he would attempt to take food through his nose.

Another feature of mouth-breathing is that the nasal passages, being
thus comparatively unused, consequently fail to keep themselves clean
and clear, and become clogged up and unclean, and are apt to contract
local diseases. Like abandoned roads that soon become filled with weeds
and rubbish, unused nostrils become filled with impurities and foul
matter.

One who habitually breathes through the nostrils is not likely to be
troubled with clogged or stuffy nostrils, but for the benefit of those
who have been more or less addicted to the unnatural mouth-breathing,
and who wish to acquire the natural and rational methods, it may perhaps
be well to add a few words regarding the way to keep their nostrils
clean and free from impurities.

A favorite Oriental method is to snuff a little water up the nostrils
allowing it to run down the passage into the throat, from thence it may
be ejected through the mouth. Some Hindu yogis immerse the face in a
bowl of water, and by a sort of suction draw in quite a quantity of
water, but this latter method requires considerable practice, and the
first mentioned method

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

is equally efficacious, and much more easily performed. Another good
plan is to open the window and breathe freely, closing one nostril with
the finger or thumb, sniffing up the air through the open nostril. Then
repeat the process on the other nostril. Repeat several times, changing
nostrils. This method will usually clear the nostrils of obstructions.

In case the trouble is caused by catarrh it is well to apply a little
vaseline or camphor ice or similar preparation. Or sniff up a little
witch-hazel extract once in a while, and you will notice a marked
improvement. A little care and attention will result in the nostrils
becoming clean and remaining so.

We have given considerable space to this subject of nostril-breathing,
not only because of its great importance in its reference to health, but
because nostril-breathing is a prerequisite to the practice of the
breathing exercises to be given later in this book, and. because
nostril-breathing is one of the basic principles underlying the Yogi
Science of Breath.

We urge upon the student the necessity of acquiring this method of
breathing if he has not, and caution him against dismissing this phase
of the subject as unimportant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Four Methods of Respiration](sob08.md)
