[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob01) 
[Next](sob03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Science of Breath*, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson,
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### Chapter I

### SALAAM

The western student is apt to be somewhat confused in his ideas
regarding the Yogis and their philosophy and practice. Travelers to
India have written great tales about the hordes of fakirs, mendicants
and mountebanks who infest the great roads of India and the streets of
its cities, and who impudently claim the title "Yogi." The Western
student is scarcely to be blamed for thinking of the typical Yogi as an
emaciated, fanatical, dirty, ignorant Hindu who either sits in a fixed
posture until his body becomes ossified, or else holds his arm up in the
air until it becomes stiff and withered and forever after remains in
that position, or perhaps clenches his fist and holds it tight until his
fingernails grow through the palms of his hands. That these people exist
is true, but their claim to the title "Yogi" seems as absurd to the true
Yogi as does the claim to the title "Doctor" on the part of the man who
pares one's corns seem to the eminent surgeon, or as does the title of
"Professor," as assumed by the street corner vendor of worm medicine,
seem to the President of Harvard or Yale.

There have been for ages past in India and other Oriental countries men
who devoted their time and attention to the development of Man,
physically, mentally and spiritually. The experience of generations of
earnest seekers has been handed down for centuries from teacher to
pupil, and gradually a definite Yogi science was built up. To these
investigations and teachings was finally applied the term "Yogi," from
the Sanscrit word "Yug," meaning "to join," From

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the same source comes the English word "yoke," with a similar meaning.
Its use in connection with these teachings is difficult to trace,
different authorities, giving different explanations, but probably the
most ingenious is that which holds that it is intended as the Hindu
equivalent for the idea conveyed by the English phrase, "getting into
harness," or "yoking up," as the Yogi undoubtedly "gets into harness" in
his work of controlling the body and mind by the Will.

Yoga is divided into several branches, ranging from that which teaches
the control of the body, to that which teaches the attainment of the
highest spiritual development. In the work we will not go into the
higher phases of the subject, except when the "Science of Breath"
touches upon the same. The "Science of Breath" touches Yoga at many
points, and although chiefly concerned with the development and control
of the physical, has also its psychic side, and even enters the field of
spiritual development.

In India there are great schools of Yoga, comprising thousands of the
leading minds of that great country. The Yoga philosophy is the rule of
life for many people. The pure Yogi teachings, however, are given only
to the few, the masses being satisfied with the crumbs which fall from
the tables of the educated classes, the Oriental custom in this respect
being opposed to that of the Western world. But Western ideas are
beginning to have their effect even in the Orient, and teachings which
were once given only to the few are now freely offered to any who are
ready to receive them. The East and the West are growing closer
together, and both profiting by the close contact, each influencing the
other.

The Hindu Yogis have always paid great attention

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

to the Science of Breath, for reasons which will be apparent to the
student who reads this book. Many Western writers have touched upon this
phase of the Yogi teachings, but we believe that it has been reserved
for the writer of this work to give the Western student, in concise form
and simple language, the underlying principles of the Yogi Science of
Breath, together with many of the favorite Yogi breathing exercises and
methods. We have given the Western idea as well as the Oriental, showing
how one dovetails into the other. We have used the ordinary English
terms, almost entirely, avoiding the Sanscrit terms, so confusing to the
average Western reader.

The first part of the book is devoted to the physical phase of the
Science of Breath; then the psychic and mental sides are considered, and
finally the spiritual side is touched upon.

We may be pardoned if we express ourselves as pleased with our success
in condensing so much Yogi lore into so few pages, and by the use of
words and terms which may be understood by anyone. Our only fear is that
its very simplicity may cause some to pass it by as unworthy of
attention, while they pass on their way searching for something "deep,"
mysterious and non-understandable. However, the Western mind is
eminently practical, and we know that it is only a question of a short
time before it will recognize the practicability of this work.

We greet our students, with our most profound saalam, and bid them be
seated for their first lesson in the Yogi Science of Breath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Breath Is Life](sob03)
