[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob07) 
[Next](sob09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Science of Breath*, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson,
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

### Chapter VII

### THE FOUR METHODS OF RESPIRATION

In the consideration of the question of respiration, we must begin by
considering the mechanical arrangements whereby the respiratory
movements are effected. The mechanics of respiration manifest through
(1) the elastic movements of the lungs, and (2) the activities of the
sides and bottom of the thoracic cavity in which the lungs are
contained. The thorax is that portion of the trunk between the neck and
the abdomen, the cavity of which (known as the thoracic cavity) is
occupied mainly by the lungs and heart. It is bounded by the spinal
column, the ribs with their cartilages, and the breastbone, and below by
the diaphragm. It is generally spoken of as "the chest." It has been
compared to a completely shut, conical box, the small end of which is
turned upward, the back of the box being formed by the spinal column,
the front by the breastbone and the sides by the ribs.

The ribs are twenty-four in number, twelve on each side, and emerge from
each side of the spinal column. [The](errata.htm#5) upper seven pairs
are known as "true ribs," being fastened to the
[breastbone](errata.htm#6) direct, while the lower five pairs are called
(false ribs) or "floating ribs," because they are not so fastened, the
upper two of them being fastened to the breastbone direct, while the
lower five having no cartilages, their forward ends being free.

The ribs are moved in respiration by two superficial muscular layers,
known as the intercostal muscles. The diaphragm, the muscular partition
before alluded to, separates the chest box from the abdominal cavity. In
the act of inhalation the muscles expand the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

lungs so that a vacuum is created and the air rushes in in accordance
with the well known law of physics. Everything depends upon the muscles
concerned in the process of respiration, which we may as, for
convenience, term the "respiratory muscles." Without the aid of these
muscles the lungs cannot expand, and upon the proper use and control of
these muscles the Science of Breath largely depends. The proper control
of these muscles will result in the ability to attain the maximum degree
of lung expansion, and the greatest amount of the life giving properties
of the air into the system.

The Yogis classify Respiration into four general methods, viz.:

\(1\) High Breathing.

\(2\) Mid Breathing.

\(3\) Low Breathing.

\(4\) Yogi Complete Breathing.

We will give a general idea of the first three methods, and a more
extended treatment of the fourth method, upon which the Yogi Science of
Breath is largely based.

\(1\) HIGH BREATHING

This form of breathing is known to the Western world as Clavicular
Breathing, or Collarbone Breathing. One breathing in this way elevates
the ribs and raises the collarbone and shoulders, at the. same time
drawing in the abdomen and pushing its contents up against the
diaphragm, which in turn is raised.

The upper part of the chest and lungs, which is the smallest, is used,
and consequently but a minimum amount of air enters the lungs. In
addition to this, the diaphragm being raised, there can be no expansion
in that direction. A study of the anatomy of the chest

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

will convince any student that in this way a maximum amount of effort is
used to obtain a minimum amount of benefit.

High Breathing is probably the worst form of breathing known to man and
requires the greatest expenditure of energy with the smallest amount of
benefit. It is an energy-wasting, poor-returns plan. It is quite common
among the Western races, many women being addicted to it, and even
singers, clergyman, lawyers and others, who should know better, using it
ignorantly.

Many diseases of the vocal organs and organs of respiration may be
directly traced to this barbarous method of breathing, and the straining
of delicate organs caused by this method, often results in the harsh,
disagreeable voices heard on all sides. Many persons who breathe in this
way become addicted to the disgusting practice of "mouth-breathing"
described in a preceding chapter.

If the student has any doubts about what has been said regarding this
form of breathing, let him try the experiment of expelling all the air
from his lungs, then standing [erect](errata.htm#7), with hands at
sides, let him raise the shoulders and collar-bone and inhale. He will
find that the amount of air inhaled far below normal. Then let him
inhale a full breath, after dropping the shoulders and collar-bone, and
he will receive an object lesson in breathing which he will be apt to
remember much longer than he would any words, printed or spoken.

\(2\) MID BREATHING

This method of respiration is known to Western students as Rib
Breathing, or Inter-Costal Breathing,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and while less objectional than High Breathing, is far inferior to
either Low Breathing or to the Yogi Complete Breath. In Mid Breathing
the diaphragm is pushed upward, and the abdomen drawn in. The ribs are
raised somewhat, and the chest is partially expanded. It is quite common
among men who have made no study of the subject. As there are two better
methods known, we give it only passing notice, and that principally to
call your attention to its shortcomings.

\(3\) LOW BREATHING

This form of respiration is far better than either of the two preceding
forms, and of recent years many Western writers have extolled its
merits, and have exploited it under the names of "Abdominal Breathing,"
"Deep Breathing," [Diaphragmatic](errata.htm#8) Breathing," etc., etc.,
and much good has been accomplished by the attention of the public
having been directed to the subject, and many having been induced to
substitute it for the inferior and injurious methods above alluded to.
Many "systems of breathing" have been built around Low Breathing, and
students have paid high prices to learn the new (?) systems. But, as we
have said, much good has resulted, and after all the students who paid
high prices to learn revamped old systems undoubtedly got their money's
worth if they were induced to discard the old methods of High Breathing
and Low Breathing.

Although many Western authorities write and speak of this method as the
best known form of breathing, the Yogis know it to be but a part of a
system which they have used for centuries and which they know as "The
Complete Breath." It must be admitted, however, that one must be
acquainted with the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

principles of Low Breathing before he can grasp the idea of Complete
Breathing.

Let us again consider the diaphragm. What is it? We have seen that it is
the great partition muscle, which separates the chest and its contents
from the abdomen and its contents. When at rest it presents a concave
surface to the abdomen. That is, the diaphragm as viewed from the
abdomen would seem like the sky as viewed from the earth—the interior of
an arched surface. Consequently the side of the diaphragm toward the
chest organs is like a protruding rounded surface—like a hill. When the
diaphragm is brought into use the hill formation is lowered and the
diaphragm presses upon the abdominal organs and forces out the abdomen.

In Low Breathing, the lungs are given freer play than in the methods
already mentioned, and consequently more air is inhaled. This fact has
led the majority of Western writers to speak and write of Low Breathing
(which they call Abdominal Breathing) as the highest and best method
known to science.. But the Oriental Yogi has long known of a better
method, and some few Western writers have also recognized this fact. The
trouble with all methods of breathing, other than "Yogi Complete
Breathing" is that in none of these methods do the lungs become filled
with air--at the best only a portion of the lung space is filled, even
in Low Breathing. High Breathing fills only the upper portion of the
lungs. Mid Breathing fills only the middle and a portion of the upper
parts. Low Breathing fills only the lower and middle parts. It is
evident that any method that lulls the entire lung space must be far
preferable to those filling only certain parts. Any method which

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

will fill the entire lung space must be of the greatest value to Man in
the way of allowing him to absorb the greatest quantity of oxygen and to
store away the greatest amount of prana. The Complete Breath is known to
the Yogis to be the best method of respiration known to science.

THE YOGI COMPLETE BREATH

Yogi Complete Breathing includes all the good points of High Breathing,
Mid Breathing and Low Breathing, with the objectionable features of each
eliminated. It brings into play the entire respiratory apparatus, every
part of the lungs, every air-cell, every respiratory muscle. The entire
respiratory organism responds to this method of breathing, and the
maximum amount of benefit is derived from the minimum expenditure of
energy. The chest cavity, is increased to its normal limits in all
directions and every part of the machinery performs its natural work and
functions.

One of the most important features of this method of breathing, is the
fact that the respiratory muscles are fully [called](errata.htm#9) into
play, whereas in the other forms of breathing only a portion of these
muscles are so used. In Complete Breathing, among other muscles, those
controlling the ribs are actively used, which increases the space in
which the lungs may expand, and also gives the proper support to the
organs when needed, Nature availing herself of the perfection of the
principle of leverage in this process. Certain muscles hold the lower
ribs firmly in position, while other muscles bend them outward.

Then again, in this method, the diaphragm is under perfect control and
is able to perform its functions

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

properly, and in such manner as to yield the maximum degree of service.

In the rib-action, above alluded to, the lower ribs are controlled by
the diaphragm which draws them slightly downward, while other muscles
hold them in place and the intercostal muscles force them outward, which
combined action increases the mid-chest cavity to its maximum. In
addition to this muscular action, the upper ribs are also lifted and
forced outward by the intercostal muscles which increase the capacity of
the upper chest to its fullest extent.

If you have studied the special features of the four given methods of
breathing, you will at once see that the Complete Breath comprises all
the advantageous features of the three other methods, plus the
reciprocal advantages accruing from the combined action of the
high-chest, mid-chest, and [diaphragmatic](errata.htm#10) regions, and
the normal [rhythmn](errata.htm#11) thus obtained.

In our next chapter, we will take up the Complete Breath in practice,
and will give full directions for the acquirement of this superior
method of breathing, with exercises, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. How to Acquire the Yogi Complete Breath](sob09)
