[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob05) 
[Next](sob07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Science of Breath*, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson,
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

### The Nervous System

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

It will be noticed that the Western scientific theories regarding the
breath confine themselves to the effects of the absorption of oxygen,
and its use through the circulatory system, while the Yogi theory also
takes into consideration the absorption of Prana, and its manifestation
through the channels of the Nervous System. Before proceeding further,
it may be as well to take a hasty glance at the Nervous System.

The Nervous System of man is divided into two great systems, viz., the
Cerebro-Spinal System and the Sympathetic System. The Cerebro-Spinal
System consists of all that part of the Nervous System contained within
the cranial cavity and the spinal canal, viz., the brain and the spinal
cord, together with the nerves which branch off from the same. This
system presides over the functions of animal life known as volition,
sensation, etc. The Sympathetic System includes all that part of the
Nervous System located principally in the thoracic, abdominal and pelvic
cavities, and which is distributed to the internal organs. It has
control over the involuntary processes, such as growth, nutrition, etc.

The Cerebro-Spinal System attends to all the seeing, hearing, tasting,
smelling, feeling, etc. It sets things in motion; it is used by the Ego
to think—to manifest consciousness. It is the instrument with which the
Ego communicates with the outside world. This system may be likened to a
telephone system, with the brain as the central office, and the spinal

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

column and nerves as cable and wires respectively.

The brain is a great mass of nerve tissue, and consists of three parts,
viz., the Cerebrum or brain proper, which occupies the upper, front,
middle and back portion of the skull; the Cerebellum, or "little brain,"
which fills the lower and back portion of the skull; and the Medulla
Oblongata, which is the broadened commencement of the spinal cord, lying
before and in front of the Cerebellum.

The Cerebrum is the organ of that part of the mind which manifests
itself in intellectual action. The Cerebellum regulates the movements of
the voluntary muscles. The Medulla Oblongata is the upper enlarged end
of the spinal cord, and from it and the Cerebrum branch forth the
Cranial Nerves which reach to various parts of the head, to the organs
of special sense, and to some of the thoracic and abdominal organs, and
to the organs of respiration.

The Spinal Cord, or spinal marrow, fills the spinal canal in the
vertebral column, or "backbone." It is a long mass of nerve tissue,
branching off at the several vertebrae to nerves communicating with all
parts of the body. The Spinal Cord is like a large telephone cable, and
the emerging nerves are like the private wires connecting therewith.

The Sympathetic Nervous System consists of a double chain of Ganglia on
the side of the Spinal column, and scattered ganglia in the head, neck,
chest and abdomen. (A ganglion is a mass of [nervous](errata.htm#3)
matter including nerve cells.) These ganglia are connected with each
other by filaments, and are also connected with the Cerebro Spinal
System by motor and sensory nerves. From these ganglia numerous fibers
branch out to the organs of the body, blood vessels, etc. At

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

various points, the nerves meet together and form what are known as
plexuses. The Sympathetic System practically controls the involuntary
processes, such as circulation, respiration and digestion.

The power of force transmitted from the brain to all parts of the body
by means of the nerves, is known to Western science as "nerve force,"
although the Yogi knows it to be a manifestation of Prana. In character
and rapidity it resembles the electric current. It will be seen that
without this "nerve force" the heart cannot beat; the blood cannot
circulate; the lungs cannot breathe; the various organs cannot function;
in fact the machinery of the body comes to a stop without it. Nay more,
even the brain cannot think without Prana be present. When these facts
are considered, the importance of the absorption of Prana must be
evident to all, and the Science of Breath assumes an importance even
greater than that accorded it by Western science.

The Yogi teachings go further than does Western science, in one
important feature of the Nervous System. We allude to what Western
science terms the "Solar Plexus," and which it considers as merely one
of a series of certain matted nets of sympathetic nerves with their
ganglia found in various parts of the body. Yogi science teaches that
this Solar Plexus is really a most important part of the Nervous System,
and that it is a form of brain, playing one of the principal parts in
the human economy. Western science seems to be moving gradually towards
a recognition of this fact which has been known to the Yogis of the East
for centuries, and some recent Western writers have termed the Solar
Plexus the "Abdominal Brain." The Solar Plexus is situated in the
Epigastric region, just

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

back of the "pit of the stomach" on either side of the spinal column. It
is composed of white and gray brain matter, similar to that composing
the other brains of man. It has control of the main internal organs of
man, and plays a much more important part than is generally recognized.
We will not go into the Yogi theory regarding the Solar Plexus, further
than to say that they know it as the great central store-house of Prana.
Men have been known to be instantly killed by a severe blow over the
Solar Plexus, and prize fighters recognize its vulnerability and
frequently temporarily paralyze their opponents by a blow over this
region.

The name "Solar" is well bestowed on this "brain," as it radiates
strength and energy to all parts of the body, even the upper brains
depending largely upon it as a storehouse of Prana. Sooner or later
Western science will fully recognize the real function of the Solar
Plexus, and will accord to it a far more important place than it now
occupies in their text-books and teachings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Nostril-Breathing vs. Mouth-Breathing](sob07)
