[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob12.md) 
[Next](sob14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662006/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Science of Breath*, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson,
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### Chapter XII

### SEVEN MINOR YOGI EXERCISES

This chapter is composed of seven minor Yogi Breathing Exercises,
bearing no special names, but each distinct and separate from the others
and having a different purpose in view. Each student will find several
of these exercises best adapted to the special requirements of his
particular case. Although we have styled these exercises "minor
exercises," they are quite valuable and useful, or they would not appear
in this book. They give one a condensed course in "Physical Culture" and
"Lung Development," and might readily be "padded out" and elaborated
into a small book on these subjects. They have, of course, an additional
value, as Yogi Breathing forms a part of each exercise. Do not pass them
by because they are marked "minor." Some one or more of these exercises
may be just what you need. Try them and decide for yourself.

EXERCISE I

\(1\) Stand erect with hands at sides.

\(2\) Inhale Complete Breath.

\(3\) Raise the arms slowly, keeping them rigid until the hands touch
over head.

\(4\) Retain the breath a few minutes with hands over head.

\(5\) Lower hands slowly to sides, exhaling slowly at same time.

\(6\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE II

\(1\) Stand erect, with arms straight in front of you.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\(2\) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

\(3\) Swing arms back as far as they will go; then back to first
position; then repeat several times, retaining the breath all the while.

\(4\) Exhale vigorously through mouth.

\(5\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE III

\(1\) Stand erect with arms straight in front of you.

\(2\) Inhale Complete Breath.

\(3\) Swing arms around in a circle, backward, a few times. Then reverse
a few times, retaining the breath all the while. You may vary this by
rotating them alternately like the sails of a windmill.

\(4\) Exhale the breath vigorously through the mouth.

\(5\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE IV

\(1\) Lie on the floor with your face downward and palms of hands flat
upon the floor by your sides.

\(2\) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

\(3\) Stiffen the body and raise yourself up by the strength of your
arms until you rest on your hands and toes.

\(4\) Then lower yourself to original position. Repeat several times.

\(5\) Exhale vigorously through your mouth.

\(6\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE V

\(1\) Stand erect with your palms against the wall.

\(2\) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

\(3\) Lower the chest to the wall, resting your weight on your hands.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

\(4\) Then raise yourself back with the arm muscles alone, keeping the
body stiff.

\(5\) Exhale vigorously through the mouth.

\(6\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE VI

\(1\) Stand erect with arms "akimbo," that is, with hands resting around
the waist and elbows standing out.

\(2\) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

\(3\) Keep legs and hips stiff and bend well forward, as if bowing, at
the same time exhaling slowly.

\(4\) Return to first position and take another Complete Breath.

\(5\) Then bend backward, exhaling slowly.

\(6\) Return to first position and take a Complete Breath.

\(7\) Then bend sideways, exhaling slowly. (Vary by bending to right and
then to left.)

\(8\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE VII

\(1\) Stand erect, or sit erect, with straight spinal column.

\(2\) Inhale a Complete Breath, but instead of inhaling a continuous
steady stream, take a series of short, quick "sniffs," as if you were
smelling aromatic salts or ammonia and did not wish to get too strong a
"whiff." Do not exhale any of these little breaths, but add one to the
other until the entire lung space is filled.

\(3\) Retain for a few seconds.

\(4\) Exhale through the nostrils in a long, restful, sighing breath.

\(5\) Practice Cleansing Breath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Vibration and Yogi Rhythmic Breathing](sob14.md)
