[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index.md) 
[Celtic](../../neu/celt/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iwd06.md) 
[Next](iwd08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA65ME/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Irish Witchcraft and Demonology*, by St. John D. Seymour, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### A.D. 1662-1686

THE DEVIL AT DAMERVILLE--AND AT BALLINAGARDE--TAVERNER AND HADDOCK'S
GHOST--HUNTER AND THE GHOSTLY OLD WOMAN--A WITCH RESCUED BY THE
DEVIL--DR. WILLIAMS AND THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN DUBLIN--APPARITIONS SEEN IN
THE AIR IN CO. TIPPERARY--A CLERGYMAN AND HIS WIFE BEWITCHED TO
DEATH--BEWITCHING OF MR. MOOR--THE FAIRY-POSSESSED BUTLER--A GHOST
INSTIGATES A PROSECUTION--SUPPOSED WITCHCRAFT IN CO. CORK--THE DEVIL
AMONG THE QUAKERS.

FROM the earliest times the Devil has made his mark, historically and
geographically, in Ireland; the nomenclature of many places indicates
that they are his exclusive property, while the antiquarian cannot be
sufficiently thankful to him for depositing the Rock of Cashel where he
did. But here we must deal with a later period of his activity. A quaint
tale comes to us from co. Tipperary of a man bargaining with his Majesty
for the price of his soul, in which as usual the Devil is worsted by

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

a simple trick, and gets nothing for his trouble. Near Shronell in that
county are still to be seen the ruins of Damerville Court, formerly the
residence of the Damer family, and from which locality they took the
title of Barons Milton of Shronell. The first of the family to settle in
Ireland, Joseph Damer, had been formerly in the service of the
Parliament, but not deeming it safe to remain in England after the
Restoration, came over to this country and, taking advantage of the
cheapness of land at that time, Purchased large estates. It was
evidently of this member of the family that the following tale is told.
He possessed great wealth, and 'twas darkly hinted that this had come to
him from no lawful source, that in fact he had made a bargain with the
Devil to sell his soul to him for a top-boot full of gold. His Satanic
Majesty greedily accepted the offer, and on the day appointed for the
ratification of the bargain arrived with a sufficiency of bullion from
the Bank of Styx--or whatever may be the name of the establishment
below! He was ushered into a room, in the middle of which stood the
empty top-boot; into

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

this he poured the gold, but to his surprise it remained as empty as
before. He hastened away for more gold, with the same result. Repeated
journeys to and fro for fresh supplies still left the boot as empty as
when he began, until at length in sheer disgust he took his final
departure, leaving Damer in possession of the gold, and as well (for a
few brief years, at all events) of that spiritual commodity he had
valued at so little. In process of time the secret leaked out. The wily
Damer had taken the sole off the boot, and had then securely fastened
the latter over a hole in the floor. In the storey underneath was a
series of large, empty cellars, in which he had stationed men armed with
shovels, who were under instructions to remove each succeeding shower of
gold, and so make room for more.

Another story <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) comes from
Ballinagarde in co. Limerick. the residence of the Croker family, though
it is probably later in point of time; in it the Devil appears in a
different rôle. Once upon a time Mr. Croker of Ballinagarde was out

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

hunting, but as the country was very difficult few were able to keep up
with the hounds. The chase lasted all day, and late in the evening
Croker and a handsome dark stranger, mounted on a magnificent black
horse, were alone at the death. Croker, delighted at his companion's
prowess, asked him home, and the usual festivities were kept up fast and
furious till far into the night. The stranger was shown to a bedroom,
and as the servant was pulling off his boots he saw that he had a cloven
hoof. In the morning he acquainted his master with the fact, and both
went to see the stranger. The latter had disappeared, and so had his
horse, but the bedroom carpet was seared by a red-hot hoof, while four
hoof-marks were imprinted on the floor of the horse's stall. What
incident gave rise to the story we cannot tell, but there was a saying
among the peasantry that such-and-such a thing occurred "as sure as the
Devil was in Ballinagarde"; while he is said to have appeared there
again recently.

A most remarkable instance of legal proceedings being instituted at the
instigation

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of a ghost comes from the co. Down in the year 1662. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) About Michaelmas one Francis Taverner,
servant to Lord Chichester, was riding home on horseback late one night
from Hillborough, and on nearing Drumbridge his horse suddenly stood
still, and he, not suspecting anything out of the common, but merely
supposing him to have the staggers, got down to bleed him in the mouth,
and then remounted. As he was proceeding two horsemen seemed to pass
him, though he heard no sound of horses' hoofs. Presently there appeared
a third at his elbow, apparently clad in a long white coat, having the
appearance of one James Haddock, an inhabitant of Malone who had died
about five years previously. When the startled Taverner asked him in
God's name who he was, he told him that he was James Haddock, and
recalled himself to his mind by relating a trifling incident that had
occurred in Taverner's father's house a short while before Haddock's
death. Taverner asked him why he spoke with him he told him, because he
was a man

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

of more resolution than other men, and requested him to ride along with
him in order that he might acquaint him with the business he desired him
to perform. Taverner refused, and, as they were at a cross-road, went
his own way. Immediately after parting with the spectre there arose a
mighty wind, "and withal he heard very hideous Screeches and Noises, to
his great amazement. At last he heard the cocks crow, to his great
comfort; he alighted off his horse, and falling to prayer desired God's
assistance, and so got safe home."

The following night the ghost appeared again to him as he sat by the
fire, and thereupon declared to him the reason for its appearance, and
the errand upon which it wished to send him. It bade him go to Eleanor
Walsh, its widow, who was now married to one Davis, and say to her that
it was the will of her late husband that their son David should be
righted in the matter of a lease which the father had bequeathed to him,
but of which the step-father had unjustly deprived him. Taverner refused
to do so, partly because

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

he did not desire to gain the ill-will of his neighbours, and partly
because he feared being taken for one demented; but the ghost so
thoroughly frightened him by appearing to him every night for a month,
that in the end he promised to fulfil its wishes. He went to Malone,
found a woman named Eleanor Walsh, who proved to be the wrong person,
but who told him she had a namesake living hard by, upon which Taverner
took no further trouble in the matter, and returned without delivering
his message.

The same night he was awakened by something pressing upon him, and saw
again the ghost of Haddock in a white coat, which asked him if he had
delivered the message, to which Taverner mendaciously replied that he
had been to Malone and had seen Eleanor Walsh. Upon which the ghost
looked with a more friendly air upon him, bidding him not to be afraid,
and then vanished in a flash of brightness. But having learnt the truth
of the matter in some mysterious way, it again appeared, this time in a
great fur and threatened to tear him to pieces if he did

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

not do as it desired. Utterly unnerved by these unearthly visits,
Taverner left his house in the mountains and went into the town of
Belfast, where he sat up all night in the house of a shoemaker named
Peirce, where were also two or three of Lord Chichester's servants.
"About midnight, as they were all by the fireside, they beheld
Taverner's countenance change and a trembling to fall upon him; who
presently espied the Apparition in a Room opposite him, and took up the
Candle and went to it, and resolutely ask'd it in the name of God
wherefore it haunted him? It replied, Because he had not delivered the
message; and withal repeated the threat of tearing him in pieces if he
did not do so speedily: and so, changing itself into many prodigious
Shapes, it vanished in white like a Ghost."

In a very dejected frame of mind Taverner related the incident to some
of Lord Chichester's family, and the chaplain, Mr. James South, advised
him to go and deliver the message to the widow, which he accordingly
did, and thereupon experienced great quietness of mind. Two nights

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

later the apparition again appeared, and on learning what had been done,
charged him to bear the same message to the executors. Taverner not
unnaturally asked if Davis, the step-father, would attempt to do him any
harm, to which the spirit gave a very doubtful response, but at length
reassured him by threatening Davis if he should attempt anything to his
injury, and then vanished away in white.

The following day Taverner was summoned before the Court of the
celebrated Jeremy Taylor, Bishop of Down, who carefully examined him
about the matter, and advised him the next time the spirit appeared to
ask it the following questions: Whence are you? Are you a good or a bad
spirit? Where is your abode? What station do you hold? How are you
regimented in the other world? What is the reason that you appear for
the relief of your son in so small a matter, when so many widows and
orphans are oppressed, and none from thence of their relations appear as
you do to right them?

That night Taverner went to Lord Conway's house. Feeling the coming
presence

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of the apparition, and being unwilling to create any disturbance within
doors, he and his brother went out into the courtyard, where they saw
the spirit coming over the wall. He told it what he had done, and it
promised not to trouble him any more, but threatened the executors if
they did not see the boy righted. "Here his brother put him in mind to
ask the Spirit what the Bishop bid him, which he did presently. But it
gave him no answer, but crawled on its hands and feet over the wall
again, and so vanished in white with a most melodious harmony." The
boy's friends then brought an action (apparently in the Bishop's Court)
against the executors and trustees; one of the latter, John Costlet, who
was also the boy's uncle, tried the effect of bluff, but the threat of
what the apparition could and might do to him scared him into a promise
of justice. About five years later, when the story was forgotten,
Costlet began to threaten the boy with an action, but, coming home drunk
one night, he fell off his horse and was killed. In the above there is
no mention of the fate of Davis.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Whatever explanation we may choose to give of the *supernatural* element
in the above, there seems to be no doubt that such an incident occurred,
and that the story is, in the main, true to fact, as it was taken by
Glanvill from a letter of Mr. Thomas Alcock's, the secretary to Bishop
Taylor's Court, who must therefore have heard the entire story from
Taverner's own lips. The incident is vividly remembered in local
tradition, from which many picturesque details are added, especially
with reference to the trial, the subsequent righting of young David
Haddock, and the ultimate punishment of Davis, on which points Glanvill
is rather unsatisfactory. According to this source, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) Taverner (or Tavney, as the name is
locally pronounced) *felt something get up behind him* as he was riding
home, and from the eerie feeling that came over him, as well as from the
mouldy smell of the grave that assailed his nostrils, he perceived that
his companion was not of this world. Finally the ghost urged Taverner to
bring the case into Court, and it came up for

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

trial at Carrickfergus. The Counsel for the opposite side browbeat
Taverner for inventing such an absurd and malicious story about his
neighbour Davis, and ended by tauntingly desiring him to call his
witness. The usher of the Court, with a sceptical sneer, called upon
James Haddock, and at the third repetition of the name a clap of thunder
shook the Court; a hand was seen on the witness-table, and a voice was
heard saying, "Is this enough?" Which very properly convinced the jury.
Davis slunk away, and on his homeward road fell from his horse and broke
his neck. Instead of propounding Bishop Taylor's shorter catechism,
Taverner merely asked the ghost, "Are you happy in your present state?"
"If," it replied in a voice of anger, "you were not the man you are, I
would tear you in pieces for asking such a question"; and then went off
in a flash of fire!!--which, we fear, afforded but too satisfactory an
answer to his question.

In the following year, 1663, a quaintly humorous story <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) of a most persistent and troublesome
ghostly visitant comes from

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the same part of the world, though in this particular instance its
efforts to right the wrong did not produce a lawsuit: the narrator was
Mr. Alcock, who appears in the preceding story. One David Hunter, who
was neat-herd to the Bishop of Down (Jeremy Taylor) at his house near
Portmore, saw one night, as he was carrying a log of wood into the
dairy, an old woman whom he did not recognise, but apparently some
subtle intuition told him that she was not of mortal mould, for
incontinent he flung away the log, and ran terrified into his house. She
appeared again to him the next night, and from that on nearly every
night for the next nine months. "Whenever she came he must go with her
through the Woods at a good round rate; and the poor fellow look'd as if
he was bewitch'd and travell'd off his legs." Even if be were in bed he
had to rise and follow her wherever she went, and because his wife could
not restrain him she would rise and follow him till daybreak, although
no apparition was visible to her. The only member of the family that
took the matter philosophically was Hunter's little

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

dog, and he became so accustomed to the ghost that he would inevitably
bring up the rear of the strange procession--if it be true that the
lower classes dispensed with the use of night-garments when in bed, the
sight must truly have been a most remarkable one.

All this time the ghost afforded no indication as to the nature and
object of her frequent appearances. "But one day the said David going
over a Hedge into the Highway, she came just against him, and he cry'd
out, 'Lord bless me, I would I were dead; shall I never be delivered
from this misery?' At which, 'And the Lord bless me too,' says she. 'It
was very happy you spoke first, for till then I had no power to speak,
though I have followed you so long. My name,' says she, 'is Margaret
------. I lived here before the War, and had one son by my Husband; when
he died I married a soldier, by whom I had several children which the
former Son maintained, else we must all have starved. He lives beyond
the Ban-water; pray go to him and bid him dig under such a hearth, and
there he shall find 28*s*. Let

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

him pay what I owe in such a place, and the rest to the charge unpay'd
at my Funeral, and go to my Son that lives here, which I had by my
latter Husband, and tell him that he lives a very wicked and dissolute
life, and is very unnatural and ungrateful to his Brother that nurtured
him, and if he does not mend his life God will destroy him.'"

David Hunter told her he never knew her. "No," says she, "I died seven
years before you came into this Country"; but she promised that, if he
would carry her message, she would never hurt him. But he deferred doing
what the apparition bade him, with the result that she appeared the
night after, as he lay in bed, and struck him on the shoulder very hard;
at which he cried out, and reminded her that she had promised to do him
no hurt. She replied that was if he did her message; if not, she would
kill him. He told her he could not go now, because the waters were out.
She said that she was content that he should wait until they were
abated; but charged him afterwards not to fail her. Ultimately be did
her errand, and afterwards

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

she appeared and thanked him. "For now," said she, "I shall be at rest,
and therefore I pray you lift me up from the ground, and I will trouble
you no more." So Hunter lifted her up, and declared afterwards that she
felt just like a bag of feathers in his arms; so she vanished, and he
heard most delicate music as she went off over his head.

An important witch-case occurred in Scotland in 1678, the account of
which is of interest to us as it incidentally makes mention of the fact
that one of the guilty persons had been previously tried and condemned
in Ireland for the crime of witchcraft. Four women and one man were
strangled and burnt at Paisley for having attempted to kill by magic Sir
George Maxwell of Pollock. They had formed a wax image of him, into
which the Devil himself had stuck the necessary pins; it was then turned
on a spit before the fire, the entire band repeating in unison the name
of him whose death they desired to compass. Amongst the women was "one
Bessie Weir, who was hanged up the last of the four (

one that had been taken

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *before in Ireland
and was condemned to the fyre for malifice before*; and when the hangman
there was about to cast her over the gallows, the devill takes her away
from them out of their sight; her *dittay* \[indictment\] was sent over
here to Scotland), who at this tyme, when she was cast off the gallows,
there appears a raven, and approaches the hangman within an ell of him,
and flyes away again. All the people observed it, and cried out at the
sight of it." <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md)

A clergyman, the Rev. Daniel Williams (evidently the man who was pastor
of Wood Street, Dublin, and subsequently founded Dr. Williams's Library
in London), relates the manner in which he freed a girl from strange and
unpleasant noises which disturbed her; the incident might have developed
into something analogous to the Drummer of Tedworth in England, but on
the whole works out rather tamely. He tells us that about the year 1678
the niece of Alderman Arundel of Dublin was troubled by noises in her
uncle's house, "as by violent Sthroaks on the Wainscots and

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chests, in what
Chambers she frequented." In the hope that they would cease she removed
to a house near Smithfield, but the disturbances pursued her thither,
and were no longer heard in her former dwelling. She thereupon betook
herself to a little house in Patrick Street, near the gate, but to no
purpose. The noises lasted in all for about three months, and were
generally at their worst about two o'clock in the morning. Certain
ministers spent several nights in prayer with her, heard the strange
sounds, but did not succeed in causing their cessation. Finally the
narrator, Williams, was called in, and came upon a night agreed to the
house, where several persons had assembled. He says: "I preached from
Hebrews ii. 18, and contrived to be at Prayer at that Time when the
Noise used to be greatest. When I was at Prayer the Woman, kneeling by
me, catched violently at my Arm, and afterwards told us that she raw a
terrible Sight--but it pleased God there was no noise at all. And from
that Time God graciously freed her from all that Disturbance." <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md)

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

Many strange stories of apparitions seen in the air come from all parts
of the world, and are recorded by writers both ancient and modern, but
there are certainly few of them that can equal the account of that weird
series of incidents that was seen in the sky by a goodly crowd of ladies
and gentlemen in co. Tipperary on 2nd March 1678. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) "At Poinstown in the county of Tepperary
were seen divers strange and prodigious apparitions. On Sunday in the
evening several gentlemen and others, after named, walked forth in the
fields, and the Sun going down, and appearing somewhat bigger than
usual, they discoursed about it, directing their eyes towards the place
where the Sun set; when one of the company observed in the air, near the
place where the Sun went down, an Arm of a blackish blue colour, with a
ruddy complection'd Hand at one end, and at the other end a cross piece
with a ring fasten'd to the middle of it, like one end of an anchor,
which stood still for a while, and then made northwards, and so
disappeared. Next, there

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

appeared at a great distance in the air, from the same part of the sky,
something like a Ship coming towards them; and it came so near that they
could distinctly perceive the masts, sails, tacklings, and men; she then
seem'd to tack about, and sail'd with the stern foremost, northwards,
upon a dark smooth sea, which stretched itself from south-west to
north-west. Having seem'd thus to sail some few minutes she sunk by
degrees into the sea, her stern first; and as she sunk they perceived
her men plainly running up the tacklings in the forepart of the Ship, as
it were to save themselves from drowning. Then appeared a Fort, with
somewhat like a Castle on the top of it; out of the sides of which, by
reason of some clouds of smoak and a flash of fire suddenly issuing out,
they concluded some shot to be made. The Fort then was immediately
divided in two parts, which were in an instant transformed into two
exact Ships, like the other they had seen, with their heads towards each
other. That towards the south seem'd to chase the other with its stem
\[stern?\] foremost, northwards, till it sunk with its stem first, as

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

the, first Ship had done; the other Ship sail'd some time after, and
then sunk with its head first. It was observ'd that men were running
upon the decks of these two Ships, but they did not see them climb up,
as in the last Ship, excepting one man, whom they saw distinctly to get
up with much haste upon the very top of the Bowsprit of the second Ship
as they were sinking. They supposed the two last Ships were engaged, and
fighting, for they saw the likeness of bullets rouling upon the sea,
while they were both visible. Then there appear'd a Chariot, drawn with
two horses, which turn'd as the Ships had done, northward, and
immediately after it came a strange frightful creature, which they
concluded to be some kind of serpent, having a head like a snake, and a
knotted bunch or bulk at the other end, something resembling a snail's
house. This monster came swiftly behind the chariot and gave it a sudden
violent blow, then out of the chariot leaped a Bull and a Dog, which
follow'd him \[the bull\], and seem'd to bait him. These also went
northwards, as the former had done, the Bull first, holding

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

his head downwards, then the Dog, and then the Chariot, till all sunk
down one after another about the same place, and just in the same manner
as the former. These meteors being vanished, there were several
appearances like ships and other things. The whole time of the vision
lasted near an hour, and it was a very clear and calm evening, no cloud
seen, no mist, nor any wind stirring. All the phenomena came out of the
West or Southwest, and all moved Northwards; they all sunk out of sight
much about the same place. Of the whole company there was not any one
but saw all these things, as above-written, whose names follow:

'"Mr. Allye, a minister, living near the place.  
Lieutenant Dunsterville, and his son. Mr. Grace, his son-in-law.  
Lieutenant Dwine. Mr. Dwine, his brother.  
Mr.. Christopher Hewelson. Mr. Richard Foster.  
Mr. Adam Hewelson.  
Mr. Bates, a schoolmaster. <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>  
Mr. Larkin.  
Mrs. Dunsterville.  
Her daughter-in-law.  
Her maiden daughter.  
Mr. Dwine's daughter.  
Mrs. Grace, her daughter."

The first of the sixteen persons who subscribed to the truth of the
above was the Rev. Peter Alley, who had been appointed curate of
Killenaule Union (Dio. Cashel) in 1672, but was promoted to livings in
the same diocese in the autumn of the year the apparitions
appeared. <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md) There is a townland named
Poyntstown in the parish of Buolick and barony of Slievardagh, and
another of the same name in the adjoining parish of Fennor. It must have
been at one or other of these places that the sights were witnessed, as
both parishes are only a few miles distant from Killenaule. Somewhat
similar tales, although not so full of marvellous detail, are reported
at different periods from the west of Ireland. Such indeed seem to have
been the origin of the belief in that mysterious island

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O'Brasil, lying
far out in the western ocean. About the year 1665, a Quaker pretended
that he had a revelation from Heaven that he was the man ordained to
discover it, and accordingly fitted out a ship for the purpose. In 1674,
Captain John Nisbet, formerly of co. Fermanagh, actually landed there!
At this period it was located off Ulster. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

Between the clergy and the witches a continuous state of warfare
existed; the former, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, ever assumed
the offensive, and were most diligent in their attempts to eradicate
such a damnable heresy from the world--indeed with regret it must be
confessed that their activity in this respect was frequently the means
of stirring up the quiescent Secular Arm, thereby setting on foot bloody
persecutions, in the course of which many innocent creatures were
tortured and put to a cruel death. Consequently, human nature being what
it is, it is not a matter of surprise to learn that witches occasionally

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

appear as the aggressors, and cause the clergy as much uneasiness of
mind and body as they possibly could. In or about the year 1670 an Irish
clergyman, the Rev. James Shaw, Presbyterian minister of Carnmoney, "was
much troubled with witches, one of them appearing in his chamber and
showing her face behind his cloke hanging on the clock-pin, and then
stepping to the door, disappeared. He was troubled with cats coming into
his chamber and bed; be sickens and dyes; his wyfe being dead before
him, and, as was supposed, witched." Some equally unpleasant experiences
befel his servant. "Before his death his man going out to the stable one
night, sees as if it had been a great heap of hay rolling towards him,
and then appeared in the shape and likeness of a bair \[bear\]. He
charges it to appear in human shape, which it did. Then he asked, for
what cause it troubled him? It bid him come to such a place and it
should tell him, which he ingaged to do, yet ere be did it, acquainted
his master with it; his master forbids him to keep sic a tryst; he
obeyed his master, and went not. That night he should have

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

kept, there is a stone cast at him from the roof of the house, and only
touches him, but does not hurt him; whereupon he conceives that had been
done to him by the devill, because he kept not tryst; wherefore he
resolutely goes forth that night to the place appointed, being a rash
bold fellow, and the divill appears in human shape, with his heid
running down with blood. He asks him again, why he troubles him? The
devill replyes, that he was the spirit of a murdered man who lay under
his bed, and buried in the ground, and who was murdered by such a man
living in sic a place twenty years ago. The man comes home, searches the
place, but finds nothing of bones or anything lyke a grave, and causes
send to such a place to search for such a man, but no such a one could
be found, and shortly after this man dyes." To which story Mr. Robert
Law <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) sagely adds the warning: "It's
not good to come in communing terms with Satan, there is a snare in the
end of it, but to resyst him by prayer and faith and to turn a deaf ear
to his temptations."

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Whatever explanation we may choose to give of the matter, there is no
doubt but at the time the influence of witchcraft was firmly believed
in, and the deaths of Mr. Shaw and his wife attributed to supernatural
and diabolical sources. The Rev. Patrick Adair, a distinguished
contemporary and co-religionist of Mr. Shaw, alludes to the incident as
follows in his *True Narrative*: "There had been great ground of
jealousy that she \[Mrs. Shaw\] in her child-bed had been wronged by
sorcery of some witches in the parish. After her death, a considerable
time, some spirit or spirits troubled the house by casting stones down
at the chimney, appearing to the servants, and especially having got one
of them, a young man, to keep appointed times and places, wherein it
appeared in divers shapes, and spake audibly to him. The people of the
parish watched the house while Mr. Shaw at this time lay sick in his
bed, and indeed he did not wholly recover, but within a while died, it
was thought not without the art of sorcery."

Classon Porter in his pamphlet gives

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

an interesting account of the affair, especially of the trend of events
between the deaths of the husband and wife respectively; according to
this source the servant-boy was an accomplice of the Evil One, not a
foolish victim. Mrs. Shaw was dead, and Mr. Shaw lay ill, and so was
unable to go to the next monthly meeting of his brethren in the ministry
to consult them about these strange occurrences. However, he sent his
servant, who was supposed to be implicated in these transactions, with a
request that his brethren would examine him about the matter, and deal
with him as they thought best. The boy was accordingly questioned on the
subject, and having confessed that he had conversed and conferred with
the evil spirit, and even assisted it in its diabolical operations, he
was commanded for the future to have no dealings of any kind with that
spirit. The boy promised obedience, and was dismissed. But the affair
made a great commotion in the parish, so great that the brethren not
only ordered the Communion (which was then approaching) to be delayed in
Carnmoney "until the confusion should fall a little,"

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

but appointed two of their number to hold a special fast in the
congregation of Carnmoney, "in consideration of the trouble which had
come upon the minister's house by a spirit that appeared to some of the
family, and the distemper of the minister's own body, with other
confusions that had followed this movement in the parish." The ministers
appointed to this duty were, Kennedy of Templepatrick, and Patton of
Ballyclare, who reported to the next meeting that they had kept the fast
at Carnmoney, but with what result is not stated. Mr. Shaw died about
two months later.

Most wonderful and unpleasant were the bodily contortions that an Irish
gentleman suffered, as the result of not having employed a woman who to
the useful trade of *sage-femme* added the mischievous one of witch--it
is quite conceivable that a country midwife, with some little knowledge
of medicine and the use of simples, would be classed in popular opinion
amongst those who had power above the average. "In Ireland there was one
Thomas Moor, who had his wife brought to bed of a child, and not having
made use of her former

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

midwife, who was *malæ famæ*, she was witched by her so that she dies.
The poor man resenting it, she was heard to say that that was nothing to
that which should follow. She witches him also, so that a certain tyme
of the day, towards night, the Devil did always trouble him, once every
day for the space of 10 or 12 yeirs, by possessing his body, and causing
it to swell highly, and tearing him so that he foamed, and his face
turned about to his neck, having a most fearfull disfigured visage. At
which tyme he was held by strong men, out of whose grips when he gott,
he would have rushed his head against the wall in hazard of braining
himself, and would have leaped up and down fearfully, tumbling now and
then on the ground, and cryed out fearfully with a wyld skirle and
noise, and this he did ordinarily for the space of ane hour; when the
fitt was over he was settled as before; and without the fitt he was in
his right mynd, and did know when it came on him, and gave notice of it,
so that those appoynted for keeping of him prepared for it. He was, by
appointment of the ministers, sent from

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

parish to parish for the case of his keepers. At length, people being
wearied with waiting on him, they devysed a way for ease, which was to
put him in a great chyer \[chair\] fitted for receiving of his body, and
so ordered it that it clasped round about so that he could not get out,
and then by a pillue \[pulley\] drew him up off the ground; and when the
fitt came on (of whilk he still gave warning) put him in it and drew him
up, so that his swinging to and froo did not hurt him, but was keept
till the fitt went over save fra danger, and then lett down till that
tyme of the next day, when the fitt recurred. Many came to see him in
his fitts, but the sight was so astonishing that few desired to come
again. He was a man of a good report, yet we may see givin up to Satan's
molestations by the wise and soveraigne God. Complains were givin in
against her \[the midwife\] for her malefices to the magistrat there,
but in England and Ireland they used not to judge and condemn witches
upon presumptions, but are very sparing as to that. He was alive in the
year 1679." The concluding words of the story would lead us to infer
that

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

trials for witchcraft had taken place in Ireland, of which Law had
heard, and from the report of which he formed his opinion relative to
the certain amount of commonsense displayed by the magistrates in that
country, in contradistinction to Scotland, where the very slightest
evidence sufficed to bring persons to torture and death.

In the following tale <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) the ghostly
portion is rather dwarfed by the strong fairy element which appears in
it, and, as we have already shown, many witchcraft cases in Scotland
were closely interwoven with the older belief in the "good people"; Lord
Orrery, when giving the account to Baxter, considered it to be "the
effect of Witchcraft or Devils." The reader is free to take what view he
likes of the matter! The Lord Orrery mentioned therein is probably
Roger, the second Earl, whom Lodge in his *Peerage* describes as being
"of a serious and contemplative disposition, which led him to seek
retirement." If this identification be correct the following event must
have occurred between 1679 and 1682, during which years the Earl held
the title.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

The butler of a gentleman living near the Earl was sent to buy a pack of
cards, As he was crossing a field he was surprised to see a company of
people sitting down at a table loaded with all manner of good things, of
which they invited him to partake, and no doubt he would have accepted
had not someone whispered in his ear, "Do nothing this company invites
you to," upon which he refused. After this they first fell to dancing,
and playing on musical instruments, then to work, in both of which
occupations they desired the butler to join, but to no purpose.

The night following the friendly spirit came to his bedside and warned
him not to stir out of doors the next day, for if he did so the
mysterious company would obtain possession of him. He remained indoors
the greater part of that day, but towards evening he crossed the
threshold, and hardly had he done so when a rope was cast about his
waist, and he was forcibly dragged away with great swiftness. A horseman
coming towards him espied both the man and the two ends of the rope, but
could see nothing pulling. By catching

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

hold of one end he succeeded in stopping the man's headlong course,
though as a punishment for so doing he received a smart blow on his arm
from the other.

This came to the ears of the Earl of Orrery, who requested the butler's
master to send him to his house, which the latter did. There were then
staying with the Earl several persons of quality, two Bishops, and the
celebrated Healer, Valentine Greatrakes. Here the malice of the spirits
or fairies manifested itself in a different manner. The unfortunate man
was suddenly perceived to rise from the ground, and the united efforts
of Greatrakes and another were unable to check his upward motion--in
fact all that the spectators could do was to keep running under him to
protect him from being hurt if the invisible power should suddenly relax
its hold. At length he fell, but was caught by them before he reached
the ground, and so received no harm.

That night the spectre, which had twice proved so friendly, appeared at
his bedside with a wooden platter full of some grey

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

liquid, which it bade him drink, as he had brought it to him to cure him
of two sorts of fits he was subject to. He refused to drink it, and it
would appear from another part of the narration that his refusal was
based on the advice of the two Bishops, whom he had consulted in the
matter. At this the spirit was very angry, but told him he had a
kindness for him, and that if he drank the juice of plantain-roots he
would be cured of one sort of fit, but that he should suffer the other
one till his death. On asking his visitant who he was, he replied that
he was the ghost of a man who had been dead seven years, and who in the
days of his flesh had led a loose life, and was therefore condemned to
be borne about in a restless condition with the strange company until
the Day of judgment. He added that "if the butler had acknowledged God
in all His ways he had not suffered such things by their means," and
reminded him that he had not said his prayers the day before he met the
company in the field; and thereupon vanished. Had this story rested
alone on the evidence of the butler the "two sorts

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

of fits" would have been more than sufficient to account for it, but
what are we to say to the fact that all the main points of the narrative
were borne out by the Earl, while Mr. Greatrakes (according to Dr. More,
the author of *Collections of Philosophical Writings*) declared that he
was actually an eye-witness of the man's being carried in the air above
their heads.

At the instigation of a ghost a lawsuit took place at Downpatrick in
1685. The account of this was given to Baxter <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md) by Thomas Emlin, "a worthy preacher in
Dublin," as well as by Claudius Gilbert, one of the principal parties
therein concerned: the latter's son and namesake proved a liberal
benefactor to the Library of Trinity College--some of his books have
been consulted for the present work. It appears that for some time past
there had been a dispute about the tithes of Drumbeg, a little parish
about four miles outside Belfast, between Mr. Gilbert, who was vicar of
that town, and the Archdeacon

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

of Down, Lemuel Matthews, whom Cotton in his *Fasti* describes as "a man
of considerable talents and legal knowledge, but of a violent
overbearing temper, and a litigous disposition." The parishioners of
Drumbeg favoured Gilbert, and generally paid the tithes to him as being
the incumbent in possession; but the Archdeacon claimed to be the lawful
recipient, in support of which claim he produced a warrant. In the
execution of this by his servants at the house of Charles Lostin, one of
the parishioners, they offered some violence to his wife Margaret, who
refused them entrance, and who died about a month later (1st Nov. 1685)
of the injuries she had received at their hands. Being a woman in a bad
state of health little notice was taken of her death, until about a
month after she appeared to one Thomas Donelson, who had been a
spectator of the violence done her, and "affrighted him into a
Prosecution of Robert Eccleson, the Criminal. She appeared divers times,
but chiefly upon one Lord's Day-Evening, when she fetch'd him with a
strange force out of his House into

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

the Yard and Fields adjacent. Before her last coming (for she did so
three times that Day) several Neighbours were called in, to whom he gave
notice that she was again coming; and beckon'd him to come out; upon
which they went to shut the Door, but he forbad it, saying that she
looked with a terrible Aspect upon him, when they offered it. But his
Friends laid hold on him and embraced him, that he might not go out
again; notwithstanding which (a plain evidence of some invisible Power),
he was drawn out of their Hands in a surprizing manner, and carried
about into the Field and Yard, as before, she charging him to prosecute
Justice: which Voice, as also Donelson's reply, the people heard, though
they saw no shape. There are many Witnesses of this yet alive,
particularly Sarah (Losnam), the Wife of Charles Lostin, Son to the
deceased Woman, and one William Holyday and his Wife." This last
appearance took place in Holyday's house; there were also present
several young persons, as well as Charles and Helen Lostin, children of
the deceased, most of whom appeared as witnesses at the trial.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

Upon this Donelson deposed all he knew of the matter to Mr. Randal
Brice, a neighbouring justice of the Peace; the latter brought the
affair before the notice of Sir William Franklin in Belfast Castle. The
depositions were subsequently carried to Dublin, and the case was tried
at Downpatrick Assizes by judge John Lindon in 1685. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) On behalf of the plaintiff, Charles
Lostin, Counseller James Macartney acted--if he be the judge who
subsequently makes his appearance in a most important witch-trial at
Carrickfergus, he certainly was as excellent an advocate as any
plaintiff in a case of witchcraft could possibly desire, as he was
strongly prejudiced in favour of the truth of all such matters. "The
several Witnesses were heard and sworn, and their Examinations were
entred in the Record of that Assizes, to the Amazement and Satisfaction
of all that Country and of the judges, whom I have heard speak of it at
that time with much Wonder; insomuch

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

that the said Eccleson hardly escaped with his life, but was Burnt in
the Hand."

A case of supposed witchcraft occurred in Cork in 1685-6, the account of
which is contained in a letter from Christopher Crofts to Sir John
Perceval (the third Baronet, and father of the first Earl of Egmont)
written on the fifteenth of March in that year. Though the narrator
professes his disbelief in such superstitions, yet there seems to have
been an unconscious feeling in his mind that his strict administration
of the law was the means of bringing the affliction on his child. He
says: "My poor boy Jack to all appearances lay dying; he had a
convulsion for eight or nine hours. His mother and several others are of
opinion he is bewitched, and by the old woman, the mother of Nell Welsh,
who is reputed a bad woman; and the child was playing by her that day
she was upon her examination, and was taken ill presently after she was
committed to Bridewell. But I have not faith to believe it was anything
but the hand of God. I have committed the girl

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

to Bridewell, where she shall stay some time." <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md)

At one period in their history that peculiar people, known amongst
themselves as the Society of Friends, and by their opponents as Quakers,
appear to have been most troublesome, and to have caused a good deal of
annoyance to other religious bodies. Not unnaturally their enemies
credited any wild tales which were related about them to their
detriment, especially when they had reference to their doctrine of the
influence of the Spirit. Dr. More, in his continuation to Glanvill's
book, has in the sixth Relation an account of a man, near Cambridge in
England, who was possessed by an evil spirit which led him to do the
most extraordinary things in its attempt to convert him to Quakerism. In
the *Life of Mr. Alexander Peden, late Minister of the Gospel at New
Glenluce in Galloway*, who died in 1686, there is an account of a
Quakers' meeting in this country at which the Devil appeared in most
blasphemous parody of the Holy Ghost. As Mr. Peden was travelling one

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

time by himself in Ireland "the night came on, and a dark mist, which
obliged him to go into a house belonging to a Quaker. Mr. Peden said, 'I
must beg the favour of the roof of your house all night.' The Quaker
said, 'Thou art a stranger, thou art very welcome and shalt be kindly
entertained, but I cannot wait upon thee, for I am going to the
meeting.' Mr. Peden said, 'I will go along with you. The Quaker said,
'Thou may, if thou please, but thou must not trouble us.' He said, 'I
will be civil.' When they came to the meeting, as their ordinary is,
they sat for some time silent, some with their faces to the wall, and
others covered. There being a void in the loft above them there came
down the appearance of a raven, and sat upon one man's head, who started
up immediately, and spoke with such vehemence that the froth flew from
his mouth; it went to a second, and he did the same; and to a third, who
did as the former two. Mr. Peden sitting near to his landlord said, 'Do
you not see that? Ye will not deny it afterwards?' When they dismissed,
going home Mr. Peden

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

said to him, 'I always thought there was devilry among you, but never
thought that he did appear visibly among you till now that I have seen
it.' The poor man fell a-weeping, and said, 'I perceive that God hath
sent you to my house, and put it into your heart to go along with me,
and permitted the Devil to appear visibly among us this night. I never
saw the like before. Let me have the help of your prayers.' After this
he became a singular Christian."

Mr. Peden was also somewhat of a prophet, and his speciality appears to
have been the prognostication of unpleasant events, at all events to
persons in Ireland. Two instances will suffice. When in a gentleman's
house in co. Antrim he foretold that a maid-servant was *enceinte*, that
she would murder the child, and would be punished. "Which accordingly
came to pass, and she was burnt at Craig Fergus." On another occasion
two messengers were sent to inform the Lord-Lieutenant that the
Presbyterian ministers in Ireland should affirm that they had nothing to
do with the rebellion at Bothwell Bridge. Mr.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Peden said they
were on the Devil's errand, but God would arrest them by the gate.
Accordingly one was stricken with sickness, while the other fell from
his horse and broke his leg.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[134:1](iwd07.htm#fr_35.md) Furnished to the writer
by T. J. Westropp, Esq., M.A.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[136:1](iwd07.htm#fr_36.md) Glanvill, *Sadducismus
Triumphatus*, Rel. 26.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[142:1](iwd07.htm#fr_37.md) *Ulster Journal of
Archæology*, vol. iii. (for 1855).

<span id="fn_38"></span>[143:1](iwd07.htm#fr_38.md) Glanvill, *op. cit*.,
Rel. 27.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[148:1](iwd07.htm#fr_39.md) Law's *Memorialls*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[149:1](iwd07.htm#fr_40.md) Baxter, *Certainty of
the World of Spirits*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[150:1](iwd07.htm#fr_41.md) William Turner,
*Compleat History of Most Remarkable Providences* (London, 1697).

<span id="fn_42"></span>[154:1](iwd07.htm#fr_42.md) Seymour, *Succession of
Clergy in Cashel and Emly*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[155:1](iwd07.htm#fr_43.md) O'Donoghue,
*Brendaniana*, p. 301. See Joyce, *Wonders of Ireland*, p. 30, for an
apparition of a ship in the air in Celtic times. See also Westropp,
*Brasil* (Proc. R.I.A.); that writer actually sketched an illusionary
island in 1872.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[157:1](iwd07.htm#fr_44.md) *Memorialls*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[163:1](iwd07.htm#fr_45.md) Glanvill, *op. cit*.,
Rel. 18; Baxter, *op. cit*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[167:1](iwd07.htm#fr_46.md) *Op. cit.*; W. P.,
*History of Witches and Wizards* (London, 1700 ?).

<span id="fn_47"></span>[170:1](iwd07.htm#fr_47) John Lindon (or Lyndon.md)
became junior puisne judge of the Chief Place in 1682, was knighted in
1692, and died in 1697 (*Cork Hist. and Arch. Journal*, vol. vii., 2nd
series).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[172:1](iwd07.htm#fr_48.md) Egmont MSS. (Hist. MSS.
Comm.), ii. 181.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: A.D. 1688: An Irish-American Witch](iwd08.md)
