[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index.md) 
[Celtic](../../neu/celt/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iwd07.md) 
[Next](iwd09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA65ME/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Irish Witchcraft and Demonology*, by St. John D. Seymour, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

# CHAPTER VII

#### A.D. 1688

### AN IRISH-AMERICAN WITCH

IT is often said that Irishmen succeed best out of Ireland; those
qualities they possess, which fail to ripen and come to maturity in the
lethargic atmosphere of the Green Isle, where nothing matters very much
provided public opinion is not run counter to, become factors of history
under the sunshine and storm of countries where more ample scope is
given for the full development of pugnacity, industry, or state-craft.
At any rate, from the days of Duns Scotus and St. Columbanus down to the
present, Irishmen have filled, and still fill, positions of the highest
importance in every part of the globe as friends of kings, leaders of
armies, or preachers of the Truth--of such every Irishman, be his creed
or politics what they may, is

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

justly proud. To the lengthy and varied list of honours and offices may
be added (in one instance at least) the item of witchcraft. Had the
unhappy creature, whose tale is related below, remained in her native
land, she would most probably have ended her days in happy oblivion as a
poor old woman, in no way distinguishable from hundreds of others in
like position; as it was, she attained unenviable notoriety as a
powerful witch, and was almost certainly the means of starting the
outbreak at Salem. Incidentally the story is of interest as showing that
at this time there were some Irish-speaking people in Boston.

Shortly after the date of its colonisation the State of Massachusetts
became remarkable for its cases of witchcraft; several persons were
tried, and some were hanged, for this crime. But at the time about which
we are writing there was in Boston a distinguished family of puritanical
ministers named Mather. The father, Increase Mather, is to be identified
with the person of that name who was Commonwealth "minister of the
Gospel" at Magherafelt in Ireland in 1656; his

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

more famous son, Cotton, was a most firm believer in all the
possibilities of witchcraft, and it is to his pen that we owe the
following. He first gave an account of it to the world in his *Memorable
Providences relating to Witchcraft*, published at Boston in 1689, the
year after its occurrence; and subsequently reproduced it, though in a
more condensed form, in his better-known *Magnalia Christi* (London,
1702). It is from this latter source that we have taken it, and the
principal passages which are omitted in it, but occur in the *Memorable
Providences*, are here inserted either within square brackets in the
text, or as footnotes. We may now let the reverend gentleman tell his
tale in his own quaint and rotund phraseology.

 

"Four children of John Goodwin in Boston which had enjoyed a Religious
Education, and answer'd it with a towardly Ingenuity; Children indeed of
an exemplary Temper and Carriage, and an Example to all about them for
Piety, Honesty, and Industry. These were in the year 1688 arrested by a
stupendous

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

Witchcraft. The Eldest of the children, a Daughter of about Thirteen
years old, saw fit to examine their Laundress, the Daughter of a
Scandalous Irish Woman in the Neighbourhood, whose name was Glover
\[whose miserable husband before he died had sometimes complained of
her, that she was undoubtedly a witch, and that wherever his head was
laid, she would quickly arrive unto the punishments due to such a one\],
about Some Linnen that was missing, and the Woman bestowing very bad
language on the Child, in the Daughter's Defence, the Child was
immediately taken with odd Fits, that carried in them something
Diabolical. It was not long before one of her Sisters, with two of her
Brothers, were horribly taken with the like Fits, which the most
Experienc'd Physicians \[particularly our worthy and prudent friend Dr.
Thomas Oakes\] pronounced Extraordinary and preternatural; and one thing
the more confirmed them in this Opinion was, that all the Children were
tormented still just the same part of their Bodies, at the same time,
though their Pains flew like swift lightning

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

from one part to another, and they were kept so far asunder that they
neither saw nor heard each other's Complaints. At nine or ten a-clock at
Night they still had a Release from their miseries, and slept all Night
pretty comfortably. But when the Day came they were most miserably
handled. Sometimes they were Deaf, sometimes Dumb, and sometimes Blind,
and often all this at once. Their tongues would be drawn down their
throats, and then pull'd out upon their Chins, to a prodigious Length.
Their Mouths were forc'd open to such a Wideness, that their jaws were
out of joint; and anon clap together again, with a Force like a
Springlock: and the like would happen to their Shoulder-blades, their
Elbows and Handwrists, and several of their joints. . . . Their Necks
would be broken, so that their Neck-bone would seem dissolv'd unto them
that felt after it, and yet on the sudden it would become again so
stiff, that there was no stirring of their Heads; yea, their Heads would
be twisted almost round. And if the main Force of their Friends at any
time obstructed a dangerous Motion

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

which they seemed upon, they would roar exceedingly. "But the
Magistrates being awakened by the Noise of these Grievous and Horrid
Occurrences, examin'd the Person who was under the suspicion of having
employ'd these Troublesome Dæmons, and she gave such a Wretched Account
of herself that she was committed unto the Gaoler's Custody. \[Goodwin
had no proof that could have done her any hurt; but the hag had not
power to deny her interest in the enchantment of the children; and when
she was asked, Whether she believed there was a God? her answer was too
blasphemous and horrible for any pen of mine to mention. Upon the
commitment of this extraordinary woman all the children had some present
ease, until one related to her, accidentally meeting one or two of them,
entertain'd them with her blessing, that is railing, upon which three of
them fell ill again.\]

"It was not long before this Woman was brought upon her Trial; but then
\[thro' the efficacy of a charm, I suppose, used upon her by one or some
of her crue\] the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Court could have
no Answers from her but in the Irish, which was her Native Language,
although she understood English very well, and had accustom'd her whole
Family to none but English in her former Conversation. \[It was long
before she could with any direct answers plead unto her Indictment, and
when she did plead\] it was with owning and bragging rather than denial
of her Guilt. And the Interpreters, by whom the Communication between
the Bench and the Barr was managed, were made sensible that a Spell had
been laid by another Witch on this, to prevent her telling Tales, by
confining her to a language which 'twas hoped nobody would understand.
The Woman's House being searched, several Images, or Poppets, or Babies,
made of Raggs and stuffed with Goat's Hair, were found; when these were
produced the vile Woman confess'd, that her way to torment the Objects
of her Malice was by wetting of her Finger with her Spittle, and
stroaking of these little Images. The abus'd Children were then produced
in Court, and the Woman still kept stooping and shrinking, as one that
was almost prest

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

to death with a mighty Weight upon her. But one of the Images being
brought to her, she odly and swiftly started up, and snatch'd it into
her Hand. But she had no sooner snatch'd it than one of the Children
fell into sad Fits before the whole Assembly. The judges had their just
Apprehensions at this, and carefully causing. a repetition of the
Experiment, they still found the same Event of it, tho' the Children saw
not when the Hand of the Witch was laid upon the Images. They ask'd her,
*Whether she had any to stand by her*? She reply'd, *She had*; and
looking very fixtly into the air, she added, *No, he's gone*! and then
acknowledged she had One, who was her Prince, with whom she mention'd I
know not what Communion. For which cause the Night after she was heard
expostulating with a Devil for his thus deserting her, telling him, that
because he had served her so basely and falsely she had confessed all.

"However to make all clear the Court appointed five or six Physicians to
examine her very strictly, whether she were no way craz'd in her
Intellectuals. Divers Hours

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

did they spend with her, and in all that while no Discourse came from
her but what was agreeable; particularly when they ask'd her what she
thought would become of her Soul, she reply'd, *You ask me a very solemn
Question, and I cannot tell what to say to it*. She profest herself a
Roman Catholick, and could recite her Paternoster in Latin very readily,
but there was one Clause or two always too hard for her, whereof she
said, *She could not repeat it, if she might have all the world*. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) In the Upshot the Doctors returned her
Compos Mentis, and Sentence of Death was past upon her.

"Divers Days past between her being arraign'd and condemn'd; and in this
time, one Hughes testify'd, that her Neighbour (called Howen), who was
cruelly bewitchd unto Death about six years before, laid her Death to
the charge of this Woman \[she had seen Glover sometimes come down her
chimney\], and bid her, the said Hughes,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

to remember this; for within six years there would be occasion to
mention it. \[This Hughes now preparing her testimony, immediately one
of her children, a fine boy well grown towards youth\] was presently
taken ill in the same wofal manner that Goodwin's were; and particularly
the Boy in the Night cry'd out, that a Black Person with a Blue Cap in
the Room tortur'd him, and that they try'd with their Hand in the Bed
for to pull out his Bowels. The Mother of the Boy went unto Glover on
the day following, and asked her, *Why she tortured her poor Lad at such
a rate*? Glover answered, *Because of the Wrong she had receiv'd from
her*; and boasted *That she had come at him as a Black Person with a
Blue Cap, and with her Hand in the Bed would have pulled his Bowels out,
but could not*. Hughes denied that she had wronged her; and Glover then
desiring to see the Boy, wished him well; upon which he had no more of
his Indisposition.

"After the Condemnation of the Woman, I did my self give divers Visits
to her, wherein she told me, that she did use to be at Meetings, where
her Prince with Four

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

more were present. She told me who the Four were, and plainly said,
*That her Prince was the Devil*. \[She entertained me with nothing but
Irish, which language I had not learning enough to understand without an
interpreter.\] When I told her that, and how her Prince had deserted
her, she reply'd \[I think in English, and with passion too\], *If it he
so, I am sorry for that*. And when she declined answering some things
that I ask'd her, she told me, *She could give me a full answer, but her
Spirits would not give her leave: nor could she consent, she said,
without this leave that I should pray for her*. \[However against her
will I pray'd with her, which if it were a fault it was in excess of
pity. When I had done she thanked me with many good words, but I was no
sooner out of her sight than she took a stone, a long and slender stone,
and with her finger and spittle fell to tormenting it; though whom or
what she meant I had the mercy never to understand.\] At her Execution
she said the afflicted Children should not be relieved by her Death, for
others besides she had a hand in their Affliction."

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

Mrs. Glover was hanged, but in [accordance](errata.htm#0.md) with her dying
words the young Goodwins experienced no relief from their torments, or,
as Cotton Mather characteristically puts it, "the Three Children
continued in their Furnace, as before; and it grew rather seven times
hotter than before," and as this was brought about by our Irish witch it
may not be out of place to give some extracts relative to the
extraordinary adventures that befel them. In their Fits they cried out
of *They* and *Them* as the Authors of all their Miseries; but who that
*They* and *Them* were, they were not able to declare. Yet at last one
of the Children was able to discern their Shapes, and utter their names.
A Blow at the Place where they saw the Spectre was always felt by the
Boy himself in that part of his Body that answer'd what might be
stricken at. And this tho' his Back were turned, and the thing so done,
that there could be no Collusion in it. But a Blow at the Spectre always
helped him too, for he would have a respite from his Ails a considerable
while, and the Spectre would be gone. Yea, 'twas very credibly affirmed,
that a dangerous

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Woman or two in
the Town received Wounds by the Blows thus given to their spectres. . .
. Sometimes they would be very mad, and then they would climb over high
Fences, yea, they would fly like Geese, and be carry'd with an
incredible Swiftness through the Air, having but just their Toes now and
then upon the Ground (sometimes not once in Twenty Foot), and their Arms
wav'd like the Wings of a Bird. . . . If they were bidden to do a
*needless* thing (as to rub a *clean* Table) they were able to do it
unmolested; but if to do any *useful* thing (as to rub a *dirty* Table),
they would presently, with many Torments, be made incapable."

Finally Cotton Mather took the eldest of the three children, a girl, to
his own house, partly out of compassion for her parents, but chiefly, as
he tells us "that I might be a critical Eye-witness of things that would
enable me to confute the Sadducism of this Debauched Age"--and certainly
her antics should have provided him with a quiverful of arguments
against the "Sadducees." "In her Fits she would

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

cough up a Ball as big as a small Egg into the side of her Windpipe that
would near choak her, till by Stroaking and by Drinking it was again
carry'd down. When I pray'd in the Room her Hands were with a *strong*,
though not *even*, Force clapt upon her Ears. And when her Hands were by
our Force pull'd away, she cry'd out, *They make such a noise, I cannot
hear a word*. She complained that Glover's chain was upon her Leg; and
assaying to go, her Gate was exactly such as the chain'd Witch had
before she dy'd. \[Sometimes she imagined she was mounted on
horseback\], and setting herself in a riding Posture, she would in her
Chair be agitated, as one sometimes Ambling, sometimes Trotting, and
sometimes Galloping very furiously. In these Motions we could not
perceive that she was mov'd by the Stress of her Feet upon the Ground,
for often she touched it not. When she had rode a Minute or two, she
would seem to be at a Rendezvous with Them that were her Company, and
there she would maintain a Discourse with them, asking them many
Questions concerning her self. At length she pretended

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

that her Horse could ride up the Stairs; and unto admiration she rode
(that is, was toss'd as one that rode) up the Stair."

Subsequently, when the clergy of Boston and Charleston had kept a day of
prayer with fasting, the children improved until they became perfectly
well. But in an unlucky moment Mr. Mather determined to entertain his
congregation with a sermon on these *Memorable Providences*, and the
study of this again affected the girl. Formerly, in the worst of her
attacks, she had been most dutiful and respectful to Cotton Mather, "but
now her whole Carriage to me was with a Sauciness which I am not us'd
anywhere to be treated withal. She would knock at my Study door,
affirming *that some one below would be glad to see me*, tho' there was
none that ask'd for me. And when I chid her for telling what was false,
her Answer was *that Mrs. Mather is always glad to see you*! Once when
lying in a fit, as he that was praying was alluding to the Words of the
Canaanitess, and saying, *Lord, have mercy on a Daughter vext with a
Devil*, there came a big, but low,

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

voice from her, in which the Spectators did not see her Mouth to move,
*There's two or three of us*."

Finally after three days of fasting and prayer the children were
completely cured, but the storm thus raised was not easily allayed. The
old woman seems, like many another of her years and sex, to have been of
a choleric and crotchety disposition, while it is also quite within the
bounds of possibility that she had become so infected with the popular
superstition (and who could blame her!) that she actually believed
herself to be capable of harming people by merely stroking dolls, or
stones with her finger. That not uncommon form of mental torture
employed, namely, the making her repeat the Lord's Prayer, all the time
watching carefully for *lapsus linguæ*, and thence drawing deductions as
to her being in league with the Devil, was particularly absurd in the
case of such a person as Mrs. Glover, whose memory was confused by age.
At any rate there are probably very few of us at the present day who
would care to be forced to say in public either that Prayer or the
Apostles'

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Creed if we knew
that our lives depended on absolute verbal accuracy, and that the
slightest slip might mean death. It is possible, too, that some of the
fits of Goodwin's children were due to conscious imposture; and certain
it is, from a study of the whole case, that the deep-rooted belief of
the self-opinionated Cotton Mather in the truth of such things, as well
as the flattering his vanity received, contributed very largely to the
success of the whole incident. Cotton Mather's account of the case was
very highly praised by Mr. Baxter in his *Certainty of the World of
Spirits*, and this so delighted Mr. Mather that he distributed the
latter work throughout New England as being one that should convince the
most obdurate "Sadducee." The result of this was speedily seen. Three
years after the Boston incident a similar outbreak occurred amongst some
young persons in the house of the Rev. Samuel Parris at Salem, then a
small village about nineteen miles north-east of Boston. The contagion
spread with appalling rapidity; numerous persons were brought to trial,
of whom, in the space of sixteen months,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

nineteen (*twenty-five* according to Ashton) <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md) were hanged, one of them being a
clergyman, the Rev. George Burroughs, about one hundred and fifty were
put in prison, and more than two hundred accused of witchcraft. Finally
the Government put a stop to the trials, and released the accused in
April 1693; Mr. Parris, in whose house the affair commenced, was
dismissed from his cure, as being the "Beginner and Procurer of the
sorest Afflictions," but, directly and indirectly, Mrs. Glover may be
considered the first cause, for if the case of Goodwin's children, had
not occurred at Boston it is more than probable the village of Salem
would never have been plagued as it was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[184:1](iwd08.htm#fr_49.md) "An experiment was
made, whether she could recite the Lord's Prayer: and it was found that
though clause after clause was most carefully repeated unto her, yet
when she said it after them that prompted her, she could not possibly
avoid making nonsense of it, with some ridiculous depravations. This
experiment I had the curiosity to see made upon two more, and it had the
same effect."

<span id="fn_50"></span>[193:1](iwd08.htm#fr_50.md) *The Devil in Britain
and America*, chap. xxiv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: A.D. 1689-1720](iwd09.md)
