[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index.md) 
[Celtic](../../neu/celt/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iwd04.md) 
[Next](iwd06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA65ME/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Irish Witchcraft and Demonology*, by St. John D. Seymour, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# CHAPTER IV

### A.D. 1606-1656

A CLERICAL WIZARD--WITCHCRAFT CURED BY A RELIC--RAISING THE DEVIL IN
IRELAND--HOW HE WAS CHEATED BY A DOCTOR OF DIVINITY--STEWART AND THE
FAIRIES--REV. ROBERT BLAIR AND THE MAN POSSESSED WITH A DEVIL--STRANGE
OCCURRENCES NEAR LIMERICK--APPARITIONS OF MURDERED PEOPLE AT
PORTADOWN--CHARMED LIVES-VISIONS AND PORTENTS--PETITION OF A BEWITCHED
ANTRIM MAN IN ENGLAND--ARCHBISHOP USHER'S PROPHECIES--MR. BROWNE AND THE
LOCKED CHEST

AN interesting trial of a clergyman for the practice of unhallowed arts
took place early in 1606--interesting and valuable, if for no other
reason than that it is the first instance of such a case being
discovered in the Rolls at the Record Office (not counting those of the
Parliament of 1447), though we hope that it will not prove to be a
unique entry, but rather the earnest of others. Shorn of legal
redundancies it runs as follows: "Inquiry taken before our lord the King
at the King's Court the Saturday

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

next after the three weeks of Easter in the 6th year of James I by the
oath of upright and lawful men of the County of Louth. Who say, that
John Aston, late of Mellifont, Co. Louth, clerk, not having the fear of
God before his eyes, but being wholly seduced by the devil, on December
1st at Mellifont aforesaid, and on divers other days and places,
wickedly and feloniously used, practised, and exercised divers
invocations and conjurings of wicked and lying spirits with the intent
and purpose that he might find and recover a certain silver cup formerly
taken away at Mellifont aforesaid, and also that he might understand
where and in what region the most wicked traitor Hugh, Earl of Tyrone,
then was, and what he was contriving against the said lord the King and
the State of this kingdom of Ireland, and also that he might find out
and obtain divers treasures of gold and silver concealed in the earth at
Mellifont aforesaid and at Cashel in the county of the Cross of
Tipperary, feloniously and against the peace of the said lord the King.
It is to be known that the aforesaid John was taken, and being a
prisoner in the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Castle of the City
of Dublin by warrant of the lord King was sent into England, therefore
further proceedings shall cease." <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)
His ultimate fate is not known; nor is it easy to see why punishment was
not meted out to him in Ireland, as he had directly contravened section
4 of the Elizabethan Act. Possibly the case was unique, and so King
James may have been anxious to examine in person such an interesting
specimen. If so, heaven help the poor parson in the grip of such a witch
hunter.

In the year 1609 there comes from the County of Tipperary a strange
story of magical spells being counteracted by the application of a holy
relic; this is preserved for us in that valuable monastic record, the
*Triumphalia S. Crucis*. At Holy Cross Abbey, near Thurles, there was
preserved for many years with the greatest veneration a supposed
fragment of the True Cross, which attracted vast numbers of people, and
by which it was said many wonderful miracles were worked. Amongst those
that came thither in that year was "Anastasia Sobechan, an inhabitant of
the district of

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Callan (co.
Kilkenny), tortured by magical spells (veneficis incantationibus
collisa), who at the Abbey, in presence of the Rev. Lord Abbot Bernard
\[Foulow\], placed a girdle round her body that had touched the holy
relic. Suddenly she vomited small pieces of cloth and wood, and for a
whole month she spat out from her body such things. The said woman told
this miracle to the Rev. Lord Abbot while she was healed by the virtue
of the holy Cross. This be took care to set down in writing."

That most diligent gleaner of things strange and uncommon, Mr. Robert
Law, to whom we are deeply indebted for much of the matter in this
volume, informs us in his *Memorialls* that in the first half of the
seventeenth century there was to be found in Ireland a celebrated Doctor
of Divinity, in Holy Orders of the Episcopal Church, who possessed
extreme adroitness in raising the Devil-a process that some would have
us believe to be commonly practised in Ireland at the present day by
persons who have no pretensions to a knowledge of the Black Art! Mr. Law
also gives the *modus operandi* at full length. A

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

servant-girl in the employment of Major-General Montgomerie at Irvine in
Scotland was accused of having stolen some silver-work. "The lass being
innocent takes it ill, and tells them, If she should raise the Devil she
should know who took these things." Thereupon, in order to summon that
Personage she went into a cellar, "takes the Bible with her, and draws a
circle about her, and turns a riddle on end from south to north, or from
the right to the left hand \[*i.e.* contrary to the path of the sun in
the heavens\], having in her right hand nine feathers which she pulled
out of the tail of a black cock, and having read the 51st \[Psalm?\]
forwards, she reads backwards chapter ix., verse 19, of the Book of
Revelation." Upon this the Devil appeared to her, and told her who was
the guilty person. She then cast three of the feathers at him, and bade
him return to the place from whence he came. This process she repeated
three times, until she had gained all the information she desired; she
then went upstairs and told her mistress, with the result that the goods
were ultimately recovered. But escaping Scylla she fell

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

into Charybdis; her uncanny practices came to the ears of the
authorities, and she was apprehended. When in prison she confessed that
she had learnt this particular branch of the Black Art in the house of
Dr. Colville in Ireland, who habitually practised it.

That instructor of youth in such unchristian practices, the Rev.
Alexander Colville, D.D., was ordained in 1622 and subsequently held the
vicarage of Carnmoney, the prebend of Carncastle, and the Precentorship
of Connor. He was possessed of considerable wealth, with which he
purchased the Galgorm estate, on which he resided; this subsequently
passed into the Mountcashel family through the marriage of his great
granddaughter with Stephen Moore, first Baron Kilworth and Viscount
Mountcashel. Where Dr. Colville got the money to purchase so large an
estate no one could imagine, and Classon Porter in his useful pamphlet
relates for us the manner in which popular rumour solved the problem. It
was said that he had sold himself to the Devil, and that he had
purchased the estate with the money his body

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and soul had realised. Scandal even went further still, and gave the
exact terms which Dr. Colville had made with the Evil One. These were,
that the Devil was at once to give the Doctor his hat full of gold, and
that the latter was in return, at a distant but specified day, to
deliver himself body and soul to the Devil. The appointed place of
meeting was a lime-kiln; the Devil may have thought that this was a
delicate compliment to him on account of the peculiarly *homelike*
atmosphere of the spot, but the Doctor had different ideas. The Devil
produced the gold, whereupon Dr. Colville produced a hat *with a wide
slit in the crown*, which he boldly held over the empty kiln-pit, with
the result that by the time the terms of the bargain were literally
complied with, a very considerable amount of gold lay at the Doctor's
disposal, which he prudently used to advance his worldly welfare.

So far, so good. But there are two sides to every question. Years rolled
by, bringing ever nearer and nearer the time at which the account had to
be settled, and at length the fatal day dawned. The Devil arrived

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

to claim his victim, and found him sitting in his house reading his
Bible by the light of a candle, whereupon he directed him to come along
with him. The Doctor begged that he might not be taken away until the
candle, by which he was reading, was burned out. To this the Devil
assented, whereupon Dr. Colville promptly extinguished the candle, and
putting it between the leaves of the Bible locked it up in the chest
where he kept his gold. The candle was thus deposited in a place of
safety where there was no danger of any person coming across it, and
thus of being the innocent cause of the Doctor's destruction. It is;
even said that he gave orders that the candle should be put into his
coffin and buried with him. So, we may presume, Dr. Colville evaded the
payment of his debt. Our readers may perchance wonder why such stories
as the above should have become connected with the reverend gentleman,.
and an explanation is not hard to be found. Dr. Colville was a
well-known divine, possessed of great wealth (inherited lawfully, we may
presume), and enjoyed considerable influence in the country-side. At
this time

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ulster was overrun
by triumphant Presbyterianism, which the Doctor, as a firm upholder of
Episcopacy, opposed with all his might, and thereupon was spoken of with
great acerbity by his opponents. It is not too uncharitable, therefore,
to assume that these stories originated with some member of that body,
who may well have believed that such had actually happened.

For the next instance of witchcraft and the supernatural in connection
with Ireland we are compelled to go beyond the confines of our country.
Though in this the connection with the Green Isle is slight, yet it is
of interest as affording an example of that blending of fairy lore with
sorcery which is not an uncommon feature of Scottish witchcraft-trials.
In the year 1613 a woman named Margaret Barclay, of Irvine in Scotland,
was accused of having caused her brother-in-law's ship to be cast away
by magical spells. A certain strolling vagabond and juggler, John
Stewart, was apprehended as her accomplice; be admitted (probably under
torture) that Margaret had applied to him to teach her some magic arts
in order that "she might get gear,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

kye's milk, love of man, her heart's desire on such persons as had done
her wrong." Though he does not appear to have granted her request, yet
he gave detailed information as to the manner in which he had gained the
supernatural power and knowledge with which he was credited. "It being
demanded of him by what means he professed himself to have knowledge of
things to come, the said John confessed that the space of twenty-six
years ago, he being travelling on All-Hallow Even night between the
towns of Monygoif and Clary, in Galway, he met with the King of the
Fairies and his company, and that the King gave him a stroke with a
white rod over the forehead, which took from him the power of speech and
the use of one eye, which he wanted for the space of three years. He
declared that the use of speech and eyesight was restored to him by the
King of Fairies and his company on a Hallowe'en night at the town of
Dublin." At his subsequent meetings with the fairy band he was taught
all his knowledge. The spot on which he was struck remained impervious
to pain although a pin was thrust into it. The

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

unfortunate wretch was cast into prison, and there committed suicide by
hanging himself from the "cruik" of the door with his garter or
bonnet-string, and so "ended his life miserably with the help of the
devil his master." <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

A tale slightly resembling portion of the above comes from the north of
Ireland a few years later. "It's storied, and the story is true," says
Robert Law in his *Memorialls*, <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22.md) "of
a godly man in Ireland, who lying one day in the fields sleeping, he was
struck with dumbness and deafness. The same man, during this condition
he was in, could tell things, and had the knowledge of things in a
strange way, which he had not before; and did, indeed, by signs make
things known to others which they knew not. Afterwards he at length,
prayer being made for him by others, came to the use of his tongue and
ears; but when that knowledge of things he had in his deaf and dumb
condition ceased, and when he was asked how he had the knowledge of
these things he made signs of, he answered he had that

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

knowledge when dumb, but how and after what manner he knew not, only he
had the impression thereof in his spirit. This story was related by a
godly minister, Mr. Robert Blair, to Mr. John Baird, who knew the truth
of it."

The Rev. Robert Blair, M.A., was a celebrated man, if for no other
reason than on account of his disputes with Dr. Echlin, Bishop of Down,
or for his description of Oliver Cromwell as a *greeting* (*i.e.*
weeping) devil. On the invitation of Lord Claneboy he arrived in Ireland
in 1623, and in the same year was settled as (Presbyterian) parish
minister at Bangor in Co. Down, with the consent of patron and people;
he remained there until 1631, when he was suspended by Dr. Echlin, and
was deposed and excommunicated in November, 1634. He has left a few
writings behind him, and was grandfather of the poet Robert Blair,
author of *The Grave*. <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md)

During the years of his ministry at Bangor the following incident
occurred to him, which he of course attributes to demonic possession,
though homicidal mania

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

resulting from intemperate habits would be nearer the truth. One day a
rich man, the constable of the parish, called upon him in company with
one of his tenants concerning the baptizing of the latter's child. "When
I had spoken what I thought necessary, and was ready to turn into my
house, the constable dismissing the other told me he had something to
say to me in private. I looking upon him saw his eyes like the eyes of a
cat in the night, did presently conceive that he had a mischief in his
heart, yet I resolved not to refuse what he desired, but I keeped a
watchful eye upon him, and stayed at some distance; and being near to
the door of the church I went in, and invited him to follow me. As soon
as he entered within the doors he fell atrembling, and I, awondering.
His trembling continuing and growing without any speech, I approached to
him, and invited him to a seat, w, herein he could hardly sit. The great
trembling was like to throw him out of the seat. I laid my arm about
him, and asked him what ailed him? But for a time he could speak none.
At last his

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

shaking ceased, and he began to speak, telling me, that for a long time
the Devil had appeared to him; first at Glasgow he bought a horse from
him, receiving a sixpence in earnest, and that in the end he offered to
him a great purse full of sylver to be his, making no mention of the
horse; he said that he blessed himself, and so the buyer with the sylver
and gold that was poured out upon the table vanished. But some days
thereafter he appeared to him at his own house, naming him by his name,
and said to him, Ye are mine, for I *arled* you with a sixpence, which
yet ye have. Then said he, I asked his name, and he answered, they call
me *Nickel Downus* (I suppose that he repeated evil, that he should have
said *Nihil Damus*). Being thus molested with these and many other
apparitions of the Devil, he left Scotland; but being come to Ireland he
did often likewise appear to him, and now of late he still commands me
to kill and slay; and oftentimes, says he, my whinger hath been drawn
and kept under my cloak to obey his commands, but still something holds
my hand that I cannot strike. But then I asked him go

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

whom he was bidden kill? He answered, any that comes in my way; but

'The better they be  
The better service to me,  
Or else I shall kill thee.'

When he uttered these words he fell again atrembling, and was stopped in
his speaking, looking lamentably at me, designing me to be the person he
aimed at; then he fell a crying and lamenting. I showed him the
horribleness of his ignorance and drunkenness; he made many promises of
reformation, which were not well keep'd; for within a fortnight he went
to an alehouse to crave the price of his malt, and sitting there long at
drink, as he was going homeward the Devil appeared to him, and
challenged him for opening to me what had passed betwixt them secretly,
and followed him to the house, pulling his cap off his head and his band
from about his neck, saying to him, I On Hallow-night I shall have thee,
soul and body, in despite of the minister and of all that he will do for
thee.'"

In his choice of a date his Satanic Majesty

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

showed his respect for popular superstitions. This attack of delirium
tremens (though Mr. Blair would not have so explained it) had a most
salutary effect; the constable was in such an abject state of terror
lest the Devil should carry him off that he begged Mr. Blair to sit up
with him all Hallow-night, which he did, spending the time very
profitably in prayer and exhortation, which encouraged the man to defy
Satan and all his works. The upshot of the matter was, that he became
very charitable to the poor, and seems to have entirely renounced his
intemperate habits. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md)

Rejecting the supernatural element in the above as being merely the
fruits of a diseased mind, there is no reason to doubt the truth of the
story. Mr. Blair also met with some strange cases of religious hysteria,
which became manifest in outbursts of weeping and bodily convulsions,
but which he attributed to the Devils "playing the ape, and
counterfeiting the works of the Lord." He states that one Sunday, in the
midst of public worship,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "one of my charge,
being a dull and ignorant person, made a noise and stretching of her
body. Incontinent I was assisted to rebuke that lying spirit that
disturbed the worship of God, charging the same not to disturb the
congregation; and through God's mercy we met with no more of that work."
Thus modestly our writer sets down what happened in his *Autobiography*;
but the account of the incident spread far and wide, and at length came
to the ears of Archbishop Usher, who, on his next meeting with Mr.
Blair, warmly congratulated him on the successful exorcism he had
practised. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

If the period treated of in this chapter, viz. from the commencement of
the seventeenth century to the Restoration of Charles II, be barren of
witchcraft proper, it must at least be admitted that it is prodigal in
regard to the marvellous under various shapes and forms, from which the
hysterical state of the public mind can be fairly accurately gauged. The
rebellion of 1641, and the Cromwellian confiscations, that troubled
period when the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

country was torn by dissention, and ravaged by fire, sword, and
pestilence, was aptly ushered in by a series of supernatural events
which occurred in the county of Limerick. A letter dated the 13th August
1640, states that "for news we have the strangest that ever was heard
of, there inchantments in the Lord of Castleconnell's Castle four miles
from Lymerick, several sorts of noyse, sometymes of drums and trumpets,
sometimes of other curious musique with heavenly voyces, then fearful
screeches, and such outcries that the neighbours near cannot sleepe.
Priests have adventured to be there, but have been cruelly beaten for
their paynes, and carryed away they knew not how, some two miles and
some four miles. Moreover were seen in the like manner, after they
appear to the view of the neighbours, infinite number of armed men on
foote as well as on horseback. . . . One thing more \[*i.e.* something
supernatural\] by Mrs. Mary Burke with twelve servants yes in the house,
and never one hurt, onley they must dance with them every night; they
say, Mrs. Mary come away,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

telling her she must be wyfe to the inchanted Earl of Desmond. . . .
Uppon a Mannour of my Lord Bishoppe of Lymerick, Loughill, hath been
seen upon the hill by most of the inhabitants aboundance of armed men
marching, and these seene many tymes--and when they come up to them they
do not appeare. These things are very strange, if the cleargie and
gentrie say true." <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md)

During the rebellion an appalling massacre of Protestants took place at
Portadown, when about a hundred persons, men, women, and children, were
forced over the bridge into the river, and so drowned; the few that
could swim, and so managed to reach the shore, were either knocked on
the head by the insurgents when they landed, or else were shot. It is
not a matter of surprise that this terrible incident gave rise to
legends and stories in which anything strange or out of the common was
magnified out of all proportion. According to one deponent there
appeared one evening in the river "a vision or spirit assuming the shape
of a woman, waist

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

high, upright in the water, naked with \[*illegible*\] in her hand, her
hair dishevelled, her eyes seeming to twinkle in her head, and her skin
as white as snow; which spirit seeming to stand upright in the water
often repeated the word *Revenge*! *Revenge*! *Revenge*!" Also Robert
Maxwell, Archdeacon of Down, swore that the rebels declared to him, (and
some deponents made similar statements) "that most of those that were
thrown from that bridge were daily and nightly seen to walk upon the
River, sometimes singing Psalms, sometimes brandishing of Swords,
sometimes screeching in a most hideous and fearful manner." Both these
occurrences are capable of a rational explanation. The supposed spectre
was probably a poor, bereaved woman, demented by grief and terror, who
stole out of her hiding-place at night to bewail the murder of her
friends, while the weird cries arose from the half-starved dogs of the
country-side, together with the wolves which abounded in Ireland at that
period, quarrelling and fighting over the corpses. Granting the above,
and bearing in mind the credulity

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of all classes of Society, it is not difficult to see how the tales
originated; but to say that, because such obviously impossible
statements occur in certain depositions, the latter are therefore
worthless as a whole, is to wilfully misunderstand the popular mind of
the seventeenth century.

We have the following on the testimony of the Rev. George Creighton,
minister of Virginia, co. Cavan. He tells us that "divers women brought
to his House a young woman, almost naked, to whom a Rogue came upon the
way, these women being present, and required her to give him her mony,
or else he would kill her, and so drew his sword; her answer was, You
cannot kill me unless God give you leave, and His will be done.
Thereupon the Rogue thrust three times at her naked body with his drawn
sword, and never pierced her skin; whereat he being, as it seems, much
confounded, went away and left her." A like story comes from the other
side: "At the taking of the Newry a rebel being appointed to be shot
upon the bridge, and stripped stark-naked, notwithstanding the musketeer
stood within

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

two yards of him, and shot him in the middle of the back, yet the bullet
entered not, nor did him any more hurt than leave a little black spot
behind it. This many hundreds were eye-witnesses of. Divers of the like
have I confidently been assured of, who have been provided of diabolical
charms." <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) Similar tales of persons
bearing charmed lives could no doubt be culled from the records of every
war that has been fought on this planet of ours since History began.

The ease with which the accidental or unusual was transformed into the
miraculous at this period is shown by the following. A Dr. Tate and his
wife and children were flying to Dublin from the insurgents. On their
way they were wandering over commons covered with snow, without any
food. The wife was carrying a sucking child, John, and having no milk to
give it she was about to lay it down in despair, when suddenly "on the
Brow of a Bank she found a Suck-bottle with sweet milk in it, no
Footsteps appearing in the snow

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of any that should bring it thither, and far from any Habitation; which
preserved the child's life, who after became a Blessing to the Church."
The Dr. Tate mentioned above was evidently the Rev. Faithful Tate, D.D.,
father of Nahum Tate of "Tate and Brady" fame. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)

On the night of Sunday, the 8th of May 1642, a terrific storm of hail
and rain came upon the English soldiers, which of course they attributed
to other than the correct source. "All the tents were in a thrice blown
over. It was not possible for any match to keep fire, or any sojor to
handle his musket or yet to stand. Yea, severalls of them dyed that
night of meere cold. Our sojors, and some of our officers too (who
suppose that no thing which is more than ordinarie can be the product of
nature), attributed this hurrikan to *the divilish skill of some Irish
witches*." <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md) Apparently the English
were not as wise in their generation as the inhabitants of Constance in
Switzerland were on the occasion

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of a similar ebullition of the elements. The latter went out, found a
witch, *persuaded* her to confess herself the guilty author of the
storm, and then burnt her--by which time, no doubt, the wind had
subsided!

Much in the same strain might be added, but, lest we should weary our
readers, we shall content ourselves with giving two more marvellous
relations from this particular period so full of the marvellous. O'Daly
in his *History of the Geraldines* relates that during the siege of
Limerick three portents appeared. The first was a luminous globe,
brighter than the moon and little inferior to the sun, which for two
leagues and a half shed a vertical light on the city, and then faded
into darkness over the enemy's camp; the second was the apparition of
the Virgin, accompanied by several of the Saints; and the third was a
*lusus naturæ*, of the Siamese-twins type: all three of which O'Daly
interprets to his own satisfaction. The first of these was some form of
the northern lights, and is also recorded in the diary of certain
Puritan officers. That learned, but somewhat

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

too credulous English antiquary, John Aubrey, relates in his
*Miscellanies* that before the last battle between the contending
parties "a woman of uncommon Statue all in white appearing to the Bishop
\[Heber McMahon, whom Aubrey terms *Veneras*\] admonished him not to
cross the River first to assault the Enemy, but suffer them to do it,
whereby he should obtain the Victory. That if the *Irish* took the water
first to move towards the *English* they should be put to a total Rout,
which came to pass. *Ocahan* and. Sir *Henry O'Neal*, who were both
killed there, saw severally the same apparition, and dissuaded the
Bishop from giving the first onset, but could not prevail upon him."

An instance of an Irishman suffering from the effects of witchcraft
outside Ireland is afforded us in a pathetic petition sent up to the
English Parliament between the years 1649 and 1653. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) The petitioner, John Campbell, stated that
twelve years since he lost his sight in co. Antrim, where he was born,
by which he was reduced to such extremity that he was forced to come

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

over to England to seek some means of livelihood for himself in craving
the charity of well-disposed people, but contrary to his expectation he
has been often troubled there with dreams and fearful visions in his
sleep, and has been twice bewitched, insomuch that he can find no
quietness or rest here, and so prays for a pass to return to Ireland.

The saintly James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, was a Prelate who, if he
had happened to live at an earlier period would certainly have been
numbered amongst those whose wide and profound learning won for
themselves the title of magician--as it was, be was popularly credited
with prophetical powers. Most of the prophecies attributed to him may be
found in a little pamphlet of eight pages, entitled "Strange and
Remarkable Prophecies and Predictions of the Holy, Learned, and
Excellent James Usher, &c. . . . Written by the person who heard it from
this Excellent person's own Mouth," and apparently published in 1656.
According to it, be foretold the rebellion of 1641 in a sermon on
Ezekiel iv. 6, preached in Dublin in

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1601. "And of this
Sermon the Bishop reserved the Notes, and put a note thereof in the
Margent of his Bible, and for twenty years before he still lived in the
expectation of the fulfilling thereof, and the nearer the time was the
more confident he was that it was nearer accomplishment, though there
was no visible appearance of any such thing." He also foretold the death
of Charles I, and his own coming poverty and loss of property, which
last he actually experienced for many years before his death. The Rev.
William Turner in his *Compleat History of Remarkable Providences*
(London, 1697 gives a premonition of approaching death that the
Archbishop received. A lady who was dead appeare to him in his sleep,
and invited him to sup with her the next night. He accepted the
invitation, and died the following afternoon, 21st March 1656.

This chapter may be brought to a conclusion by the following story from
Glanvill's *Relations*. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) One Mr. John
Browne of Durley in Ireland was made by his neighbour, John Mallett of
Enmore, trustee

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

for his children in minority. In 1654 Mr. Browne lay a-dying: at the
foot of his bed stood a great iron chest fitted with three locks, in
which were the trustees' papers. Some of his people and friends were
sitting by him, when to their horror they suddenly saw the locked chest
begin to open, lock by lock, without the aid of any visible hand, until
at length the lid stood upright. The dying man, who had not spoken for
twenty-four hours, sat up in the bed, looked at the chest, and said:
*You say true, you say true, you are in the right* (a favourite
expression of his), *I'll he with you by and by*, and then lay down
again, and never spoke after. The chest slowly locked itself in exactly
the same manner as it had opened, and shortly after this Mr. Browne
died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[79:1](iwd05.htm#fr_20.md) Enrolment of Pleas, 6
James I, memb. 2 (Queen's Bench).

<span id="fn_21"></span>[87:1](iwd05.htm#fr_21.md) Scott, *Demonology and
Witchcraft*, Letter V.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[87:2](iwd05.htm#fr_22.md) Ed. C. X. Sharpe
(Edinburgh, 1818).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[88:1](iwd05.htm#fr_23.md) Witherow, *Memorials of
Presbyterianism in Ireland*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[92:1](iwd05.htm#fr_24.md) Quot. in Law's
*Memorialls*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[93:1](iwd05.htm#fr_25.md) Witherow, *op. cit.*,
pp. 15-16.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[95:1](iwd05.htm#fr_26.md) Lenihan, *History of
Limerick*, p. 147.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[98:1](iwd05.htm#fr_27.md) Hickson, *Ireland in the
Seventeenth Century*, vol. i.; Fitzpatrick, *Bloody Bridge*, p. 125;
Temple's *History of the Rebellion*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[99:1](iwd05.htm#fr_28.md) Baxter, *Certainty of
the World of Spirits* (London, 1691); Clark, *A Mirrour or Looking-Glass
for Saints and Sinners*. (London, 1657-71).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[99:2](iwd05.htm#fr_29.md) Fitzpatrick, *op. cit*.,
p. 127.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[101:1](iwd05.htm#fr_30.md) Hist. MSS. Comm. Report
13 (Duke of Portland MSS.).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[103:1](iwd05.htm#fr_31.md) No. 25 in *Sadducismus
Triumphatus* (London, 1726).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: A.D. 1661](iwd06.md)
