[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index.md) 
[Celtic](../../neu/celt/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iwd03.md) 
[Next](iwd05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA65ME/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Irish Witchcraft and Demonology*, by St. John D. Seymour, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# CHAPTER III

#### A.D. 1223-1583

THE KYTELER CASE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS OF SORCERY AND HERESY--MICHAEL
SCOT--THE FOURTH EARL OF DESMOND--JAMES I AND THE IRISH PROPHETESS--A
SORCERY ACCUSATION OF 1447--WITCHCRAFT TRIALS IN THE SIXTEENTH
CENTURY--STATUTES DEALING WITH THE SUBJECT--EYE-BITERS--THE ENCHANTED
EARL OF DESMOND

IN one respect the case of Dame Alice Kyteler stands alone in the
history of magical dealings in Ireland prior to the seventeenth century.
We have of the entire proceedings an invaluable and contemporary
account, or at latest one compiled within a very few years after the
death of Petronilla of Meath; while the excitement produced by the
affair is shown by the more or less lengthy allusions to it in early
writings, such as *The Book of Howth* (Carew MSS.), the Annals by Friar
Clyn, the Chartularies of S. Mary's Abbey (vol. ii.), &c. It is also
rendered more valuable by the fact that those who

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

are best qualified to give their opinion on the matter have assured the
writer that to the best of their belief no entries with respect to
trials for sorcery or witchcraft can be found in the various old Rolls
preserved in the Dublin Record Office.

But when the story is considered with reference to the following facts
it takes on a different signification. On the 29th of September 1317
(Wright says 1320), Bishop de Ledrede held his first Synod, at which
several canons were passed, one of which seems in some degree
introductory to the events detailed in the preceding chapter. In it he
speaks of "a certain new and pestilential sect in our parts, differing
from all the faithful in the world, filled with a devilish spirit, more
inhuman than heathens or Jews, who pursue the priests and bishops of the
Most High God equally in life and death, by spoiling and rending the
patrimony of Christ in the diocese of Ossory, and who utter grievous
threats against the bishops and their ministers exercising
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and (by various means) attempt to hinder
the correction of sins and the salvation of souls, in contempt of God

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

and the Church." <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) From this it would
seem that heresy and unorthodoxy had already made its appearance in the
diocese. In 1324 the Kyteler case occurred, one of the participants
being burnt at the stake, while other incriminated persons were
subsequently followed up, some of whom shared the fate of Petronilla. In
1327 Adam *Dubh*, of the Leinster tribe of O'Toole, was burnt alive on
College Green for denying the doctrines of the Incarnation and the Holy
Trinity, as well as for rejecting the authority of the Holy See. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) In 1335 Pope Benedict XII wrote a letter to
King Edward III, in which occurs the following passage: "It has come to
our knowledge that while our venerable brother, Richard, Bishop of
Ossory, was visiting his diocese, there appeared in the midst of his
catholic people men who were heretics together with their abettors, some
of whom asserted that Jesus Christ was a mere man and a sinner, and was
justly crucified for His own sins; others after having done homage and
offered sacrifice to demons, thought otherwise of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the sacrament of the Body of Christ than the Catholic Church teaches,
saying that the same venerable sacrament is by no means to be
worshipped; and also asserting that they are not bound to obey or
believe the decrees, decretals, and apostolic mandates; in the meantime,
consulting demons according to the rites of those sects among the
Gentiles and Pagans, they despise the sacraments of the Catholic Church,
and draw the faithful of Christ after them by their superstitions." As
no Inquisitors of heresy have been appointed in Ireland, he begs the
King to give prompt assistance to the Bishop and other Prelates in their
efforts to punish the aforesaid heretics. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) If the above refer to the Kyteler case it
came rather late in the day; but it is quite possible, in view of the
closing words of the anonymous narrator, that it has reference rather to
the following up of the dame's associates, a process that must have
involved a good deal of time and trouble, and in which no doubt many
unhappy creatures were implicated. Again, in 1353, two men were tried at
Bunratty in co. Clare by Roger Cradok, Bishop of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Waterford, for
holding heretical opinions (or for offering contumely to the Blessed
Virgin), and were sentenced to be burnt. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) The above are almost the only (if not the
only) instances known of the punishment of death by fire being inflicted
in Ireland for heresy.

From a consideration of the facts here enumerated it would seem as if a
considerable portion of Ireland had been invaded by a wave of heresy in
the first half of the fourteenth century, and that this manifested
itself under a twofold form--first, in a denial of the cardinal
doctrines of the Church and a consequent revolt against her
jurisdiction'; and secondly, in the use of magical arts, incantations,
charms, familiar spirits, *et hoc genus omne*. In this movement the
Kyteler case was only an episode, though obviously the most prominent
one; while its importance was considerably enhanced, if not exaggerated
out of all due proportion, by the aggressive attitude adopted by Bishop
de Ledrede against the lady and her companions, as well as by his

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

struggles with Outlawe and Le Poer, and their powerful backers, the
Chancellor and Treasurer of Ireland. The anonymous writer, who was
plainly a cleric, and a partisan of the Bishop's, seems to have compiled
his narration not so much on account of the incident of sorcery as to
show the courage and perseverance of De Ledrede, and as well to make
manifest the fact that the Church should dictate to the State, not the
State to the Church. It appears quite possible, too, that other separate
cases of sorcery occurred in Ireland at this period, though they had no
historian to immortalise them, and no doubt in any event would have
faded into insignificance in comparison with the doings of Dame Kyteler
and her "infernal crew."

From this on we shall endeavour to deal with the subject as far as
possible in chronological order. It is perhaps not generally known that
at one time an Irish See narrowly escaped (to its misfortune, be it
said) having a magician as its Chief Shepherd. In 1223 the Archbishopric
of Cashel became vacant, upon which the Capitular Body elected as their
Archbishop the then

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Bishop of Cork, to whom the temporalities were restored in the following
year. But some little time prior to this the Pope had set aside the
election and "provided" a nominee of his own, one Master M. Scot, to
fill the vacancy: he however declined the proffered dignity on the
ground that he was ignorant of the Irish language. This papal candidate
was none other than the famous Michael Scot, reputed a wizard of such
potency that--

"When in Salamanca's cave  
Him listed his magic wand to wave  
The bells would ring in Notre Dame."

Scot had studied successively at Oxford and Paris (where he acquired the
title of "mathematicus"); he then passed to Bologna, thence to Palermo,
and subsequently continued his studies at Toledo. His refusal of the See
of Cashel was an intellectual loss to the Irish Church, for, he was so
widely renowned for his varied and extensive learning that he was
credited with supernatural powers; a number of legends grew up around
his name which hid his real merit, and transformed the man

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

of science into a magician. In the Border country traditions of his
magical power are common. Boccaccio alludes to "a great master in
necromancy, called Michael Scot," while Dante places him in the eighth
circle of Hell.

The next, who is so slender in the Ranks,  
Was Michael Scot, who of a verity  
Of magical illusions knew the game." <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md)

Another man to whom magical powers were attributed solely on account of
his learning was Gerald, the fourth Earl of Desmond, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12.md) styled the Poet, who died rather
mysteriously in 1398. The Four Masters in their Annals describe him as
"a nobleman of wonderful bounty, mirth, cheerfulness of conversation,
charitable in his deeds, easy of access, a witty and ingenious composer
of Irish poetry, a learned and profound chronicler." No legends are
extant of his magical deeds.

King James I of Scotland, whose severities against his nobles had
aroused their bitter resentment, was barbarously assassinated at

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perth in 1437 by
some of their supporters, who were aided and abetted by the aged Duke of
Atholl. From a contemporary account of this we learn that the monarch's
fate was predicted to him by an Irish prophetess or witch; had he given
ear to her message he might have escaped with his life. We modernise the
somewhat difficult spelling, but retain the quaint language of the
original. "The king, suddenly advised, made a solemn feast of the
Christmas at Perth, which is clept Saint John's Town, which is from
Edinburgh on the other side of the Scottish sea, the which is vulgarly
clept the water of Lethe. In the midst of the way there arose a woman of
Ireland, that clept herself as a soothsayer. The which anon as she saw
the king she cried with loud voice, saying thus: 'My lord king, and you
pass this water you shall never turn again alive.' The king hearing this
was astonied of her words; for but a little before he had read in a
prophecy that in the self same year the king of Scots should be slain:
and therewithal the king, as he rode, cleped to him one of his knights,
and gave him in commandment to turn

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

again to speak with that woman, and ask of her what she would, and what
thing she meant with her loud crying. And she began, and told him as ye
have heard of the King of Scots if he passed that water. As now the king
asked her, how she knew that. And she said, that Huthart told her so.
'Sire,' quoth he, 'men may "calant" ye take no heed of yon woman's
words, for she is but a drunken fool, and wot not what she saith'; and
so with his folk passed the water clept the Scottish sea, towards Saint
John's town." The narrator states some dreams ominous of James's murder,
and afterwards proceeds thus: "Both afore supper, and long after into
quarter of the night, in the which the Earl of Atholl (Athetelles) and
Robert Steward were about the king, where they were occupied at the
playing of the chess, at the tables, in reading of romances, in singing
and piping, in harping, and in other honest solaces of great pleasance
and disport. Therewith came the said woman of Ireland, that clept
herself a divineress, and entered the king's court, till that she came
straight to the king's chamber-door, where she stood, and

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

abode because that it was shut. And fast she knocked, till at the last
the usher opened the door, marvelling of that woman's being there that
time of night, and asking her what she would. 'Let me in, sir,' quoth
she, 'for I have somewhat to say, and to tell unto the king; for I am
the same woman that not long ago desired to have spoken with him at the
Leith, when he should pass the Scottish sea.' The usher went in and told
him of this woman. 'Yea,' quoth the king, 'let her come tomorrow';
because that he was occupied with such disports at that time him let not
to hear her as then. The usher came again to the chamber-door to the
said woman, and there he told her that the king was busy in playing, and
bid her come soon again upon the morrow. 'Well,' said the woman, 'it
shall repent you all that ye will not let me speak now with the king.'
Thereat the usher laughed, and held her but a fool, charging her to go
her way, and therewithal she went thence." Her informant "Huthart" was
evidently a familiar spirit who was in attendance on her. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md)

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Considering the barrenness of Irish records on the subject of sorcery
and witchcraft it affords us no small satisfaction to find the following
statement in the Statute Rolls of the Parliament <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) for the year 1447. It consists of a most
indignantly-worded remonstrance from the Lords and Commons, which was
drawn forth by the fact that some highly-placed personage had been
accused of practising sorcery with the intent to do grievous harm to his
enemy. When making it the remonstrants appear to have forgotten, or
perhaps, like Members of Parliament in other ages, found it convenient
to forget for the nonce the Kyteler incident of the previous century. Of
the particular case here alluded to unfortunately no details are given,
nor is any clue for obtaining them afforded us. The remonstrance runs as
follows: "Also at the prayer of John, Archbishop of Armagh (and others).
That whereas by the subtle malice and malicious suits of certain persons
slandering a man of rank this land was entirely slandered, and still is
in such slanderous matters as never were known in this land before, as
in ruining

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

or destroying any man by sorcery or necromancy., the which they think
and believe impossible to be performed in art--It is ordained and agreed
by authority of this present parliament, with the entire assent of the
lords spiritual and temporal and commons of said parliament, that our
lord the king be certified of the truth in this matter, in avoidance of
the slander of this land in common, asserting that no such art was
attempted at any time in this land, known or rumoured among the people,
nor any opinion had or entertained of the same by the lay men in this
land until now." It seems likely that the accusation was prompted by
personal enmity, and was groundless in fact; but the annals of
witchcraft show that such an indictment could prove a most terrible
weapon in the hands of unscrupulous persons. With respect to the above
we learn that Ireland was coming into line with England, for in the
latter country during the fifteenth century charges of sorcery were
frequently raised against persons of eminence by their political
adversaries. One of the most celebrated cases of the kind occurred only
six years prior to the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

above, in 1441, that of the Duchess of Gloucester in the reign of Henry
VI.

Nothing further on the subject is recorded until the year 1544, under
which date we find the following entry in the table of the red council
book of Ireland:

"A letter to Charles FitzArthur for sendinge a witch to the Lord Deputie
to be examined."

This note is a most tantalising one. The red council book has been lost,
but a succinct "table" of its contents, from which the above has been
extracted, and which was apparently compiled by Sir William Usher, has
been preserved in Add. MSS. 1792, and published in Hist. MSS. Comm. 15th
Report, appendix, part 3, but an examination of the original MS. reveals
nothing in addition to the above passage; so, until the lost book is
discovered, we must remain in ignorance with respect to the doings of
this particular witch.

The next notice of witchcraft in Ireland occurs in the year 1578, when a
witch-trial took place at Kilkenny, though here again, unfortunately, no
details have been preserved.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the November of
that year sessions were held there by the Lord Justice Drury and Sir
Henry Fitton, who, in their letter to the Privy Council on the 20th of
the same month, inform that Body that upon arriving at the town "the
jail being full we caused sessions immediately to be held. Thirty-six
persons were executed, amongst whom were some good ones, *a blackamoor
and two witches* by natural law, for that we find no law to try them by
in this realm." <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) It is easy to see
why the witches were put to death, but the reason for the negro's
execution is not so obvious. It can hardly have been for the colour of
his skin, although no doubt a black man was as much a *rara avis* in the
town of Kilkenny as a black swan. Had the words been written at the time
the unfortunate negro might well have exclaimed, though in vain, to his
judges:

"Mislike me not for my complexion--  
The shadowed livery of the burning sun."

Or could it have been that he was the unhappy victim of a false
etymology! For

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

in old writers the word "necromancy" is spelt "nigromancy," as if
divination was practised through the medium of *negroes* instead of
*dead persons*; indeed in an old vocabulary of 1475 "Nigromantia" is
defined as "divinatio facta *per nigros*." He may therefore have been
suspected of complicity with the two witches.

As yet the "natural law" held sway in Ireland, but very soon this
country was to be fully equipped with a Statute all to itself. Two
Statutes against witchcraft had already been passed in England, one in
1541, which was repealed six years later, and a second in 1562. Partly
no doubt on account of the Kilkenny case of 1578, and partly to place
Ireland on the same footing as England, a Statute was passed by the
Irish Parliament in 1586. Shorn of much legal verbiage the principal
points of it may be gathered from the following extracts:

"Where at this present there is no ordinarie ne condigne punishment
provided against the practices of the wicked offences

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of conjurations, and of invocations of evill spirites, and of sorceries,
enchauntments, charms, and witchcrafts, whereby manie fantasticall and
devilish persons have devised and practised invocations and conjurations
of evill and wicked spirites, and have used and practised witchcrafts,
enchauntments, charms, and sorceries, to the destruction of the persons
and goods of their neighbours, and other subjects of this realm, and for
other lewde and evill intents and purposes, contrary to the laws of
Almighty God, to the peril of their owne soules, and to the great
infamie and disquietnesse of this realm. For reformation thereof, be it
enacted by the Queen's Majestie, with the assent of the lords spirituall
and temporall and the commons in this present Parliament assembled.

"1. That if any person or persons after the end of three months next,
and immediately after the end of the last session of this present
parliament, shall use, practise, or exercise any witchcraft,
enchauntment, charme, or sorcery, whereby any person shall happen to be
killed or destroied,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

that then as well any such offender or offenders in invocations and
conjurations, as is aforesaid, their aydors or councelors . . . being of
the said offences lawfully convicted and attainted, shall suffer paines
of death as a felon or felons, and shall lose the privilege and benefit
of clergie and sanctuarie; saving to the widow of such person her title
of dower, and also the heires and successors of such a person all
rights, titles, &c., as though no such attaynder had been made.

"2. If any persons (after the above period) shall use, practise, or
exercise any witchcraft, enchauntment, charme, or sorcery, whereby any
person or persons shall happen to be wasted, consumed, or lamed, in his
or their bodie or member, or whereby any goods or cattels of any such
person shall be destroyed, wasted, or impaired, then every such offender
shall for the first offence suffer imprisonment by the space of one
yeare without bayle or maineprise, and once in every quarter of the said
yeare, shall in some market towne, upon the market day, or at such time
as any faire

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

shall be kept there, stand openlie in the pillorie for the space of sixe
houres, and shall there openly confesse his or theire errour and
offence, and for the second offence shall suffer death as a felon,
saving, &c. (as in clause 1).

"3. Provided always, that if the offender in any of the cases aforesaid,
for which the paines of death shall ensue, shall happen to be a peer of
this realm: then his triall therein to be had by his peers, as is used
in cases of felony and treason, and not otherwise.

"4. And further, to the intent that all manner of practice, use, or
exercise of witchcraft, enchauntment, charme, or sorcery, should be from
henceforth utterly avoide, abolished. and taken away; be it enacted by
the authority of this present Parliament that if any person or persons .
. . shall take upon them by witchcraft, &c., to tell or declare in what
place any treasure of gold or silver shall or might be found or had in
the earth or other secret Places, or where goods or things lost or
stollen should be found or become, or shall use or practice any sorcery,
&c., to the intent to provoke

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

any person to unlawful love (for the first offence to be punished as in
clause 2), but if convicted a second time shall forfeit unto the Queen's
Majesty all his goods and chattels, and suffer imprisonment during
life."

 

On the whole, considering the temper of the time, this Statute was
exceedingly mild. It made no provision whatsoever for the use of torture
to extract evidence, nor indeed did it offer any particular
encouragement to the witch hunter, while the manner of inflicting the
death penalty was precisely that for felony, viz. hanging, drawing, and
quartering for men, and burning (preceded by strangulation) for
women--sufficiently unpleasant, no doubt, but far more merciful than
burning alive at the stake.

In some way Ireland was fortunate enough to escape the notice of that
keen witch hunter, King James I and VI; had it been otherwise we have
little doubt but that this country would have contributed its share to
the list of victims in that monarch's reign. The above was therefore the
only

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Statute against
witchcraft passed by the Irish Parliament; it is said that it was never
repealed, and so no doubt is in force at the present day. Another Act of
the Parliament of Ireland, passed in 1634, and designed to facilitate
the administration of justice, makes mention of witchcraft, and it is
there held to be one of the recognised methods by which one man could
take the life of another.

 

"Forasmuch as the most necessary office and duty of law is to preserve
and save the life of man, and condignly to punish such persons that
unlawfully or wilfully murder, slay, or destroy men . . . and where it
often happeneth that a man is feloniously strucken in one county, and
dieth in another county, in which case it hath not been found by the
laws of this realm that any sufficient indictment thereof can be taken
in any of the said two counties. . . . For redress and punishment of
such offences . . . be it enacted . . . that where any person shall be
traiterously or feloniously stricken, poysoned, or *bewitched* in one
county (and die in another, or out of

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the kingdom, &c.), that an indictment thereof found by jurors in the
county where the death shall happen, shall be as good and effectual in
the law as if, &c. &c. )."

 

Before passing from the subject we may note a curious allusion to a
mythical Act of Parliament which was intended to put a stop to a certain
lucrative form of witchcraft. It is gravely stated by the writer of a
little book entitled *Beware the Cat* <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) (and by Giraldus Cambrensis before him.md),
that Irish witches could turn wisps of hay, straw, &c. into red-coloured
pigs, which they dishonestly sold in the market, but which resumed their
proper shape when crossing running water. To prevent this it is stated
that the Irish Parliament passed an Act forbidding the purchase of red
swine. We regret to say, however, that no such interesting Act is to be
found in the Statute books.

The belief in the power of witches to

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

inflict harm on the cattle of those whom they hated, of which we have
given some modern illustrations in the concluding chapter, was to be
found in Elizabethan times in this country. Indeed if we are to put
credence in the following passage from Reginald Scot, quoted by Thomas
Ady in his *Perfect Discovery of Witches* (London, 1661), a certain
amount of witch persecution arose with reference to this point, possibly
as a natural outcome of the Statute of 1586. "Master Scot in his
Discovery telleth us, that our English people in Ireland, whose
posterity were lately barbarously cut off, were much given to this
Idolatry \[belief in witches\] in the Queen's time \[Elizabeth\],
insomuch that there being a Disease amongst their Cattel that grew
blinde, being a common Disease in that Country, they did commonly
execute people for it, calling them *eye-biting* Witches."

From incidental notices in writers of the latter half of the sixteenth
century it would seem at first sight as if witchcraft, as we are
treating of it in this work, was very prevalent in Ireland at this
period. Barnabe

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rich says in his
description of Ireland: "The Irish are wonderfully addicted to give
credence to the prognostications of Soothsayers and Witches." Stanihurst
writes that in his time (1547-1618) there were many sorcerers amongst
the Irish. A note in Dr. Hanmer's Collection speaks of "Tyrone his witch
the which he hanged." <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) But these
statements seem rather to have reference to the point of view from which
the English writers regarded the native bards, as well as the "wise
women" who foretold the future; probably "Tyrone" put his "witch" to
death, not through abhorrence of her unhallowed doings, but in a fit of
passion because her interpretation of coming events, by which he may
have allowed himself to be guided, turned out wrongly.

We have already alluded to Gerald, the fourth Earl of Desmond. His
namesake, the sixteenth holder of the title, commonly known as the
"Great Earl," who was betrayed and killed in 1583, has passed from the
region of history to that of mythology,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

as he is credited with being the husband (or son) of a goddess. Not many
miles from the city of Limerick is a lonely, picturesque lake, Lough
Gur, which was included in his extensive possessions, and at the bottom
of which he is supposed to lie enchanted. According to the legend <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) he was a very potent magician, and usually
resided in a castle which was built on a small island in that lake. To
this he brought his bride, a young and beautiful girl, whom he loved
with a too fond love, for she succeeded in prevailing upon him to
gratify her selfish desires, with fatal results. One day she presented
herself in the chamber in which her husband exercised his forbidden art,
and begged him to show her the wonders of his evil science. With the
greatest reluctance he consented, but warned her that she must prepare
herself to witness a series of most frightful phenomena, which, once
commenced, could neither be abridged nor mitigated, while if she spoke a
single word during the proceedings the castle and all it contained

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

would sink to the bottom of the lake.

Urged on by curiosity she gave the required promise, and he commenced.
Muttering a spell as he stood before her, feathers sprouted thickly over
him, his face became contracted and hooked, a corpse-like smell filled
the air, and winnowing the air with beats of its heavy wings a gigantic
vulture rose in his stead, and swept round and round the room as if on
the point of pouncing upon her. The lady controlled herself through this
trial, and another began.

The bird alighted near the door, and in less than a minute changed, she
saw not how, into a horribly deformed and dwarfish hag, who, with yellow
skin hanging about her face, and cavernous eyes, swung herself on
crutches towards the lady, her mouth foaming with fury, and her grimaces
and contortions becoming more and more hideous every moment, till she
rolled with a fearful yell on the floor in a horrible convulsion at the
lady's feet, and then changed into a huge serpent, which came sweeping
and arching towards her with crest erect and quivering tongue.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Suddenly, as it
seemed on the point of darting at her, she saw her husband in its stead,
standing pale before her, and with his finger on his lips enforcing the
continued necessity of silence. He then placed himself at full length on
the floor and began to stretch himself out, longer and longer, until his
head nearly reached to one end of the vast room and his feet to the
other. This utterly unnerved her. She gave a wild scream of horror,
whereupon the castle and all in it sank to the bottom of the lake.

Once in seven years the great Earl rises, and rides by night on his
white horse round Lough Gur. The steed is shod with silver shoes, and
when these are worn out the spell that holds the Earl will be broken,
and he will regain possession of his vast estates and semi-regal power.
In the opening years of the nineteenth century there was living a man
named Teigue O'Neill, who claimed to have seen him on the occasion of
one of his septennial appearances under the following curious
conditions. O'Neill was a blacksmith, and his forge: stood on the brow
of a hill

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

overlooking the lake, on a lonely part of the road to Cahirconlish. One
night, when there was a bright moon, he was working very late and quite
alone. In one of the pauses of his work he heard the ring of many hoofs
ascending the steep road that passed his forge, and, standing in his
doorway, he saw a gentleman on a white horse, who was dressed in a
fashion the like of which he had never seen before. This man was
accompanied by a mounted retinue, in similar dress. They seemed to be
riding up the hill at a gallop, but the pace slackened as they drew
near, and the rider of the white horse, who seemed from his haughty air
to be a man of rank, drew bridle, and came to a halt before the smith's
door. He did not speak, and all his train were silent, but he beckoned
to the smith, and pointed down at one of the horse's hoofs. Teigue
stooped and raised it, and held it just long enough to see that it was
shod with a silver shoe, which in one place was worn as thin as a
shilling. Instantly his situation was made apparent to him by this sign,
and he recoiled with a terrified prayer. The

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

lordly rider, with a look of pain and fury, struck at him suddenly with
something that whistled in the air like a whip; an icy streak seemed to
traverse his body, and at the same time he saw the whole cavalcade break
into a gallop, and disappear down the hill. It is generally supposed
that for the purpose of putting an end to his period of enchantment the
Earl endeavours to lead someone on to first break the silence and speak
to him; but what, in the event of his succeeding, would be the result,
or would befall the person thus ensnared, no one knows.

In a letter <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) written in the year
1640, the Earl assumes a different appearance. We learn from it that as
a countryman was on his way to the ancient and celebrated fair of
Knockaney, situated a few miles from Lough Gur, he met "a gentleman
standing in the waye, demanding if he would sell his horse. He answered,
yea, for £5. The gentleman would give him but £4, 10 *s*., saying he
would not get so much at the ffaire. The fellow

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

went to the ffaire, could not get so much money, and found the gentleman
on his return in the same place, who proffered the same money. The
fellow accepting of it, the other bid him come in and receive his money.
He carried him into a fine spacious castle, payed him his money every
penny, and showed him the fairest black horse that ever was seene, and
told him that that horse was the Earl of Desmond, and that he had three
shoes alreadye, when he hath the fourthe shoe, which should be very
shortlie, then should the Earl be as he was before, thus guarded with
many armed men conveying him out of the gates. The fellow came home, but
never was any castle in that place either before or since." The local
variant of the legend states that the seller of the horse was a Clare
man, and that he went home after having been paid in gold the full
amount of a satisfactory bargain, but on the following morning found to
his great mortification, that instead of the gold coins he had only a
pocketful of ivy leaves. Readers of Victor Hugo's *Notre Dame* will
recall the incident of the *écu* that (apparently)

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

was transformed by magic into a withered leaf. Similar tales of
horse-dealing with mysterious strangers are told in Scotland in
connection with the celebrated Thomas the Rhymer, of Erceldoune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[48:1](iwd04.htm#fr_7.md) Carrigan, *History of the
Diocese of Ossory*, i. p. 48.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[48:2](iwd04.htm#fr_8.md) Stokes, *Ireland and the
Anglo-Norman Church*, p. 374.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[49:1](iwd04.htm#fr_9.md) Theiner, *Vet. Mon*., p.
269.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[50:1](iwd04.htm#fr_10.md) Westropp, *Wars of
Turlough* (Proc. R.I.A.), p. 161; Seymour, *Pre-Ref. Archbishops of
Cashel*, 47.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[53:1](iwd04.htm#fr_11.md) *Dict. Nat. Biog*.,
Seymour, *op. cit.*, p. 18.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[53:2](iwd04.htm#fr_12.md) O'Daly, *History of the
Geraldines*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[56:1](iwd04.htm#fr_13.md) Sharpe, *History of
Witchcraft in Scotland*, p. 30.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[57:1](iwd04.htm#fr_14.md) Ed. H. F. Berry, D.Litt.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[60:1](iwd04.htm#fr_15.md) Carrigan, *op. cit*.,
iii. p. 18.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[67:1](iwd04.htm#fr_16.md) Quoted in *Journal of
Royal Society of Antiquaries*, 3rd series, vol. i. Français mentions a
Swiss sorcerer, somewhat of a wag, who used to play the same trick on
people.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[69:1](iwd04.htm#fr_17.md) *Ulster Journal of
Archæology*, vol. iv. (for 1858).

<span id="fn_18"></span>[70:1](iwd04.htm#fr_18.md) *All the Year Round*
(for April 1870).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[74:1](iwd04.htm#fr_19.md) Lenihan, *History of
Limerick*, p. 147.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: A.D. 1606-1656](iwd05.md)
