[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index) 
[Celtic](../../neu/celt/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iwd08) 
[Next](iwd10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA65ME/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Irish Witchcraft and Demonology*, by St. John D. Seymour, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

#### A.D. 1689-1720

PORTENT ON ENTRY OF JAMES II--WITCHCRAFT IN CO. ANTRIM--TRADITIONAL
VERSION OF SAME--EVENTS PRECEDING THE ISLAND-MAGEE WITCH-TRIAL,--THE
TRIAL ITSELF--DR. FRANCIS HUTCHINSON.

THE account of the following portent is given us in Aubrey's
*Miscellanies*. "When King James II first entered Dublin after his
Arrival from France, 1689, one of the Gentlemen that bore the Mace
before him, stumbled without any rub in his way, or other visible
occasion. The Mace fell out of his hands, and the little Cross upon the
Crown thereof stuck fast between two Stones in the Street. This is well
known all over Ireland, and did much trouble King James himself with
many of his chief Attendants"; but no doubt greatly raised the hopes of
his enemies.

A few years later a witch-story comes from the north of Ireland, and is
related

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

by George Sinclair in his *Satan's Invisible World displayed* (in later
editions, not in the first). This book, by the way, seems to have been
extremely popular, as it was reprinted several times, even as late as
1871. "At Antrim in Ireland a little girl of nineteen (nine?) years of
age, inferior to none in the place for beauty, education, and birth,
innocently put a leaf of sorrel which she had got from a witch into her
mouth, after she had given the begging witch bread and beer at the door;
it was scarce swallowed by her, but she began to be tortured in the
bowels, to tremble all over, and even was convulsive, and in fine to
swoon away as dead. The doctor used remedies on the 9th of May 1698, at
which time it happened, but to no purpose, the child continued in a most
terrible paroxysm; whereupon they sent for the minister, who scarce had
laid his hand upon her when she was turned by the demon in the most
dreadful shapes. She began first to rowl herself about, then to vomit
needles, pins, hairs, feathers, bottoms of thread, pieces of glass,
window-nails, nails drawn out of a cart or coach-wheel, an iron knife
about a span long, eggs, and fish-shells

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

and when the witch came near the place, or looked to the house, though
at the distance of two hundred paces from where the child was, she was
in worse torment, insomuch that no life was expected from the child till
the witch was removed to some greater distance. The witch was
apprehended, condemned, strangled, and burnt, and was desired to undo
the incantation immediately before strangling; but said she could not,
by reason others had done against her likewise. But the wretch confessed
the same, with many more. The child was about the middle of September
thereafter carried to a gentleman's house, where there were many other
things scarce credible, but that several ministers and the gentleman
have attested the same. The relation is to be seen in a pamphlet printed
1699, and entitled *The Bewitching of a Child in Ireland*."

Baxter in his *Certainty of the World of Spirits* quotes what at first
sight appears to be the same case, but places it at Utrecht, and dates
it 1625. But it is quite possible for a similar incident to have
occurred on the Continent as well

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

as in Ireland; many cases of witchcraft happening at widely different
places and dates have points of close resemblance. Sinclair's story
appears to be based on an actual trial for witchcraft in co. Antrim, the
more so as he has drawn his information from a pamphlet on the subject
which was printed the year after its occurrence. The mention of this
latter is particularly interesting; it was probably locally printed, but
there appears to be no means of tracing it, and indeed it must have been
thumbed out of existence many years ago. The above story, marvellous
though it may seem, is capable of explanation. The oxalic acid in sorrel
is an irritant poison, causing retching and violent pains. But when once
the suspicion of *witchcraft* arose the ejection of such an
extraordinary collection of miscellaneous articles followed quite as a
matter of course--it would, so to speak, have been altogether against
the rules of the game for the girl to have got rid of anything else at
that particular date.

Classon Porter gives what he considers to be the traditional version of
the above.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> According to it
the supposed witch was a poor old woman, who was driven mad by the cruel
and barbarous treatment which she received from many of her neighbours
on the ground of her being a witch. To escape this treatment she sought
refuge in a cave, which was in a field attached to the old (not the
present) meeting-house in Antrim. Her living in such a place being
thought a confirmation of what was alleged against her, she was
thereupon stabbed to death, and her body cut in pieces, which were then
scattered over the places where she was supposed to have exercised her
evil influence. For some years after this terrible tragedy her ghost, in
the form of a goat, was believed to haunt the session-house of the old
meeting-house near which she had met her cruel fate; it was popularly
known as MacGregor's ghost, this having been the name of the man who was
sexton of the meeting-house when these things took place, and who
probably had been concerned in the murder. So far Classon Porter. But we
very much doubt if the above has really any connection with the Antrim
witch-case

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

of 1698. It seems more probable that it occurred at a later date,
possibly after the Island-Magee trial, and thus would be an instance of
one of those outbursts of cruelty on the part of a mob rendered
ferocious by ignorance and superstition, of which examples are to be
found in England during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

On one occasion an Irish witch or wise woman was the means of having a
Scotch girl delated by the Kirk for using charms at Hallow-Eve
apparently for the purpose of discovering who her future husband should
be. She confessed that "at the instigation of an old woman from Ireland
she brought in a pint of water from a well which brides and burials pass
over, and dipt her shirt into it, and hung it before the fire; that she
either dreamed, or else there came something and turned about the chair
on which her shirt was, but she could not well see what it was." Her
sentence was a rebuke before the congregation; considering the state of
Scotland at that period it must be admitted she escaped very well. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

We now come to the last instance of witches being tried and convicted in
Ireland--as offenders against the laws of the realm--the celebrated
Island-Magee case. There is a very scarce published account of this,
said to have been compiled by an eyewitness, and entitled: "A Narrative
of the sufferings of a young girl called Mary Dunbar, who was strangely
molested by spirits and witches, at Mr. James Haltridge's house, parish
of Island Magee, near Carrigfergus, in the County of Antrim, and
Province of Ulster, in Ireland, and in some other places to which she
was removed during her disorder; as also of the aforesaid Mr.
Haltridge's house being haunted by spirits in the latter end of 1710 and
beginning of 1711." This continued for many years in manuscript, but in
1822 it was printed as a pamphlet at Belfast, under the editorship of
M'Skimin, author of the *History of Carrigfergus*. This pamphlet we have
not seen; but full particulars of the entire case can be obtained by
combining the following sources of information, viz. Wright's
*Narratives of Sorcery and Witchcraft*; the

Dublin University

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Magazine*, vol.
lxxxii.; a letter by Dr. Tisdall, the Vicar of Belfast, in the
*Hibernian Magazine* for January 1775; Classon Porter's pamphlet;
M'Skimin's *History of Carrigfergus* (ed. M'Crum, 1909); while the
depositions that were taken are published in Young's *Historical Notices
of Old Belfast*, pp. 161-4.

The actual trial of the witches was preceded by a series of most
extraordinary incidents. In September 1710, Mrs. Anne Haltridge, widow
of the Rev. John Haltridge, late Presbyterian minister at Island Magee,
while staying in the house of her son, James Haltridge of the same
place, suffered great annoyance every night from some invisible object,
which threw stones and turf at her bed, the force of the blow often
causing the curtains to open, and even drawing them from one end of the
bed to the other. About the same time, also, the pillows were taken from
under her head, and the clothes pulled off; and though a strict search
was made, nothing could be discovered. Continuing to be annoyed in this
way she removed to another room,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

being afraid to remain in her own any longer.

Then about the 11th of December, as she was sitting in the twilight at
the kitchen fire, a little boy came in and sat down beside her. He
appeared to be about eleven or twelve years old, with short black hair,
having an old black bonnet on his head, a half-worn blanket about him
trailing on the floor, and a torn vest under it, and kept his face
covered with the blanket held before it. Mrs. Haltridge asked him
several questions: Where he came from? Where he was going? Was he cold
or hungry? and so on; but instead of answering her he got up and danced
very nimbly round the kitchen, and then ran out of the house and
disappeared in the cow-shed. The servants ran after him, but he was
nowhere to be seen; when they returned to the house, however, there he
was beside them. They tried to catch him, but every time they attempted
it he ran off and could not be found. At last one of the servants,
seeing the master's dog coming in, cried out that her master was
returning home, and that he would soon

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

catch the troublesome creature, upon which he immediately vanished, nor
were they troubled with him again till February 1711.

On the 11th of that month, which happened to be a Sunday, old Mrs.
Haltridge was reading Dr. Wedderburn's *Sermons on the Covenant*, when,
laying the book aside for a little while, nobody being in the room all
the time, it was suddenly taken away. She looked for it everywhere, but
could not find it. On the following day the apparition already referred
to came to the house, and breaking a pane of glass in one of the
windows, thrust in his hand with the missing volume in it. He began to
talk with one of the servants, Margaret Spear, and told her that he had
taken the book when everybody was down in the kitchen, and that her
mistress would never get it again. The girl asked him if he could read
it, to which he replied that he could, adding that the Devil had taught
him. Upon hearing this extraordinary confession she exclaimed, "The Lord
bless me from thee! Thou hast got ill lear (learning)." He told her she
might bless

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

herself as often as she liked, but that it could not save her; whereupon
he produced a sword, and threatened to kill everybody in the house. This
frightened her so much that she ran into the parlour and fastened the
door, but the apparition laughed at her, and declared that he could come
in by the smallest hole in the house like a cat or mouse, as the Devil
could make him anything he pleased. He then took up a large stone, and
hurled it through the parlour window, which, upon trial, could not be
put out at the same place. A little after the servant and child looked
out, and saw the apparition catching the turkey-cock, which he threw
over his shoulder, holding him by the tail; and the bird making a great
sputter with his feet, the stolen book was spurred out of the loop in
the blanket where the boy had put it. He then leaped over a wall with
the turkey-cock on his back. Presently the girl saw him endeavouring to
draw his sword to kill the bird, but it escaped. Missing the book out of
his blanket he ran nimbly up and down in search of it, and then with a
club came and broke the glass of the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

parlour window. The girl again peeped out through the kitchen window,
and saw him digging with his sword. She summoned up courage to ask him
what he was doing, and he answered, "Making a grave for a corpse which
will come out of this house very soon." He refused, however, to say who
it would be, but having delivered himself of this enlivening piece of
information, flew over the hedge as if he had been a bird.

For a day or two following nothing happened, but on the morning of the
15th the clothes were mysteriously taken off Mrs. Haltridge's bed, and
laid in a bundle behind it. Being put back by some of the family they
were again removed, and this time folded up and placed under a large
table which happened to be in the room. Again they were laid in order on
the bed, and again they were taken off, and this. third time made up in
the shape of a corpse, or something that very closely resembled it. When
this strange news spread through the neighbourhood many persons came to
the house, and, after a thorough investigation lest there might be a
trick in

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

the matter, were obliged to acknowledge that there was some invisible
agent at work. Mr. Robert Sinclair, the Presbyterian minister of the
place, with John Man and Reynold Leaths, two of his Elders, stayed the
whole of that day and the following night with the distressed family,
spending much of the time in prayer. At night Mrs. Haltridge went to bed
as usual in the haunted room, but got very little rest, and at about
twelve o'clock she cried out suddenly as if in great pain. Upon Mr.
Sinclair asking her what was the matter, she said she felt as if a knife
had been stuck into her back. Next morning she quitted the haunted room
and went to another; but the violent pain never left her back, and at
the end of the week, on the 22nd of February, she died. During her
illness the clothes were frequently taken off the bed which she
occupied, and made up like a corpse, and even when a table and chairs
were laid upon them to keep them on, they were mysteriously removed
without any noise, and made up as before; but this never happened when
anyone was in the room.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

The evening before she died they were taken off as usual; but this time,
instead of being made up in the customary way, they were folded with
great care, and laid in a chest upstairs, where they were only found
after a great deal of searching.

We now reach the account of the witchcraft proper, and the consequent
trial. In or about the 27th of February 1711, a girl about eighteen
years of age, Miss Mary Dunbar, whom Dr. Tisdall describes as "having an
open and innocent countenance, and being a very intelligent young
person," came to stay with Mrs. Haltridge, junior, to keep her company
after her mother-in-law's death. A rumour was afloat that the latter had
been bewitched into her grave, and this could not fail to have its
effect on Miss Dunbar. Accordingly on the night of her arrival her
troubles began. When she retired to her bedroom, accompanied by another
girl, they were surprised to find that a new mantle and some other
wearing apparel had been taken out of a trunk and scattered through the
house. Going to look

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

for the missing articles, they found lying on the parlour floor an apron
which two days before had been locked up in another apartment. This
apron, when they found it, was rolled up tight, and tied fast with a
string of its own material, which had upon it five strange knots <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) (Tisdall <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53) says nine). These she proceeded to
unloose, and having done so, she found a flannel cap, which had belonged
to old Mrs. Haltridge, wrapped up in the middle of the apron. When she
saw this she was frightened, and threw both cap and apron to young Mrs.
Haltridge, who also was alarmed, thinking that the mysterious knots
boded evil to some inmate of the house. That evening Miss Dunbar was
seized with a most violent fit, and, recovering, cried out that a knife
was run through her thigh, and that she was most grievously afflicted by
three women, whom she described particularly,

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

but did not then give any account of their names. About midnight she
was, seized with a second fit; when she saw in her vision seven or eight
women who conversed together, and in their conversation called each
other by their names. When she came out of her fit she gave their names
as Janet Liston, Elizabeth Cellor, Kate M'Calmont, Janet Carson, Janet
Mean, Latimer, and one whom they termed Mrs. Ann. She gave so minute a
description of them that several of them were guessed at, and sent from
different parts of the district to the "Afflicted," as Dr. Tisdall terms
her, whom she distinguished from many other women that were brought with
them. "She was constantly more afflicted as they approached the house;
particularly there was one Latimer, who had been sent from Carrigfergus
privately by Mr. Adair, the dissenting teacher; who, when she came to
the house where the Afflicted was, viz. in Island Magee, none of them
suspected her, but the Afflicted fell into a fit as she came near the
house, and recovering when the woman was in the chamber the first

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

words she said were, *O Latimer, Latimer* (which was her name), and her
description agreed most exactly to the person. After this manner were
all the rest discovered; and at one time she singled out one of her
tormentors amongst thirty whom they brought in to see if they could
deceive her either in the name or description of the accused person. All
this was sworn to by persons that were present, as having heard it from
the Afflicted as she recovered from her several fits."

Between the 3rd and the 24th of March depositions relative to various
aspects of the case were sworn to by several people, and the Mayor of
Carrigfergus issued a warrant for the arrest of all suspected persons.
Seven women were arrested; their names were

Janet Mean, of Braid Island.  
Jane Latimer, of Irish quarter, Carrigfergus.  
Margaret Mitchell, of Kilroot.  
Catherine M'Calmont, of Island Magee.  
Janet Liston, *alias* Sellar, of same.  
Elizabeth Sellar, of same.  
Janet Carson, of same.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

Her worst tormentors seem to have been taken into custody at an early
stage in the proceedings, for Miss Dunbar stated in her deposition, made
on the 12th of March, that since their arrest she received no annoyance,
except from "Mrs. Ann, and another woman blind of an eye, who told her
when Mr. Robb, the curate, was going to pray with and for her, that she
should be little the better for his prayers, for they would hinder her
from hearing them, which they accordingly did." In one of her attacks
Miss Dunbar was informed by this "Mrs. Ann" that she should never be
discovered by her name, as the rest had been, but she seems to have
overlooked the fact that her victim was quite capable of giving an
accurate *description* of her, which she accordingly did, and thus was
the means of bringing about the apprehension of one Margaret Mitchell,
upon which she became free from all annoyance, except that she felt
something strange in her stomach which she would be glad to get rid
of--and did, as we shall see presently.

With regard to the woman blind in

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

one eye, we learn from another deponent that three women thus disfigured
were brought to her, but she declared that they never troubled her. "One
Jane Miller, of Carrigfergus, blind of an eye, being sent for, as soon
as she drew near the house the said Mary, who did not know of her
coming, became very much afraid, faintish, and sweat, and as soon as she
came into the room the said Mary fell into such a violent fit of pains
that three men were scarce able to bold her, and cryed out, 'For
Christ's sake, take the Devil out of the room.' And being asked, said
the third woman, for she was the woman that did torment her." Yet Jane
Miller does not seem to have been arrested.

In one of the earliest of the depositions, that sworn by James Hill on
the 5th of March, we find an extraordinary incident recorded, which
seems to show that at least one of the accused was a victim of religious
mania. He states that on the 1st of March, "he being in the house of
William Sellar of Island Magee, one Mary Twmain (*sic!*) came to the
said house and called out Janet Liston to speak to

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

her, and that after the said Janet came in again she fell a-trembling,
and told this Deponent that the said Mary had been desiring her to go to
Mr. Haltridge's to see Mary Dunbar, but she declared she would not go
for all Island Magee, except Mr. Sinclair would come for her, and said:
If the plague of God was on her (Mary Dunbar), the plague of God be on
them altogether; the Devil be with them if he was among them. If God had
taken her health from her, God give her health: if the Devil had taken
it from her, the Devil give it her. And then added: O misbelieving ones,
eating and drinking damnation to themselves, crucifying Christ afresh,
and taking all out of the hands of the Devil!"

Finally the accused were brought up for trial at Carrigfergus before
Judges Upton and Macartney <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) on 31st
March 1711. Amongst the witnesses examined

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

were Mr. Skeffington, curate of Larne; Mr. Ogilvie, Presbyterian
minister of Larne; Mr. Adair, Presbyterian minister of Carrigfergus; Mr.
Cobham, Presbyterian minister of Broad Island; Mr. Edmonstone, of Red
Hall, and others. The proceedings commenced at six o'clock in the
morning, and lasted until two in the afternoon. An abstract of the
evidence was made by Dr. Tisdall, who was present in Court during the
trial, and from whose letter we extract the following passages--many of
the foregoing facts (!) being also adduced.

"It was sworn to by most of the evidences that in some of her fits three
strong men were scarce able to hold her down, that she would mutter to
herself, and speak some words distinctly, and tell everything she had
said in her conversation with the witches, and how she came to say such
things, which she spoke when in her fits."

"In her fits she often had her tongue thrust into her windpipe in such a
manner that she was like to choak, and the root seemed pulled up into
her mouth. Upon

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

her recovery she complained extremely of one Mean, who had twisted her
tongue; and told the Court that she had tore her throat, and tortured
her violently by reason of her crooked fingers and swelled knuckles. The
woman was called to the Bar upon this evidence, and ordered to show her
hand; it was really amazing to see the exact agreement betwixt the
description of the Afflicted and the hand of the supposed tormentor; all
the joints were distorted and the tendons shrivelled up, as she had
described."

"One of the men who had held her in a fit swore she had nothing visible
on her arms when he took hold of them, and that all in the room saw some
worsted yarn tied round her wrist, which was put on invisibly; there
were upon this string seven double knots and one single one. In another
fit she cried out that she was grievously tormented with a pain about
her knee; upon which the women in the room looked at her knee, and found
a fillet tied fast about it; her mother swore to the fillet, that it was
the same she had given her that morning, and had seen it

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

about her head; this had also seven double knots and one single one."

"Her mother was advised by a Roman Catholic priest to use a
counter-charm, which was to write some words out of the first chapter of
St. John's Gospel in a paper, and to tie the paper with an incle three
times round her neck, knotted each time. This charm the girl herself
declined; but the mother, in one of the times of her being afflicted,
used it. She was in a violent fit upon the bed held down by a man, and,
recovering a little, complained grievously of a pain in her back and
about her middle; immediately the company discovered the said incle tied
round her middle with seven double knots and one single one: this was
sworn to by several. The man who held the Afflicted was asked by the
judge if it were possible she could reach the incle about her neck while
he held her; he said it was not, by the virtue of his oath, he having
her hands fast down."

"The Afflicted, during one of her fits, was observed by several persons
to slide off the bed in an unaccountable manner,

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

and to be laid gently on the ground as if supported and drawn invisibly.
Upon her recovery she told them the several persons who had drawn her in
that manner, with the intention, as they told her, of bearing her out of
the window; but that she reflecting at that time, and calling upon God
in her mind, they let her drop on the floor."

"The Afflicted, recovering from a fit, told the persons present that her
tormentors had declared that she should not have power to go over the
threshold of the chamber-door; the evidence declared that they had
several times attempted to lead her out of the door, and that she was as
often thrown into fits as they had brought her to the said threshold;
that to pursue the experiment further they had the said threshold taken
up, upon which they were immediately struck with so strong a smell of
brimstone that they were scarce able to bear it; that the stench spread
through the whole house, and afflicted several to that degree that they
fell sick in their stomachs, and were much disordered." The above were
the principal facts sworn

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

to in the Court, to which most of the witnesses gave their joint
testimony.

"There was a great quantity of things produced in Court, and sworn to be
what she vomited out of her throat. I had them all in my hand, and found
there was a great quantity of feathers, cotton, yarn, pins, and two
large waistcoat buttons, at least as much as would fill my hand. They
gave evidence to the Court they had seen those very things coming out of
her mouth, and had received them into their hands as she threw them up."

Her tormentors had told Miss Dunbar that she should have no power to
give evidence against them in Court. "She was accordingly that day
before the trial struck dumb, and so continued in Court during the whole
trial, but had no violent fit. I saw her in Court cast her eyes about in
a wild distracted manner.) and it was then thought she was recovering
from her fit \[of dumbness\], and it was hoped she would give her own
evidence. I observed, as they were raising her up, she sank into the
arms of a person who held her, closed her eyes, and seemed perfectly
senseless and

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

motionless. I went to see her after the trial; she told me she knew not
where she was when in Court; that she had been afflicted all that time
by three persons, of whom she gave a particular description both of
their proportion, habits, hair, features, and complexion, and said she
had never seen them till the day before the trial."

The prisoners had no lawyer to defend them, while it is hardly necessary
to say that no medical evidence as to the state of health of Miss Dunbar
was heard. When the witnesses had been examined the accused were ordered
to make their defence. They all positively denied the charge of
witchcraft; one with the worst looks, who was therefore the greatest
suspect, called God to witness that she was wronged. Their characters
were inquired into, and some were reported unfavourably of, which seemed
to be rather due to their ill appearance than to any facts proved
against them. "It was made appear on oath that most of them had received
the Communion, some of them very lately, that several of them had been
laborious, industrious people,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

and had frequently been known to pray with their families, both
publickly and privately; most of them could say the Lord's Prayer, which
it is generally said they learnt in prison, they being every one
Presbyterians."

"Judge Upton summed up the whole evidence with great exactness and
perspicuity, notwithstanding the confused manner in which it was
offered. He seemed entirely of opinion that the jury could not bring
them in guilty upon the sole testimony of the afflicted person's
visionary images. He said he could not doubt but that the whole matter
was preternatural and diabolical, but he conceived that. had the persons
accused been really witches and in compact with the Devil, it could
hardly be presumed that they should be such constant attenders upon
Divine Service, both in public and private."

Unfortunately his Brother on the Bench was not so open-minded. Judge
Macartney, who is almost certainly the Counsel for the plaintiff in the
Lostin case, differed altogether from him, and thought that the jury
might well bring them in guilty.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

The twelve good men and true lost no time in doing so, and, in
accordance with the Statute, the prisoners were sentenced to a year's
imprisonment, and to stand in the pillory four times during that period.
It is said that when placed in this relic of barbarism the unfortunate
wretches were pelted by the mob with eggs and cabbage-stalks to such an
extent that one of them had an eye knocked out. And thus ended the last
trial for witchcraft in Ireland.

It is significant that witch-trials stopped in all three countries
within a decade of each other. The last condemnation in England occurred
in 1712, when a woman in Hertfordshire, Jane Wenharn, was found guilty
by a jury, but was reprieved at the representation of the judge; another
trial occurred in 1717, but the accused were acquitted. In Scotland the
Sheriff-depute of Sutherland passed sentence of death on a woman (though
apparently illegally) in 1722, who was consequently strangled and burnt.
Ashton indeed states (p. 192) that the last execution in Ireland
occurred at Glarus, when a servant was burnt as a

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

witch in 1786. This would be extremely interesting, were it not for the
fact that it is utterly incorrect. It is clear from what J. Français
says that this happened at Glaris *in Switzerland*, and was the last
instance of judicial condemnation and execution in Europe. We have drawn
attention to this lest it should mislead others, as it did us.

Before concluding this chapter it will not be out of place to mention
the fact that one of the most strenuous writers against witchcraft
subsequently ornamented the Irish Episcopal Bench. This was Dr. Francis
Hutchinson, who wrote the "Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft" in
the form of a dialogue between a clergyman (the author), a Scotch
advocate, and an English juror. The first edition was published in 1718,
and was followed by a second in 1720, in which year he was promoted to
the See of Down and Connor. As to the value of his book, and the
important position it occupied in the literary history of witchcraft in
England, we cannot do better than quote Dr. Notestein's laudatory
criticism. He says: "Hutchinson's

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

book must rank with Reginald Scot's *Discoverie* as one of the great
classics of English witch-literature. So nearly was his point of view
that of our own day that it would be idle to rehearse his arguments. A
man with warm sympathies for the oppressed, he had been led probably by
the case of Jane Wenham, with whom he had talked, to make a personal
investigation of all cases that came at all within the ken of those
living. Whoever shall write the final story of English witchcraft will
find himself still dependent upon this eighteenth-century historian. His
work was the last chapter in the witch controversy. There was nothing
more to say."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[199:1](iwd09.htm#fr_51) C. K. Sharpe, *op.
cit*.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[208:1](iwd09.htm#fr_52) A man in the Orkneys
was ruined by nine knots tied in a blue thread (Dalyell's *Darker
Superstitions of Scotland*).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[208:2](iwd09.htm#fr_53) The Rev. Dr. Tisdall,
who has given such a full account of the trial, was Vicar of Belfast.
For his attitude towards the Presbyterians, see Witherow's *Memorials of
Presbyterianism in Ireland*, pp. 118, 159. Yet his narrative of the
trial is not biassed, for all his statements can be home out by other
evidence.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[213:1](iwd09.htm#fr_54) James Macartney became
second puisne justice of the King's Bench in 1701, puisne justice of
Common Pleas (vice A. Upton) in 1714, and retired in 1726. Anthony Upton
became puisne Justice of Common Pleas, was succeeded as above, and
committed suicide in 1718. Both were natives of co. Antrim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: A.D. 1807 to Present Day](iwd10)
