[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scc16)  [Next](scc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 15.--TRUHOHI YOKUTS. THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD.

Told by a Tachi Yokuts.

Far in the south was a mountain. It was the only land. Everything else
was water. The eagle was the chief. The people had nothing to eat. They
were eating the earth and it was nearly gone. Then Coyote said: "Can we
not obtain earth? Can we not make mountains?" The eagle said: "I do not
know how."

{p. 210}

Coyote said: "There is a man that we will ask." Then they got the
magpie. The eagle said: "Can we obtain earth?" The magpie said: "Yes."
"Where?" "Right below us." Then all the ducks dived and tried to bring
up the earth. Some were gone half a day. They could not reach the bottom
and died and floated up. The eagle said: "When you reach the ground take
hold of it and bite it, and fill your nose and ears." For six days they
dived and found nothing. There was only one more to go down, the mudhen.
Then the eagle said: "Now you go. Let us see if you can find the earth."
The mudhen said: "Good." Then it dived. It was gone for a day and a
night. In the morning it came up. It was dead. They looked it over. It
had earth in its nails, its cars, and its nose. Then they made the earth
from this ground. They mixed it with chiyu seeds and from this they made
the earth. After six days the eagle said to the wolf: "Now go around."
Then the wolf went where the Sierra Nevada now is and around to the west
and came back along where the Coast Range is. The eagle said: "Do not
touch it for six days. Let it dry first." All the people said: "Very
well, we will let it become dry." But soon Coyote said: "I will try it.
It is getting hard now." He traveled along where the Sierras are. That
is why these are rough and broken now. It is from his running over the
soft earth. Then he turned west and went back along the Coast Range.
That is why there are mountains there also. Coyote made it so. Now the
eagle sent out the prairie falcon and the raven (Khotoi). He told them:
"Go around the world and see if the earth is hard yet." Then the prairie
falcon went north along the Sierra Nevada and Khotoi went north along
the Coast Range. Each came back the way he had gone. Now at first the
Sierra Nevada was not so high as the Coast Range. When the two returned
the eagle said: "How is the earth? Is it hard?" "Yes," they said. Then
the prairie falcon said "Look at my mountains. They are the highest,"
but Khotoi said: "No, mine are higher." The prairie falcon said: "No,
your, do not amount to anything. They are low." Then the eagle and
Coyote sent the people to different places. They said: "You go to that
place with your people. You go to that spring." So they sent them off,
and the people went to the different places

{p. 211}

where they are now. They were still animals, but they became people. For
a little while after they had all gone the eagle and Coyote stayed
there. Then Coyote said: "Where will you go?" The eagle said: "I am
thinking about it. I think I will go up." Coyote said: "Where shall I
live?" The eagle said: "Here." But Coyote said: "No, I will go with
you." The eagle told him: "No, you must stay here. You will have to look
after this place here." So they talked for six days. Then the eagle took
all his things. "Goodby," he said, "I am going." Then he went. Coyote
looked up. He said: "I am going too." "You have no wings. You cannot,"
said the eagle. "I will go," said Coyote, and he went. Now they are
together in the sky above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16.--Truhohi Yokuts. The Theft Of Fire.](scc18)
