[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scc24)  [Next](scc26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 23.--TACHI YOKUTS. THE THUNDER TWINS.

All the land in the plains north of Tulare Lake where the Tachi lived in
summer was burned bare. Nothing was growing there, no seeds and no tule.
The people were starving. In the mountains to the west, where the Tachi
lived in winter, there were two little boys, twins. They were covered
with sores and stank. Whenever they had finished eating, their father
whipped them out of the house. They came back crying, but their parents
took no pity on them. Only their grandmother took care of them Now the
chief of the people in the plains said to his people: "Go about the land
and see if you cannot find food. We will move wherever anything is
growing." Then runners went southwestward. There they found a high
mountain and near it a little lake, which is now dry. There were tule
roots and seeds to be had there and the people moved there. Now the
father and mother of the two boys abandoned them. But their grandmother
stayed with them and cried over them. For two years they lived in this
way. Sometimes the old woman found a few tule roots, and with these she
fed the boys and they grew. Now, when they were two years older, they no
longer wanted to eat anything. They turned into thunders. At a high
mountain west of the north end of the lake is a spring. There the boys
went and there they are living now. They told their grandmother:
"Grandmother, next month we shall have many fish from that water." Then
in a month the spring was full of fish. They caught them and dried them.
The boys did not eat any of them, for they had turned into supernatural
beings. Now their mother's brother, who had gone away with their
parents, came back, bringing the boys a little food. Then they shot him.
They nearly killed him, but cured him again. He told them: "When your
father and your mother come, kill them." Then he went back with the fish
which they had given him. When he returned, he told the people: "They
are well off now. They have much to eat." Then the boys' father and
mother went there with other people. The boys shot at them and killed
their parents and those that went with them. Next day those of the
people who had not yet gone, said: "Perhaps they were given many fish
and that is why they

{p. 216}

did not come back last night." But their mother's brother told them why
they should not go to that place. So the remainder of the people stayed
where they were and were not killed. The mountain where the thunder
twins live is called chenhali.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24.--Tachi Yokuts. The Visit To The Dead.](scc26)
