[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](scc21)  [Next](scc23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 20.--TACHI YOKUTS. THE PLEIADES.

The Pleiades were five girls and a flea, baakil. The girls sang and
played all night in the sky. The flea constantly went with them. They
did not like the other men that came to them; they liked only him. They
did not like the other men that came to them ran away, but the flea went
with them. And they let him marry them. He married all five. Now he
turned into a flea, and in summer became sick with the itch. The girls
did not like him any longer. They said: "Let us run away. Where shall we
go?" Then they agreed to go east together. "When shall we go?" they
said. "As soon as he sleeps." Now the flea slept and the five got up and
went off. After they were far away the flea woke up and thought: "Where
are my wives?" He found that they had gone away.

{p. 214}

He thought: "Where shall I go?" He went east. At last he came in sight
of them, just before he reached the ocean. He said: "I will catch you."
They said: "He is coming. Let us go on." They ran on again. Then one
asked: "Do you see him again!" Another said: "Yes, he is near." Then
they said: "Let us go up into the air. Then he cannot come with us."
Then they went up. But the man rose, too. That is why there are five
stars close together now in the Pleiades and one at the side. That one
is he, the flea.\[1\]

\[1. The Yaudanchi have a myth about the Pleiades. They say that they
were girls who rose to the sky. One was pregnant and could not rise. She
turned to a rock. One or more stars near them are young men who followed
them.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21.--Tachi Yokuts. The Wolf And The Crane.](scc23.md)
