[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scc33)  [Next](scc35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 32.--YAUDANCHI YOKUTS. WAR OF THE FOOTHILL AND PLAINS PEOPLE.

The birds and animals from the mountains (foothills) went to war with
the animals of the lake below. With the party from the mountains was
Coyote. He had a large quiver full of arrows. In the morning he got up,
knotted his hair behind, took his bow, and called to all, "Get up, get
up, or I will kill you. I am ready to go to war." Now they started. All
the way down into the plains Coyote led the way and hurried the others.
Alongside him

{p. 224}

was the humming-bird. They two were the leaders. There were three owls,
( ? tuwidech) with the party. One of these carried an inexhaustible
supply of arrow point; in his mouth; another carried sinew; and a third
feathers for arrow-shafts. As the arrows became used during the fight,
they produced these materials and kept the people supplied. So they
fought. The people from the mountains beat those of the plains. But
there were two that they could not kill, the fish epis and the turtle.
One of these was slippery, the other was hard, and the arrows glanced
off their backs. Then Coyote broke his leg, took out the bone, stuck it
into the end of his arrow, and shot. He struck the fish in the back of
its neck and killed it. Then he shot at the turtle and struck it in its
head aperture and killed it.

Now the eagle, who was the chief of all, sent off the victorious
mountain people. He said: "You cannot live here any longer. You must go
away. Where do you want to go?" Coyote said: "Wishawishawisha!
Wishawishawisha! Wishawishawisha! I do not want to go." The humming-bird
agreed with him. The eagle, said: "Well, what are you going to become?
What will you be? I am going to fly high up in the air and live on
squirrels and sometimes on deer." The dog said: "I will stay with people
and be their friend. I will follow them, and perhaps I will get
something to eat in that way." The buzzard said: "When something dies I
will smell it. I will go there and eat it." The crow said: "When I see
something lying dead I will pick its eyes." Coyote said: "I will go
about killing grasshoppers. That is how I will live." The humming-bird
said: "I will go to the flowers and get my food from them." The condor
said: "I will not stay here. I will go far off into the mountains.
Perhaps I will, find something there." The woodpecker said: "I will get
acorns and make holes in the trees." The bluejay said: "I am going to
make trees grow over the hills. I will work." The rat said: "I will go
where there are old trees and make my house in them." The mouse said: "I
will run here and there and everywhere. I shall have holes and perhaps I
can live in that way." The trout said: "I will live in the water and
perhaps I can find something to eat there."

That was the time they stopped being like us and scattered.

{p. 225}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33.--Yaudanchi Yokuts. Thunder And Whirlwind.](scc35)
