[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scc32)  [Next](scc34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 31.--YAUDANCHI YOKUTS. THE PRAIRIE FALCON LOSES.\[1\]

The prairie falcon shouted because he beat all the people at playing.
Then the dove and the meadow-lark told Coyote: "Go and cuckold him."
Coyote said: "Yes, I will do it." He went up the mountain. Halfway up
was a spring. From there Coyote went to the summit. He rolled himself
down. At each bound he cried: "I am the prairie falcon, I am the prairie
falcon!" When he had rolled to the spring he looked at himself in the
water. He resembled the prairie falcon a little. He went to the top of
the mountain again and rolled down once more, crying: "I am the prairie
falcon." Then he looked at himself in the spring and thought: "I am a
little more like him." Again he went to the top and rolled down. Then he
looked at himself in the water. Now he was the prairie falcon. Then he
said: "Let me have a stick." Then he had his stick and went to the
prairie falcon's house. He leaned the stick against the entrance and
said to the woman: "Give me my ball." She asked him: "Where is it?" "It
is there at our pillow. She could not find it. So she said: "Come, get
it yourself." Coyote entered the house, lifted up the pillow, and there
was the ball. The prairie falcon's wife asked: "Why did you not take it
when you went?" Then he hugged her. And then he cohabited with her. When
he went out of the house, the woman saw his tail sticking out. He went
where they were playing. Now the dove won and the meadow-lark won, and
the prairie falcon lost. He lost all his beads.

\[1. From a Yaudanchi text. Present series, II, 264.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32.--Yaudanchi Yokuts. War Of The Foothill And Plains
People.](scc34)
