[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02002)  [Next](cc02004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 26.

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
26:1-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And there was a famine in the land,
beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went
unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Deinde fuit fames in terra praeter
famem superiorem, quae fuerat in diebus Abraham: et profectus est Ishac
ad Abimelech regem Pelisthim in Gerar

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the LORD appeared unto him, and
said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee
of:

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Nam visus est ei Iehova, et dixit, Ne
descendas in AEgyptum: habita in terra quam dicam tibi.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Sojourn in this land, and I will be
with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will
give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto
Abraham thy father;

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Inhabita terram hanc, et ero tecum, et
benedicam tibi: quia tibi et semini tuo dabo omnes terras istas: et
statuam juramentum quod juravi ad Abraham patrem tuum.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And I will make thy seed to multiply as
the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries;
and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et multiplicare faciam semen tuum sicut
stellas coeli, et dabo semini tuo omnes terras istas: benedicenturque in
semine tuo omnes gentes terrae:

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>**5.** Because that Abraham obeyed my voice,
and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Eo quod obedierit Abraham voci meae,
et custodierit custodiam meam, praecepta mea, statuta mea, et leges
meas.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et habitavit Ishac in Gerar.

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the men of the place asked *him*
of his wife; and he said, She *is* my sister: for he feared to say, *She
is* my wife; lest, *said he*, the men of the place should kill me for
Rebekah; because she *was* fair to look upon.

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et interrogaverunt incolae regionis de
uxore ejus; et dixit, Soror mea est: quia timuit dicere, uxor mea est:
ne forte occiderent me incolae regionis propter Ribcam, quia pulchra
aspectu erat.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And it came to pass, when he had been
there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at
a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac *was* sporting with Rebekah his
wife.

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Verum fuit, quum protracti essent ei
ibi dies, aspexit Abimelech rex Pelisthim per fenestram, et vidit, et
ecce Ishac ludebat cum Ribca uxore sua.

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Abimelech called Isaac, and said,
Behold, of a surety she *is* thy wife: and how saidst thou, She *is* my
sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Tunc vocavit Abimelech Ishac, et
dixit, Vere ecce uxor tua est; et quomodo dixisti, Soror mea est? Et
dixit ad eum Ishac, Quia dixi, Ne forte moriar propter eam.

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Abimelech said, What *is* this
thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with
thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et dixit Abimelech, Quid hoc fecisti
nobis? paulum abfuit quin dormierit unus e populo cum uxore tua, et
venire fecisses super nos delictum.

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>**11.** And Abimelech charged all *his*
people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be
put to death.

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Praecepit itaque Abimelech omni
populo, dicendo, Qui tetigerit virum hunc, et uxorem ejus, noriendo
morietur.

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>**12.** Then Isaac sowed in that land, and
received in the same year an hundredfold: and the LORD blessed him.

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et sevit Ishac in terra ipsa, et
reperit in anno ipso centum modios: et benedixit ei Iehova.

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span>**13.** And the man waxed great, and went
forward, and grew until he became very great:

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et crevit vir, et perrexit pergendo
et crescendo, donec cresceret valde.

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span>**14.** For he had possession of flocks, and
possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines
envied him.

<span id="iv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et fuit ei possessio pecudum, et
possessio boum, et proventus multus: et inviderunt ei Pelisthim.

<span id="iv.i-p30"></span>**15.** For all the wells which his father’s
servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines
had stopped them, and filled them with earth.

<span id="iv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Itaque omnes puteos, quos foderant
servi patris sui in diebus Abraham patris sui, obturaverunt Pelisthim,
et impleverunt eos terra.

<span id="iv.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go
from us; for thou art much mightier than we.

<span id="iv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et dixit Abimelech ad Ishac, Abi a
nobis: quia longe fortior es nobis.

<span id="iv.i-p34"></span>**17.** And Isaac departed thence, and
pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.

<span id="iv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Abiit ergo inde Ishac, et mansit in
valle Gerar, et habitavit ibi.

<span id="iv.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Isaac digged again the wells of
water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the
Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called
their names after the names by which his father had called them.

<span id="iv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Postquam reversus est Ishac, fodit
puteos aquae, quos foderant in diebus Abraham patris sui: quia
obturaverant eos Pelisthim mortuo Abraham: et vocavit eos nominibus
secundum nomina, quibus vocaverat eos pater suus.

<span id="iv.i-p38"></span>**19.** And Isaac’s servants digged in the
valley, and found there a well of springing water.

<span id="iv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et foderunt servi Ishac in valle, et
invenerunt ibi puteum aquae vivae.

<span id="iv.i-p40"></span>**20.** And the herdmen of Gerar did strive
with Isaac’s herdmen, saying, The water *is* ours: and he called the
name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.

<span id="iv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Sed litigaverunt pastores Gerar cum
pastoribus Ishac, dicendo, Nostra est aqua: et vocavit nomen putei
Hesech, quia litigaverunt cum eo.

<span id="iv.i-p42"></span>**21.** And they digged another well, and
strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.

<span id="iv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et foderunt puteum alium, et
litigaverunt etiam super eo: et vocavit nomen ejus Sitnah.

<span id="iv.i-p44"></span>**22.** And he removed from thence, and
digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the
name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD hath made room for
us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.

<span id="iv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et transtulit se inde, et fodit
puteum alium, et non litigaverunt super eo: ideo vocavit nomen ejus
Rehoboth: et dixit, Quia nunc dilatationem fecit Iehova nobis, et
crevimus in terra.

<span id="iv.i-p46"></span>**23.** And he went up from thence to
Beersheba.

<span id="iv.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et ascendit inde in Beer-sebah.

<span id="iv.i-p48"></span>**24.** And the LORD appeared unto him the
same night, and said, I *am* the God of Abraham thy father: fear not,
for I *am* with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my
servant Abraham’s sake.

<span id="iv.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et visus est ei Iehova necte ipsa, et
dixit, Ego sum Deus Abraham patris tui: ne timeas, quia tecum sum, et
benedicam tibi, et multiplicare faciam semen tuum propter Abraham servum
meum.

<span id="iv.i-p50"></span>**25.** And he builded an altar there, and
called upon the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there: and there
Isaac’s servants digged a well.

<span id="iv.i-p51"></span>**25.** Tunc aedificavit ibi altare, et
invocavit nomen Iehovae, et tetendit ibi tabernaculum suum: et foderunt
ibi servi Ishac puteum.

<span id="iv.i-p52"></span>**26.** Then Abimelech went to him from
Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of
his army.

<span id="iv.i-p53"></span>**26.** Porro Abimelech profectus est ad eum
ex Gerar, et Ahuzath qui erat ex amicis ejus, et Phichol princeps
exercitus ejus.

<span id="iv.i-p54"></span>**27.** And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore
come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?

<span id="iv.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et dixit ad eos Ishac, Cur venistis
ad me, et vos odio habuistis me, et emisistis me ne essem vobiscum?

<span id="iv.i-p56"></span>**28.** And they said, We saw certainly that
the LORD was with thee: and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt
us, *even* betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;

<span id="iv.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et dixerunt, Videndo vidimus quod
esset Iehova tecum, et diximus, Sit nunc juramentum inter nos, inter nos
et inter to, et percutiamus foedus tecum.

<span id="iv.i-p58"></span>**29.** That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we
have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good,
and have sent thee away in peace: thou *art* now the blessed of the
LORD.

<span id="iv.i-p59"></span>**29.** Si feceris nobiscum malum:
quemadmodum non tetigimus to, et quemadmodum fecimus tecum duntaxat
bonum, et dimisimus to in pace: tu nunc es benedictus Iehovae.

<span id="iv.i-p60"></span>**30.** And he made them a feast, and they
did eat and drink.

<span id="iv.i-p61"></span>**30.** Instruxit autem eis convivium, et
ederunt, atque biberunt.

<span id="iv.i-p62"></span>**31.** And they rose up betimes in the
morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent them away, and they
departed from him in peace.

<span id="iv.i-p63"></span>**31.** Et surrexerunt mane: et juraverunt
alter alteri: et deduxit eos Ishac, et abierunt ab eo in pace.

<span id="iv.i-p64"></span>**32.** And it came to pass the same day,
that Isaac’s servants came, and told him concerning the well which they
had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.

<span id="iv.i-p65"></span>**32.** Adhaec fuit, in die ipsa venerunt
servi Ishac, et nuntiaverunt ei de puteo quem foderant, et dixerunt ei,
Invenimus aquam.

<span id="iv.i-p66"></span>**33.** And he called it Shebah: therefore
the name of the city *is* Beersheba unto this day.

<span id="iv.i-p67"></span>**33.** Et vocavit eum Sibhah: idcirco nomen
urbis est Beer-sebah usque ad diem hanc.

<span id="iv.i-p68"></span>**34.** And Esau was forty years old when he
took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the
daughter of Elon the Hittite:

<span id="iv.i-p69"></span>**34.** Erat autem Esau quadragenarius, et
accepit uxorem Iehudith filiam Beeri Hittaei, et Bosmath filiam Elon
Hittaei.

<span id="iv.i-p70"></span>**35.** Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac
and to Rebekah.

<span id="iv.i-p71"></span>**35.** Et irritabant spiritum Ishac et
Ribcae.

<span id="iv.i-p72"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p73"></span><span id="iv.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p74"></span>**1.** *And there was a famine*. Moses
relates that Isaac was tried by nearly the same kind of temptation as
that through which his father Abraham had twice passed. I have before
explained how severe and violent was this assault. The condition in
which it was the will of God to place his servants, as strangers and
pilgrims in the land which he had promised to give them, seemed
sufficiently troublesome and hard; but it appears still more
intolerable, that he scarcely suffered them to exist (if we may so
speak) in this wandering, uncertain, and changeable kind of life, but
almost consumed them with hunger. Who would not say that God had
forgotten himself, when he did not even supply his own children, — whom
he had received into his especial care and trust, — however sparingly
and scantily, with food? But God thus tried the holy fathers, that we
might be taught, by their example, not to be effeminate and cowardly
under temptations. Respecting the terms here used, we may observe, that
though there were two seasons of dearth in the time of Abraham, Moses
alludes only to the one, of which the remembrance was most recent.
 <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="iv.i-p76"></span><span id="iv.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p77"></span>**2.** *And the Lord appeared unto him*. I do
not doubt but a reason is here given why Isaac rather went to the
country of Gerar than to Egypt, which perhaps would have been more
convenient for him; but Moses teaches that he was withheld by a heavenly
oracle, so that a free choice was not left him. It may here be asked,
why does the Lord prohibit Isaac from going to Egypt, whither he had
suffered his father to go? Although Moses does not give the reason, yet
we may be allowed to conjecture that the journey would have been more
dangerous to the son. The Lord could indeed have endued the son also
with the power of his Spirit, as he had done his father Abraham, so that
the abundance and delicacies of Egypt should not have corrupted him by
their allurements; but since he governs his faithful people with such
moderation, that he does not correct all their faults at once, and
render them entirely pure, he assists their infirmities, and
anticipates, with suitable remedies, those evils by which they might be
ensnared. Because, therefore, he knew that there was more infirmity in
Isaac than there had been in Abraham, he was unwilling to expose him to
danger; for he is faithful, and will not suffer his own people to be
tempted beyond what they are able to bear. (<span
id="iv.i-p77.1"></span>[1Co 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i-p77.1"></span>.) Now, as we must be persuaded, that however
arduous and burdensome may be the temptations which alight upon us, the
Divine help will never fail to renew our strength; so, on the other
hand, we must beware lest we rashly rush into dangers; but each should
be admonished by his own infirmity to proceed cautiously and with fear.

<span id="iv.i-p78"></span>*Dwell in the land*. God commands him to
settle in the promised land, yet with the understanding that he should
dwell there as a stranger. The intimation was thus given, that the time
had not yet arrived in which he should exercise dominion over it. God
sustains indeed his mind with the hope of the promised inheritance, but
requires this honor to be given to his word, that Isaac should remain
inwardly at rest, in the midst of outward agitations; and truly we never
lean upon a better support than when, disregarding the appearance of
things present, we depend entirely upon the word of the Lord, and
apprehend by faith that blessing which is not yet apparent. Moreover, he
again inculcates the promise previously made, in order to render Isaac
more prompt to obey; for so is the Lord wont to awaken his servants from
their indolence, that they may fight valiantly for him, while he
constantly affirms that their labor shall not he in vain; for although
he requires from us a free and unreserved obedience, as a father does
from his children, he yet so condescends to the weakness of our
capacity, that he invites and encourages us by the prospect of reward.

<span id="iv.i-p79"></span><span id="iv.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p80"></span>**5.** *Because that Abraham obeyed my
voice*. Moses does not mean that Abraham’s obedience was the reason why
the promise of God was confirmed and ratified to him; but from what has
been said before, (<span id="iv.i-p80.1"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="iv.i-p80.1"></span>,)
where we have a similar expression, we learn, that what God freely
bestows upon the faithful is sometimes, beyond their desert, ascribed to
themselves; that they, knowing their intention to be approved by the
Lord, may the more ardently addict and devote themselves entirely to his
service: so he now commends the obedience of Abraham, in order that
Isaac may be stimulated to an imitation of his example. And although
laws, statutes, rites, precepts, and ceremonies, had not yet been
written, Moses used these terms, that he might the more clearly show how
sedulously Abraham regulated his life according to the will of God alone
— how carefully he abstained from all the impurities of the heathen —
and how exactly he pursued the straight course of holiness, without
turning aside to the right hand or to the left: for the Lord often
honors his own law with these titles for the sake of restraining our
excesses; as if he should say that it wanted nothing to constitute it a
perfect rule, but embraced everything pertaining to absolute holiness.
The meaning therefore is, that Abraham, having formed his life in entire
accordance with the will of God, walked in his pure service.

<span id="iv.i-p81"></span><span id="iv.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p82"></span>**7.** *And the men of the place asked him*.
Moses relates that Isaac was tempted in the same manner as his father
Abraham, in having his wife taken from him; and without doubt he was so
led by the example of his father, that he, being instructed by the
similarity of the circumstances, might become associated with him in his
faith. Nevertheless, on this point he ought rather to have avoided than
imitated his father’s fault; for no doubt he well remembered that the
chastity of his mother had twice been put in great danger; and although
she had been wonderfully rescued by the hand of God, yet both she and
her husband paid the penalty of their distrust: therefore the negligence
of Isaac is inexcusable, in that he now strikes against the same stone.
He does not in express terms deny his wife; but he is to be blamed,
first, because, for the sake of preserving his life, he resorts to an
evasion not far removed from a lie; and secondly, because, in absolving
his wife from conjugal fidelity, he exposes her to prostitution: but he
aggravates his fault, principally (as I have said) in not taking warning
from domestic examples, but voluntarily casting his wife into manifest
danger. Whence it appears how great is the propensity of our nature to
distrust, and how easy it is to be devoid of wisdom in affairs of
perplexity. Since, therefore, we are surrounded on all sides with so
many dangers, we must ask the Lord to confirm us by his Spirit, lest our
minds should faint, and be dissolved in fear and trembling; otherwise we
shall be frequently engaged in vain enterprises, of which we shall
repent soon, and yet too late to remedy the evil.

<span id="iv.i-p83"></span><span id="iv.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p84"></span>**8.** *Abimelech, king of the Philistines,
looked out at a window*. Truly admirable is the kind forbearance of God,
in not only condescending to pardon the twofold fault of his servant,
but in stretching forth his hand, and in wonderfully averting, by the
application of a speedy remedy, the evil which he would have brought
upon himself. God did not suffer — what twice had occurred to Abraham —
that his wife should be torn from his bosom; but stirred up a heathen
king, mildly, and without occasioning him any trouble, to correct his
folly. But although God sets before us such an example of his kindness,
that the faithful, if at any time they may have fallen, may confidently
hope to find him gentle and propitious; yet we must beware of
self-security, when we observe, that the holy woman who was, at that
time, the only mother of the Church on earth, was exempted from
dishonor, by a special privilege. Meanwhile, we may conjecture, from the
judgment of Abimelech, how holy and pure had been the conduct of Isaac,
on whom not even a suspicion of evil could fall; and further, how much
greater integrity flourished in that age than in our own. For why does
he not condemn Isaac as one guilty of fornication, since it was probable
that some crime was concealed, when he disingenuously obtruded the name
of sister, and tacitly denied her to be his wife? And therefore I have
no doubt that his religion, and the integrity of his life, availed to
defend his character. By this example we are taught so to cultivate
righteousness in our whole life, that men may not be able to suspect
anything wicked or dishonorable respecting us; for there is nothing
which will more completely vindicate us from every mark of infamy than a
life passed in modesty and temperance. We must, however, add, what I
have also before alluded to, that lusts were not, at that time, so
commonly and so profusely indulged, as to cause an unfavourable
suspicion to enter into the mind of the king concerning a sojourner of
honest character. Wherefore, he easily persuades himself that Rebekah
was a wife and not a harlot. The chastity of that age is further proved
from this, that Abimelech takes the familiar sporting of Isaac with
Rebekah as an evidence of their marriage.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) For Moses does not speak about marital
intercourse, but about some too free movement, which was a proof of
either dissolute exuberance or conjugal love. But now licentiousness has
so broken through all bounds, that husbands are compelled to hear in
silence of the dissolute conduct of their wives with strangers.

<span id="iv.i-p86"></span><span id="iv.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p87"></span>**10.** *What is this thou hast done unto
us?* The Lord does not chastise Isaac as he deserved, perhaps because he
was not so fully endued with patience as his father was; and, therefore,
lest the seizing of his wife should dishearten him, God mercifully
prevents it. Yet, that the censure may produce the deeper shame, God
constitutes a heathen his master and his reprover. We may add, that
Abimelech chides his folly, not so much with the design of injuring him,
as of upbraiding him. It ought, however, deeply to have wounded the mind
of the holy man, when he perceived that his offense was obnoxious to the
judgment even of the blind. Wherefore, let us remember that we must walk
in the light which God has kindled for us, lest even unbelievers, who
are wrapped in the darkness of ignorance, should reprove our stupor. And
certainly when we neglect to obey the voice of God, we deserve to be
sent to oxen and asses for instruction.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) Abimelech, truly, does not investigate
nor prosecute the whole offense of Isaac, but only alludes to one part
of it. Yet Isaac, when thus gently admonished by a single word, ought to
have condemned himself, seeing that, instead of committing himself and
his wife to God, who had promised to be the guardian of them both, he
had resorted, through his own unbelief, to an illicit remedy. For faith
has this property, that it confines us within divinely prescribed
bounds, so that we attempt nothing except with God’s authority or
permission. Whence it follows that Isaac’s faith wavered when he swerved
from his duty as a husband. We gather, besides, from the words of
Abimelech, that all nations have the sentiment impressed upon their
minds, that the violation of holy wedlock is a crime worthy of divine
vengeance, and have consequently a dread of the judgment of God. For
although the minds of men are darkened with dense clouds, so that they
are frequently deceived; yet God has caused some power of discrimination
between right and wrong to remain, so that each should bear about with
him his own condemnation, and that all should be without excuse. If,
then, God cites even unbelievers to his tribunal, and does not suffer
them to escape just condemnation, how horrible is that punishment which
awaits us, if we endeavor to obliterate, by our own wickedness, that
knowledge which God has engraven on our consciences?

<span id="iv.i-p89"></span><span id="iv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p90"></span>**11.** *And Abimelech charged all his
people*. In denouncing capital punishment against any who should do
injury to this stranger, we may suppose him to have issued this edict as
a special privilege; for it isnot customary thus rigidly to avenge every
kind of injury. Whence, then, arose this disposition on the part of the
king to prefer Isaac to all the native inhabitants of the country, and
almost to treat him as an equal, except that some portion of the divine
majesty shone forth in him, which secured to him this degree of
reverence? God, also, to assist the infirmity of his servant, inclined
the mind of the heathen king, in every way, to show him favor. And there
is no doubt that his general modesty induced the king thus carefully to
protect him; for he, perceiving him to be a timid man, who had been on
the point of purchasing his own life by the ruin of his wife, was the
more disposed to assist him in his dangers, in order that he might live
in security under his own government.

<span id="iv.i-p91"></span><span id="iv.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p92"></span>**12.** *Then Isaac sowed*. Here Moses
proceeds to relate in what manner Isaac reaped the manifest fruit of the
blessing promised to him by God; for he says, that when he had sowed,
the increase was a hundredfold: which was an extraordinary fertility,
even in that land. He also adds, that he was rich in cattle, and had a
very great household. Moreover, he ascribes the praise of all these
things to the blessing of God; as it is also declared in the psalm, that
the Lord abundantly supplies what will satisfy his people while they
sleep. (<span id="iv.i-p92.1"></span>[Ps
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span id="iv.i-p92.1"></span>.)
It may, however, be asked, how could Isaac sow when God had commanded
him to be a stranger all his life? Some suppose that he had bought a
field, and so translate the word <span id="iv.i-p92.2"></span>הנק
(*kanah*) a possession; but the context corrects their error: for we
find soon afterwards, that the holy man was not delayed, by having land
to sell, from removing his effects elsewhere: besides, since the
purchasing of land was contrary to his peculiar vocation and to the
command of God, Moses undoubtedly would not have passed over such a
notable offense. To this may be added, that since express mention is
immediately made of a tent, we may hence infer, that wherever he might
come, he would have to dwell in the precarious condition of a stranger.
We must, therefore, maintain, that he sowed in a hired field. For
although he had not a foot of land in his own possession, yet, that he
might discharge the duty of a good householder, it behaved him to
prepare food for his family; and perhaps hunger quickened his care and
industry, that he might with the greater diligence make provision for
himself against the future. Nevertheless, it is right to keep in mind,
what I have lately alluded to, that he received as a divine favor the
abundance which he had acquired by his own labor.

<span id="iv.i-p93"></span><span id="iv.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p94"></span>**14.** *And the Philistines envied him*. We
are taught by this history that the blessings of God which pertain to
the present earthly life are never pure and perfect, but are mixed with
some troubles, lest quiet and indulgence should render us negligent.
Wherefore, let us all learn not too ardently to desire great wealth. If
the rich are harassed by any cause of disquietude, let them know that
they are roused by the Lord, lest they should fall fast asleep in the
midst of their pleasures; and let the poor enjoy this consolation, that
their poverty is not without its advantages. For it is no light good to
live free from envy, tumults, and strifes. Should any one raise the
objection, that it can by no means be regarded as a favor, that God, in
causing Isaac to abound in wealth, exposed him to envy, to contentions,
and to many troubles; there is a ready answer, that not all the troubles
with which God exercises his people, in any degree prevent the benefits
which he bestows upon them from retaining the taste of his paternal
love. Finally, he so attempers the favor which he manifests towards his
children in this world, that he stirs them up, as with sharp goads, to
the consideration of a celestial life. It was not, however, a slight
trial, that the simple element of water, which is the common property of
all animals, was denied to the holy patriarch; with how much greater
patience ought we to bear our less grievous sufferings! If, however, at
any time we are angry at being unworthily injured; let us remember that,
at least, we are not so cruelly treated as holy Isaac was, when he had
to contend for water. Besides, not only was he deprived of the element
of water, but the wells which his father Abraham had dug for himself and
his posterity were filled up. This, therefore, was the extreme of
cruelty, not only to defraud a stranger of every service due to him, but
even to take from him what had been obtained by the labor of his own
father, and what he possessed without inconvenience to any one.

<span id="iv.i-p95"></span><span id="iv.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p96"></span>**16.** *And Abimelech said unto Isaac*. It
is uncertain whether the king of Gerar expelled Isaac of his own accord
from his kingdom, or whether he commanded him to settle elsewhere,
because he perceived him to be envied by the people. He possibly might,
in this manner, advise him as a friend; although it is more probable
that his mind had become alienated from Isaac; for at the close of the
chapter Moses relates, that the holy man complains strongly of the king
as well as of others. But since we can assert nothing with certainty
respecting the real feelings of the lying, let it suffice to maintain,
what is of more importance, that in consequence of the common wickedness
of mankind, they who are the most eminent fall under the suspicion of
the common people. Satiety, indeed, produces ferocity. Wherefore there
is nothing to which the rich are more prone than proudly to boast, to
carry themselves more insolently than they ought, and to stretch every
nerve of their power to oppress others. No such suspicion, indeed, could
fall upon Isaac; but he had to bear that envy which was the attendant on
a common vice. Whence we infer, how much more useful and desirable it
often is, for us to be placed in a moderate condition; which is, at
least, more peaceful, and which is neither exposed to the storms of
envy, nor obnoxious to unjust suspicions. Moreover, how rare and
unwonted was the blessing of God in rendering Isaac prosperous, may be
inferred from the fact, that his wealth had become formidable both to
the king and to the people. A large inheritance truly had descended to
him from his father; but Moses shows, that from his first entrance into
the land, he had so greatly prospered in a very short time, that it
seemed no longer possible for the inhabitants to endure him.

<span id="iv.i-p97"></span><span id="iv.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p98"></span>**18.** *And Isaac digged again the wells of
water*. First, we see that the holy man was so hated by his neighbors,
as to be under the necessity of seeking a retreat for himself which was
destitute of water; and no habitation is so troublesome and inconvenient
for the ordinary purposes of life as that which suffers from scarcity of
water. Besides, the abundance of his cattle and the multitude of his
servants — who were like a little army — rendered a supply of water very
necessary; whence we learn that he was brought into severe straits. But
that this last necessity did not instigate him to seek revenge, is a
proof of singular forbearance; for we know that lighter injuries will
often rack the patience even of humane and moderate men. If any one
should object to this view, that he was deficient in strength; I grant,
indeed, that he was not able to undertake a regular war; but as his
father Abraham had armed four hundred servants, he also certainly had a
large troop of domestics, who could easily have repelled any force
brought against him by his neighbors. But the hope which he had
entertained when he settled in the valley of Gerar, was again suddenly
cut off. He knew that his father Abraham had there used wells which were
his own, and which he had himself discovered; and although they had been
stopped up, yet they were well known to have sufficient springs of water
to prevent the labor of digging them again from being misspent.
Moreover, the fact that the wells had been obstructed ever since the
departure of Abraham, shows how little respect the inhabitants had for
their guest; for although their own country would have been benefited by
these wells, they chose rather to deprive themselves of this advantage
than to have Abraham for a neighbor; for, in order that such a
convenience might not attract him to the place, they, by stopping up the
wells, did, in a certain sense, intercept his way. It was a custom among
the ancients, if they wished to involve any one in ruin, and to cut him
off from the society of men, to interdict him from water, and from fire:
thus the Philistine, for the purpose of removing Abraham from their
vicinity, deprive him of the element of water.

<span id="iv.i-p99"></span>*He called their names*. He did not give new
names to the wells, but restored those which had been assigned them by
his father Abraham, that, by this memorial, the ancient possession of
them might be renewed. But subsequent violence compelled him to change
their names, that at least he might, by some monument, make manifest the
injury which had been done by the Philistines, and reprove them on
account of it: for whereas he calls one well *strife*, or *contention*,
another *hostility*, he denies that the inhabitants possessed that by
right, or by any honest title, which they had seized upon as enemies or
robbers. Meanwhile, it is right to consider, that in the midst of these
strifes he had a contest not less severe with thirst and deficiency of
water, whereby the Philistines attempted to destroy him; such is the
scope of the history. First, Moses, according to his manner, briefly
runs through the summary of the affair: namely, that Isaac intended to
apply again to his own purpose the wells which his father had previously
found, and to acquire, in the way of recovery, the lost possession of
them. He then prosecutes the subject more diffusely, stating that, when
he attempted the work, he was unjustly defrauded of his labor; and
whereas, in digging the third well, he gives thanks to God, and calls it
*Room*,  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) because, by the favor of
God, a more copious supply is now afforded him, he furnishes an example
of invincible patience. Therefore, however severely he may have been
harassed, yet when, after he had been freed from these troubles, he so
placidly returns thanks to God, and celebrates his goodness, he shows
that in the midst of trials he has retained a composed and tranquil
mind.

<span id="iv.i-p101"></span><span id="iv.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p102"></span>**23.** *And he went up from thence to
Beer-sheba*. Next follows a more abundant consolation, and one affording
effectual refreshment to the mind of the holy man. In the tranquil
enjoyment of the well, he acknowledges the favor which God had showed
him: but forasmuch as one word of God weighs more with the faithful than
the accumulated mass of all good things, we cannot doubt that Isaac
received this oracle more joyfully than if a thousand rivers of nectar
had flowed unto him: and truly Moses designedly commemorates in lofty
terms this act of favor, that the Lord encouraged him by his own word,
(<span id="iv.i-p102.1"></span>[Ge
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024)<span id="iv.i-p102.1"></span>;)
whence we may learn, in ascribing proper honor to each of the other
gifts of God, still always to give the palm to that proof of his
paternal love which he grants us in his word. Food, clothing, health,
peace, and other advantages, afford us a taste of the Divine goodness;
but when he addresses us familiarly, and expressly declares himself to
be our Father, then indeed it is that he thoroughly refreshes us to
satiety. Moses does not explain what had been the cause of Isaac’s
removal to Beer-sheba, the ancient dwelling-place of his fathers. It
might be that the Philistines ceased not occasionally to annoy him; and
thus the holy man, worn out with their implacable malice, removed to a
greater distance. It is indeed probable, taking the circumstance of the
time into account, that he was sorrowful and anxious; for as soon as he
had arrived at that place, God appeared unto him on the very first
night. Here, then, something very opportune is noticed. Moreover, as
often as Moses before related that God had appeared unto Abraham, he, at
the same time, showed that the holy man was either tormented with
grievous cares, or was held in suspense under some apprehension, or was
plunged in sadness, or, after many distresses, was nearly borne down by
fatigue, so as to render it apparent that the hand of God was seasonably
stretched out to him as his necessity required, lest he should sink
under the evils which surrounded him. So now, as I explain it, he came
to Isaac, for the purpose of restoring him, already wearied and broken
down by various miseries.

<span id="iv.i-p103"></span><span id="iv.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p104"></span>**24.** *And the Lord appeared unto him*.
This vision (as I have elsewhere said) was to prepare him to listen more
attentively to God, and to convince him that it was God with whom he had
to deal; for a voice *alone* would have had less energy. Therefore God
*appears*, in order to produce confidence in and reverence towards his
word. In short, visions were a kind of symbols of the Divine presence,
designed to remove all doubt from the minds of the holy fathers
respecting him who was about to speak. Should it be objected, that such
evidence was not sufficiently sure, since Satan often deceives men by
similar manifestations, being, as it were, the ape of God; — we must
keep in mind what has been said before, that a clear and unambiguous
mark was engraven on the visions of God, by which the faithful might
certainly distinguish them from those which were fallacious, so that
their faith should not be kept in suspense: and certainly, since Satan
can only delude us in the dark, God exempts his children from this
danger, by illuminating their eyes with the brightness of his
countenance. Yet God did not fully manifest his glory to the holy
fathers, but assumed a form by means of which they might apprehend him
according to the measure of their capacities; for, as the majesty of God
is infinite, it cannot be comprehended by the human mind, and by its
magnitude it absorbs the whole world. Besides, it follows of necessity
that men, on account of their infirmity, must not only faint, but be
altogether annihilated in the presence of God. Wherefore, Moses does not
mean that God was seen in his true nature and greatness, but in such a
manner as Isaac was able to bear the sight. But what we have said,
namely, that the vision was a testimony of Deity, for the purpose of
giving credibility to the oracle, will more fully appear from the
context; for this appearance was not a mute spectre; but the word
immediately followed, which confirmed, in the mind of Isaac, faith in
gratuitous adoption and salvation.

<span id="iv.i-p105"></span>*I am the God of Abraham*. This preface is
intended to renew the memory of all the promises before given, and to
direct the mind of Isaac to the perpetual covenant which had been made
with Abraham, and which was to be transmitted, as by tradition, to his
posterity. The Lord therefore begins by declaring himself to be the God
who had spoken at the first to Abraham, in order that Isaac might not
sever the present from the former oracles: for as often as he repeated
the testimony of his grace to the faithful, he sustained their faith
with fresh supports. Yet he would have that very faith to remain based
upon the first covenant by which he had adopted them to himself: and we
must always keep this method in mind, in order that we may learn to
gather together the promises of God, as they are combined in an
inseparable bond. Let this also ever occur to us, as a first principle,
that God thus kindly promises us his grace because he has freely adopted
us.

<span id="iv.i-p106"></span>*Fear not*. Since these words are elsewhere
expounded, I shall now be the more brief. In the first place, we must
observe, that God thus addresses the faithful for the purpose of
tranquillizing their minds; for, if his word be withdrawn, they
necessarily become torpid through stupidity, or are tormented with
disquietude. Whence it follows, that we can receive peace from no other
source than from the mouth of the Lord, when he declares himself the
author of our salvation; not that we are then free from all fear, but
because the confidence of faith is sufficiently efficacious to assuage
our perturbations. Afterwards the Lord gives proofs of his love, by its
effect, when he promises that he will bless Isaac.

<span id="iv.i-p107"></span><span id="iv.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p108"></span>**25.** *And he builded an altar there*.
From other passages we are well aware that Moses here speaks of public
worship; for inward invocation of God neither requires an altar; nor has
any special choice of place; and it is certain that the saints, wherever
they lived, worshipped. But because religion ought to maintain a
testimony before men, Isaac, having erected and consecrated an altar,
professes himself a worshipper of the true and only God, and by this
method separates himself from the polluted rites of heathens. He also
built the altar, not for himself alone, but for his whole family; that
there, with all his household, he might offer sacrifices. Moreover,
since the altar was built for the external exercises of faith, the
expression, he called upon God, implies as much as if Moses had said
that Isaac celebrated the name of God, and gave testimony of his own
faith. The visible worship of God had also another use; namely, that
men, according to their infirmity, may stimulate and exercise themselves
in the fear of God. Besides, since we know that sacrifices were then
commanded, we must observe that Isaac did not rashly trifle in
worshipping God, but adhered to the rule of faith, that he might
undertake nothing without the word of God. Whence also we infer how
preposterous and erroneous a thing it is to imitate the fathers, unless
the Lord join us with them by means of a similar command. Meanwhile, the
words of Moses clearly signify, that whatever exercises of piety the
faithful undertake are to be directed to this end, namely, that God may
be worshipped and invoked. To this point, therefore, all rites and
ceremonies ought to have reference. But although it was the custom of
the holy fathers to build an altar in whatever place they pitched their
tent, we yet gather, from the connection of the words, that after God
appeared to his servant Isaac, this altar was built by him in token of
his gratitude.

<span id="iv.i-p109"></span>*And there Isaac’s servants digged a well*.
It is remarkable that whereas this place had already received its name
from the well which had been dug in it, Isaac should there again have to
seek water, especially since Abraham had purchased, for himself and his
posterity, the right to the well from the king. Moreover, the digging
itself was difficult and labourious; for Moses had a design in saying,
that afterwards the servants came and said to him, We have found water.
I have, therefore, no doubt, that throughout the whole of that region a
conspiracy had been entered into by the inhabitants, for the purpose of
expelling the holy man, through want of water; so that this well of
Sheba also had been fraudulently stopped up. The context also shows,
that the first care of the holy patriarch concerned the worship of God,
because Moses relates that an altar was erected, before he speaks of the
well. Now it is of importance to observe with what great troubles these
holy fathers continually had to contend; which they never would have
been able to overcome or to endure, unless they had been far removed
from our delicate course of living. For how severely should we feel the
loss of water, seeing that we often rage against God if we have not
abundance of wine? Therefore, by such examples, let the faithful learn
to accustom themselves to patient endurance: and if at any time food and
other necessaries of life fail them, let them turn their eyes to Isaac,
who wandered, parched with thirst, in the inheritance which had been
divinely promised him.  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iv.i-p111"></span><span id="iv.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p112"></span>**26.** *Then Abimelech went to him*. We
have had an exactly similar narrative in <span
id="iv.i-p112.1"></span>[Ge 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i-p112.1"></span>. The Lord, therefore, followed Isaac with the
same favor which he had before shown to his father Abraham. For it was
no common blessing, that Abimelech should voluntarily seek his
friendship. Besides, he would be relieved from no little care and
anxiety, when his neighbors, who had harassed him in so many ways, being
now themselves afraid of him, desire to secure his friendship. Therefore
the Lord both confers signal honor upon his servant, and provides at the
same time for his tranquility. There is not the least doubt that the
king was led to this measure, by a secret divine impulse. For, if he was
afraid, why did he not resort to some other remedy? Why did he humble
himself to supplicate a private man? Why, at least, did he not rather
send for him, or command him with authority to do what he wished? But
God had so forcibly impressed his mind, that he, forgetting his regal
pride, sought for peace and alliance with a man who was neither
covetous, nor warlike, nor furnished with a great army. Thus we may
learn, that the minds of men are in the hand of God, so that he not only
can incline those to gentleness who before were swelling with fury, but
can humble them by terror, as often as he pleases.

<span id="iv.i-p113"></span><span id="iv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p114"></span>**27.** *And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore
come ye to me?* Isaac not only expostulates concerning injuries
received, but protests that in future he can have no confidence in them,
since he had found in them a disposition so hostile to himself. This
passage teaches us, that it is lawful for the faithful to complain of
their enemies, in order, if possible, to recall them from their purpose
of doing injury, and to restrain their force, frauds, and acts of
injustice. For liberty is not inconsistent with patience: nor does God
require of his own people, that they should silently digest every injury
which may be inflicted upon them, but only that they should restrain
their minds and hands from revenge.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) Now, if their minds are pure and well
regulated, their tongues will not be virulent in reproaching the faults
of others; but their sole purpose will be to restrain the wicked by a
sense of shame from iniquity. For where there is no hope of profiting by
complaints, it is better to cherish peace by silence; unless, perhaps,
for the purpose of rendering those who delight themselves in wickedness
inexcusable. We must, indeed, always beware, lest, from a desire of
vengeance, our tongues break out in reproaches; and, as Solomon says,
hatred stirreth up strifes. (<span id="iv.i-p115.3"></span>[Pr
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span id="iv.i-p115.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p116"></span><span id="iv.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p117"></span>**28.** *We saw certainly that the Lord was
with thee*. By this argument they prove that they desired a compact with
Isaac, not insidiously, but in good faith, because they acknowledge the
favor of God towards him. For it was necessary to purge themselves from
this suspicion, seeing that they now presented themselves so courteously
to one against whom they had before been unreasonably opposed. This
confession of theirs, however, contains very useful instruction. Profane
men in calling one, whose affairs all succeed well and prosperously, the
blessed of the Lord, bear testimony that God is the author of all good
things, and that from him alone flows all prosperity. Exceedingly base,
therefore, is our ingratitude, if, when God acts kindly towards us, we
pass by his benefits with closed eyes. Again, profane men regard the
friendship of one whom God favors, as desirable for themselves;
considering that there is no better or holier commendation than the love
of God. Perversely blind, therefore, are they, who not only neglect
those whom God declares to be dear unto him, but also iniquitously vex
them. The Lord proclaims himself ready to execute vengeance on any one
who may injure those whom he takes under his protection; but the greater
part, unmoved by this most terrible denunciation, still wickedly afflict
the good and the simple. We here, however, see that the sense of nature
dictated to unbelievers, what we scarcely credit when spoken by the
mouth of God himself. Still it is surprising that they should be afraid
of an inoffensive man; and should require from him an oath that he would
do them no injury. They ought to have concluded, from the favor which
God had showed him, that he was a just man, and therefore there could be
no danger from him; yet because they form their estimate of him from
their own disposition and conduct, they also distrust his probity. Such
perturbation commonly agitates unbelievers, so that they are
inconsistent with themselves; or at least waver and are tossed between
conflicting sentiments, and have nothing fixed and equable. For those
principles of right judgment, which spring up in their breasts, are soon
smothered by depraved affections. Hence it happens, that what is justly
conceived by them vanishes; or is at least corrupted, and does not bring
forth good fruit.

<span id="iv.i-p118"></span><span id="iv.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p119"></span>**29.** *As we have not touched thee*. An
accusing conscience urges them to desire to hold him closely bound unto
them; and therefore they require an oath from him that he will not hurt
them. For they knew that he might rightfully avenge himself on them for
the sufferings he had endured: but they dissemble on this point, and
even make a wonderful boast of their own acts of kindness. At first,
indeed, the humanity of the king was remarkable, for he not only
entertained Isaac with hospitality, but treated him with peculiar honor;
yet he by no means continued to act thus to the end. It accords,
however, with the common custom of men, to disguise their own faults by
whatever artifice or color they can invent. But if we have committed any
offense, it rather becomes us ingenuously to confess our fault, than by
denying it, to wound still more deeply the minds of those whom we have
injured. Nevertheless Isaac, since he had already sufficiently pierced
their consciences, does not press them any further. For strangers are
not to be treated by us as domestics; but if they do not receive profit,
they are to be left to the judgment of God. Therefore, although Isaac
does not extort from them a just confession; yet, that he may not be
thought inwardly to cherish any hostility towards them, he does not
refuse to strike a covenant with them. Thus we learn from his example,
that if any have estranged themselves from us, they are not to be
repelled when they again offer themselves to us. For if we are commanded
to follow after peace, even when it seems to fly from us, it behoves us
far less to be repulsive, when our enemies voluntarily seek
reconciliation; especially if there be any hope of amendment in future,
although true repentance may not yet appear. And he receives them to a
feast, not only for the sake of promoting peace, but also for the sake
of showing that he, having laid aside all offense, has become their
friend.

<span id="iv.i-p120"></span>*Thou art now the blessed of the Lord*. This
is commonly explained to mean that they court his favor by flatteries,
just as persons are accustomed to flatter when they ask favor; but I
rather think this expression to have been added in a different sense.
Isaac had complained of their injuries in having expelled him through
envy: they answer, that there was no reason why any particle of grief
should remain in his mind, since the Lord had treated him so kindly and
so exactly according to his own wish; as if they had said, What dost
thou want? Art thou not content with thy present success? Let us grant
that we have not discharged the duty of hospitality towards thee; yet
the blessing of God abundantly suffices to obliterate the memory of that
time. Perhaps, however, by these words, they again assert that they are
acting towards him with good faith, because he is under the guardianship
of God.

<span id="iv.i-p121"></span><span id="iv.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p122"></span>**31.** *And sware one to another*. Isaac
does not hesitate to swear; partly, that the Philistines may be the more
easily appeased; partly, that he may not be suspected by them. And this
is the legitimate method of swearing, when men mutually bind themselves
to the cultivation of peace. A simple promise, indeed, ought to have
sufficed; but since dissimulations or inconstancy causes men to be
distrustful of each other, the Lord grants them the use of his name,
that this more holy confirmation may be added to our covenants; and he
does not only permit, he even commands us to swear as often as necessity
requires it. (<span id="iv.i-p122.1"></span>[De
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="iv.i-p122.1"></span>.)
Meanwhile we must beware, lest his name be profaned by rashly swearing.

<span id="iv.i-p123"></span><span id="iv.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p124"></span>**32.** *And it came to pass the same day*.
Hence it appears, (as I have said a little before,) that the waters were
not found in a moment of time. If it be asked, whence a supply of water
had been obtained for his cattle and his household during the
intervening days, I doubt not, indeed, that he either bought it, or was
compelled to go to a distance to see if any one would be found from whom
he might obtain it by entreaty. With respect to the name, (Sheba,) they
are mistaken, in my judgment, who deem it to be any other than that
which Abraham had first given to the well. For since the Hebrew word is
ambiguous, Abraham alluded to the covenant which he had struck with the
king of Gerar; but now Isaac recalling this ancient memorial to mind,
joins with it the covenant in which he had himself engaged.

<span id="iv.i-p125"></span><span id="iv.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p126"></span>**34.** *And Esau was forty years old*. For
many reasons Moses relates the marriages of Esau. Inasmuch as he mingled
himself with the inhabitants of the land, from whom the holy race of
Abraham was separated, and contracted affinities by which he became
entangled; this was a kind of prelude of his rejection. It happened
also, by the wonderful counsel of God, that these daughters-in-law were
grievous and troublesome to the holy patriarch (Isaac) and his wife, in
order that they might not by degrees become favorable to that reprobate
people. If the manners of the people had been pleasing, and they had had
good and obedient daughters, perhaps also, with their consent, Isaac
might have taken a wife from among them. But it was not lawful for those
to be bound together in marriage, whom God designed to be perpetual
enemies. For how would the inheritance of the land be secured to the
posterity of Abraham, but by the destruction of those among whom he
sojourned for a time? Therefore God cuts off all inducements to these
inauspicious marriages, that the disunion which he had established might
remain. It appears hence, with what perpetual affection Esau was loved
by Isaac; for although the holy man justly regarded his son’s wives with
aversion, and his mind was exasperated against them, he never failed to
act with the greatest kindness towards his son, as we shall afterwards
see. We have elsewhere spoken concerning polygamy. This corruption had
so far prevailed in every direction among many people, that the custom,
though vicious, had acquired the force of law. It is not, therefore,
surprising that a man addicted to the flesh indulged his appetite by
taking two wives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc02003.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p75"></span> Abimelech, king of the Philistines,
mentioned in this verse, was not he who is spoken of in <span
id="iv.i-p75.1"></span>[Genesis
xxi.](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#000)<span id="iv.i-p75.1"></span>, but
perhaps his descendant. “It is probable the name was common to the kings
of Gerar, as Pharaoh was to the kings of Egypt. The meaning of the word
<span id="iv.i-p75.2"></span>ךלמיבא is, My father the king. Kings ought
to be the fathers of their country.” — *Menochius* in Poli Syn.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc02003.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p85"></span> The following passage is here omitted in the
translation: — “<span id="iv.i-p85.1"></span>Non enim de coitu loquitur
Moses, sed de aliquo liberiore gestu, qui vel dissolute lasciviae, vel
conjugalis amoris testis esset.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc02003.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p88"></span> The allusion is obviously to <span
id="iv.i-p88.1"></span>[Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i-p88.1"></span>: “The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master’s crib; but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc02003.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p100"></span> Latitudines, a literal Latin translation of
the Hebrew word <span id="iv.i-p100.1"></span>תבהר (*Rehoboth*,) a
plural form, expressing the notion of abundant enlargement and room. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc02003.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p110"></span> <span id="iv.i-p110.1"></span>Qui
siticulosus in haereditate sibi divinitus promissa erravit. <span
id="iv.i-p110.2"></span>Qui est errant en l’heritage qui Dieu lui avoit
promis, et tarrissant de soif. — *Fr*. *Tr*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc02003.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p115"></span> <span id="iv.i-p115.1"></span>Neque hoc a
suis requirit Deus, ut quicquid noxae illatum fuerit, taciti devorent;
sed tantum ut animos et manus contineant a vindicta. <span
id="iv.i-p115.2"></span>Dieu ne requiert point des siens, qu’ils
avallent sans mot dire toutes les nuisances qu’on leur fera, mais
seulement qu’ils gardent leurs coeurs et leur mains de vengence. — *Fr*.
*Tr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](cc02004)
