[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02017)  [Next](cc02019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 41.

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
41:1-57](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass at the end of two
full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Verum fuit in fine duorum annorum
dierum, Pharao somniavit, et ecce, stabat juxta flumen.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** And, behold, there came up out of the
river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ecce autem e flumine ascendebant
septem vaccae pulchrae aspectu, et pingues carne, et pascebant in
carecto.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** And, behold, seven other kine came up
after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by
the *other* kine upon the brink of the river.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et ecce, septem vaccae aliae
ascendebant post eas e flumine, turpes aspectu, et tenues carne, et
stabant juxta vaccas, quoe erant juxta ripam fluminis.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the ill favoured and leanfleshed
kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et comederunt vaccae turpes aspectu,
et tenues carne, septem vaccas pulchras aspectu et pingues: et
expergefactus est Pharao.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** And he slept and dreamed the second
time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and
good.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Deinde dormivit, et somniavit
secundo, et ecce, septem spicae ascendebant in culmo uno pingues et
pulchrae.

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** And, behold, seven thin ears and
blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et ecce, septem spicae tenues, et
arefactae Euro, oriebantur post eas.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the seven thin ears devoured the
seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, *it was* a
dream.

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et deglutiverunt spicae tenues,
septem spicas pingues et plenas: et expergefactus est Pharao, et ecce
somnium.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**8.** And it came to pass in the morning
that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the
magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them
his dream; but *there was* none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et fuit, mane consternatus est
spiritus ejus: misit igitur, et vocavit omnes magos Aegypti, et omnes
sapientes ejus, et narravit Pharao eis somnium suum, et non erat ex eis
qui interpretaretur ipsi Pharaoni.

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>**9.** Then spake the chief butler unto
Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et loquutus est princeps pincernarum
ad Pharaonem, dicendo, Peccata mea ego reduco in memoriam hodie.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**10.** Pharaoh was wroth with his servants,
and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s house, *both* me and
the chief baker:

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Pharao iratus est contra servos
suos, et posuit me in custodiam domus principis satellitum, me et
principem pistorum.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span>**11.** And we dreamed a dream in one night,
I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his
dream.

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et somniavimus somnium nocte eadem,
ego et ipse: uterque secundum interpretationem somnii sui somniavimus.

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span>**12.** And *there was* there with us a
young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told
him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his
dream he did interpret.

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Ibi autem erat nobiscum puer
Hebraeus, servus principis satellitum, et narravimus ei, et
interpretatus est nobis somnia nostra, utrique secundum somnium suum
interpretatus est.

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span>**13.** And it came to pass, as he
interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him
he hanged.

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et fuit, quemadmodum interpretatus
est nobis, sic fuit: me redire fecit ad locum meum, et ipsum suspendit.

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span>**14.** Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph,
and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved
*himself*, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.

<span id="xix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tune misit Pharao, et arcessivit
Joseph, et celeriter eduxerunt eum e carcere, et totondit se, et mutavit
vestes suas, et vendit ad Pharaonem.

<span id="xix.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have
dreamed a dream, and *there is* none that can interpret it: and I have
heard say of thee, *that* thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.

<span id="xix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et dixit Pharao ad Joseph, Somnium
somniavi, et qui illud interpretetur non est: ego autem audivi de to
dici, quod audias somnium ad interpretandum illud.

<span id="xix.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying,
*It is* not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.

<span id="xix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et respondit Joseph ad Pharaonem,
dicendo, Praeter me, Deus respondebit in pacem Pharaonis.

<span id="xix.i-p34"></span>**17.** And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my
dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:

<span id="xix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Tune loquutus est Pharao ad Joseph,
Me somniante ecce, stabam juxta ripan fluminis.

<span id="xix.i-p36"></span>**18.** And, behold, there came up out of
the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a
meadow:

<span id="xix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et ecce, e flumine ascendebant
septem vaccae pingues carne, et pulchrae forma, et pascebant in carecto.

<span id="xix.i-p38"></span>**19.** And, behold, seven other kine came
up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I
never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:

<span id="xix.i-p39"></span>**19.** Ecce vero septem vaccae aliae
ascendebant post eas tenues, et turpes forma valde, et tenues carne: non
vidi similes illis in tota terra Aegypti in turpitudine.

<span id="xix.i-p40"></span>**20.** And the lean and the ill favoured
kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:

<span id="xix.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et comederunt vaccae tenues et
turpes, septem vaccas priores pingues.

<span id="xix.i-p42"></span>**21.** And when they had eaten them up, it
could not be known that they had eaten them; but they *were* still ill
favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.

<span id="xix.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et venerunt ad interiora earum, et
non est cognitum quod venissent ad interiora earum: et aspectus earum
turpis, quemadmodum in principio: et expergefactus sum.

<span id="xix.i-p44"></span>**22.** And I saw in my dream, and, behold,
seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:

<span id="xix.i-p45"></span>**22.** Vidi praeterea dum somniarem, et
ecce, septem spicae ascendebant in culmo uno plenae et pulchrae.

<span id="xix.i-p46"></span>**23.** And, behold, seven ears, withered,
thin, *and* blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:

<span id="xix.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et ecce item septem spicae parvae et
tenues, percussae Euro germinabant post eas.

<span id="xix.i-p48"></span>**24.** And the thin ears devoured the seven
good ears: and I told *this* unto the magicians; but *there was* none
that could declare *it* to me.

<span id="xix.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et deglutiverunt spicae tenues,
septem spicas pulchras. Et dixi ad magos, et non fuit qui indicaret
mihi.

<span id="xix.i-p50"></span>**25.** And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The
dream of Pharaoh *is* one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he *is* about to
do.

<span id="xix.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et dixit Joseph ad Pharaonem,
Somnium Pharaonis unum est: quae Deus facit, indicavit Pharaoni.

<span id="xix.i-p52"></span>**26.** The seven good kine *are* seven
years; and the seven good ears *are* seven years: the dream *is* one.

<span id="xix.i-p53"></span>**26.** Septem vaccae pulchrae, septum anni
sunt, et septem spicae pulchrae, septem anni sunt: somnium idem est.

<span id="xix.i-p54"></span>**27.** And the seven thin and ill favoured
kine that came up after them *are* seven years; and the seven empty ears
blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.

<span id="xix.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et septem vaccae vacuae et turpes,
ascendentes post eas, septem anni sunt: et septem spicae vacuae
arefactae Euro, erunt septem anni famis.

<span id="xix.i-p56"></span>**28.** This *is* the thing which I have
spoken unto Pharaoh: What God *is* about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.

<span id="xix.i-p57"></span>**28.** Hoc est verbum quod liquutus sum ad
Pharaonem, guod Deus facit, videre fecit Pharaonem.

<span id="xix.i-p58"></span>**29.** Behold, there come seven years of
great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:

<span id="xix.i-p59"></span>**29.** Ecce, septem anni veniunt
abundantiae magnae in omni terra Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p60"></span>**30.** And there shall arise after them
seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land
of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;

<span id="xix.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et surgent septem anni famis post
eos: et erit in oblivione omnis abundantia in terra Aegypti, et consumet
fames terram.

<span id="xix.i-p62"></span>**31.** And the plenty shall not be known in
the land by reason of that famine following; for it *shall be* very
grievous.

<span id="xix.i-p63"></span>**31.** Nec cognoscetur abundantia in terra,
propter famem ipsam se quentem, quia gravis erit valde.

<span id="xix.i-p64"></span>**32.** And for that the dream was doubled
unto Pharaoh twice; *it is* because the thing *is* established by God,
and God will shortly bring it to pass.

<span id="xix.i-p65"></span>**32.** Propterea vero iteratum est somnium
ipsi Pharaoni duabus vicibus, quia firma est res a Deo, et festinat Deus
facere eam.

<span id="xix.i-p66"></span>**33.** Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a
man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p67"></span>**33.** Nune igitur provideat Pharaovirum
prudentem, et sapientem, et constituant illum super terram Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p68"></span>**34.** Let Pharaoh do *this*, and let him
appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land
of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.

<span id="xix.i-p69"></span>**34.** Faciat Pharao, et praeficiat
praefectos super terram, et quintam partem sumat a terra Aegypti in
septem annis abundantiae.

<span id="xix.i-p70"></span>**35.** And let them gather all the food of
those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh,
and let them keep food in the cities.

<span id="xix.i-p71"></span>**35.** Et congregent totam annonam horum
annorum bonorum qui venient, congregent, inquam, frumentum sub manu
Pharaonis, cibum in urbibus, et servent.

<span id="xix.i-p72"></span>**36.** And that food shall be for store to
the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land
of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.

<span id="xix.i-p73"></span>**36.** Et erit cibus in depositum pro
terra, pro septem annis famis qui erunt in terra Aegypti: ita non
succidetur terra propter famem.

<span id="xix.i-p74"></span>**37.** And the thing was good in the eyes
of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.

<span id="xix.i-p75"></span>**37.** Placuit sermo in oculis Pharaonis,
et in oculis omnium servorum ejus.

<span id="xix.i-p76"></span>**38.** And Pharaoh said unto his servants,
Can we find *such a one* as this *is*, a man in whom the Spirit of God
*is*?

<span id="xix.i-p77"></span>**38.** Et dixit Pharao ad servos suos, Num
inveniemus talem virum, in quo Spiritus Dei?

<span id="xix.i-p78"></span>**39.** And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,
Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, *there is* none so discreet
and wise as thou *art*:

<span id="xix.i-p79"></span>**39.** Dixit ergo Pharao ad Joseph,
Postquam cognoscere fecit Deus to totum hoc, non est intelligens et
sapiens sicut tu.

<span id="xix.i-p80"></span>**40** Thou shalt be over my house, and
according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne
will I be greater than thou.

<span id="xix.i-p81"></span>**40.** Tu eris super domum meam, et ad os
tuum osculabitur omnis populus meus: tantum solio major ero to.

<span id="xix.i-p82"></span>**41.** And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I
have set thee over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p83"></span>**41.** Itaque dixit Pharao ad Joseph, Vide,
posui to super totam terram Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p84"></span>**42.** And Pharaoh took off his ring from
his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of
fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;

<span id="xix.i-p85"></span>**42.** Et removit Pharao annulum suum e
manu sua, posuitque illum in manu Joseph: et indui fecit eum vestibus
byssinis, et posuit torquem aureum in collo ejus.

<span id="xix.i-p86"></span>**43.** And he made him to ride in the
second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee:
and he made him *ruler* over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p87"></span>**43.** Et equitare fecit eum in curru
secundi, qui erat apud se, clamabantque ante eum, Albrech, (id est,
pater tener,) et constituit cum super universam terram Aegypti

<span id="xix.i-p88"></span>**44.** And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I *am*
Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all
the land of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p89"></span>**44.** Dixit ergo Pharao ad Joseph, Ego
Pharao, et sine, to non levabit quisquam manum suam et pedem suum in
tota terra Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p90"></span>**45.** And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name
Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of
Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over *all* the land of
Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p91"></span>**45.** Et vocavit Pharao nomen Joseph,
Saphenath — Paneah, (id est, vir cui abscondita revelata sunt, vel,
absconditorum expositor,) et dedit ei Asenath filiam Poti — pherah
principis On in uxorem, et egressus est Joseph super terram Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p92"></span>**46.** And Joseph *was* thirty years old
when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the
presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p93"></span>**46.** Joseph vero erat vir triginta
annorum, quando stetit coram Pharaone rege Aegypti: et egressus est
Joseph a facie Pharaonis, et transivit per totam terram Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p94"></span>**47.** And in the seven plenteous years the
earth brought forth by handfuls.

<span id="xix.i-p95"></span>**47.** Et protulit terra septem annis
saturitatis ad collectiones.

<span id="xix.i-p96"></span>**48.** And he gathered up all the food of
the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food
in the cities: the food of the field, which *was* round about every
city, laid he up in the same.

<span id="xix.i-p97"></span>**48.** Et congregavit de universis cibis
septem annorum, qui fuerunt in terra Aegypti, et posuit cibum in
urbibus: cibum agri civitatis, qui erat in circuitu ejus, posuit in
medio ejus.

<span id="xix.i-p98"></span>**49.** And Joseph gathered corn as the sand
of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for *it was* without
number.

<span id="xix.i-p99"></span>**49.** Congregavit itaque Joseph frumentum,
tanquam arenam maris multum valde, adeo ut cessaverit numerari, quia non
erat numerus.

<span id="xix.i-p100"></span>**50.** And unto Joseph were born two sons
before the years of famine came, which Asenath the daughter of
Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.

<span id="xix.i-p101"></span>**50.** Porro ipsi Joseph nati sunt duo
filii antequam veniret annus famis, quos peperit ei Asenath filia Poti —
pherah principis On.

<span id="xix.i-p102"></span>**51.** And Joseph called the name of the
firstborn Manasseh: For God, *said he*, hath made me forget all my toil,
and all my father’s house.

<span id="xix.i-p103"></span>**51.** Et vocavit Joseph nomen
primogeniti, Menasseh: quia dixit, Oblivisci fecit me Deus omnis laboris
mei, et omnis domus patris mei.

<span id="xix.i-p104"></span>**52.** And the name of the second called
he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my
affliction.

<span id="xix.i-p105"></span>**52.** Nomen autem secundi vocavit
Ephraim: quia dixit, crescere fecit me Deus in terra afflictionbis meae.

<span id="xix.i-p106"></span>**53.** And the seven years of
plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.

<span id="xix.i-p107"></span>**53.** Et finit sunt septem anni
saturitatis, quae fuit in terra Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p108"></span>**54.** And the seven years of dearth began
to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands;
but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.

<span id="xix.i-p109"></span>**54.** Inceperunt vero septem anni famis
venire, quemadmodum dixerat Joseph, fuitque fames in omnibus terris: at
in tota terra Aegypti erat panis.

<span id="xix.i-p110"></span>**55.** And when all the land of Egypt was
famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto
all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.

<span id="xix.i-p111"></span>**55.** Postea esuriit tota terra Aegypti,
et clamavit populus ad Pharaonem pro pane: et dixit Pharao omnibus
Aegyptiis, Ite ad Joseph, quod dixerit vobis, facietis.

<span id="xix.i-p112"></span>**56.** And the famine was over all the
face of the earth: And Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto
the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p113"></span>**56.** Et fames erat in omni superficie
terrae: et aperuit Joseph omnia horrea, in quibus erant frumenta, et
vendidit Aegyptiis: et invaluit fames in terra Aegypti.

<span id="xix.i-p114"></span>**57.** And all countries came into Egypt
to Joseph for to buy *corn*; because that the famine was *so* sore in
all lands.

<span id="xix.i-p115"></span>**57.** Et omnes habitatores terrae
venerunt in Aegyptum, ut emerent a Joseph: quia invaluerat fames in omni
terra.

<span id="xix.i-p116"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p117"></span><span id="xix.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p118"></span>**1.** *At the end of two full years*
 <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) What anxiety oppressed the mind
of the holy man during this time, each of us may conjecture from his own
feeling; for we are so tender and effeminate, that we can scarcely bear
to be put off for a short time. The Lord exercised his servant not only
by a delay of long continuance, but also by another kind of temptation,
because he took all human grounds of hope away from him: therefore Moses
puts “years of days” for complete and full years. That we may better
understand the invincible nature of his fortitude, we must also notice
that winding course of divine providence, of which I have spoken, and by
which Joseph was led about, till he rose into notice with the king. In
the king’s dream, this is worthy to be observed in the first place, that
God sometimes deigns to present his oracles even to unbelieving and
profane men. It was certainly a singular honor to be instructed
concerning an event yet fourteen years future: for truly the will of God
was manifested to Pharaoh, just as if he had been taught by the word,
except that the interpretation of it was to be sought elsewhere. And
although God designs his word especially for the Church, yet it ought
not to be deemed absurd that he sometimes admits even aliens into his
school, though for an inferior end. The doctrine which leads to the hope
of eternal life belongs to the Church; while the children of this world
are only taught, incidentally, concerning the state of the present life.
If we observe this distinction, we shall not wonder that some oracles
are common to profane and heathen men, though the Church possesses the
spiritual doctrine of life, as the treasure of its own inheritance. That
another dream succeeded to the former, arose from two causes; for God
both designed to rouse the mind of Pharaoh to more diligent inquiry, and
to add more light to a vision which was obscure. In short, he follows
the same course in this dream which he does in his daily method of
procedure; for he repeats a second time what he has before delivered,
and sometimes inculcates still more frequently, not only that the
doctrine may penetrate more deeply into men’s hearts, and thus affect
them the more; but also that he may render it more familiar to their
minds. That by the second dream God designed to illustrate more fully
what was obscure in the first, appears from this, that the figure used
was more appropriate to the subject revealed. At first, Pharaoh saw fat
cows devoured by lean ones. This did not so clearly prefigure the seven
years’ abundance, and as many years of want in corn and other seeds, as
the vision of the ears of corn did: for the similitude, in the latter
case, better agrees with the thing represented.

<span id="xix.i-p120"></span><span id="xix.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p121"></span>**8.** *In the morning his spirit was
troubled*. A sting was left in Pharaoh’s heart, that he might know that
he had to deal with God; for this anxiety was as an inward seal of the
Spirit of God, to give authenticity to the dream; although Pharaoh
deserved to be deprived of the advantage of this revelation, when he
resorted to magicians and soothsayers, who were wont to turn the truth
of God into a lie.  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) He was
convinced by a secret impulse that the dream sent by God portended
something important; but he seeks out imposters, who would darken, by
their fallacies, the light which was divinely kindled; and it is the
folly of the human mind to gather to itself leaders and teachers of
error. No doubt he believed them to be true prophets; but because he
voluntarily closes his eyes, and hastens into the snare, his false
opinion forms no sufficient excuse for him; otherwise men, by merely
shutting their eyes, might have some plausible pretext for mocking God
with impunity: and we see that many seek protection for themselves in
that gross ignorance in which they knowingly and purposely involve
themselves. Pharaoh, therefore, as far as he was able, deprived himself
of the benefit of the prophecy, by seeking for magicians as the
interpreters of it. So we see it daily happens that many lose hold of
the truth, because they either bring a cloud over themselves by their
own indolence, or too eagerly catch at false and spurious inventions.
But because the Lord would, at that time, succor the kingdom of Egypt,
he drew Pharaoh back, as by main force, from his error.

<span id="xix.i-p123"></span>*There was none that could interpret*. By
this remedy God provided that the dream should not fail. We know what an
inflated and impudent race of men these soothsayers were, and how
extravagantly they boasted. How did it then happen that they gave the
king no answer, seeing they might have trifled in any way whatever with
a credulous man, who willingly suffered himself to be deluded?
Therefore, that he might desist from inquiry, he is not allowed to find
what he had expected in his magicians: and the Lord so strikes dumb the
wicked workers of deceit, that they cannot even find a specious
explanation of the dreams. Moreover, by this method, the anxiety of the
king is sharpened; because he considers that what has escaped the
sagacity of the magicians must be something very serious and secret. By
which example we are taught, that the Lord provides the best for us,
when he removes the incitements of error from those of us who with to be
deceived; and we must regard it as a singular favor, when either false
prophets are silenced, or their fatuity is, in any manner, discovered to
us. As for the rest, the king might hence easily gather how frivolous
and nugatory was the profession of wisdom, in which the Egyptians
gloried above all others; for they boasted that they were possessed of
the science of divination which ascended above the very heavens. But
now, as far as they are concerned, the king is without counsel, and,
being disappointed of his hope, is filled with anguish; nevertheless he
does not so awake as to shake off his superstition. Thus we see that
men, though admonished, remain still in their torpor. Whence we plainly
perceive how inexcusable is the obstinacy of the world, which does not
desist from following those delusions which are openly condemned as
foolishness, from heaven.

<span id="xix.i-p124"></span><span id="xix.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p125"></span>**9.** *Then spake the chief butler*.
Although the Lord took pity on Egypt, yet he did it not for the sake of
the king, or of the country, but that Joseph might, at length, be
brought out of prison; and further, that, in the time of famine, food
might be supplied to the Church: for although the produce was stored
with no design beyond that of providing for the kingdom of Egypt; yet
God chiefly cared for his Church, which he esteemed more highly than ten
worlds. Therefore the butler, who had resolved to be silent respecting
Joseph, is constrained to speak for the liberation of the holy man. In
saying, *I do remember my faults this day*, he is understood by some as
confessing the fault of ingratitude, because he had not kept the promise
he had given. But the meaning is different; for he could not speak
concerning his imprisonment, without interposing a preface of this kind,
through fear, lest suspicion should enter into the mind of the king,
that his servant thought himself injured; or, should take offense, as if
the butler had not been sensible of the benefit conferred upon him. We
know how sensitive are the minds of kings; and the courtier had found
this out by long experience: therefore he begins by acknowledging that
he had been justly cast into prison. Whence it follows that he was
indebted to the clemency of the king for restoration to his former
state.

<span id="xix.i-p126"></span><span id="xix.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p127"></span>**14.** *Then Pharaoh sent and called
Joseph*. We see in the person of a proud king, as in a glass, what
necessity can effect. They whose circumstances are happy and prosperous
will scarcely condescend to hear those whom they esteem true prophets,
still less will they listen to strangers. Wherefore it was necessary
that the obstinacy of Pharaoh should be first subdued, in order that he
might send for Joseph, and accept him as his master and instructor. The
same kind of preparation is also necessary even for the elect; because
they never become docile until the pride of the flesh is laid low.
Whenever, therefore, we are cast into grievous troubles, which keep us
in perplexity and anxiety, let us know that God, in this manner, is
accomplishing his design of rendering us obedient to himself. When Moses
relates that Joseph, before he came into the presence of the king,
changed his garments, we may hence conjecture that his clothing was
mean. To the same point, what is added respecting his “shaving himself,”
ought, in my opinion, to be referred: for since Egypt was a nations of
effeminate delicacy, it is probable that they, being studious of
neatness and elegance, rather nourished their hair than otherwise.
 <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) But as Joseph put off his
squalid raiment, so, that he might have no remaining cause of shame, he
is shaved. Let us know, then, that the servant of God lay in filth even
to the day of his deliverance.

<span id="xix.i-p129"></span><span id="xix.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p130"></span>**15.** *And Pharaoh said unto Joseph*. We
see that Pharaoh offers himself as a disciple to Joseph, being
persuaded, by the statement of the butler, that he is a prophet of God.
This is, indeed, a constrained humility; but it is expressly recorded,
in order that, when the opportunity of learning  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) is afforded us, we may not refuse
reverently to honor the gifts of the Spirit. Now, though Joseph, in
referring Pharaoh to God, seems to deny that he himself is about to
interpret the dream, yet his answer bears on a different point: for,
because he knew that he was conversing with a heathen addicted to
superstitions, he wishes, above all things, to ascribe to God the glory
due to him; as if he had said, I am able to do nothing in this matter,
nor will I offer anything as from myself; but God alone shall be the
interpreter of his own secret.  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157)
Should any one object, that whenever God uses the agency of men, their
office ought to be referred to in connection with his command: that
indeed I acknowledge, but yet so that the whole glory may remain with
God; according to the saying of St. Paul,

<span id="xix.i-p133"></span>“Neither is he that planteth anything,
neither he that watereth.”  
(<span id="xix.i-p133.2"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="xix.i-p133.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p134"></span>Moreover, Joseph not only desires to imbue
the mind of Pharaoh with some relish for piety, but, by ascribing the
gift of interpreting dreams to God alone, confesses that he is destitute
of it, until he obtains it from God. Wherefore, let us also learn, from
the example of holy Joseph, to honor the grace of God even among
unbelievers; and if they shut the door against the entire and full
doctrine of piety; we must, at least, endeavor to instill some drops of
it into their minds. Let us also reflect on this, that nothing is less
tolerable than for men to arrogate to themselves anything as their own;
for this is the first step of wisdom, to ascribe nothing to ourselves;
but modestly to confess, that whatever in us is worthy of praise, flows
only from the fountain of God’s grace. It is especially worthy of
notice, that as the Spirit of understanding is given to any one from
heaven, he will become a proper and faithful interpreter of God.

<span id="xix.i-p135"></span><span id="xix.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p136"></span>**16.** *God shall give Pharaoh an answer
of peace*. Joseph added this from the kindly feeling of his heart; for
he did not yet comprehend what the nature of the oracle would be.
Therefore he could not, in his character as a prophet, promise a
successful and desirable issue; but, as it was his duty sincerely to
deliver what he received from the Lord, however sad and severe it might
prove; so, on the other hand, this liberty presented no obstacle to his
wishing a joyful issue to the king. Therefore, what is here said to the
king concerning peace, is a prayer rather than a prophecy.

<span id="xix.i-p137"></span><span id="xix.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p138"></span>**17.** *In my dream*. This whole narration
does not need to be explained, for Pharaoh only repeats what we have
before considered, with the addition, that the lean cows, having
devoured the fat ones, were rendered nothing better. Whereby God
designed to testify, that the dearth would be so great, that the people,
instead of being nourished by the abundance of food gathered together,
would be famished, and drag on a miserable existence. Joseph, in
answering that the two dreams were one, simply means, that one and the
same thing was showed unto Pharaoh by two figures. But before he
introduces his interpretation, he maintains that this is not a merely
vanishing dream, but a divine oracle: for unless the vision had
proceeded from God, it would have been foolish to inquire anxiously what
it portended. Pharaoh, therefore, does not here labor in vain in
inquiring into the counsel of God. The form of speaking, however,
requires to be noticed; because Joseph does not barely say that God will
declare beforehand what may happen from some other quarter, but what he
himself is about to do. We hence infer, that God does not indolently
contemplate the fortuitous issue of things, as most philosophers vainly
talk; but that he determines, at his own will, what shall happen.
Wherefore, in predicting events, he does not give a response from the
tables of fate, as the poets feign concerning their Apollo, whom they
regard as a prophet of events which are not in his own power, but
declares that whatever shall happen will be his own work. So Isaiah,
that he may ascribe to God alone the glory due to him, attributes to
him, both the revealing of things future, and the government of ail his
events, by his own authority. (<span id="xix.i-p138.1"></span>[Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)<span id="xix.i-p138.1"></span>.)
For he cries aloud that God is neither deceived, nor deceives, like the
idols; and he declares that God alone is the author of good and evil;
understanding by *evil*, adversity. Wherefore, unless we would cast God
down from his throne, we must leave to him his power of action, as well
as his foreknowledge. And this passage is the more worthy of
observation; because, in all ages, many foolish persons have endeavored
to rob God of half his glory, and now (as I have said) the same figment
pleases many philosophers; because they think it absurd to ascribe to
God whatever is done in the world: as if truly the Scripture had in vain
declared, that his “judgments are a great deep.” (<span
id="xix.i-p138.2"></span>[Ps 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)<span
id="xix.i-p138.2"></span>.) But while they would subject the works of
God to the judgment of their own brain, having rejected his word, they
prefer giving credit to Plato respecting celestial mysteries. “That
God,” they say, “has foreknowledge of all things, does not involve the
necessity of their occurrence:” as if, indeed, we asserted, that bare
prescience was the cause of things, instead of maintaining the
connection established by Moses, that God foreknows things that are
future, because he had determined to do them; but they ignorantly and
perversely separate the providence of God from his eternal counsel, and
his continual operation. Above all things, it is right to be fully
persuaded that, whenever the earth is barren, whether frost, or drought,
or hail, or any other thing, may be the cause of it, the whole result is
directed by the counsel of God.

<span id="xix.i-p139"></span><span id="xix.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p140"></span>**32.** *And for that the dream was
doubled*. Joseph does not mean to say, that what God may have declared
but once, is mutable: but he would prevent Pharaoh’s confidence
respecting the event revealed, from being shaken. For since God
pronounces nothing but from his own fixed and steadfast purpose, it is
enough that he should have spoken once. But our dullness and inconstancy
cause him to repeat the same thing the more frequently, in order that
what he has certainly decreed, may be fixed in our hearts; otherwise, as
our disposition is variable, so, what we have once heard from his mouth,
is tossed up and down by us, until it entirely escapes our memory.
Moreover, Joseph not only commemorates the stability of the heavenly
decree, but also declares that what God has determined to do, is near at
hand, lest Pharaoh himself should slumber in the confident expectation
of longer delay. For though we confess that the judgments of God are
always hanging over our heads, yet unless we are stimulated by the
thought of their speedy approach, we are but slightly affected with
anxiety and fear respecting them.

<span id="xix.i-p141"></span><span id="xix.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p142"></span>**33.** *Now therefore let Pharaoh look out
a man*. Joseph does more than he had been asked to do; for he is not
merely the interpreter of the dream; but, as fulfilling the office of a
prophet, he adds instruction and counsel. For we know that the true and
lawful prophets of God do not barely predict what will happen in future;
but propose remedies for impending evils. Therefore Joseph, after he had
uttered a prophecy of the changes which would take place in fourteen
years, now teaches what ought to be done; and exhorts Pharaoh to be
vigilant in the discharge of this duty. And one of the marks by which
God always distinguished his own prophets from false prognosticators,
was to endue them with the power of teaching and exhorting, that they
might not uselessly predict future events. Let us grant that the
predictions of Apollo, and of all the magicians were true, and were not
entangled with ambiguous expressions; yet whither did they tend, but
either to drive men headlong in perverse confidence, or to plunge them
into despair? A very different method of prophesying was divinely
prescribed, which would form men to piety, would lead them to
repentance, and would excite them to prayer when oppressed with fear.
Moreover, because the prophecy of which mention is here made, was
published only for the temporal advantage of this fleeting life, Joseph
proceeds no further than to show the king for what purpose the dream had
been sent to him; as if he had said, “Be not sorry on account of this
revelation; accept this advantage from it, that thou mayest succor the
poverty of thy kingdom.” However, there is no doubt that God guided his
tongue, in order that Pharaoh might entrust him with this office. For he
does not craftily insinuate himself into the king’s favor; nor abuse the
gift of revelation to his private gain: but, what had been divinely
ordained was brought to its proper issue without his knowledge; namely,
that the famishing house of Jacob should find unexpected sustenance.

<span id="xix.i-p143"></span><span id="xix.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p144"></span>**35.** *Under the hand of Pharaoh*.
Whereas prosperity so intoxicates men, that the greater part make no
provision for themselves against the future, but absorb the present
abundance by intemperance; Joseph advises the king to take care that the
country may have its produce laid up in store. Besides, the common
people would also form themselves to habits of frugality, when they
understood that this great quantity of corn was not collected in vain by
the king, but that a remedy was hereby sought for some unwonted
calamity. In short, because luxury generally prevails in prosperity, and
wastes the blessings of God, the bridle of authority was necessary. This
is the reason why Joseph directed that garners should be established
under the power of the king, and that corn should be gathered into them.
He concludes at length, that the dream was useful, although at first
sight, it would seem sad and inauspicious: because, immediately after
the wound had been shown, the means of cure were suggested.

<span id="xix.i-p145"></span><span id="xix.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p146"></span>**38.** *Can we find such a one as this?*
We see that necessity is an excellent teacher. If prefects or judges are
to be created, some one is advanced to the honor because he is a
favorite, without consideration of his desert; whence it happens that
they who are most unworthy frequently creep into office. And although we
see political order disturbed and mankind involved in many
inconveniences, because they who are least suitable, rashly push
themselves, by wicked contrivances, into affairs for which they are not
able to manage; nevertheless, ambition triumphs, and subverts equity.
But necessity extorts a sober judgment. Pharaoh says nothing but what is
naturally engraven on the hearts of all men, that honors ought to be
conferred on none but competent persons, and such as God has furnished
with the necessary qualifications. Experience, however, abundantly
teaches, that this law of nature slips from the memory, whenever men are
free to offend against it with impunity. Therefore the pride of Pharaoh
was wisely so subdued, that he, setting aside ambition, preferred a
foreigner just brought out of prison, to all his courtiers, because he
excelled them in virtue. The same necessity restrained the nobles of the
kingdom, so that they did not each contend, according to their custom,
to obtain the priority of rank for themselves. And although it was but a
compulsory modesty, inasmuch as they were ashamed to resist the public
good; yet there is no doubt, that God inspired them with fear, so that,
by the common consent of all, Joseph was made president of the whole
kingdom. It is also to be observed that Pharaoh, though he had been
infatuated by his soothsayers, nevertheless honors the gifts of the
spirit in Joseph: because God, indeed, never suffers man to become so
brutalized, as not to feel his power, even in their darkness. And
therefore whatever impious defection may hurry them away, there still
abides with them a remaining sense of Deity. Meanwhile, that knowledge
is of little worth, which does not correct a man’s former madness; for
he despises the God whom with his mouth he proclaims: and has no
conception of any other than I know not what confused divinity. This
kind of knowledge often enlightens profane men, yet not so as to cause
them to repent. Whereby we are admonished to regard any particular
principle as of small value, till solid piety springs from it and
flourishes.

<span id="xix.i-p147"></span><span id="xix.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p148"></span>**40.** *Thou shalt be over my house*. Not
only is Joseph made governor of Egypt, but is adorned also with the
insignia of royalty, that all may reverence him, and may obey his
command. The royal signet is put upon his finger for the confirmation of
decrees. He is clothed in robes of fine linen, which were then a luxury,
and were not to be had at any common price. He is placed in the most
honorable chariot.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) It may,
however, be asked, whether it was lawful for the holy man to appear with
so great pomp? I answer, although such splendor can scarcely ever be
free from blame, and therefore frugality in external ornaments is best;
yet all kind of splendor in kings and other princes of the world is not
to be condemned, provided they neither too earnestly desire it, nor make
an ostentatious display of it. Moderation is, indeed, always to be
cultivated; but since it was not in Joseph’s power to prescribe the mode
of investiture, and the royal authority would not have been granted to
him without the accustomed pomp of state, he was at liberty to accept
more than seemed in itself desirable. If the option be given to the
servants of God, nothing is safer for them, than to cut off whatever
they can of outward splendor. And where it is necessary for them to
accommodate themselves to public custom, they must beware of all
ostentation and vanity. With respect to the explanation of the words;
whereas we render them, “At thy mouth all the people shall *kiss*,”
 <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) others prefer to read, “shall
be *armed*;” others, “shall be fed at thy will or commandment;” but as
the proper signification of the verb <span id="xix.i-p150.2"></span>קשנ
(*nashak*) is to kiss, I do not see why interpreters should twist it to
another sense. Yet I do not think that here any special token of
reverence is intended; but the phrase rather seems to be metaphorical,
to the effect that the people should cordially receive and obediently
embrace whatever might proceed from the mouth of Joseph: as if Pharaoh
had said, “Whatever he may command, it is my will that the people shall
receive with one consent, as if all should kiss him.” The second
chariot, is read by the Hebrews in construction, for the chariot of the
viceroy, who holds the second place from the king. The sense, however,
is clear, that Joseph has the precedence of all the nobles of Egypt.

<span id="xix.i-p151"></span>There are various opinions about the
meaning of the word <span id="xix.i-p151.1"></span>ךרבא (*abraik*). They
who explain it by “tender father,” because Joseph, being yet in tender
years, was endowed with the prudence and gravity of old age, seem to me
to bring something from afar to correspond with their own fancy. They
who render it “the father of the king,” as if the word were compounded
of the Hebrew noun <span id="xix.i-p151.2"></span>בא (*ab*,) and the
Arabic <span id="xix.i-p151.3"></span>ךר (*rak*,) have little more color
for their interpretation. If, indeed, the word be Hebrew, the meaning
preferred by others, “Bow the knee,” seems to me more probable. But
because I rather suppose that Egyptian terms are referred to by Moses,
both in this place and shortly afterwards, I advise the readers not to
distort them in vain. And truly those interpreters are ridiculously
subtle, who suppose that a Hebrew name was given him by an Egyptian
king, which they render either the “Redeemer of the world,” or the
“Expounder of mysteries.”  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) I
prefer following the Greek interpreters, who, by leaving both words
untouched, sufficiently prove that they thought them to be of a foreign
language. That the father-in-law of Joseph was, as is commonly believed,
a *priest*, is what I cannot refute, though I can scarcely be induced to
believe it. Therefore, since <span id="xix.i-p152.2"></span>ןהוכ
(*cohen*) signifies a *prince* as well as a *priest*, it seems to me
probable that he was one of the nobles of the court, who might also be
the satrap or prefect of the city of On.  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="xix.i-p154"></span><span id="xix.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p155"></span>**46.** *And Joseph was thirty years old*.
For two reasons Moses records the age at which Joseph was advanced to
the government of the kingdom. First, because it is seldom that old men
give themselves up to be governed by the young: whence it may be
inferred that it was by the singular providence of God that Joseph
governed without being envied, and that reverence and majesty were given
him beyond his years. For if there was danger lest Timothy’s youth
should render him contemptible, Joseph would have been equally exposed
to contempt, unless authority had been divinely procured for him. And
although he could not have obtained this authority by his own industry,
yet it is probable that the extraordinary virtues with which God had
endowed him, availed not a little to increase and confirm it. A second
reason for noting his age is, that the reader may reflect on the long
duration of the sufferings with which he had been, in various ways,
afflicted. And however humane his treatment might have been; still,
thirteen years of exile, which had prevented his return to his father’s
house, not merely by the bond of servitude, but also by imprisonment,
would prove a most grievous trial. Therefore, it was only after he had
been proved by long endurance, that he was advanced to a better state.
Moses then subjoins, that he discharged his duties with diligence and
with most punctual fidelity; for the circuit taken by him, which is here
mentioned, was a proof of no common industry. He might, indeed, have
appointed messengers, on whose shoulders he could have laid the greater
part of the labor and trouble; but because he knew himself to be
divinely called to the work, as one who had to render an account to the
divine tribunal, he refused no part of the burden. And Moses, in a few
words, praises his incredible prudence, in having quickly found out the
best method of preserving the corn. For it was an arduous task to erect
storehouses in every city, which should contain the entire produce of
one year, and a fifth part more.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) This arrangement was also not less a
proof of sagacity, in providing that the inhabitants of any given region
should not have to seek food at a distance. Immediately afterwards his
integrity is mentioned, which was equally deserving of praise; because
in the immense accumulation which was made, he abstained from all
self-indulgence, just as if some humble office only, had been assigned
to him. But it is to the praise of both these virtues that, after he has
collected immense heaps, he remits nothing of his wonted diligence,
until he has accomplished all the duties of the office which he had
undertaken. The ancient proverb says, “Satiety produces disgust,” and in
the same manner abundance is commonly the mother of idleness. Whence,
therefore, is it, that the diligence of Joseph holds on its even course,
and does not become remiss at the sight of present abundance, except
because he prudently considers, that, however great the plenty might be,
seven years of famine would swallow it all up? He manifested also his
fidelity, and his extraordinary care for the public safety, in this,
that he did not become weary by the assiduous labor of seven years, nor
did he ever rest till he had made provision for the seven years which
still remained.

<span id="xix.i-p157"></span><span id="xix.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p158"></span>**50.** *And unto Joseph were born two
sons*. Although the names which Joseph gave his sons in consequence of
the issue of his affairs, breathe somewhat of piety, because in them he
celebrates the kindness of God: yet the oblivion of his father’s house,
which, he says, had been brought upon him, can scarcely be altogether
excused. It was a pious and holy motive to gratitude, that God had
caused him to “forget” all his former miseries; but no honor ought to
have been so highly valued, as to displace from his mind the desire and
the remembrance of his father’s house. Granted that he is Viceroy of
Egypt, yet his condition is unhappy, as long as he is an exile from the
Church. Some, in order to exculpate the holy man, explain the passage as
meaning that he so rejoiced in the present favor of God, as to make him
afterwards forgetful of the injuries inflicted upon him by his brethren;
but this (in my judgment) is far too forced. And truly, we must not
anxiously labor to excuse the sin of Joseph; but rather, I think, we are
admonished how greatly we ought to be on our guard against the
attractions of the world, lest our minds should be unduly gratified by
them. Behold Joseph, although he purely worships God, is yet so
captivated by the sweetness of honor, and has his mind so clouded, that
he becomes indifferent to his father’s house, and pleases himself in
Egypt. But this was almost to wander from the fold of God. It was,
indeed, a becoming modesty, that from a desire of proclaiming the Divine
goodness towards him, he was not ashamed to perpetuate a memorial of his
depressed condition in the names of his sons. They who are raised on
high, from an obscure and ignoble position, desire to extinguish the
knowledge of their origin, because they deem it disgraceful to
themselves. Joseph, however, regarded the commendation of Divine grace
more highly than an ostentatious future nobility.

<span id="xix.i-p159"></span><span id="xix.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p160"></span>**53.** *And the seven years... were
ended*. Already the former unwonted fertility, which showed Joseph to
have been a true prophet, had procured for him a name and reputation;
and in this way the Egyptians had been restrained from raising any
tumult against him. Nevertheless, it is wonderful that a people so proud
should have borne, in the time of prosperity, the rule of a foreigner.
But the famine which followed proved a more sharp and severe curb for
the subjugation of their lofty and ferocious spirits, in order that they
might be brought into subjection to authority. When, however, Moses says
that there was corn in all the land of Egypt, while the neighboring
regions were suffering from hunger, he seems to intimate that wheat had
also been laid up by private persons. And, indeed, (as we have said
elsewhere,) it was impossible but the rumor of the approaching famine
would be spread abroad, and would everywhere infuse fears and
solicitude, so that each person would make some provision for himself.
Nevertheless, however provident each might be, what they had preserved
would, in a short time, be consumed. Whence it appeared with what skill
and prudence Joseph had perceived from the beginning, that Egypt would
not be safe, unless provisions were publicly gathered together under the
hand of the king.

<span id="xix.i-p161"></span><span id="xix.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p162"></span>**55.** *Go unto Joseph*. It is by no means
unusual for kings, while their subjects are oppressed by extreme
sufferings, to give themselves up to pleasures. But Moses here means
something else; for Pharaoh does not exonerate himself from the trouble
of distributing corn, because he wishes to enjoy a repose free from all
inconvenience; but because he hassuch confidence in holy Joseph, that he
willingly leaves all things to him, and does not allow him to be
disturbed in the discharge of the office which he had undertaken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc02018.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xix.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p119"></span> <span id="xix.i-p119.1"></span>In fine
duorum annorum dierum “In the account of Pharaoh’s dream, we are first
struck with the use of the word <span id="xix.i-p119.2"></span>וחא,
(*Achu*,) Nile grass, an Egyptian word for an Egyptian thing.” A note on
this passage adds, “Our translators have inaccurately rendered it
meadow, (ver. 2,) the aquatic plants of the Nile, particularly those of
the litus kind, were so valuable in Egypt, that they were reaped in as
regular a harvest as the flax and corn.” The writer proceeds, “In the
next place, the seven poor and the seven fat kine attract our attention.
The symbol of the cow is very peculiar and exclusively Egyptian. It is
scarcely conceivable that a foreign inventor should have confined
himself so closely to the peculiar Egyptian symbols. The circumstance
that the kine come up out of the Nile, the fat and also the lean, has
reference to the fact that Egypt owes all its fertility to this stream,
and that famine succeeds as soon as it fails.” — Egypt and the Books of
Moses, p. 28. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc02018.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xix.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p122"></span> “Pharaoh calls ‘all the magicians of
Egypt, and all the wise men thereof,’ that they might interpret the
dream by which he is troubled. Now, we find in Egyptian antiquity an
order of persons, to whom this is entirely appropriate, which is here
ascribed to the magicians. The priests had a double office, the
practical worship of the gods, and the pursuit of that which in Egypt
was accounted as wisdom. The first belonged to the so — called prophets,
the second to the holy scribes. These last were the learned men of the
nation; as in the Pentateuch they are called wise men, so the classical
writers named them sages. The interpretation of dreams and also
divination belonged to the order of the holy scribes,” — Egypt and the
Books of Moses, p. 29. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc02018.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xix.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p128"></span> This conjecture of Calvin’s is erroneous.
“*Herodotus* mentions it among the distinguishing pecularities of the
Egyptians, that they commonly were shaved, but in mourning they allowed
the beard to grow. The sculptures also agree with this representation.
‘So particular,’ says *Wilkinson*, ‘were they on this point, that to
have neglected it was a subject of reproach and ridicule; and whenever
they intended to convey the idea of a man of low condition, or a
slovenly person, the artists represented him with a beard.’” — Egypt and
the Books of Moses, p. 30. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc02018.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xix.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p131"></span> In the Amsterdam edition, it is “<span
id="xix.i-p131.1"></span>facultas decendi,” but in Hengstenberg’s it is
“<span id="xix.i-p131.2"></span>facultas discendi;” and as the French
version has it “<span id="xix.i-p131.3"></span>le moyen d’apprendre,”
there can be no doubt that the later Latin edition is right. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc02018.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xix.i-p131.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p132"></span> The force of Joseph’s language is
remarkable: “Without me, God will answer to the peace of Pharaoh.” He
thus entirely renounces, in a single word, all the personal honor which
the heathen monarch was disposed to pay him, that God alone may have the
glory due unto his name. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc02018.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xix.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p149"></span> Of the marks of distinction conferred by
Pharaoh upon Joseph, mentioned in verses 42 and 43 of this chapter; the
first is the signet-ring which was common to the nations of the East as
well as to Egypt. The next is the “vesture of fine linen,” or byssus,
which was a peculiarly Egyptian token of honor. The third is the gold
chain, or the necklace of gold, “of which the Egyptian monuments afford
abundant explanation.” Modern objectors to the Mosaic account pretend
that all the ornaments here mentioned belong to a later date. But such
remarks, as *Hengstenberg* observes, “have interest only as they show
how far the investigations of the rationalists, in reference to the
Pentateuch, fall short of the present advanced state of knowledge
repsecting Egyptian antiquity.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc02018.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xix.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p150"></span> <span id="xix.i-p150.1"></span>Osculabitur
totus populus ad os tuum. The English version is, “According unto thy
word shall all my people be ruled:” which is a free translation,
bearing, according to Calvin’s explanation, the true sense of the
original. The margin of our Bible gives “be armed,” or, “kiss,” instead
of the words “be ruled.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc02018.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xix.i-p151.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p152"></span> This is the rendering given of the name
Zaphnath — <span id="xix.i-p152.1"></span>paneah by Jerome, and by the
Chaldee Paraphrast respectively. The reader may consult *Rivetus* in his
Exercitation elviii., *Gesenius’s* Lexicon, and the Commentaries of
*Bush* and *Dr. A. Clarke*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc02018.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xix.i-p152.3"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p153"></span> That the word <span
id="xix.i-p153.1"></span>ןהוכ (*cohen*) generally signifies priest, is
not to be disputed. *Gesenius* earnestly contends that this is its
invariable meaning; but to establish his point, he is obliged to regard
some as priests who were not of the tribe of Levi. This seems conclusive
against him; for there is no room for doubt that none were, or could be,
priests who sprang from any other tribe. Yet so much, perhaps, ought to
be conceded to the primary meaning of the work, that is should be
translated priest, wherever the sense of the passage does not require
another interpretation. Such a rule would determine its meaning in this
passage. The following remarks of *Hengstenberg* deserve attention.
“According to <span id="xix.i-p153.2"></span>[Ge
41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045)<span id="xix.i-p153.2"></span>,
Pharaoh gives to Joseph, Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, the priest
of On, in marriage. This name (which means he who belongs to the sun) is
very common on the Egyptian monuments, and is especially appropriate for
the Priest of On, or Heliopolis (the city of the sun). Since Pharaoh
evidently intended, by this act, to establish the power bestowed on
Joseph upon a firm basis, it is implied in this account; first, that
Egyptian High Priests occupied a very important position; and, secondly,
that among them the High Priest of On was the most distinguished. Both
these points are confirmed by history.” — See Egypt and the Books of
Moses, p. 32. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc02018.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xix.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p156"></span> “The labors of Joseph in building
storehouses are placed vividly before us in the paintings upon the
monuments, which show how common the storehouse was in ancient Egypt. In
a tomb at Elethya, a man is represented whose business it evidently was
to take account of the number of bushels which another man, acting under
him, measures... Then follows the transportation of the grain. From the
measurer, others take it and carry it into the storehouses.” — Egypt and
the Books of Moses, p. 36. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](cc02019)
