[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02000)  [Next](cc02002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 24.

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
24:1-67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Abraham was old, *and* well
stricken in age: and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Abraham autem senex venit in dies, et
Iehova benedixerat Abraham in omnibus.

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Abraham said unto his eldest
servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee,
thy hand under my thigh:

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit Abraham ad servum suum
seniorem domus suae, qui praeerat omnibus qui erant ei, Pone nunc manum
tuam sub femore meo:

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And I will make thee swear by the LORD,
the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a
wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et adjurabo to per Iehovam Deum coeli,
et Deum terrae, quod non capies uxorem filio meo de filiabus Chenaanaei,
in cujus medio ego habito:

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>**4.** But thou shalt go unto my country, and
to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Sed ad terram meam, et ad cognationem
meam perges, et capies uxorem filio meo Ishac.

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the servant said unto him,
Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land:
must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et dixit ad eum servus, Si forsitan
noluerit mulier venire post me ad terram hanc, numquid reducendo reducam
filium tuum ad terram unde egressus es?

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou
that thou bring not my son thither again.

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit ad eum Abraham Cave tibi ne
forte reducas filium meum illuc.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>**7.** The LORD God of heaven, which took me
from my father’s house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake
unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this
land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife
unto my son from thence.

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Iehova Deus coeli, qui tulit me e domo
patris mei, et e terra cognationis meae, et qui loquutus est mihi, et
qui juravit mihi, dicendo, Semini tuo dabo terram hane: ipse mittet
Angelum suum ante to, et capies uxorem filio meo inde.

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And if the woman will not be willing
to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring
not my son thither again.

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quodsi noluerit mulier pergere post
to, mundus eris ab adjuratione mea ista: duntaxat filium meum ne reducas
illuc.

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the servant put his hand under the
thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et posuit servus manum suam sub femore
Abraham domini sui, et juravit ei super re hac.

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And the servant took ten camels of
the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master
*were* in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city
of Nahor.

<span id="ii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et accepit servus decem camelos e
camelis domini sui, et perrexit: quia omne bonum domini sui erat in manu
ejus: et surrexit, et profectus est in Aram-naharaim, ad civitatem
Nachor.

<span id="ii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And he made his camels to kneel down
without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, *even*
the time that women go out to draw *water*

<span id="ii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et genu flectere fecit camelos extra
civitatem ad puteum aquae, tempore vespertino, tempore quo egrediuntur
mulieres, quae hauriunt.

<span id="ii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he said, O LORD God of my master
Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness
unto my master Abraham.

<span id="ii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et dixit, Iehova Deus domini mei
Abraham, occurrere fac nunc coram me hodie, et fac misericordiam cum
domino meo Abraham.

<span id="ii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Behold, I stand *here* by the well of
water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:

<span id="ii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ecce, ego sto juxta fontem aquae, et
filiae virorum civitatis egrediuntur ad hauriendam aquam.

<span id="ii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And let it come to pass, that the
damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I
may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink
also: *let the same be* she *that* thou hast appointed for thy servant
Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my
master.

<span id="ii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sit ergo, puella ad quam dixero,
Inclina nunc hydriam tuam, et bibam: et dixerit, Bibe, et etiam camelis
tuis potum dabo: ipsam praeparaveris servo tuo Ishac: et per hoc sciam
quod feceris misericordiam cum domino meo.

<span id="ii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And it came to pass, before he had
done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel,
son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham’s brother, with her pitcher
upon her shoulder.

<span id="ii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et fuit, antequam ipse complevisset
loqui, ecce, Ribca egrediebatur, quae nata erat Bethuel filio Milchah
uxoris Nachor fratris Abraham, et hydria ejus erat super humerum ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And the damsel *was* very fair to
look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to
the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.

<span id="ii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Puella autem erat pulchra aspectu
valde, virgo, et vir non cognoverat eam: quae descendit ad fontem, et
implevit hydriam suam, et ascendit.

<span id="ii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the servant ran to meet her, and
said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.

<span id="ii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Itaque cucurrit servus in occursum
ejus, et dixit, Potum da mihi nunc parum aquae ex hydria tua.

<span id="ii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And she said, Drink, my lord: and she
hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

<span id="ii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et dixit, Bibe, domine mi: et
festinavit, et demisit hydriam suam super manum suam, et potum dedit ei.

<span id="ii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And when she had done giving him
drink, she said, I will draw *water* for thy camels also, until they
have done drinking.

<span id="ii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Ubi complevit potum dare ei: tune
dixit, Etiam camelis tuis hauriam, donec compleverint bibere.

<span id="ii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And she hasted, and emptied her
pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw *water*,
and drew for all his camels.

<span id="ii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et festinavit, et effudit hydriam
suam in canale, et cucurrit adhuc ad puteum ut hauriret: et hausit
omnibus camelis ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And the man wondering at her held his
peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.

<span id="ii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Porro vir stupebat super ea tacens,
ut sciret utrum secundasset Iehova viam suam, an non.

<span id="ii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And it came to pass, as the camels
had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel
weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten *shekels* weight of gold;

<span id="ii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et fuit, quum complevissent cameli
bibere, protulit vir inaurem auream, semissis pondus ejus: et duas
armillas, et posuit super manus ejus: decem aurei pondus earum.

<span id="ii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And said, Whose daughter *art* thou?
tell me, I pray thee: is there room *in* thy father’s house for us to
lodge in?

<span id="ii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et jam dixerat, Filia, cujus es?
indica nunc mihi, numquid est in domo patris tui locus nobis ad
pernoctandum?

<span id="ii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And she said unto him, I *am* the
daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.

<span id="ii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et dixerat ad eum, Filia Bethuel sum,
filii Milchah, quem peperit ipsa nachor.

<span id="ii.i-p50"></span>**25.** She said moreover unto him, We have
both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.

<span id="ii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et dixit ad eum, Etiam palea, etiam
pabulum multum est apud nos, etiam locus ad pernoctandum.

<span id="ii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And the man bowed down his head, and
worshipped the LORD.

<span id="ii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et inclinavit se vir, et incurvavit
se Iehova.

<span id="ii.i-p54"></span>**27.** And he said, Blessed *be* the LORD
God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his
mercy and his truth: I *being* in the way, the LORD led me to the house
of my master’s brethren.

<span id="ii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et dixit, Benedictus Iehova Deus
domini mei Abraham, qui non dereliquit misericordiam suam et veritatem
suam a domino meo. Ego in via, duxit me Iehova ad domum fratrum domini
mei.

<span id="ii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And the damsel ran, and told *them
of* her mother’s house these things.

<span id="ii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et cucurrit puella, et nuntiavit
domui matris suae secundum verba haec.

<span id="ii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And Rebekah had a brother, and his
name *was* Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.

<span id="ii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et ipsi Ribca erat frater, et nomen
ejus Laban: et cucurrit Laban ad virum foras ad fontem.

<span id="ii.i-p60"></span>**30.** And it came to pass, when he saw the
earring and bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and when he heard the
words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he
came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

<span id="ii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Fuit autem, quum vidisset inaurem et
armillas in manibus sororis suae, et quum audisset ipse verba Ribca
sororis suae, dicendo, Sic loquutus est ad me vir: venit a virum, et
ecce, stabat juxta camelos, juxta fontem.

<span id="ii.i-p62"></span>**31.** And he said, Come in, thou blessed of
the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the
house, and room for the camels.

<span id="ii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Et dixit, Ingredere benedicte
Iehovae, ut quid manes foris? et ego paravi domum, et locum camelis.

<span id="ii.i-p64"></span>**32.** And the man came into the house: and
he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and
water to wash his feet, and the men’s feet that *were* with him.

<span id="ii.i-p65"></span>**32.** Et venit vir ad domum, et solvit
camelos, et dedit paleam et pabulum camelis, et aquam ad lavandum pedes
ejus, et pedes virorum qui erant cum eo.

<span id="ii.i-p66"></span>**33.** And there was set *meat* before him
to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And
he said, Speak on.

<span id="ii.i-p67"></span>**33.** Et positum est coram eo, ut
comederet: et dixit, Non comedam, donec loquutus fuero verba mea. Et
dixit, Loquere.

<span id="ii.i-p68"></span>**34.** And he said, I *am* Abraham’s
servant.

<span id="ii.i-p69"></span>**34.** Dixit igitur, Servus Abraham sum.

<span id="ii.i-p70"></span>**35.** And the LORD hath blessed my master
greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and
herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and
camels, and asses.

<span id="ii.i-p71"></span>**35.** Iehova autem benedixit domino meo
valde, et magnificatus est, et dedit ei pecudes et boves, et argentum,
et aurum, et servos, et ancillas, et camelos, et asinos.

<span id="ii.i-p72"></span>**36.** And Sarah my master’s wife bare a son
to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he
hath.

<span id="ii.i-p73"></span>**36.** Et peperit Sarah uxor domini mei
filium domino meo post senectutem suam, et dedit ei omnia quae sunt ei.

<span id="ii.i-p74"></span>**37.** And my master made me swear, saying,
Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites,
in whose land I dwell:

<span id="ii.i-p75"></span>**37.** Et jurare fecit me dominus meus,
dicendo, Non capies uxorem filio meo de filiabus Chenaanaei, in cujus
terra ego habito:

<span id="ii.i-p76"></span>**38.** But thou shalt go unto my father’s
house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.

<span id="ii.i-p77"></span>**38.** Sed ad domum patris mei perges, et ad
familiam meam, et capies uxorem filio meo.

<span id="ii.i-p78"></span>**39.** And I said unto my master,
Peradventure the woman will not follow me.

<span id="ii.i-p79"></span>**39.** Et dixi domino meo, Forsitan non
perget mulier post me.

<span id="ii.i-p80"></span>**40.** And he said unto me, The LORD, before
whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and
thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father’s
house:

<span id="ii.i-p81"></span>**40.** Et dixit ad me, Iehova, in cujus
conspectu ambulavi, mittet Angelum suum tecum, et secundabit viam tuam:
et capies uxorem filio meo de familia mea, et de domo patris mei.

<span id="ii.i-p82"></span>**41.** Then shalt thou be clear from *this*
my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee
*one*, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

<span id="ii.i-p83"></span>**41.** Tunc mundus eris ab adjuratione mea,
si veneris ad familiam meam: et si non dederint tibi, eris mundus ab
adjuratione mea.

<span id="ii.i-p84"></span>**42.** And I came this day unto the well,
and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way
which I go:

<span id="ii.i-p85"></span>**42.** Veni igitur hodie ad fontem, et dixi,
Iehova Deus domini mei Abraham, si tu nunc secundas viam meam, per quam
ego ambulo:

<span id="ii.i-p86"></span>**43.** Behold, I stand by the well of water;
and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw
*water*, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy
pitcher to drink;

<span id="ii.i-p87"></span>**43.** Ecce, ego sto juxta fontem aquae:
itaque sit, virgo quae egredietur ad hauriendum, et dixero ei, Da mihi
potum nunc parum aquae ex hydria tua:

<span id="ii.i-p88"></span>**44.** And she say to me, Both drink thou,
and I will also draw for thy camels: *let* the same *be* the woman whom
the LORD hath appointed out for my master’s son.

<span id="ii.i-p89"></span>**44.** Et dixerit mihi, Etiam tu bibe, et
etiam camelis tuis hauriam: ipsa sit uxor, quam praeparavit Iehova filio
domini mei.

<span id="ii.i-p90"></span>**45.** And before I had done speaking in
mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder;
and she went down unto the well, and drew *water*: and I said unto her,
Let me drink, I pray thee.

<span id="ii.i-p91"></span>**45.** Ego antequam complerem loqui in corde
meo, ecce, Ribca egrediebatur, et hydria ejus erat super humerum ejus,
et descendit ad fontem, et hausit: et dixi ad eam, Da mihi potum nunc.

<span id="ii.i-p92"></span>**46.** And she made haste, and let down her
pitcher from her *shoulder*, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels
drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.

<span id="ii.i-p93"></span>**46.** Et festinavit, et demisit hydriam
suam desuper se, et dixit, Bibe, et etiam camelis tuis potum dabo. Et
bibi, et etiam camelis dedit potum.

<span id="ii.i-p94"></span>**47.** And I asked her, and said, Whose
daughter *art* thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor’s son,
whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the
bracelets upon her hands.

<span id="ii.i-p95"></span>**47.** Et interrogavi eam, et dixi, Filia
cujus es? Et dixit, Filia Bethuel filii nachor, quem peperit ei Milchah.
Et posui inaurem super nares ejus, et armillas super manus ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p96"></span>**48.** And I bowed down my head, and
worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham,
which had led me in the right way to take my master’s brother’s daughter
unto his son.

<span id="ii.i-p97"></span>**48.** Et inclinavi me, incurvavique me
Iehovae, et benedixi Iehovae Deo domini mei Abraham, qui duxit me per
viam veritatis, (vel certam fidem,) ut acciperem filiam fratris domini
mei filio ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p98"></span>**49.** And now if ye will deal kindly and
truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to
the right hand, or to the left.

<span id="ii.i-p99"></span>**49.** Et nunc si facitis misericordiam et
veritatem cum domino meo, indicate mihi: et si non, indicate mihi, et
vertam me ad dexteram vel ad sinistram.

<span id="ii.i-p100"></span>**50.** Then Laban and Bethuel answered and
said, The thing proceedeth from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad
or good.

<span id="ii.i-p101"></span>**50.** Et responderunt Laban et Bethuel, et
dixerunt, A Iehova egressa est res: non possumus loqui ad to malum vel
bonum.

<span id="ii.i-p102"></span>**51.** Behold, Rebekah *is* before thee,
take *her*, and go, and let her be thy master’s son’s wife, as the LORD
hath spoken.

<span id="ii.i-p103"></span>**51.** Ecce, Ribca coram to, accipe, et
vade: et sit uxor filio domini tui, quemadmodum loquutus est Iehova.

<span id="ii.i-p104"></span>**52.** And it came to pass, that, when
Abraham’s servant heard their words, he worshipped the LORD, *bowing
himself* to the earth.

<span id="ii.i-p105"></span>**52.** Et fuit, quando audivit servus
Abraham verba eorum, incurvavit se super terram Iehovae.

<span id="ii.i-p106"></span>**53.** And the servant brought forth jewels
of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave *them* to Rebekah:
he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.

<span id="ii.i-p107"></span>**53.** Et protulit servus vasa argentea, et
vasa aurea, et vestes, et dedit ipsi Ribcae, et pretiosa dedit fratri
ejus, et matri ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p108"></span>**54.** And they did eat and drink, he and
the men that *were* with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in
the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.

<span id="ii.i-p109"></span>**54.** Et comederunt, et biberunt, ipse et
viri qui erant cum eo, et pernoctaverunt: et surrexerunt mane: et dixit,
Dimitte me, ut vadam ad dominum meum.

<span id="ii.i-p110"></span>**55.** And her brother and her mother said,
Let the damsel abide with us *a few* days, at the least ten; after that
she shall go.

<span id="ii.i-p111"></span>**55.** Et dixit frater ejus et mater ejus,
Maneat puella nobiscum per dies, vel decem: postea ibis, (vel ibit.)

<span id="ii.i-p112"></span>**56.** And he said unto them, Hinder me
not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go
to my master.

<span id="ii.i-p113"></span>**56.** Et dixit ad eos, Ne retardetis me,
quando Iehova secundavit viam meam: dimittite me, et ibo ad dominum
meum.

<span id="ii.i-p114"></span>**57.** And they said, We will call the
damsel, and enquire at her mouth.

<span id="ii.i-p115"></span>**57.** Et dixerunt, Vocemus puellam, et
interrogemus os ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p116"></span>**58.** And they called Rebekah, and said
unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.

<span id="ii.i-p117"></span>**58.** Et vocaverunt Ribcam, et dixerunt ad
eam, Numquid ibis cum viro isto? Et dixit, Ibo.

<span id="ii.i-p118"></span>**59.** And they sent away Rebekah their
sister, and her nurse, and Abraham’s servant, and his men.

<span id="ii.i-p119"></span>**59.** Et dimiserunt Ribcam sororem suam,
et nutricem ejus, et servum Abraham, et viros ejus.

<span id="ii.i-p120"></span>**60.** And they blessed Rebekah, and said
unto her, Thou *art* our sister, be thou *the mother* of thousands of
millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.

<span id="ii.i-p121"></span>**60.** Et benedixerunt Ribcae, et dixerunt
ei, Soror nostra es, sis in millia decem millium, et haereditet semen
tuum portam odio habentium illud.

<span id="ii.i-p122"></span>**61.** And Rebekah arose, and her damsels,
and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant
took Rebekah, and went his way.

<span id="ii.i-p123"></span>**61.** Et surrexit Ribea et puellae ejus,
et ascenderunt super camelos, et perrexerunt post virum: et tulit servus
Ribcah, et abiit.

<span id="ii.i-p124"></span>**62.** And Isaac came from the way of the
well Lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country.

<span id="ii.i-p125"></span>**62.** Ishac autem veniebat, qua venitur a
Puteo viventis videntis me: et ipse habitabat in terra Meridiana.

<span id="ii.i-p126"></span>**63.** And Isaac went out to meditate in
the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and,
behold, the camels *were* coming.

<span id="ii.i-p127"></span>**63.** Et egressus erat Ishac ad orandum in
agro, dum declinaret vespera: et elevavit oculos suos, et vidit, et
ecce, cameli veniebant.

<span id="ii.i-p128"></span>**64.** And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and
when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.

<span id="ii.i-p129"></span>**64.** Tunc elevavit Ribcah oculos suos, et
vidit Ishac, et projecit se de camelo.

<span id="ii.i-p130"></span>**65.** For she *had* said unto the servant,
What man *is* this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant
*had* said, It *is* my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered
herself.

<span id="ii.i-p131"></span>**65.** Iam autem dixerat ad servum, Quis
est vir iste, qui ambulat per agrum in occursum nostrum? Et dixit
servus, Ipse est dominus meus: et accepit velum, et operuit se.

<span id="ii.i-p132"></span>**66.** And the servant told Isaac all
things that he had done.

<span id="ii.i-p133"></span>**66.** Et narravit servus ipsi Ishac omnia
quae fecerat.

<span id="ii.i-p134"></span>**67.** And Isaac brought her into his
mother Sarah’s tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he
loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother’s *death*

<span id="ii.i-p135"></span>**67.** Et introduxit eam Ishac in
tabernaculum Sarah matris suae, et accepit Ribcah, fuitque ei in uxorem,
at delexit cam: et consolatus est se Ishac post matrem suam.

<span id="ii.i-p136"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p137"></span><span id="ii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p138"></span>**1.** *And Abraham was old.*  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Moses passes onwards to the relation of
Isaac’s marriage, because indeed Abraham, perceiving himself to be worn
down by old age, would take care that his son should not marry a wife in
the land of Canaan. In this place Moses expressly describes Abraham as
an old man, in order that we may learn that he had been admonished, by
his very age, to seek a wife for his son: for old age itself, which, at
the most, is not far distant from death, ought to induce us so to order
the affairs of our family, that when we die, peace may be preserved
among our posterity, the fear of the Lord may flourish, and
rightly-constituted order may prevail. The old age of Abraham was indeed
yet green, as we shall see hereafter; but when he reckoned up his own
years he deemed it time to consult for the welfare of his son.
Irreligious men, partly because they do not hold marriage sufficiently
in honor, partly because they do not consider the importance attached
especially to the marriage of Isaac, wonder that Moses, or rather the
Spirit of God, should be employed in affairs so minute; but if we have
that reverence which is due in reading the Sacred Scriptures, we shall
easily understand that here is nothing superfluous: for inasmuch as men
can scarcely persuade themselves that the Providence of God extends to
marriages, so much the more does Moses insist on this point. He chiefly,
however, wishes to teach that God honored the family of Abraham with
especial regard, because the Church was to spring from it. But it will
be better to treat of everything in its proper order.

<span id="ii.i-p140"></span><span id="ii.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p141"></span>**2.** *And Abraham said unto his eldest
servant*. Abraham here fulfils the common duty of parents, in laboring
for and being solicitous about the choice of a wife for his son: but he
looks somewhat further; for since God had separated him from the
Canaanites by a sacred covenant, he justly fears lest Isaac, by joining
himself in affinity with them, should shake off the yoke of God. Some
suppose that the depraved morals of those nations were so displeasing to
him, that he conceived the marriage of his son must prove unhappy if he
should take a wife from among them. But the special reason was, as I
have stated, that he would not allow his own race to be mingled with
that of the Canaanites, whom he knew to be already divinely appointed to
destruction; yea, since upon their overthrow he was to be put into
possession of the land, he was commanded to treat them with distrust as
perpetual enemies. And although he had dwelt in tranquility among them
for a time, yet he could not have a community of offspring with them
without confounding things which, by the command of God, were to be kept
distinct. Hence he wished both himself and his family to maintain this
separation entire.

<span id="ii.i-p142"></span>*Put, I pray thee, thy hand*. It is
sufficiently obvious that this was a solemn form of swearing; but
whether Abraham had first introduced it, or whether he had received it
from his fathers, is unknown. The greater part of Jewish writers declare
that Abraham was the author of it; because, in their opinion, this
ceremony is of the same force as if his servant had sworn by the
sanctity of the divine covenant, since circumcision was in that part of
his person. But Christian writers conceive that the hand was placed
under the thigh in honor of the blessed seed.  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) Yet it may be that these earliest fathers
had something different in view; and there are those among the Jews who
assert that it was a token of subjection, when the servant was sworn on
the thigh of his master. The more plausible opinion is, that the
ancients in this manner swore by Christ; but because I do not willingly
follow uncertain conjectures, I leave the question undecided.
Nevertheless the latter supposition appears to me the more simple;
namely, that servants, when they swore fidelity to their lords, were
accustomed to testify their subjection by this ceremony, especially
since they say that this practice is still observed in certain parts of
the East. That it was no profane rite, which would detract anything from
the glory of God, we infer from the fact that the name of God is
interposed. It is true that the servant placed his hand under the thigh
of Abraham, but he is adjured by God, the Creator of heaven and earth;
and this is the sacred method of adjuration, whereby God is invoked as
the witness and the judge; for this honor cannot be transferred to
another without casting a reproach upon God. Moreover, we are taught, by
the example of Abraham, that they do not sin who demand an oath for a
lawful cause; for this is not recited among the faults of Abraham, but
is recorded to his peculiar praise. It has already been shown that the
affair was of the utmost importance, since it was undertaken in order
that the covenant of God might be ratified among his posterity. He was
therefore impelled, by just reasons, most anxiously to provide for the
accomplishment of his object, by taking an oath of his servant: and
beyond doubt, the disposition, and even the virtue of Isaac, were so
conspicuous, that in addition to his riches, he had such endowments of
mind and person, that many would earnestly desire affinity with him. His
father, therefore, fears lest, after his own death, the inhabitants of
the land should captivate Isaac by their allurements. Now, though Isaac
has hitherto steadfastly resisted those allurements, the snares of which
few young men escape, Abraham still fears lest, by shame and the dread
of giving offense, he may be overcome. The holy man wished to anticipate
these and similar dangers, when he bound his servant to fidelity, by
interposing an oath; and it may be that some secret necessity also
impelled him to take this course.

<span id="ii.i-p144"></span><span id="ii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p145"></span>**3.** *That thou shalt not take a wife*.
The kind of discipline which prevailed in Abraham’s house is here
apparent. Although this man was but a servant, yet, because he was put
in authority by the master of the family, his servile condition did not
prevent him from being next in authority to his lord; so that Isaac
himself, the heir and successor of Abraham, submitted to his direction.
To such an extent did the authority of Abraham and reverence for him
prevail, that when he substituted a servant in his place, he caused this
servant, by his mere will or word, to exercise a power which other
masters of families find it difficult to retain for themselves. The
modesty also of Isaac, who suffered himself to be governed by a servant,
is obvious; for it would have been in vain for Abraham to enter into
engagements with his servant, had he not been persuaded that his son
would prove submissive and tractable. It here appears what great
veneration he cherished towards his father; because Abraham, relying on
Isaac’s obedience, confidently calls his servant to him. Now this
example should be taken by us as a common rule, to show that it is not
lawful for the children of a family to contract marriage, except with
the consent of parents; and certainly natural equity dictates that, in a
matter of such importance, children should depend upon the will of their
parents. How detestable, therefore, is the barbarity of the Pope, who
has dared to burst this sacred bond asunder! Wherefore the wantonness of
youths is to be restrained, that they may not rashly contract nuptials
without consulting their fathers.

<span id="ii.i-p146"></span><span id="ii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p147"></span>**4.** *But thou shalt go unto my country
and to my kindred*. It seems that, in the choice of the place, Abraham
was influenced by the thought, that a wife would more willingly come
from thence to be married to his son, when she knew that she was to
marry one of her own race and country. But because it afterwards follows
that the servant came to Padan Aram, some hence infer that Mesopotamia
was Abraham’s country. The solution, however, of this difficulty is
easy. We know that Mesopotamia was not only the region contained between
the Tigris and the Euphrates, but that a part also of Chaldea was
comprehended in it; for Babylon is often placed there by profane
writers. The Hebrew name simply means, “Syria of the rivers.” They give
the name Aram to that part of Syria which, beginning near Judea,
embraces Armenia and other extensive regions, and reaches almost to the
Euxine Sea. But when they especially designate those lands which are
washed or traversed by the Tigris and Euphrates, they add the name
“Padan:” for we know that Moses did not speak scientifically, but in a
popular style. Since, however, he afterwards relates that Laban, the son
of Nahor, dwelt at Charran, (<span id="ii.i-p147.1"></span>[Ge
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#004)<span id="ii.i-p147.1"></span>,)
it seems to me probable that Nahor, who had remained in Chaldea, because
it would be troublesome to leave his native soil, in process of time
changed his mind; either because filial piety constrained him to attend
to his decrepit and declining father, or because he had learned that he
might have there a home as commodious as in his own country. It
certainly appears from the eleventh chapter <span
id="ii.i-p147.2"></span>[Ge 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)<span
id="ii.i-p147.2"></span> that he had not migrated at the same time with
his father.  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

<span id="ii.i-p149"></span><span id="ii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p150"></span>**5.** *And the servant said unto him*.
Since he raises no objection respecting Isaac, we may conjecture that he
was so fully persuaded of his integrity as to have no doubt of his
acquiescence in his father’s will. We must also admire the religious
scrupulosity of the man, seeing he does not rashly take an oath. What
pertained to the faithful and diligent discharge of his own duty he
might lawfully promise, under the sanction of an oath; but since the
completion of the affair depended on the will of others, he properly and
wisely adduces this exception, “Peradventure the woman will not be
willing to follow me.”

<span id="ii.i-p151"></span><span id="ii.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p152"></span>**6.** *Beware that thou bring not my son
thither again*. If the woman should not be found willing, Abraham,
commending the event to God, firmly adheres to the principal point, that
his son Isaac should not return to his country, because in this manner
he would have deprived himself of the promised inheritance. He therefore
chooses rather to live by hope, as a stranger, in the land of Canaan,
than to rest among his relatives in his native soil: and thus we see
that, in perplexed and confused affairs, the mind of the holy man was
not drawn aside from the command of God by any agitating cares; and we
are taught, by his example, to follow God through every obstacle.
However, he afterwards declares that he looks for better things. By such
words he confirms the confidence of his servant, so that he,
anticipating with greater alacrity a prosperous issue, might prepare for
the journey.

<span id="ii.i-p153"></span><span id="ii.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p154"></span>**7.** *The Lord God of heaven*. By a
twofold argument Abraham infers, that what he is deliberating respecting
the marriage of his son will, by the grace of God, have a prosperous
issue. First, because God had not led him forth in vain from his own
country into a foreign land; and secondly, because God had not falsely
promised to give the land, in which he was dwelling as a stranger, to
his seed. He might also with propriety be confident that his design
should succeed, because he had undertaken it only by the authority, and,
as it were, under the auspices of God; for it was his exclusive regard
for God which turned away his mind from the daughters of Canaan. He may,
however, be thought to have inferred without reason that God would give
his son a wife from that country and kindred to which he himself had
bidden farewell. But whereas he had left his relatives only at the
divine command, he hopes that God will incline their minds to be
propitious and favorable to him. Meanwhile he concludes, from the past
kindnesses of God, that his hand would not fail him in the present
business; as if he would say, “I, who at the command of God left my
country, and have experienced his continued help in my pilgrimage, do
not doubt that he will also be the guide of thy journey, because it is
in reliance on his promise that I lay upon thee this injunction.” He
then describes the mode in which assistance would be granted; namely,
that God would send his angel, for he knew that God helps his servants
by the ministration of angels, of which he had already received many
proofs. By calling God the God of heaven, he celebrates that divine
power which was the ground of his confidence.

<span id="ii.i-p155"></span><span id="ii.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p156"></span>**10.** *And the servant took ten camels.*
He takes the camels with him, to prove that Abraham is a man of great
wealth, in order that he may the more easily obtain what he desires. For
even an open-hearted girl would not easily suffer herself to be drawn
away to a distant region, unless on the proposed condition of being
supplied with the conveniences of life. Exile itself is sad enough,
without poverty as its attendant. Therefore, that the maid might not be
deterred by the apprehension of want, but rather invited by the prospect
of affluence, he ladens ten camels with presents, to give sufficient
proof to the inhabitants of Chaldea of the domestic opulence of Abraham.
What follows, namely, that “all the substance of Abraham was in the hand
of his servant,” some of the Hebrews improperly explain as meaning that
the servant took with him an account of all Abraham’s wealth, described
and attested in written documents. It is rather the assigning of the
reason of the fact, which might appear improbable, that the servant
assumed so much power to himself. Therefore Moses, having said that a
man who was but a servant set out on a journey with such a sumptuous and
splendid equipage, immediately adds, that he did this of his own accord,
because he had all the substance of Abraham in his hand. In saying that
he came to the city of Nahor, he neither mentions the name of the city
nor the part of Chaldea, or of any other region, where he dwelt, but
only says, in general terms, that he came to “Syria of the rivers,”
concerning which term I have said something above.

<span id="ii.i-p157"></span><span id="ii.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p158"></span>**12.** *O lord God of my master Abraham*.
The servant, being destitute of counsel, retakes himself to prayers. Yet
he does not simply ask counsel of the Lord; but he also prays that the
maid appointed to be the wife of Isaac should be brought to him with a
certain sign, from which he might gather that she was divinely presented
to him. It is an evidence of his piety and faith, that in a matter of
such perplexity he is not bewildered, as one astonished; but breaks
forth into prayer with a collected mind. But the method which he uses
 <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) seems scarcely consistent with the
true rule of prayer. For, first, we know that no one prays aright unless
he subjects his own wishes to God. Wherefore there is nothing more
unsuitable than to prescribe anything, at our own will, to God. Where,
then, it may be asked, is the religion of the servant, who, according to
his own pleasure, imposes a law upon God? Secondly, there ought to be
nothing ambiguous in our prayers; and absolute certainty is to be sought
for only in the Word of God. Now, since the servant prescribes to God
what answer shall be given, he appears culpably to depart from the
suitable modesty of prayer; for although no promise had been given him,
he nevertheless desires to be made fully certain respecting the whole
affair. God, however,  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) in hearkening
to his wish, proves, by the event, that it was acceptable to himself.
Therefore we must know, that although a special promise had not been
made at the moment, yet the servant was not praying rashly, nor
according to the lust of the flesh, but by the secret impulse of the
Spirit. Moreover, the general law, by which all the pious are bound,
does not prevent the Lord, when he determines to give something
extraordinary, from directing the minds of his servants towards it; not
that he would lead them away from his word, but only that he makes some
peculiar concession to them in their mode of praying. The sum of the
prayer before us is this: “O Lord, if a damsel shall present herself
who, being asked to give me drink, shall also kindly and courteously
offer it to my camels, I will seek after her as a wife for my master
Isaac, just as if she were delivered into my hand by thee.” He seems,
indeed, to be laying hold on some dubious conjecture; but since he
reposes on the Providence of God, he is certainly persuaded that this
token shall be to him equivalent to an oracle; because God, who is the
guardian of his enterprise, will not suffer him to err. Meanwhile this
is worthy of remark, that he does not fetch the sign of recognition from
afar, but takes it from something present; for she who shall be thus
humane to an unknown guest, will, by that very act, give proof of an
excellent disposition. This observation may be of use to prevent
inquisitive men from adducing this example as a precedent for vain
prognostications. In the words themselves the following particulars are
to be noticed: first, that he addresses himself to the God of his master
Abraham; not as being himself a stranger to the worship of God, but
because the affair in question depends upon the promise given to
Abraham. And truly he had no confidence in prayer, from any other source
than from the covenant into which God had entered with the house of
Abraham. The expression “cause to meet me this day,”  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) Jerome renders, “meet me, I pray, this day.”
But the verb is transitive, and the servant of Abraham intimates by the
use of it, that the affairs of men were so ordered by the counsel and
the hand of God, that the issue of them was not fortuitous; as if he
would say, O Lord, in vain shall I look on this side and on that; in
vain shall I catch at success by my own labor, industry and various
contrivances, unless thou direct the work. And when he immediately
afterwards subjoins, show kindness to my master, he implies that in this
undertaking he rests upon nothing but the grace which God had promised
to Abraham.

<span id="ii.i-p162"></span><span id="ii.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p163"></span>**15.** *Before he had done speaking*. The
sequel sufficiently demonstrates that his wish had not been foolishly
conceived. For the quickness of the answer manifests the extraordinary
indulgence of God, who does not suffer the man to be long harassed with
anxiety. Rebekah had, indeed, left her house before he began to pray;
but it must be maintained that the Lord, at whose disposal are both the
moments of time and the ways of man, had so ordered it on both sides as
to give clear manifestation of his Providence. For sometimes he keeps us
the longer in suspense, till, wearied with praying, we may seem to have
lost our labor; but in this affair, in order that his blessing might not
seem doubtful, he suddenly interposed. The same thing also happened to
Daniel, unto whom the angel appeared, before the conclusion of his
prayer. (<span id="ii.i-p163.1"></span>[Da
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021)<span id="ii.i-p163.1"></span>.)
Now, although it frequently happens that, on account of our sloth, the
Lord delays to grant our requests, it is, at such times, expedient for
us, that what we ask should be delayed. In the meantime, he has openly
and conspicuously proved, by unquestionable examples, that although the
event may not immediately respond to our wishes, the prayers of his
people are never in vain: yea, his own declaration, that before they cry
he is mindful of their wants, is invariably fulfilled. (<span
id="ii.i-p163.2"></span>[Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)<span id="ii.i-p163.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p164"></span><span id="ii.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p165"></span>**21.** *And the man, wondering at her, held
his peace*. This wondering of Abraham’s servant, shows that he had some
doubt in his mind. He is silently inquiring within himself, whether God
would render his journey prosperous. Has he, then, no confidence
concerning that divine direction, of which he had received the sign or
pledge? I answer, that faith is never so absolutely perfect in the
saints as to prevent the occurrence of many doubts. There is, therefore,
no absurdity in supposing that the servant of Abraham, though committing
himself generally to the providence of God, yet wavers, and is agitated,
amidst a multiplicity of conflicting thoughts. Again, faith, although it
pacifies and calms the minds of the pious, so that they patiently wait
for God, still does not exonerate them from all care; because it is
necessary that patience itself should be exercised, by anxious
expectation, until the Lord fulfill what he has promised. But though
this hesitation of Abraham’s servant was not free from fault, inasmuch
as it flowed from infirmity of faith; it is vet, on this account,
excusable, because he did not turn his eyes in another direction, but
only sought from the event a confirmation of his faith, that he might
perceive God to be present with him.

<span id="ii.i-p166"></span><span id="ii.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p167"></span>**22.** *The man took a golden ear-ring*.
His adorning the damsel with precious ornaments is a token of his
confidence. For since it is evident by many proofs that he was an honest
and careful servant, he would not throw away without discretion the
treasures of his master. He knows, therefore, that these gifts will not
be ill-bestowed; or, at least, relying on the goodness of God, he gives
them, in faith, as an earnest of future marriage. But it may be asked,
Whether God approves ornaments of this kind, which pertain not so much
to neatness as to pomp? I answer, that the things related in Scripture
are not always proper to be imitated. Whatever the Lord commands in
general terms is to be accounted as an inflexible rule of conduct; but
to rely on particular examples is not only dangerous, but even foolish
and absurd. Now we know how highly displeasing to God is not only pomp
and ambition in adorning the body, but all kind of luxury. In order to
free the heart from inward cupidity, he condemns that immoderate and
superfluous splendor, which contains within itself many allurements to
vice. Where, indeed, is pure sincerity of heart found under splendid
ornaments? Certainly all acknowledge this virtue to be rare. It is not,
however, for us expressly to forbid every kind of ornament; yet because
whatever exceeds the frugal use of such things is tarnished with some
degree of vanity; and more especially, because the cupidity of women is,
on this point, insatiable; not only must moderation, but even
abstinence, be cultivated as far as possible. Further, ambition silently
creeps in, so that the somewhat excessive adorning of the person soon
breaks out into disorder. With respect to the earrings and bracelets of
Rebekah, as I do not doubt that they were those in use among the rich,
so the uprightness of the age allowed them to be sparingly and frugally
used; and yet I do not excuse the fault. This example, however, neither
helps us, nor alleviates our guilt, if, by such means, we excite and
continually inflame those depraved lusts which, even when all incentives
are removed, it is excessively difficult to restrain. The women who
desire to shine in gold, seek in Rebekah a pretext for their corruption.
Why, therefore, do they not, in like manner, conform to the same austere
kind of life and rustic labor to which she applied herself? But, as I
have just said, they are deceived who imagine that the examples of the
saints can sanction them in opposition to the common law of God. Should
any one object that it is abhorrent to the modesty of a virtuous and
chaste maiden to receive earrings and bracelets from a man who was a
stranger, and whom she had never before seen. In the first place, it may
be, that Moses passes over much conversation held on both sides, by
which it is probable she was induced to venture on the reception of
them. It may also be, that he relates first what was last in order. For
it follows soon afterwards in the context, that the servant of Abraham
inquired whose daughter she was. We must also take into account the
simplicity of that age. Whence does it arise that it was not
disreputable for a maid to go alone out of the city, unless that then
the morals of mankind did not require so severe a guard for the
preservation of modesty? Indeed, it appears from the context, that the
ornaments were not given her for a dishonorable purpose;  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) but a portion is offered to the parents to
facilitate the contract for marriage. Interpreters are not agreed
respecting the value of the presents. Moses estimates the earrings at
half a shekel, and the bracelets at ten shekels. Jerome, instead of half
a shekel, reads two shekels. I conceive the genuine sense to be, that
the bracelets were worth ten shekels, and the frontal ornament or
earrings worth half that sum, or five shekels. For since nothing is
added after the word <span id="ii.i-p168.2"></span>עקב (*bekah*,) it has
reference to the greater number.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)
Otherwise here is no suitable proportion between the bracelets and the
ornaments for the head. Moreover, if we take the shekel for four Attic
drachms, the value is trifling; therefore I think the weight of gold is
indicated, which makes the sum much greater than the piece of money
called a shekel.

<span id="ii.i-p170"></span><span id="ii.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p171"></span>**26.** *And the man bowed down his head*.
When the servant of Abraham hears that he had alighted upon the daughter
of Bethel, he is more and more elated with hope. Yet he does not exult,
as profane men are wont to do, as if the occurrence were fortuitous; but
he gives thanks to God, regarding it, as the result of Providence, that
he had been thus opportunely led straight to the place he had wished. He
does not, therefore, boast of his good fortune; but he declares that God
had dealt kindly and faithfully with Abraham; or, in other words, that,
for his own mercy’s sake, God had been faithful in fulfilling his
promises. It is true that the same form of speech is applied to the
persons present; just as it follows soon after in the same chapter,
(<span id="ii.i-p171.1"></span>[Ge
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#049)<span id="ii.i-p171.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.i-p172"></span>“If ye will deal kindly and truly with my
master tell me.”

<span id="ii.i-p173"></span>The language is, however, peculiarly
suitable to the character of God, both because he gratuitously confers
favors upon men, and is specially inclined to beneficence: and also, by
never frustrating their hope, he proves himself to be faithful and true.
This thanksgiving, therefore, teaches us always to have the providence
of God before our eyes, in order that we may ascribe to him whatever
happens prosperously to us.

<span id="ii.i-p174"></span><span id="ii.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p175"></span>**28.** *And the damsel ran and told them of
her mother’s house*. It is possible, that the mother of Rebekah occupied
a separate house; not that she had a family divided from that of her
husband, but for the purpose of keeping her daughters and maidens under
her own custody. The expression may, however, be more simply explained
to mean, that she came directly to her mother’s chamber; because she
could more easily relate the matter to her than to her father. It is
also probable, that when Bethuel was informed of the fact, by the
relation of his wife, their son Laban was sent by both of them to
introduce the stranger. Other explanations are needless.

<span id="ii.i-p176"></span><span id="ii.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p177"></span>**33.** *I will not eat until I have told my
errand*  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) Moses begins to show by what
means the parents of Rebekah were induced to give her in marriage to
their nephew. That the servant, when food was set before him, should
refuse to eat till he had completed his work is a proof of his diligence
and fidelity; and it may with propriety be regarded as one of the
benefits which God had vouchsafed to Abraham, that he should have a
servant so faithful, and so intent upon his duty. Since, however, this
was the reward of the holy discipline which Abraham maintained, we
cannot wonder that very few such servants are to be found, seeing that
everywhere they are so ill-governed.

<span id="ii.i-p179"></span>Moreover, although the servant seems to
weave a superfluous story, yet there is nothing in it which is not
available to his immediate purpose. He knew that it was a feeling
naturally inherent in parents, not willingly to send away their children
to a distance. He therefore first commemorates Abraham’s riches, that
they might not hesitate to connect their daughter with a husband so
wealthy. He secondly explains that Isaac was born of his mother in her
old age; not merely for the purpose of informing them that he had been
miraculously given to his father, whence they might infer that he had
been divinely appointed to this greatness and eminence; but that an
additional commendation might be given on account of Isaac’s age. In the
third place, he affirms that Isaac would be the sole heir of his father.
Fourthly, he relates that he had been bound by an oath to seek a wife
for his master Isaac, from among his own kindred; which special choice
on the part of Abraham was very effectual in moving them to compliance.
Fifthly, he states that Abraham, in full confidence that God would be
the leader of his journey, had committed the whole business to him.
Sixthly, he declares, that whatever he had asked in prayer he had
obtained from the Lord; whence it appeared that the marriage of which he
was about to treat was according to the will of God. We now see the
design of his narration: First, to persuade the parents of Rebekah that
he had not been sent for the purpose of deceiving them, that he had not
in anything acted craftily, or by oblique methods, but in the fear of
the Lord, as the religious obligation of marriage requires. Secondly,
that he was desiring nothing which would not be profitable and honorable
for them. And lastly, that God had been the director of the whole
affair.

<span id="ii.i-p180"></span>Moreover, since the servant of Abraham,
though persuaded that the angel of God would be the guide of his
journey, yet neither directs his prayers nor his thanksgivings to him,
we may hence learn that angels are not, in such a sense, constituted the
ministers of God to us, as that they should be invoked by us, or should
transfer to themselves the worship due to God; a superstition which
prevails nearly over the whole world to such a degree, that men turn
aside a portion of their faith from the only fountain of all good to the
rivulets which flow from it. The clause, the *Lord, before whom I walk*,
(<span id="ii.i-p180.1"></span>[Ge
24:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#040)<span id="ii.i-p180.1"></span>,)
which some refer to the probity and good conscience of Abraham, I rather
explain as applying to the faith, by which he set God before him, as the
governor of his life, being confident that he was the object of God’s
care, and dependent upon his grace.

<span id="ii.i-p181"></span>*If ye will deal kindly*  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) I have lately related the force of this
expression; namely, to act with humanity and good faith. He thus
modestly and suppliantly asks them to consent to the marriage of Isaac
and Rebekah: should he meet with a repulse from them, he says, he will
go either to the right hand or to the left; that is, he will look around
elsewhere. For he places the right hand and the left in contrast with
the straight way in which he had been led to them. It is, however, with
fertile ingenuity that some of the Hebrews explain the words as meaning,
that he would go to Lot, or to Ishmael.

<span id="ii.i-p183"></span><span id="ii.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p184"></span>**50.** *The thing proceedeth from the
Lord*. Whereas they are convinced by the discourse of the man, that God
was the Author of this marriage, they avow that it would be unlawful for
them to offer anything in the way of contradiction. They declare that
the thing proceedeth from the Lord; because he had, by the clearest
signs, made his will manifest. Hence we perceive, that although the true
religion was in part observed among them, and in part infected with
vicious errors, yet the fear of God was never so utterly extinguished,
but this axiom remained firmly fixed in all their minds, that God must
be obeyed. If, then, wretched idolaters, who had almost fallen away from
religion, nevertheless so subjected themselves to God, as to acknowledge
it to be unlawful for them to swerve from his will, how much more prompt
ought our obedience to be? Therefore, as soon as the will of God is made
known to us, not only let our tongues be silent, but let all our senses
be still; because it is an audacious profanation to admit any thought
which is opposed to that will.

<span id="ii.i-p185"></span><span id="ii.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p186"></span>**52.** *He worshipped*. Moses again repeats
that Abraham’s servant gave thanks to God; and it is not without reason
that he so often inculcates this religious duty; because, since God
requires nothing greater from us, the neglect of it betrays the most
shameful indolence. The acknowledgment of God’s kindness is a sacrifice
of sweet-smelling savor; yea, it is a more acceptable service than all
sacrifices. God is continually heaping innumerable benefits upon men.
Their ingratitude, therefore, is intolerable, if they fail to exercise
themselves in celebrating those benefits.

<span id="ii.i-p187"></span><span id="ii.i-p187.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p188"></span>**54.** *And they rose up in the morning*.
On this point Moses insists the more particularly; partly, for the
purpose of commending the faithful industry of the servant in fulfilling
his master’s commands; partly, for that of teaching, that his mind was
inflamed by the Spirit of God, for he is so ardent as to allow no truce
to others, and no relaxation to himself. Thus, although he conducted
himself as became an honest and prudent servant, it is still not to be
doubted that the Lord impelled him, for Isaac’s sake, to act as he did.
So the Lord watches over his own people while they sleep, expedites and
accomplishes their affairs in their absence, and influences the
dispositions of all, so far as is expedient, to render them assistance.
It is by a forced interpretation, that some would explain the ten days,
during which Laban and his mother desire the departure of Rebekah to be
deferred, as meaning years or months. For it was merely the tender wish
of the mother, who could ill bear that her daughter should thus suddenly
be torn away from her bosom.

<span id="ii.i-p189"></span><span id="ii.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p190"></span>**57.** *We will call the damsel*. Bethuel,
who had before unreservedly given his daughter in marriage, now seems to
adhere, with but little constancy, to his purpose. When, however, he had
previously offered his daughter, without making any exception, he is to
be understood as having done it, only so far as he was able. But now,
Moses declares that he did not exercise tyranny over his daughter, so as
to thrust her out reluctantly, or to compel her to marry against her
will, but left her to her own free choice. Truly, in this matter, the
authority of parents ought to be sacred: but a middle course is to be
pursued, so that the parties concerned may make their contract
spontaneously, and with mutual consent. It is not right to understand
that Rebekah in answering so explicitly, showed contempt for the
paternal roof, or too anxiously desired a husband;  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) but since she saw that the affair was
transacted by the authority of her father, and with the consent of her
mother, she also herself acquiesced in it.

<span id="ii.i-p192"></span><span id="ii.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p193"></span>**59.** *And they sent away Rebekah*. Moses
first relates, that Rebekah was honorably dismissed; because her nurse
was given unto her. Moreover, I doubt not that they had domestic nurses,
who were their handmaidens; not that mothers entirely neglected that
duty, but that they committed the care of education to one particular
maid. They therefore who assisted mothers with subsidiary service were
called nurses. Moses afterwards adds, that Rebekah’s relatives “blessed
her,” (<span id="ii.i-p193.1"></span>[Ge
24:60](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#060)<span id="ii.i-p193.1"></span>,)
by which expression he means, that they prayed that her condition might
be a happy one. We know that it was a solemn custom, in all ages, and
among all people, to accompany marriages with all good wishes. And
although posterity has greatly degenerated from the pure and genuine
method of celebrating marriages used by the fathers; yet it is God’s
will that some public testimony should stand forth, by which men may be
admonished, that no nuptials are lawful, except those which are rightly
consecrated. Now, the particular form of benediction which is here
related, was probably in common use, because nature dictates that the
propagation of offspring is the special end of marriage. Under the
notion of victory (<span id="ii.i-p193.2"></span>[Ge
24:60](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#060)<span id="ii.i-p193.2"></span>)
is comprehended a prosperous state of life. The Lord, however, directed
their tongues to utter a prophecy of which they themselves were
ignorant. To possess the gates of enemies, means to obtain dominion over
them; because judgment was administered in the gates, and the bulwarks
of the city were placed there.

<span id="ii.i-p194"></span><span id="ii.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p195"></span>**63.** *And Isaac went out*. It appears
that Isaac dwelt apart from his father; either because the family was
too large, or because such was the custom. And perhaps Abraham had
already married another wife; so that, for the sake of avoiding
contentions, it would seem more convenient for him to have a house of
his own. Thus great wealth has its attendant troubles. Doubtless, of all
earthly blessings granted by God, none would have been sweeter to
Abraham than that of living with his son. However, I by no means think
that he was deprived of his society and assistance. For such was the
piety of Isaac, that he undoubtedly studied to discharge every duty
towards his father: this alone was wanting, that they did not live in
the same house. Moses also relates how it happened that Isaac met with
his wife before she reached his home. For he says, that Isaac went out
in the evening to *meditate* or to *pray*. For the Hebrew word <span
id="ii.i-p195.1"></span>חוש (*soach*) may mean either. It is probable
that he did this according to his custom, and that he sought a place of
retirement for prayer, in order that his mind, being released from all
avocations, might be the more at liberty to serve God. Whether, however,
he was giving his mind to meditation or to prayer, the Lord granted him
a token of his own presence in that joyful meeting.

<span id="ii.i-p196"></span><span id="ii.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p197"></span>**64.** *And Rebekah lifted up her eyes*. We
may easily conjecture that Isaac, when he saw the camels, turned his
steps towards them, from the desire of seeing his bride; this gave
occasion to the inquiry of Rebekah. Having received the answer, she
immediately, for the sake of doing honor to her husband, dismounted her
camel to salute him. For that she fell, struck with fear, as some
suppose, in no way agrees with the narrative. She had performed too long
a journey, under the protection of many attendants, to be so greatly
afraid at the sight of one man. But these interpreters are deceived,
because they do not perceive, that in the words of Moses, the reason is
afterwards given to this effect, that when Rebekah saw Isaac, she
alighted from her camel; because she had inquired of the servant who he
was, and had been told that he was the son of his master Abraham. It
would not have entered into her mind to make such inquiry respecting any
person whom she might accidentally meet: but seeing she had been
informed that Abraham’s house was not far distant, she supposes him at
least to be one of the domestics. Moses also says that she took a veil:
which was a token of shame and modesty. For hence also, the Latin word
which signifies “to marry,”  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) is
derived, because it was the custom to give brides veiled to their
husbands. That the same rite was also observed by the fathers, I have no
doubt.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) So much the more shameful,
and the less capable of excuse, is the licentiousness of our own age; in
which the apparel of brides seems to be purposely contrived for the
subversion of all modesty.

<span id="ii.i-p200"></span><span id="ii.i-p200.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p201"></span>**67.** *And Isaac brought her into his
mother Sarah’s tent*. He first brought her into the tent, then took her
as his wife. By the very arrangement of his words, Moses distinguishes
between the legitimate mode of marriage and barbarism. And certainly the
sanctity of marriage demands that man and woman should not live together
like cattle; but that, having pledged their mutual faith, and invoked
the name of God, they might dwell with each other. Besides, it is to be
observed, that Isaac was not compelled, by the tyrannical command of his
father, to marry; but after he had given his mind to her he took her
freely, and cordially gave her the assurance of conjugal fidelity.

<span id="ii.i-p202"></span>*And Isaac was comforted after his mother’s
death*. Since his grief for the death of his mother was now first
assuaged, we infer how great had been its vehemence; for a period
sufficiently long had already elapsed.  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) We may also hence infer, that the
affection of Isaac was tender and gentle: and that his love to his
mother was of no common kind, seeing he had so long lamented her death.
And the knowledge of this fact is useful to prevent us from imagining
that the holy patriarchs were men of savage manners and of iron hardness
of heart, and from becoming like those who conceive fortitude to consist
in brutality. Only care must be taken that grief should be duly
mitigated; lest it burst forth in impious murmurings, or subvert the
hope of a future resurrection. I do not however entirely excuse the
sorrow of Isaac; I only advise, that what belongs to humanity, ought not
to be altogether condemned. And although it was culpable not to be able
to efface grief from the mind, until the opposite joy of marriage
prevailed over it; Moses still reckons it among the benefits conferred
by God, that he applies a remedy of any kind to his servant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc02001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p139"></span> Abraham was a hundred years old when Isaac
was born, (<span id="ii.i-p139.1"></span>[Ge
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#005)<span id="ii.i-p139.1"></span>,)
and Isaac was forty years old when he was married, (<span
id="ii.i-p139.2"></span>[Ge 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#020)<span
id="ii.i-p139.2"></span>.) This makes Abraham’s age a hundred and forty
years. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc02001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p143"></span> Under my thigh. “A sign which Jacob also
required of his son Joseph, (<span id="ii.i-p143.1"></span>[Ge
47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029)<span id="ii.i-p143.1"></span>,)
either to signify subjection, or for a further mystery of the covenant
of circumcision, or rather of Christ the promised seed, who was to come
out of Abraham’s loins or thigh.” — *Ainsworth*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc02001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.i-p147.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p148"></span> See <span id="ii.i-p148.1"></span>[Ge
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)<span id="ii.i-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc02001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p159"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p159.1"></span>Divinatio
qua utitur.” The word <span id="ii.i-p159.2"></span>divinatio seems to
be too strong for the occasion. The servant certainly sought a sign from
heaven; and may seem improperly to have prescribed to God in what way
his prayer should be answered. He might, however, be acting under a
divine impulse, and the context would lead to such an inference. But if
it was a weakness in this good man to be thus minute in his
stipulations, it was one which God neither reproved nor condemned; and
therefore it seems harsh to give it the name of divination. Calvin’s
object, however, is, in thus strongly stating the case, to meet it as an
objection, by a conclusive answer. A method which, the reader will have
observed, he frequently adopts. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc02001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.i-p159.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p160"></span> Calvin’s answer to the objection above
stated begins here. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc02001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p161"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p161.1"></span>Et dixit
Iehova Deus domini mei Abraham, occurrere fac nunc coram me hodie, et
fac misericordiam cum domino meo Abraham.” *Dathe* seems to have taken
the same view of the passage with Calvin. “<span
id="ii.i-p161.2"></span>O Iova Deus domini mei Abrahami, fac pro tuo
erga dominum meum Abrahamum amore, ut mihi jam quam quoero, occurrat.”
“O Lord God of my master Abraham, cause, according to thy love towards
my master Abraham, that she whom I seek may meet me.” The English
version is simply, “I pray thee, send me good speed this day.” But
probably the more specific meaning attached by Calvin and *Dathe* to the
passage is the true one. Calvin properly objects against the translation
of the *Vulgate* as being intransitive, whereas <span
id="ii.i-p161.3"></span>הרקה (*hakreh*) is transitive. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc02001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p168"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p168.1"></span>Non turpis
lenocinii causa datum esse.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc02001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.i-p168.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p169"></span> Some suppose that by the ear-rings is meant
an ornament for the face or forehead, as appears in the margin of our
version, and as Calvin here seems to intimate. But the increased
knowledge of Eastern customs which recent times have furnished, has
given weight to the opinion of older commentators, that a nose-jewel is
here intended. This ornament was not suspended from the central
cartilaginous substance of the nose, but from one side, which was bored
for the purpose. Calvin’s interpretation, that the weight of this
ornament was the half of ten shekels, instead of half a shekel, cannot
be admitted. Though, according to its weight, it might not be worth more
than ten or twelve shillings; yet its workmanship might be costly; and
if it contained some precious stone, which is not improbable, it might
be of very great value. There can be no doubt that the presents
generally were exceedingly valuable. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc02001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p178"></span> It was the custom of the ancients on
occasions of this kind first to take their meal together, and when the
wants of nature had been supplied, and the spirit had been exhilarated,
to open the subject of communication; but Abraham’s servant purposely
reverses this order, to show his earnestness in attending to his
master’s business; and perhaps also his confidence of success, in
consequence of the favorable indications which God had given in answer
to his prayers. See *Dathe* and *Le Clerc*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc02001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p182"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p182.1"></span>Si facitis
misericordiam.”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc02001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.i-p190.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p191"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p191.1"></span>Vel procax
juvencula maritum nimis cupide appeteret.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc02001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.i-p197.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p198"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p198.1"></span>Verbum
nubendi.” The original meaning of the word <span
id="ii.i-p198.2"></span>nubere is *to veil*, or *cover*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc02001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.i-p198.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p199"></span> “Isaac was walking, and it would therefore
have been the highest breach of Oriental good manners, to have remained
on the camel when presented to him. No doubt they all alighted and
walked to meet him, conducting Rebekah as a bride to meet the
bridegroom.” — *Bush*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc02001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.i-p202.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p203"></span> The time from the death of Sarah to Isaac’s
marriage was three years. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](cc02002)
