[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02016)  [Next](cc02018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 40.

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
40:1-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass after these
things, *that* the butler of the king of Egypt and *his* baker had
offended their lord the king of Egypt.

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fuit autem, posthaec peccaverunt
pincerna regis AEgypti, et pistor contra dominum suum regem. Aegypti, et
pistor conra dominum suum regen. Aegypti.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Pharaoh was wroth against two
*of* his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the
chief of the bakers.

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Itaque iratus est Pharao contra
utrumque satrapam suum, contra principem pincernarum et contra principem
pistorum.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And he put them in ward in the house
of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph
*was* bound.

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et posuit illos in custodia domus
principis satellitum, in domo carceris, in loco in quo Joseph vinctus
erat.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the captain of the guard charged
Joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in
ward.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et praeposuit princeps satellitum
ipsum Joseph eis, et ministrabat eis: fuerunt autem per annum in
custodia.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>**5**. And they dreamed a dream both of
them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the
interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of
Egypt, which *were* bound in the prison.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Porro somniaverunt somnium uterque
ipsorum, puisque somnium suum nocte eadem: singuli secundum
interpretationem somnii sui, princerna et pistor qui fuerant regi
Aegypti, qui erant vincti in domo carceris.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Joseph came in unto them in the
morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they *were* sad.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et venit ad eos Joseph mane, et
vidit eos, et ecce, erant tristitia affecti.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he asked Pharaoh’s officers
that *were* with him in the ward of his lord’s house, saying, Wherefore
look ye *so* sadly to day?

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Tune interrogavit principes
Pharaonis, qui erant secum in custodia domus domini sui, dicendo, Cur
facies vestrae sunt afflictae hodie?

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And they said unto him, We have
dreamed a dream, and *there is* no interpreter of it. And Joseph said
unto them, *Do* not interpretations *belong* to God? tell me *them*, I
pray you.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixerunt ad eum, Somnium
somniavimus, et qui interpretetur illud, non est. Et dixit ad eos
Joseph, Nonne Dei sunt interpretationes? Narrate quaeso mihi.

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>**9** And the chief butler told his dream
to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine *was* before me;

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et narravit princeps pincernarum
somnium suum ipsi Joseph, et dixit ei, Me somniante, ecce, vitis erat
coram me.

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And in the vine *were* three
branches: and it *was* as though it budded, *and* her blossoms shot
forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et in vite erant tres rami, et dum
floreret, ascendit flos ejus, et maturuerunt botri ejus in uvas.

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And Pharaoh’s cup *was* in my
hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and I
gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et calix Pharaonis erat in manu
mea, et accipiebam uvas, et exprimebam eas in calicem Pharaonis, et
dabam calicem in manu Pharaonis.

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And Joseph said unto him, This
*is* the interpretation of it: The three branches *are* three days:

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et dixit ei Joseph, Haec est
interpretatio ejus, Tres rami, tres dies sunt.

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Yet within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou
shalt deliver Pharaoh’s cup into his hand, after the former manner when
thou wast his butler.

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span>**13.** In fine trium dierum elevabit
Pharao caput tuum, et redire faciet to ad locum tuum, et dabis calicem
Pharaoni in manu ejus secundum consuetudinem primam, quando eras
pincerna ejus.

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span>**14.** But think on me when it shall be
well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make
mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sed memento mihi tecum, quum bene
fuerit tibi: et fac quaeso mecum misericordiam, et mentionem mei fac
Pharaoni, et educere fac me e domo hac:

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span>**15.** For indeed I was stolen away out
of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they
should put me into the dungeon.

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quia furto auferendo, furto
ablatus sum e terra Hebraeorum: et etiam hic non feci quiequam, ut
ponerent me in carcerem.

<span id="xviii.i-p32"></span>**16.** When the chief baker saw that the
interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also *was* in my dream,
and, behold, *I had* three white baskets on my head:

<span id="xviii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et vidit princeps pistorum, quod
bene interpretatus esset, et dixit ad Joseph, Etiam me somniante, ecce,
tria canistra alba super caput meum.

<span id="xviii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And in the uppermost basket *there
was* of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them
out of the basket upon my head.

<span id="xviii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et in canistro superiori erat ex
omni cibo Pharaonis, opere pistorio: et aves comedebant illud e
canistro, quod erat super caput meum.

<span id="xviii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Joseph answered and said, This
*is* the interpretation thereof: The three baskets *are* three days:

<span id="xviii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et respondit Joseph, et dixit,
Haec est interpretatio ejus, Tria eanistra, tres dies sunt.

<span id="xviii.i-p38"></span>**19.** Yet within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree;
and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

<span id="xviii.i-p39"></span>**19.** In fine trium dierum auferet
Pharao caput tuum a to, et suspendet to in ligno, et comedent aves
carnem tuam a to.

<span id="xviii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And it came to pass the third day,
*which was* Pharaoh’s birthday, that he made a feast unto all his
servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief
baker among his servants.

<span id="xviii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et fuit in die tertia, die qua
natus fuerat Pharao, fecit convivium omnibus servis suis, et elevavit
caput principis pincernarum et caput principis pistorum in medio
servorum suorum.

<span id="xviii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And he restored the chief butler
unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand:

<span id="xviii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Ac redire fecit principem
pimcernarum ad propinationem suam, et dedit calicem in manu Pharaoni:

<span id="xviii.i-p44"></span>**22** But he hanged the chief baker: as
Joseph had interpreted to them.

<span id="xviii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Principem autem pistorum
suspendit, quemadmodum interpretatus fuerat eis Joseph.

<span id="xviii.i-p46"></span>**23.** Yet did not the chief butler
remember Joseph, but forgat him.

<span id="xviii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et non est recordatus princeps
pincernarum ipsius Joseph, sed oblitus est ejus.

<span id="xviii.i-p48"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p49"></span><span id="xviii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p50"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass after these
things*. We have already seen, that when Joseph was in bonds, God cared
for him. For whence arose the relaxation afforded him, but from the
divine favor? Therefore, God, before he opened the door for his
servant’s deliverance, entered into the very prison to sustain him with
his strength. But a far more illustrious benefit follows; for he is not
only liberated from prison, but exalted to the highest degree of honor.
In the meantime, the providence of God led the holy man through
wonderful and most intricate paths. The butler and baker of the king are
cast into the prison; Joseph expounds to them their dreams. Restoration
to his office having been promised to the butler, some light of hope
beams upon the holy captive; for the butler agreed, after he should have
returned to his post, to become the advocate for Joseph’s pardon. But,
again, that hope was speedily cut off, when the butler failed to speak a
word to the king on behalf of the miserable captive. Joseph, therefore,
seemed to himself to be buried in perpetual oblivion, until the Lord
again suddenly rekindles the light which had been smothered, and almost
extinguished. Thus, when he might have delivered the holy man directly
from prison, he chose to lead him around by circuitous paths, the better
to prove his patience, and to manifest, by the mode of his deliverance,
that he has wonderful methods of working, hidden from our view. He does
this that we may learn not to measure, by our own sense, the salvation
which he has promised us; but that we may suffer ourselves to be turned
hither or thither by his hand, until he shall have performed his work.
By the butler and the baker we are not to understand any common person
of each rank, but those who presided over the rest; for, soon
afterwards, they are called eunuchs or nobles. Ridiculous is the fiction
of the trifler Gerundensis, who, according to his manner, asserts that
they were made eunuchs for the sake of infamy, because Pharaoh had been
enraged against them. They were, in short, two of the chief men of the
court. Moses now more clearly declares that the prison was under the
authority of Potiphar. Whence we learn what I have before said, that his
anger had been mitigated, since without his consent, the jailer could
not have acted with such clemency towards Joseph. Even Moses ascribes
such a measure of humanity to Potiphar, that he committed the butler and
baker to the charge of Joseph. Unless, perhaps, a new successor had been
then appointed in Potiphar’s place; which, however, is easily refuted
from the context, because a little afterwards Moses says that the master
of Joseph was the captain of the guard, (<span
id="xviii.i-p50.1"></span>[Ge
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#003)<span id="xviii.i-p50.1"></span>.)
When Moses says they were kept in prison *a season*, some understand by
the word, *a whole year*; but in my judgment they are mistaken; it
rather denotes a long but uncertain time, as appears from other places.

<span id="xviii.i-p51"></span><span id="xviii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p52"></span>**5.** *And they dreamed a dream*. What I
have before alluded to respecting dreams must be recalled to memory;
namely, that many frivolous things are presented to us, which pass away
and are forgotten;  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) some,
however, have the force and significance of prophecy. Of this kind were
these two dreams, by which God made known the hidden result of a future
matter. For unless the mark of a celestial oracle had been engraven upon
then, the butler and the baker would not have been in such consternation
of mind. I acknowledge, indeed, that men are sometimes vehemently
agitated by vain and rashly conceived dreams; yet their terror and
anxiety gradually subsides; but God had fixed an arrow in the minds of
the butler and the baker, which would not suffer them to rest; and by
this means, each was rendered more attentive to the interpretation of
his dream. Moses, therefore, expressly declares that it was a presage of
something certain.

<span id="xviii.i-p54"></span><span id="xviii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p55"></span>**6.** *And Joseph came in unto them, in
the morning*. As I have lately said, we ought here to behold, with the
eyes of faith, the wonderful providence of God. For, although the butler
and baker are certainly informed of their own fate; yet this was not
done so much out of regard to them, as in favor of Joseph; whom God
designed, by this method, to make known to the king. Therefore, by a
secret instinct he had rendered them sad and astonished, as if he would
lead them by the hand to his servant Joseph. It is, however, to be
observed, that by a new inspiration of the Spirit, the gift of prophecy,
which he had not before possessed, was imparted to him in the prison.
When he had previously dreamed himself, he remained, for a while, in
suspense and doubt respecting the divine revelation; but now he is a
certain interpreter to others. And though, when he was inquiring into
the cause of their sadness, he perhaps did not think of dreams; yet,
from the next verse it appears that he was conscious to himself of
having received the gift of the Spirit; and, in this confidence, he
exhorts them to relate the dreams, of which he was about to be the
interpreter. *Do not interpretations* (he says) *belong to God*?
Certainly he does not arrogantly transfer to himself what he
acknowledges to be peculiar to God; but according to the means which his
vocation supplied, he offers them his service. This must be noted, in
order that no one may undesignedly usurp more to himself than he knows
that God has granted him. For, on this account, Paul so diligently
teaches that the gifts of the Spirit are variously distributed, (<span
id="xviii.i-p55.1"></span>[1Co
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)<span id="xviii.i-p55.1"></span>,)
and that God has assigned to each a certain post, in order that no one
may act ambitiously, or intrude himself into another’s office; but
rather that each should keep himself within the bounds of his own
calling. Unless this degree of moderation shall prevail, all things will
necessarily be thrown into confusion; because the truth of God will be
distorted by the foolish temerity of many; peace and concord will be
disturbed, and, in short, no good order will be maintained. Let us
learn, therefore, that Joseph confidently promised an interpretation of
the dreams, because he knew that he was furnished and adorned with this
gift by God. The same remark applies to his interrogation respecting the
dreams. For he does not attempt to proceed beyond what his own power
authorized him to do: he does not, therefore, divine what they had
dreamed, but confesses it was hidden from him. The method pursued by
Daniel was different, for he was enabled, by a direct revelation, to
state and interpret the dream which had entirely escaped the memory of
the king of Babylon. (<span id="xviii.i-p55.2"></span>[Da
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028)<span id="xviii.i-p55.2"></span>.)
He, therefore, relying upon a larger measure of the Spirit, does not
hesitate to profess that he can both divine and interpret dreams. But
Joseph, to whom the half only of these gifts was imparted, keeps himself
within legitimate bounds. Besides, he not only guards himself against
presumption; but, by declaring that whatever he has received is from
God, he ingenuously testifies that he has nothing from himself. He does
not, therefore, boast of his own quickness or clear-sightedness, but
wishes only to be known as the servant of God. Let those who excel,
follow this rule; lest, by ascribing too much to themselves, (which
commonly happens,) they obscure the grace of God. Moreover, this vanity
is to be restrained, not only that God alone may be glorified, and may
not be robbed of his right; but that prophets, and teachers, and all
others who are indued with heavenly grace, may humbly submit themselves
to the direction of the Spirit. What Moses says is also to be observed,
that Joseph was concerned at the sadness of those who were with him in
prison. For thus men become softened by their own afflictions, so that
they do not despise others who are in misery; and, in this way, common
sufferings generate sympathy. Wherefore it is not wonderful that God
should exercise us with various sorrows; since nothing is more becoming
than humanity towards our brethren, who, being weighed down with trials,
lie under contempt. This humanity, however, must be learned by
experience; because our innate ferocity is more and more inflated by
prosperity.

<span id="xviii.i-p56"></span><span id="xviii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p57"></span>**12.** *The three branches are three
days*. Joseph does not here offer what he thought to be probable, like
some ambiguous conjecturer; but asserts, by the revelation of the
Spirit, the meaning of the dream. For why does he say, that by the three
branches, three *days* rather than *years* are signified, unless because
the Spirit of God had suggested it? Joseph, therefore, proceeds, by a
special impulse above nature, to expound the dream; and by immediately
commending himself to the butler, as if he was already restored, shows
how certain and indubitable was the truth of his interpretation: as if
he had said, “Be convinced that what thou hast heard of me has come from
God.” Where also he shows how honorably he thinks of the oracles of God,
seeing that he pronounces concerning the future effect with as much
confidence as if it had already taken place. But it may be deemed
absurd, that Joseph asks for a reward of his prophecy. I answer, that he
did not speak as one who would set the gift of God to sale: but it came
into his mind, that a method of deliverance was now set before him by
God, which it was not lawful for him to reject. Indeed, I do not doubt
that a hope of better fortune had been divinely imparted to him. For
God, who, even from his childhood, had twice promised him dominion, did
not leave him, amidst so many straits, entirely destitute of all
consolation. Now this opportunity of seeking deliverance was offered to
him by none but God. Wherefore, it is not surprising that Joseph should
thus make use of it. With respect to the expression, *Lift up thine
head;* it signifies to raise any one from a low and contemptible
condition, to one of some reputation. Therefore, “*Pharaoh will lift up
thine head,”* means, he will bring thee forth from the darkness of the
prisons, or he will raise thee who art fallen, and restore thee to thy
former rank. For I take the word to mean simply *place* or *rank*, and
not *basis*  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150)

<span id="xviii.i-p59"></span><span id="xviii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p60"></span>**14.** *Show kindness I pray thee unto
me*  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) Although the expression
show kindness is used among the Hebrews to describe the common exercise
of humanity; there is yet no doubt that Joseph spoke simply as his own
sad and afflicted condition suggested, for the purpose of inclining the
mind of the butler to procure him help. He insists, however, chiefly on
this, that he had been thrust into prison for no crime, in order that
the butler might not refuse his assistance to an innocent man. For
although they who are most wicked find patrons; yet commendation
elicited by importunity, which rescues a wicked man from deserved
punishment, is in itself an odious and infamous thing. It is, however,
probable that Joseph explained his whole cause, so that he fully
convinced the butler of his innocence.

<span id="xviii.i-p62"></span><span id="xviii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p63"></span>**16.** *When the chief baker saw*  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) He does not care respecting the skill
and fidelity of Joseph as an interpreter; but because Joseph had brought
good and useful tidings to his companion, he also desires an
interpretation, which he hopes will prove according to his mind. So,
many, with ardor and alacrity, desire the word of God, not because they
simply wish to be governed by the Lord, and to know what is right, but
because they dream of mere enjoyment. When, however, the doctrine does
not correspond with their wishes, they depart sorrowful and wounded.
Now, although the explanation of the dream was about to prove unpleasant
and severe; yet Joseph, by declaring, without ambiguity, what had been
revealed unto him, executed with fidelity the office divinely committed
to him. This freedom must be maintained by prophets and teachers, that
they may not hesitate, by their teaching, to inflict a wound on those
whom God has sentenced to death. All love to be flattered. Hence the
majority of teachers, in desiring to yield to the corrupt wishes of the
world, adulterate the word of God. Wherefore, no one is a sincere
minister of God’s word, but he, who despising reproach, and being ready,
as often as it may be necessary, to attack various offenses, will frame
his method of teaching according to the command of God. Joseph would,
indeed, have preferred to augur well concerning both; but since it is
not in his power to give a prosperous fortune to any one, nothing
remains for him but frankly to pronounce whatever he has received from
the Lord. So, formerly, although the people chose for themselves
prophets who would promise them abundance of wine and oil and corn,
while they exclaimed loudly against the holy prophets, because they let
fall nothing but threatening, (for these complaints are related in
Micah,) yet it was the duty of the servants of the Lord, who had been
sent to denounce vengeance, to proceed with severity, although they
brought upon themselves hatred and danger.

<span id="xviii.i-p65"></span><span id="xviii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p66"></span>**19.** *Pharaoh shall lift up thy head
from off thee*. This phrase (in the original) is ambiguous without some
addition; and may be taken in a good or a bad sense; just as we say,
“With *regard* to any one,” or “With *respect* to him;” here the
expression is added “from thee.” Yet there seems to be an allusion of
this kind, as if Joseph had said, “Pharaoh will lift up thy head, that
he may take it off.” Now, when Moses relates, that what Joseph had
predicted happened to both of them, he proves by this sign that Joseph
was a true prophet of God, as it is written in Jeremiah. (<span
id="xviii.i-p66.1"></span>[Jer
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#009)<span id="xviii.i-p66.1"></span>.)
For that the prophets sometimes threatened punishments, which God
abstained from inflicting, was done for this reason, because to such
prophecies a condition was annexed. But when the Lord speaks positively
by his servants, it is necessary that whatever he predicts should be
confirmed by the result. Therefore, Moses expressly commends in Joseph,
his confidence in the heavenly oracle. With regard to what Moses
records, that Pharaoh celebrated his birthday by a great feast, we know
that this custom has always been in use, not only among kings, but also
among plebeian men. Nor is the custom to be condemned, if only men would
keep the right end in view; namely, that of giving thanks unto God by
whom they were created and brought up, and whom they have found, in
innumerable ways, to be a beneficent Father. But such is the depravity
of the world, that it greatly distorts those things which formerly were
honestly instituted by their fathers, into contrary corruptions. Thus,
by a vicious practice, it has become common for nearly all to abandon
themselves to luxury and wantonness on their birthday. In short, they
keep up the memory of God, as the Author of their life, in such a manner
as if it were their set purpose to forget Him.

<span id="xviii.i-p67"></span><span id="xviii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p68"></span>**23.** *Yet did not the chief butler
remember*. This was the most severe trial of Joseph’s patience, as we
have before intimated. For since he had obtained an advocate who,
without trouble, was able to extricate him from prison, especially as
the opportunity of doing so had been granted to him by God, he felt a
certain assurance of deliverance, and earnestly waited for it every
hour. But when he had remained to the end of the second year in
suspense, not only did this hope vanish, but greater despair than ever
rested upon his mind. Therefore, we are all taught, in his person, that
nothing is more improper, than to prescribe the time in which God shall
help us; since he purposely, for a long season, keeps his own people in
anxious suspense, that, by this very experiment, they may truly know
what it is to trust in Him. Besides, in this manner he designed openly
to claim for himself the glory of Joseph’s liberation. For, if liberty
had been granted to him through the entreaty of the butler, it would
have been generally believed that this benefit was from man and not from
God. Moreover, when Moses says, that the butler was forgetful of Joseph,
let it be so understood, that he did not dare to make any mention of
him, lest he should be subjected to reproach, or should be troublesome
to the king himself. For it is common with courtiers perfidiously to
betray the innocent, and to deliver them to be slain, rather than to
offend those of whom they themselves are afraid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc02017.htm#fr_149) <span
id="xviii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p53"></span> Calvin’s words are: “<span
id="xviii.i-p53.1"></span>Quae Transeunt per portam corneam.” — Vide
Virgil. Aeneid. VI. In finem. This is an obviously mistaken allusion,
arising probably from a lapse of memory in Calvin, or in the transcriber
of his works. He should have said “<span
id="xviii.i-p53.2"></span>portam eburnam.” The ancient mythologists
distinguished true dreams from false, by representing the former as
passing through the “horny gate,” (<span id="xviii.i-p53.3"></span>porta
cornea,) the latter through the “ivory gate,” (<span
id="xviii.i-p53.4"></span>porta eburna.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc02017.htm#fr_150) <span
id="xviii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p58"></span> <span id="xviii.i-p58.1"></span>Pro loco
et ordine simpliciter accipio, non autem pro basi The passage needs
explanation. The word <span id="xviii.i-p58.2"></span>ךשאר, rendered
“thy head,” might be rendered “thy nail,” and some writers have supposed
that it should be so translated in this place. The reason given for such
a rendering arises from a supposed custom among eastern monarchs of
having a large white tablet, on which the name of each officer of state
was inscribed, and a nail was placed in a hole opposite the name. When
the officer offended, the nail was removed from its place, that is, from
its basis or foundation, and the man’s distinction and character were
lost. — *Junis* in Poli Synopsin. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc02017.htm#fr_151) <span
id="xviii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p61"></span> <span id="xviii.i-p61.1"></span>Fac
quaeso mecum misericordiam.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc02017.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xviii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p64"></span> “The chief baker, in his dream, carries
the wicker baskets with various choice baker’s commodities on his head.
Similar woven baskets, flat and open, for carrying grapes and other
fruits, are found represented on the monuments. The art of baking was
carried to a high degree of perfection among the Egyptians.” — Egypt and
the Books of Moses, p. 27. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](cc02018)
