[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag14)  [Next](rag16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART III

## The Legends

## CHAPTER I.

##### THE NATURE OF MYTHS.

IN a primitive people the mind of one generation precisely repeats the
minds of all former generations; the construction of the intellectual
nature varies no more, from age to age, than the form of the body or the
color of the skin; the generations feel the same emotions, and think the
same thoughts, and use the same expressions. And this is to be expected,
for the brain is as much a part of the inheritable, material
organization as the color of the eyes or the shape of the nose.

The minds of men move automatically: no man thinks because he intends to
think; he thinks, as he hungers and thirsts, under a great primal
necessity; his thoughts come out from the inner depths of his being as
the flower is developed by forces rising through the roots of the plant.

The female bird says to herself, "The time is propitious, and now, of my
own free will, and under the operation of my individual judgment, I will
lay a nestful of eggs and batch a brood of children." But it is
unconscious that it is moved by a physical necessity, which has
constrained all its ancestors from the beginning of time,

{p. 114}

and which will constrain all its posterity to the end of time; that its
will is nothing more than an expression of age, development, sunlight,
food, and "the skyey influences." If it were otherwise it would be in
the power of a generation to arrest the life of a race.

All great thoughts are inspirations of God. They are part of the
mechanism by which he advances the race; they are new varieties created
out of old genera.

There come bursts of creative force in history, when great thoughts are
born, and then again Brahma, as the Hindoos say, goes to sleep for ages.

But, when the fever of creation comes, the poet, the inventor, or the
philosopher can no more arrest the development of his own thoughts than
the female bird, by her will-power, can stop the growth of the ova
within her, or arrest the fever in the blood which forces her to
incubation.

The man who wrote the Shakespeare plays recognized this involuntary
operation of even his own transcendent intellect, when he said:

"Our poesy is a gum which oozes  
From whence 'tis nourished."

It came as the Arabian tree distilled its "medicinal gum"; it was the
mere expression of an internal force, as much beyond his control as the
production of the gum was beyond the control of the tree.

But in primitive races mind repeats mind for thousands of years. If a
tale is told at a million hearth-fires, the probabilities are small,
indeed, that any innovation at one hearth-fire, however ingenious, will
work its way into and modify the narration at all the rest. There is no
printing-press to make the thoughts of one man the thoughts of
thousands. While the innovator is modifying

{p. 115}

the tale, to his own satisfaction, to his immediate circle of hearers,
the narrative is being repeated in its unchanged form at all the rest.
The doctrine of chances is against innovation. The majority rules.

When, however, a marvelous tale is told to the new generation--to the
little ones sitting around with open eyes and gaping mouths--they
naturally ask, "*Where* did all this occur?" The narrator must satisfy
this curiosity, and so he replies, "On yonder mountain-top," or "In
yonder cave."

The story has come down without its geography, and a new geography is
given it.

Again, an ancient word or name may have a signification in the language
in which the story is told different from that which it possessed in the
original dialect, and, in the effort to make the old fact and the new
language harmonize, the story-teller is forced, gradually, to modify the
narrative; and, as this lingual difficulty occurs at every fireside, at
every telling, an ingenious explanation comes at last to be generally
accepted, and the ancient myth remains dressed in a new suit of
linguistic clothes.

But, as a rule, simple races repeat; they do not invent.

One hundred years ago the highest faith was placed in written history,
while the utmost contempt was felt for all legends. Whatever had been
written down was regarded as certainly true; whatever had not been
written down was necessarily false.

We are reminded of that intellectual old brute, Dr. Samuel Johnson,
trampling poor Macpherson under foot, like an enraged elephant, for
daring to say that he had collected from the mountaineers of wild
Scotland the poems of Ossian, and that they had been transmitted, from
mouth to mouth, through ages. But the great epic of the son of Fingal
will survive, part of the widening

{p. 116}

heritage of humanity, while Johnson is remembered only as a
coarse-souled, ill-mannered incident in the development of the great
English people.

But as time rolled on it was seen that the greater part of history was
simply recorded legends, while all the rest represented the passions of
factions, the hates of sects, or the servility and venality of
historians. Men perceived that the common belief of antiquity, as
expressed in universal tradition, was much more likely to be true than
the written opinions of a few prejudiced individuals.

And then grave and able men,--philosophers, scientists,--were seen with
note-books and pencils, going out into Hindoo villages, into German
cottages, into Highland huts, into Indian *tepees*, in short, into all
lands, taking down with the utmost care, accuracy, and respect, the
fairy-stories, myths, and legends of the people;--as repeated by old
peasant-women, "the knitters in the sun," or by "gray-haired warriors,
famousèd for fights."

And, when they came to put these narratives in due form, and, as it
were, in parallel columns, it became apparent that they threw great
floods of light upon the history of the world, and especially upon the
question of the unity of the race. They proved that all the nations were
repeating the same stories, in some cases in almost identical words,
just as their ancestors had heard them, in some most ancient land, in
"the dark background and abysm of time," when the progenitors of the
German, Gaul, Gael, Greek, Roman, Hindoo, Persian, Egyptian, Arabian,
and the red-people of America, dwelt together under the same roof-tree
and used the same language.

But, above all, these legends prove the absolute fidelity of the memory
of the races.

We are told that the bridge-piles driven by the Romans, two thousand
years ago, in the rivers of Europe,

{p. 117}

from which the surrounding waters have excluded the decaying atmosphere,
have remained altogether unchanged in their condition. If this has been
the case for two thousand years, why would they not remain unchanged for
ten thousand, for a hundred thousand years? If the ice in which that
Siberian mammoth was incased had preserved it intact for a hundred
years, or a thousand years, why might it not have preserved it for ten
thousand, for a hundred thousand years?

Place a universal legend in the minds of a race, let them repeat it from
generation to generation, and time ceases to be an element in the
problem.

Legend has one great foe to its perpetuation--civilization.

Civilization brings with it a contempt for everything which it can not
understand; skepticism becomes the synonym for intelligence; men no
longer repeat; they doubt; they dissect; they sneer; they reject; they
invent. If the myth survives this treatment, the poets take it up and
make it their stock in trade: they decorate it in a masquerade of
frippery and finery, feathers and furbelows, like a clown dressed for a
fancy ball; and the poor barbarian legend survives at last, if it
survives at all, like the Conflagration in Ovid or King Arthur in
Tennyson--a hippopotamus smothered in flowers, jewels, and laces.

Hence we find the legends of the primitive American Indians adhering
quite closely to the events of the past, while the myths that survive at
all among the civilized nations of Europe are found in garbled forms,
and. only among the peasantry of remote districts.

In the future more and more attention will be given to the myths of
primitive races; they will be accounted as more reliable, and as
reaching farther back in time than many things which we call history.
Thoughtful men will

{p. 118}

analyze them, despising nothing; like a chemist who resolves some
compound object into its original elements--the very combination
constituting a history of the object.

H. H. Bancroft describes myths as--

"A mass of fragmentary truth and fiction, not open to rationalistic
criticism; a partition wall of allegories, built of dead facts cemented
with wild fancies; it looms ever between the immeasurable and the
measurable past."

But he adds:

"Never was there a time in the history of philosophy when the character,
customs, and beliefs of aboriginal man, and everything appertaining to
him, were held in such high esteem by scholars as at present."

"It is now a recognized principle of philosophy that no religious
belief, however crude, nor any historical tradition, however absurd, can
be held by the majority of a people for any considerable time as true,
without having had in the beginning some foundation in fact."\[1\]

An universal myth points to two conclusions:

First, that it is based on some fact.

Secondly, that it dates back, in all probability, to the time when the
ancestors of the races possessing it had not yet separated.

A myth should be analyzed carefully; the fungi that have attached
themselves to it should be brushed off; the core of fact should be
separated from the decorations and errors of tradition.

But above all, it must be remembered that we can not depend upon either
the geography or the chronology of a myth. As I have shown, there is a
universal tendency to give the old story a new habitat, and hence we
have Ararats and Olympuses all over the world. In the same

\[1. "The Native Races of America," vol. iii, p. 14.\]

{p. 119}

way the myth is always brought down and attached to more recent events:

"All over Europe-in Germany, France, Spain, Switzerland, England,
Scotland, Ireland--the exploits of the oldest mythological heroes,
figuring in the Sagas, Eddas, and Nibelungen Lied, have been ascribed,
in the folk-lore and ballads of the people, to Barbarossa, Charlemagne,
Boabdil, Charles V, William Tell, Arthur, Robin Hood, Wallace, and St.
Patrick."\[1\]

In the next place, we must remember how impossible it is for the mind to
invent an entirely new fact.

What dramatist or novelist has ever yet made a plot which did not
consist of events that had already transpired somewhere on earth? He
might intensify events, concentrate and combine them, or amplify them;
but that is all. Men in all ages have suffered from jealousy,--like
Othello; have committed murders,--like Macbeth; have yielded to the sway
of morbid minds,--like Hamlet; have stolen, lied, and debauched,--like
Falstaff;--there are Oliver Twists, Bill Sykeses, and Nancies;
Micawbers, Pickwicks, and Pecksniffs in every great city.

There is nothing in the mind of man that has not preexisted in nature.
Can we imagine a person, who never saw or heard of an elephant, drawing
a picture of such a two-tailed creature? It was thought at one time that
man had made the flying-dragon out of his own imagination; but we now
know that the image of the *pterodactyl* had simply descended from
generation to generation. Sindbad's great bird, the *roc*, was
considered a flight of the Oriental fancy, until science revealed the
bones of the *dinornis*. All the winged beasts breathing fire are simply
a recollection of the comet.

In fact, even with the patterns of nature before it, the

\[1. Bancroft, "Native Races," note, vol. iii, p. 17.\]

{p. 120}

human mind has not greatly exaggerated them: it has never drawn a bird
larger than the *dinornis* or a beast greater than the mammoth.

It is utterly impossible that the races of the whole world, of all the
continents and islands, could have preserved traditions from the most
remote ages, of a comet having struck the earth, of the great heat, the
conflagration, the cave-life, the age of darkness, and the return of the
sun, and yet these things have had no basis of fact. It was not possible
for the primitive mind to have imagined these things if they had never
occurred.

{p. 121}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Did Man Exist Before The Drift?](rag16)
