[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag26)  [Next](rag28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII.

##### GENESIS READ BY THE LIGHT OF THE COMET.

AND now, gathering into our hands all the light afforded by the
foregoing facts and legends, let us address ourselves to this question:
How far can the opening chapters of the book of Genesis be interpreted
to conform to the theory of the contact of a comet with the earth in the
Drift Age?

It may appear to some of my readers irreverent to place any new meaning
on any part of the sacred volume, and especially to attempt to transpose
the position of any of its parts. For this feeling I have the highest
respect.

I do not think it is necessary, for the triumph of truth, that it should
lacerate the feelings even of the humblest. It should come, like
Quetzalcoatl, advancing with shining, smiling face, its hands full of
fruits and flowers, bringing only blessings and kindliness to the
multitude; and should that multitude, for a time, drive the prophet
away, beyond the seas, with curses, be assured they will eventually
return to set up his altars.

He who follows the gigantic Mississippi upward from the Gulf of Mexico
to its head-waters on the high plateau of Minnesota, will not scorn even
the tiniest rivulet among the grass which helps to create its first
fountain. So he who considers the vastness for good of this great force,
Christianity, which pervades the world down the long course of so many
ages, aiding, relieving, encouraging, cheering, purifying, sanctifying
humanity, can not afford

{p. 317}

to ridicule even these the petty fountains, the head-waters, the first
springs from which it starts on its world-covering and age-traversing
course.

If we will but remember the endless array of asylums, hospitals, and
orphanages; the houses for the poor, the sick, the young, the old, the
unfortunate, the helpless, and the sinful, with which Christianity has
literally sprinkled the world; when we remember the uncountable millions
whom its ministrations have restrained from bestiality, and have
directed to purer lives and holier deaths, he indeed is not to be envied
who can find it in his heart, with malice-aforethought, to mock or
ridicule it.

At the same time, few, I think, even of the orthodox, while bating no
jot of their respect for the sacred volume, or their faith in the great
current of inspired purpose and meaning which streams through it, from
cover to cover, hold to-day that every line and word is literally
accurate beyond a shadow of question. The direct contradictions which
occur in the text itself show that the errors of man have crept into the
compilation or composition of the volume.

The assaults of the skeptical have been largely directed against the
opening chapters of Genesis:

"What!" it has been said, "you pretend in the first chapter that the
animated creation was made in six days; and then in the second chapter
(verses 4 and 5) you say that the heavens and the earth and all the
vegetation were made in one day. Again: you tell us that there was light
shining on the earth on the first day; and that there was night too; for
'God divided the light from the darkness'; and there was morning and
evening on the first, second, and third days, while the sun, moon, and
stars, we are told, were not created until the fourth day; and grass and
fruit-trees were made before the sun."

{p. 318}

"How," it is asked, "could there be night and day and vegetation without
a sun?"

And to this assault religion has had no answer.

Now, I can not but regard these opening chapters as a Mosaic work of
ancient legends, dovetailed together in such wise that the true
chronological arrangement has been departed from and lost.

It is conceded that in some of the verses of these chapters God is
spoken of as Elohim, while in the remaining verses he is called Jehovah
Elohim. This is very much as if a book were discovered to-day in part of
which God was referred to as Jove, and in the rest as Jehovah-Jove. The
conclusion would be very strong that the first part was written by one
who know the Deity only as Jove, while the other portion was written by
one who had come under Hebraic influences. And this state of facts in
Genesis indicates that it was not the work of one inspired mind,
faultless and free from error; but the work of two minds, relating
facts, it is true, but jumbling them together in an incongruous order.

I propose, therefore, with all reverence, to attempt a re-arrangement of
the verses of the opening chapters of the book of Genesis, which will, I
hope, place it in such shape that it will be beyond future attack from
the results of scientific research; by restoring the fragments to the
position they really occupied before their last compilation. Whether or
not I present a reasonably probable case, it is for the reader to judge.

If we were to find, under the *débris* of Pompeii, a grand tessellated
pavement, representing one of the scenes of the "Iliad," but shattered
by an earthquake, its fragments dislocated and piled one upon the top of
another, it would be our duty and our pleasure to seek, by following the
clew of the picture, to re-arrange the fragments so as

{p. 319}

to do justice to the great design of its author; and to silence, at the
same time, the cavils of those who could see in its shocked and broken
form nothing but a subject for mirth and ridicule.

In the same way, following the clew afforded by the legends of mankind
and the revelations of science, I shall suggest a reconstruction of this
venerable and most ancient work. If the reader does not accept my
conclusions, he will, at least, I trust, appreciate the motives with
which I make the attempt.

I commence with that which is, and should be, the first verse of the
first chapter, the sublime sentence:

"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth."

Let us pause here: "God created the heavens and the earth *in the
beginning*";--that is, before any other of the events narrated in the
chapter. Why should we refuse to accept this statement? *In the
beginning*, says the Bible, at the very first, God created the heavens
and the earth. He did not make them in six days, he made them *in the
beginning*; the words "six days" refer, as we shall see, to something
that occurred long afterward. He did not attempt to create them, he
created them; he did not partially create them, he created them
altogether. The work was finished; the earth was made, the heavens were
made, the clouds, the atmosphere, the rocks, the waters; and the sun,
moon, and stars; all were completed.

What next? Is there anything else in this dislocated text that refers to
this first creation? Yes; we go forward to the next chapter; here we
have it:

Chap. ii, v. 1. "*Thus* the heavens and the earth were finished, and all
the host of them."

{p. 320}

And then follows:

Chap. ii, v. 4. "These are the generations of the heavens and of the
earth, *when they were created*, IN THE DAY that the Lord God made the
earth and the heavens.

Chap. ii, v. 5. "And every plant of the field before it was in the
earth, and every herb of the field before it grew; for the Lord God *had
not caused it to rain upon the earth*, and there was not a man to till
the ground."

Here we have a consecutive statement--God made the heavens and the earth
in the beginning, and thus they were *finished*, and all the host of
them. They were not made in six days, but "*in the day*," to wit, in
that period of remote time called "The Beginning." And God made also all
the herbs of the field, all vegetation. And he made every plant of the
field before it was cultivated in that particular part of the world
called "The Earth," for, as we have seen, Ovid draws a distinction
between "The Earth" and the rest of the globe; and Job draws one between
"the island of the innocent" and the other countries of the world.

And here I would call the reader's attention particularly to this
remarkable statement:

Chap. ii, verse 5. "For the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the
earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

Verse 6. "But there went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole
face of the ground."

This is extraordinary: *there was no rain*.

A mere inventor of legends certainly had never dared make a statement so
utterly in conflict with the established order of things; there was no
necessity for him to do so; he would fear that it would throw discredit
on all the rest of his narrative; as if he should say, "at that time the
grass was not green," or, "the sky was not blue."

{p. 321}

A world without rain! Could it be possible? 'Did the writer of Genesis
invent an absurdity, or did he record an undoubted tradition? Let us
see:

Rain is the product of two things--heat which evaporates the waters of
the oceans, lakes, and rivers; and cold which condenses them again into
rain or snow. Both heat and cold are necessary, In the tropics the water
is sucked up by the heat of the sun; it rises to a cooler stratum, and
forms clouds; these clouds encounter the colder air flowing in from the
north and south, condensation follows, accompanied probably by some
peculiar electrical action, and then the rain falls.

But when the lemon and the banana grew in Spitzbergen, as geology
assures us they did in pre-glacial days, where was the cold to come
from? The very poles must then have possessed a warm climate. There
were, therefore, at that time, no movements of cold air from the poles
to the equator; when the heat drew up the moisture it rose into a vast
body of heated atmosphere, surrounding the whole globe to a great
height; it would have to pass through this cloak of warm air, and high
up above the earth, even to the limits of the earth-warmth, before it
reached an atmosphere sufficiently cool to condense it, and from that
great height it would fall as a fine mist.

We find an illustration of this state of things on the coast of Peru,
from the river Loa to Cape Blanco,\[1\] where no rain ever falls, in
consequence of the heated air which ascends from the vast sand wastes,
and keeps the moisture of the air above the point of condensation.

Or it would have to depend for its condensation on the difference of
temperature between night and day, settling

\[1. "American Cyclopædia," vol. xiii, p. 387.\]

{p. 322}

like a dew at night upon the earth, and so maintaining vegetation.

What a striking testimony is all this to the fact that these traditions
of Genesis reach back to the very infancy of human history--to the age
before the Drift!

After the creation of the herbs and plants, what came next? We go back
to the first chapter:

Verse 21. "And God created great whales, and every living creature that
moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and
every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good."

Verse 22. "And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
fill the waters in the seas, and let the fowl multiply in the earth."

Verse 25. "And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and
cattle after their kind, and everything that creepeth upon the earth
after his kind: and God saw that it was good."

Verse 26. "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth."

We come back to the second chapter:

Verse 7. "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living
soul."

We return to the first chapter:

Verse 27. "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him; male and female created he them."

We come back to the second chapter:

Verse 8. "And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there
he put the man he had formed."

Verse 9. "And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree
that is pleasant to the sight and good

{p. 323}

for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree
of knowledge of good and evil."

Verse 10. "And a river went out of Eden to water the garden," etc.

Here follows a description of the garden; it is a picture of a glorious
world, of that age when the climate of the Bahamas extended to
Spitzbergen.

Verse 15. "And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of
Eden to dress it and to keep it."

Here follows the injunction that "the man whom God had formed," (for he
is not yet called Adam--the Adami--the people of Ad,) should not eat of
the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

And then we have, (probably a later interpolation,) an account of Adam,
so called for the first time, naming the animals, and of the creation of
Eve from a rib of Adam.

And here is another evidence of the dislocation of the text, for we have
already been informed (chap. i, v. 27) that God had made Man, "male and
*female*"; and here we have him making woman over again from man's rib.

Verse 25. "And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed."

It was an age of primitive simplicity, the primeval world; free from
storms or ice or snow; an Edenic age; the Tertiary Age before the Drift.

Then follows the appearance of the serpent. Although represented in the
text in a very humble capacity, he is undoubtedly the same great
creature which, in all the legends, brought ruin on the world--the
dragon, the apostate, the demon, the winding or crooked serpent of Job,
the leviathan, Satan, the devil. And as such he is regarded by the
theologians.

He obtains moral possession of the woman, just as we

{p. 324}

have seen, in the Hindoo legends, the demon Ravana carrying off Sita,
the representative of an agricultural civilization; just as we have seen
Ataguju, the Peruvian god, seducing the sister of certain rayless ones,
or Darklings. And the woman ate of the fruit of the tree.

This is the same legend which we see appearing in so many places and in
so many forms. The apple of Paradise was one of the apples of the Greek
legends, intrusted to the Hesperides, but which they could not resist
the temptation to pluck and eat. The serpent Ladon watched the tree.

It was one of the apples of Idun, in the Norse legends, the wife of
Brage, the god of poetry and eloquence. She keeps them in a box, and
when the gods feel the approach of old age they have only to taste them
and become young again. Loke, the evil-one, the Norse devil, tempted
Idun to come into a forest with her apples, to compare them with some
others, whereupon a giant called Thjasse, in the appearance of an
enormous eagle, flew down, seized Idun and her apples, and carried them
away, like Ravana, into the air. The gods compelled Loke to bring her
back, for they were the apples of the tree of life to them; without them
they were perishing. Loke stole Idun from Thjasse, changed her into a
nut, and fled with her, pursued by Thjasse. The gods kindled *a great
fire*, the eagle plumage of Thjasse caught the flames, he *fell to the
earth, and was slain by the gods*.\[1\]

But the serpent in Genesis ruins Eden, just as he did in all the
legends; just as the comet ruined the Tertiary Age. The fair world
disappears; cold and ice and snow come.

Adam and Eve, we have seen, were at first naked, and subsequently clothe
themselves, for modesty, with fig-leaves, (chap. iii, v. 7;) but there
comes a time, as in the

\[1. Norse Mythology," pp. 275, 276.\]

{p. 325}

North American legends, when the great cold compels them to cover their
shivering bodies with the skins of the wild beasts they have slain.

A recent writer, commenting on the Glacial Age, says:

"Colder and colder grew the winds. The body could not be kept warm.
Clothing must be had, and this must be furnished by the wild beasts.
Their hides must assist in protecting the life of men. . . . The skins
were removed and transferred to the bodies of men."\[1\]

Hence we read in chapter iii, verse 21:

"Unto Adam also, and to his wife, did the Lord God make *coats of skins
and clothed them*."

This would not have been necessary during the warm climate of the
Tertiary Age. And as this took place, according to Genesis, before Adam
was driven out of Paradise, and while he still remained in the garden,
it is evident that some great change of climate had fallen upon Eden.
The Glacial Age had arrived; the Drift had come. It was a rude,
barbarous, cold age. Man must cover himself with skins; he must, by the
sweat of physical labor, wring a living out of the ground which God had
"cursed" with the Drift. Instead of the fair and fertile world of the
Tertiary Age, producing all fruits abundantly, the soil is covered with
stones and clay, as in Job's narrative, and it brings forth, as we are
told in Genesis,\[2\] only "thorns and thistles"; and Adam, the human
race, must satisfy its starving stomach upon grass, "and thou shalt eat
the herb of the field"; just as in Job we are told:

Chap. xxx, verse 3. "For want and famine they were solitary; fleeing
into the wilderness in former time, desolate and solitary."

\[1. Maclean's "Antiquity of Man," p. 65.

2\. Chap. iii, verse 18.\]

{p. 326}

Verse 4. "Who cut up mallows by the bushes and juniper-roots for their
food."

Verse 7. "Among the bushes they brayed, under the nettles were they
gathered together."

And God "*drove out the man*" from the fair Edenic world into the
post-glacial desolation; and Paradise was lost, and--

"At the east of the garden of Eden he placed cherubims and *a flaming
sword*, which turned every way, to keep the way to the tree of life."

This is the sword of the comet. The Norse legends say:

"Yet, before all things, there existed what we call Muspelheim. It is a
world luminous, glowing, not to be dwelt in by strangers, and situate at
the end of the earth. Surtur holds his empire there. *In his hand there
shines a flaming sword*."

There was a great conflagration between the by-gone Eden and the present
land of stones and thistles.

Is there any other allusion besides this to the fire which accompanied
the comet in Genesis?

Yes, but it is strangely out of place. It is a distinct description of
the pre-glacial wickedness of the world, the fire falling from heaven,
the cave-life, and the wide-spread destruction of humanity; but the
compiler of these antique legends has located it in a time long
subsequent to the Deluge of Noah, and in the midst of a densely
populated world. It is as if one were to represent the Noachic Deluge as
having occurred in the time of Nero, in a single province of the Roman
Empire, while the great world went on its course unchanged by the
catastrophe which must, if the statement were true, have completely
overwhelmed it. So we find the story of Lot and the destruction of the
cities of the plain brought down to the time

{p. 327}

of Abraham, when Egypt and Babylon were in the height of their glory.
And Lot's daughters believed that the whole human family, except
themselves, had been exterminated; while Abraham was quietly feeding his
flocks in an adjacent country.

For if Lot's story is located in its proper era, what became of Abraham
and the Jewish people, and all the then civilized nations, in this great
catastrophe? And if it occurred in that age, why do we hear nothing more
about so extraordinary an event in the history of the Jews or of any
other people?

Mr. Smith says:

"The conduct of Lot in the mountain whither he had retired scarcely
admits of explanation. It has been generally supposed that his daughters
believed that the whole of the human race were destroyed, except their
father and themselves. But how they could have thought so, when they had
previously tarried at Zoar, it is not easy to conceive; and we can not
but regard the entire case as one of those problems which the Scriptures
present as indeterminate, on account of a deficiency of data on which to
form any satisfactory conclusion."\[1\]

The theory of this book makes the whole story tangible, consistent, and
probable.

We have seen that, prior to the coming of the comet, the human race,
according to the legends, had abandoned itself to all wickedness. In the
Norse Sagas we read:

Brothers will fight together,  
And become each other's bane;  
Sisters' children  
Their sib shall spoil;  
Hard, is the world,  
Sensual sins grow huge."

\[1. "The Patriarchal Age," vol. i, p. 388.\]

{p. 328}

In the legends of the British Druids we are told that it was "the
profligacy of mankind" that caused God to send the great disaster. So,
in the Bible narrative, we read that, in Lot's time, God resolved on the
destruction of "the cities of the plain," Sodom, (Od, Ad,) and Gomorrah,
(Go-Meru,) because of the wickedness of mankind:

Chap. xviii, verse 20. "And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous"--

therefore he determined to destroy them. When the angels came to Sodom,
the people showed the most villainous and depraved appetites. The angels
warned Lot to flee. Blindness (darkness?) came upon the people of the
city, so that they could not find the doors of the houses. The angels
took Lot and his wife and two daughters by the hands, and led or dragged
them away, and told them to fly "to the mountain, lest they be
consumed."

There is an interlude here, an inconsistent interpolation probably,
where Lot stays at Zoar, and persuades the Lord to spare Zoar; but soon
after we find all the cities of the plain destroyed, and Lot and his
family hiding in a cave in the mountain; so that Lot's intercession
seems to have been of no avail:

Verse 24. "Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah *brimstone
and fire from the Lord out of heaven*."

Verse 25. "And he overthrew those cities, and *all the cities of the
plain*, and all the *inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon
the ground*."

It was a complete destruction of all living things in that locality; and
Lot "*dwell in a cave*, he and his two daughters."

And the daughters were convinced that they were the

{p. 329}

last of the human race left alive on the face of the earth,
notwithstanding the fact that the Lord had promised (chap. iii, verse
21), "I will not overthrow this city," Zoar; but Zoar evidently *was*
overthrown. And the daughters, rather than see the human race perish,
committed incest with their father, and became the mothers of two great
and extensive tribes or races of men, the Moabites and the Ammonites.

This, also, looks very much as if they were indeed repeopling an empty
and desolated world..

To recapitulate, we have here, in due chronological order:

1\. The creation of the heavens and the earth, and all the host of them.

2\. The creation of the plants, animals, and man.

3\. The fair and lovely age of the Pliocene, the summer-land, when the
people went naked, or clothed themselves in the leaves of trees; it was
the fertile land where Nature provided abundantly everything for her
children.

4\. The serpent appears and overthrows this Eden.

5\. Fire falls from heaven and destroys a large part of the human race.

6\. A remnant take refuge in a cave.

7\. Man is driven out of the Edenic land, and a blazing sword, a
conflagration, waves between him and Paradise, between Niflheim and
Muspelheim.

What next?

We return now to the first chapter of this dislocated text:

Verse 2. "And the earth *was without form, and void*."

That is to say, chaos had come in the train of the comet. Otherwise, how
can we understand how God, as stated in the preceding verse, has just
made the heavens

{p. 330}

and the earth? How could his work have been so imperfect?

"*And darkness was upon the face of the deep*."

This is the primeval night referred to in all the legends; the long age
of darkness upon the earth.

"And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters."

The word for *spirit*, in Hebrew, as in Latin, originally meant *wind*;
and this passage might be rendered, "a mighty wind swept the face of the
waters." This wind represents, I take it, the great cyclones of the
Drift Age.

Verse 3. "And God said, Let there be light: and there was light."

The sun and moon had not yet appeared, but the dense mass of clouds,
pouring their waters upon the earth, had gradually, as Job expresses it,
"wearied" themselves,--they had grown thin; and the light began to
appear, at least sufficiently to mark the distinction between day and
night.

Verse 4. "And God saw the light: that it was good; and God divided the
light from the darkness."

Verse 5. "And God called the light day, and the darkness be called
night. And the evening and the morning were the first day."

That is to say, in subdividing the phenomena of this dark period, when
there was neither moon nor sun to mark the time, mankind drew the first
line of subdivision, very naturally, at that point of time, (it may have
been weeks, or months, or years,) when first the distinction between
night and day became faintly discernible, and men could again begin to
count time.

But this gain of light had been at the expense of the

{p. 331}

clouds; they had given down their moisture in immense and perpetual
rains; the low-lying lands of the earth were overflowed; the very
mountains, while not under water, were covered by the continual floods
of rain. There was water everywhere. To appreciate this condition of
things, one has but to look at the geological maps of the amount of land
known to have been overflowed by water during the so-called Glacial Age
in Europe.

And so the narrative proceeds:

Verse 6. "And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the
waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters."

This has been incomprehensible to the critics. It has been supposed that
by this "firmament" was meant the heavens; and that the waters "above
the firmament" were the clouds; and it has been said that this was a
barbarian's conception, to wit, that the unbounded and illimitable
space, into which the human eye, aided by the telescope, can penetrate
for thousands of billions of miles, was a blue arch a few hundred feet
high, on top of which were the clouds; and that the rain was simply the
leaking of the water through this roof of the earth. And men have said:
"Call ye this real history, or inspired narrative? Did God know no more
about the nature of the heavens than this?"

And Religion has been puzzled to reply.

But read Genesis in this new light: There was water everywhere; floods
from the clouds, floods from the melting ice; floods on the land, where
the return of the evaporated moisture was not able, by the channel-ways
of the earth, to yet find its way back to the oceans.

"And God said, Let there be a firmament *in the midst of the waters*,
and let it divide the waters from the waters."

{p. 332}

That is to say, first a great island appeared dividing the waters from
the waters. This was "the island of the innocent," referred to by Job,
where the human race did not utterly perish. We shall see more about it
hereafter.

"7. And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under
the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was
so.

"8. *And God called the firmament Heaven*. And the evening and the
morning were the second day."

The Hebrew *Rokiâ* is translated *stereoma*, or *solidity*, in the
Septuagint version. It meant solid land--not empty space.

And if man was not or had not yet been on earth, whence could the name
Heaven have been derived? For whom should God have named it, if there
were no human ears to catch the sound? God needs no lingual
apparatus--he speaks no human speech.

The true meaning probably is, that this was the region that had been for
ages, before the Drift and the Darkness, regarded as the home of the
godlike, civilized race; situated high above the ocean, "*in the midst
of the waters*," in mid-sea; precipitous and mountainous, it was the
first region to clear itself of the descending torrents.

What next?

"9. And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

"10. And God called the dry land Earth and the gathering together of the
waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good."

This may be either a recapitulation of the facts already stated, or it
may refer to the gradual draining off of the continents, by the passing
away of the waters; the continents

{p. 333}

being distinguished in order of time from the island "in the midst of
the waters."

"11. And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in
itself *upon the earth*: and it was so."

It has been objected, as I have shown, that this narrative was false,
because science has proved that the fruit-trees did not really precede
in order of creation the creeping things and the fish, which, we are
told, were not made until the fifth day, two days afterward. But if we
will suppose that, as the water disappeared from the land, the air grew
warmer by the light breaking through the diminishing clouds, the grass
began to spring up again, as told in the Norse, Chinese, and other
legends, and the fruit-trees, of different kinds, began to grow again,
for we are told they produced each "after his kind."

And we learn "that its seed is in itself upon the earth." Does this mean
that the seeds of these trees were buried in the earth, and their
vitality not destroyed by the great visitation of fire, water, and ice?

And on the fourth day "God made two great lights," the sun and moon. If
this were a narration of the original creation of these great orbs, we
should be told that they were made exclusively to give light. But this
is not the case. The light was there already; it had appeared on the
evening of the first day; they were made, we are told, to "divide the
day from the night." Day and night already existed, but in a confused
and imperfect way; even the day was dark and cloudy; but, with the
return of the sun, the distinction of day and night became once more
clear.

"14. And God said . . . Let them be for signs and for *seasons*, and for
days and years."

{p. 334}

That is to say, let them be studied, as they were of old, as
astronomical and astrological *signs*, whose influences control affairs
on earth. We have seen that in many legends a good deal is said about
the constellations, and the division of time in accordance with the
movements of the heavenly bodies, which was made soon after the
catastrophe:

"90. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life, and fowls that may fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven."

That is to say, the moving creatures, the fishes which still live, which
have escaped destruction in the deep waters of the oceans or lakes, and
the fowls which were flying wildly in the open firmament, are commanded
to bring forth abundantly, to "replenish" the desolated seas and earth.

"23. And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

"24. And God said, Let the earth *bring forth* the living creature after
his kind, cattle, and creeping thing and beast of the earth after his
kind: and it was so."

God does not, in this, *create* them; he calls them forth from the
earth, from the caves and dens where they had been hiding, each *after
his kind*; they were already divided into species and genera.

"28. And God blessed them," (the human family,) "and God said unto them,
Be fruitful, and multiply and REPLENISH the *earth*."

Surely the poor, desolated world needed replenishing, restocking. But
how could the word "replenish" be applied to a new world, never before
inhabited?

We have seen that in chapter ii (verses 16 and 17) God especially
limited man and enjoined him not to eat of the

{p. 335}

fruit of the tree of knowledge; while in v. 22, ch. iii, it is evident
that there was another tree, "the tree of life," which God did not
intend that man should enjoy the fruit of. But with the close of the
Tertiary period and the Drift Age all this was changed: these trees,
whatever they signified, had been swept away, "the blazing sword" shone
between man and the land where they grew, or had grown; and hence, after
the Age of Darkness, God puts no such restraint or injunction upon the
human family. We read:

Ch. i, v. 29. "And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing
seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and *every tree*, in the
which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; *to you it shall be for
meat*."

With what reason, if the text is in its true order, could God have given
man, in the first chapter, the right to eat the fruit of *every* tree,
and in the following chapters have consigned the whole race to ruin for
eating the fruit of one particular tree?

But after the so-called Glacial Age all limitations were removed. The
tree of knowledge and the tree of life had disappeared for ever. The
Drift covered them.

Reader, waive your natural prejudices, and ask yourself whether this
proposed readjustment of the Great Book does not place it thoroughly in
accord with all the revelations of science; whether it does not answer
all the objections that have been made against the reasonableness of the
story; and whether there is in it anything inconsistent with the
sanctity of the record, the essentials of religion, or the glory of God.

Instead of being, compelled to argue, as Religion now does, that the
whole heavens and the earth, with its twenty miles in thickness of
stratified rocks, were made in six actual days, or to interpret "days"
to mean vast periods

{p. 336}

of time, notwithstanding the record speaks of "the evening and the
morning" constituting these "days," as if they were really subdivisions
of sun-marked time; we here see that the vast Creation, and the great
lapses of geologic time, all lie far back of the day when darkness was
on the face of the deep; and that the six days which followed, and in
which the world was gradually restored to its previous condition, were
the natural subdivisions into which events arranged themselves. The
Chinese divided this period of reconstruction into "branches" or
"stems"; the race from whom the Jews received their traditions divided
it into days.

The first subdivision was, as I have said, that of the twilight age,
when light began to invade the total darkness; it was subdivided again
into the evening and the morning, as the light grew stronger.

The next subdivision of time was that period, still in the twilight,
when the floods fell and covered a large part of the earth, but
gradually gathered themselves together in the lower lands, and left the
mountains bare. And still the light kept increasing, and the period was
again subdivided into evening and morning.

And why does the record, in each case, tell us that the evening and the
morning "constituted the day, instead of the morning and the evening?
The answer is plain:--mankind were steadily advancing from darkness to
light; each stage terminating in greater clearness and brightness; they
were moving steadily forward to the perfect dawn. And it is a curious
fact that the Israelites, even now, commence the day with the period of
darkness: they begin their Sabbath on Friday at sunset.

The third subdivision was that in which the continents cleared
themselves more and more of the floods, and the increasing light and
warmth called forth grass and the

{p. 337}

trees, and clothed nature in a mantle of green. Man had come out of his
cave, and there were scattered remnants of the animal kingdom here and
there, but the world, in the main, was manless and lifeless--a scene of
waste and desolation.

In the fourth subdivision of time, the sun, moon, and stars
appeared;--dimly, and wrapped in clouds, in the evening; clearer and
brighter in the morning.

In the next subdivision of time, the fish, which spawn by the million,
and the birds, which quadruple their numbers in a year, began to
multiply and scatter themselves, and appear everywhere through the
waters and on the land. And still the light kept increasing, and "the
evening and the morning were the fifth day."

And on the sixth day, man and the animals, slower to increase, and
requiring a longer period to reach maturity, began to spread and show
themselves everywhere on the face of the earth.

There was a long interval before man sent out his colonies and
repossessed the desolated continents. In Europe, as I have shown, twelve
feet of stalagmite intervenes in the caves between the remains of
pre-glacial and post-glacial man. As this deposit forms at a very slow
rate, it indicates that, for long ages after the great destruction, man
did not dwell in Europe. Slowly, "like a great blot that spreads," the
race expanded again over its ancient bunting-grounds.

And still the skies grew brighter, the storms grew less, the earth grew
warmer, and "the evening and the morning" constituted the sixth
subdivision of time.

And this process is still going on. Mr. James Geikie says:

"We are sure of this, that since the deposition of the shelly clays, and
the disappearance of the latest local glaciers,

{p. 338}

there have been no oscillations, but only a *gradual amelioration of
climate*."\[1\]

The world, like Milton's lion, is still trying to disengage its binder
limbs from the superincumbent weight of the Drift. Every snow-storm,
every chilling blast that blows out from the frozen lips of the icy
North, is but a reminiscence of Ragnarok.

But the great cosmical catastrophe was substantially over with the close
of the sixth day. We are now in the seventh day. The darkness has gone;
the sun has come back; the waters have returned to their bounds;
vegetation has resumed its place; the fish, the birds, the animals, men,
are once more populous in ocean, air, and on the land; the comet is
gone, and the orderly processes of nature are around us, and God is
"resting" from the great task of restoring his afflicted world.

The necessity for some such interpretation as this was apparent to the
early fathers of the Christian Church, although they possessed no theory
of a. comet. St. Basil, St. Cæsarius, and Origen, long before any such
theory was dreamed of, argued that the sun, moon, and stars existed from
the beginning, but that they did not *appear* until the fourth day.
"Who," says Origen, "that has sense, can think that the first, second,
and third days were without sun, moon, or stars?"

But where were they? Why did they not appear? What obscured them?

What could obscure them but dense clouds? Where did the clouds come
from? They were vaporized water. What vaporized the water and caused
this darkness on the face of the deep, so dense that the sun, moon, and
stars did not appear until the world had clothed itself

\[1. "The Great Ice Age," p. 438.\]

{p. 389}

again in vegetation? Tremendous heat. Where did the heat come from? If
it was not caused by contact with a comet, *what was it*? And if it was
not caused by contact with a comet, how do you explain the blazing sword
at the gate of Eden; the fire falling from heaven on "the cities of the
plain"; and the fire that fell on Job's sheep and camels and consumed
them; and that drove Job to clamber by ropes down into the
narrow-mouthed bottomless cave; where he tells us of the leviathan, the
twisted, the undulating one, that cast down stones in the mire, and made
the angels in heaven to tremble, and the deep to boil like a pot? And is
it not more reasonable to suppose that this sublime religious poem,
called the Book of Job, represents the exaltation of the human soul
under the stress of the greatest calamity our race has ever endured,
than to believe that it is simply a record of the sufferings of some
obscure Arab chief from a loathsome disease? Surely inspiration should
reach us through a different channel; and there should be some
proportion between the grandeur of the thoughts and the dignity of the
events which produced them.

And if Origen is right, and it is absurd to suppose that the sun, moon,
and stars were not created until the third day, then the sacred text is
dislocated, transposed; and the second chapter narrates events which
really occurred before those mentioned in the first chapter; and the
"darkness" is something which came millions of years after that
"Beginning," in which God made the earth, and the heavens, and all the
host of them.

In conclusion, let us observe how fully the Bible record accords with
the statements of the Druidical, Hindoo, Scandinavian, and other
legends, and with the great unwritten theory which underlies all our
religion. Here we have:

{p. 340}

1\. The Golden Age; the Paradise.

2\. The universal moral degeneracy of mankind; the age of crime and
violence.

3\. God's vengeance.

4\. The serpent; the fire from heaven.

5\. The cave-life and the darkness.

6\. The cold; the struggle to live.

7\. The "Fall of Man," from virtue to vice; from plenty to poverty; from
civilization to barbarism; from the Tertiary to the Drift; from Eden to
the gravel.

8\. Reconstruction and regeneration.

Can all this be accident? Can all this mean nothing?

{p. 341}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV. Conclusions.--Chapter I. Was Pre-Glacial Man
Civilized?](rag28)
