[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

##### THE AFTER-WORD.

WHEN that magnificent genius, Francis Bacon, sent forth one of his great
works to the world, he wrote this prayer:

"Thou, O Father, who gavest the visible light as the first-born of thy
creatures, and didst pour into man the intellectual light as the top and
consummation of thy workmanship, be pleased to protect and govern this
work, which coming from thy goodness returneth to thy glory. . . . We
humbly beg that this mind may be steadfastly in us; and that thou, by
our hands and the hands of others, on whom thou shalt bestow the same
spirit, wilt please to convey a largess of new alms to thy family of
mankind."

And again he says:

"This also we beg, that human things may not prejudice such as are
divine; neither that from the unlocking of the gates of sense, and the
kindling of a greater natural light, anything of incredulity, or
intellectual night, may arise in our minds toward divine mysteries."

In the same spirit, but humbly halting afar after this illustrious man,
I should be sorry to permit this book to go out to the world without a
word to remove the impression which some who read it, and may believe
it, may form, that such a vast catastrophe as I have depicted militates
against the idea that God rules and cares for his world and his
creatures. It will be asked, If "there is a special providence even in
the fall of a sparrow," how

{p. 438}

could He have permitted such a calamity as this to overtake a beautiful,
populous, and perhaps civilized world?

Here we fall again upon the great debate of Job, and we may answer in
the words which the author of that book puts into the mouth of God
himself, when from out the whirlwind he answered him:

"Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him "He that
reproveth God, let him answer."

In other words, Who and what is man to penetrate the counsels and
purposes of the Creator; and who are you, Job?--

"Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare it,
if thou hast understanding.

"Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? Or who has
stretched the line upon it?

"Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? Or who laid the
corner-stone thereof?

"When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy."

Consider, Job, the littleness of man, the greatness of the universe; and
what right have you to ask Him, who made all this, the reasons for his
actions?

And this is a sufficient answer: A creature seventy inches long prying
into the purposes of an Awful Something, whose power ranges so far that
blazing suns are seen only as mist-specks!

But I may make another answer:

Although it seems that many times have comets smitten the earth,
covering it with *débris*, or causing its rocks to boil, and its waters
to ascend into the heavens, yet, considering all life, as revealed in
the fossils, from the first cells unto this day, *nothing has perished
that was worth preserving*.

{p. 439}

So far as we can judge, after every cataclysm the world has risen to
higher levels of creative development.

If I am right, despite these incalculable tons of matter piled on the
earth, despite heat and cyclones and darkness and ice and floods, not
even a tender tropical plant fit to adorn or sustain man's life was
blotted out; not an animal valuable for domestication was exterminated;
and not even the great inventions which man had attained to, during the
Tertiary Age, were lost. Nothing died but that which stood in the
pathway of man's development,--the monstrous animals, the Neanderthal
races, the half-human creatures intermediate between man and the brute.
The great centers of human activity to-day in Europe and America are
upon the Drift-deposits; the richest soils are compounded of the
so-called glacial clays. Doubtless, too, the human brain was forced
during the Drift Age to higher reaches of development under the terrible
ordeals of the hour.

Surely, then, we can afford to leave God's planets in God's hands. Not a
particle of dust is whirled in the funnel of the cyclone but God
identifies it, and has marked its path.

If we fall again upon

"Axe-ages, sword-ages,  
Wind-ages, murder-ages--

if "sensual sins grow huge"; if "brother spoils brother" if Sodom and
Gomorrah come again--who can say that God may not bring out of the
depths of space a rejuvenating comet?

Be assured of one thing--this world tends now to a deification of
matter.

Dives says: "The earth is firm under my feet; I own my possessions down
to the center of the earth and up to

{p. 440}

the heavens. If fire sweeps away my houses, the insurance company
reimburses me; if mobs destroy them, the government pays me; if civil
war comes, I can convert them into bonds and move away until the storm
is over; if sickness comes, I have the highest skill at my call to fight
it back; if death comes, I am again insured, and my estate makes money
by the transaction; and if there is another world than this, still am I
insured: I have taken out a policy in the ----- church, and pay my
premiums semiannually to the minister."

And Dives has an unexpressed belief that heaven is only a larger Wall
Street, where the millionaires occupy the front benches, while those who
never had a bank account on earth sing in the chorus.

Speak to Dives of lifting up the plane of all the underfed, under-paid,
benighted millions of the earth--his fellow-men--to higher levels of
comfort, and joy, and intelligence--not tearing down any but building up
all--and Dives can not understand you.

Ah, Dives! consider, if there is no other life than this, the fate of
these uncounted millions of your race! What does existence give to them?
What do they get out of all this abundant and beautiful world?

To look down the vista of such a life as theirs is like gazing into one
of the corridors of the Catacombs: an alley filled with reeking bones of
dead men; while from the cross-arches, waiting for the poor man's coming
on, ghastly shapes look out:--sickness and want and sin and grim despair
and red-eyed suicide.

Put yourself in his place, Dives, locked up in such a cavern as that,
and the key thrown away!

Do not count too much, Dives, on your lands and houses and parchments;
your guns and cannon and laws; your insurance companies and your
governments. There

{p. 441}

may be even now one coming from beyond Arcturus, or Aldebaran, or Coma
Berenices, with glowing countenance and horrid hair, and millions of
tons of *débris*, to overwhelm you and your possessions, and your
corporations, and all the ant-like devices of man in one common ruin.

Build a little broader, Dives. Establish spiritual relations. Matter is
not everything. You do not deal in certainties. You are but a vitalized
speck, filled with a fraction of God's delegated intelligence, crawling
over an egg-shell filled with fire, whirling madly through infinite
space, a target for the bombs of a universe.

Take your mind off your bricks and mortar, and put out your tentacles
toward the great spiritual world around you. Open communications with
God. You can not help God. For Him who made the Milky Way you can do
nothing. But here are his creatures. Not a nerve, muscle, or
brain-convolution of the humblest of these but duplicates your own; you
excel them simply in the coordination of certain inherited faculties
which have given you success. Widen your heart. Put your intellect to
work to so readjust the values of labor, and increase the productive
capacity of Nature, that plenty and happiness, light and hope, may dwell
in every heart, and the Catacombs be closed for ever.

And from such a world God will fend off the comets with his great right
arm, and the angels will exult over it in heaven.
