[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl13) [Next](yl15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

## XII THE LEOPARD-MAN

A <span class="small">HANDSOME</span> stranger once came into a certain
village and strolled about among the people in mysterious silence. All
the maidens admired him and wished that he would choose one of them for
his bride. But he said nothing, and at last walked away into the forest
and disappeared from sight.

 A month later the stranger came again, and this time one of the maidens
fell so much in love with him that she resolved to follow him into the
forest, as she could not bear to be separated from him.

 When the stranger looked back and saw her coming behind him, he
stopped, and begged her to return home; but she would not, and
exclaimed: “I will never leave you, and wherever you go, I will follow.”

 “Beautiful maiden, you will regret it,” replied the stranger sadly, as
he hurried on.

 After a while he stopped again, and once <span id="page_19">p.
19</span> more begged her to retrace her steps; but she made the same
reply, and again the handsome stranger said in sorrowful tones: “You
will regret it, beautiful maiden!”

 They went far into the depths of the forest, and at length reached a
tree at the foot of which there lay a leopard-skin. Standing under the
tree, the stranger began to sing a melancholy song, in which he told her
that though he was allowed once a month to wander about in villages and
towns like a man, he was in reality a savage leopard and would rend her
in pieces as soon as he regained his natural form.

 With these words he flung himself upon the ground, and immediately
became a snarling leopard and began to pursue the terrified girl.

 But fear gave such speed to her feet that he could not overtake her. As
he pursued her he sang that he would tear her in small pieces, and she
in another song replied that he would never overtake her.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

 For a great distance they ran, and then the maiden suddenly came to a
deep but narrow river, which she could not cross. It seemed as if the
leopard would catch her after all. But a tree, which stood on the
river-bank, took pity on her and fell across the river, so that she was
able to cross.

 At last, nearly exhausted, she came to the edge of the forest and
reached the village in safety. The leopard, disappointed of its prey,
slunk back into the forest, and the handsome stranger was never seen
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl15)
