[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl22) [Next](yl24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XXI THE HEAD

T<span class="small">HERE</span> is a certain country where the
inhabitants have heads but no bodies. The Heads move about by jumping
along the ground, but they never go very far.

 One of the Heads desired to see the world, so he set out one morning
secretly. When he had gone some distance, he saw an old woman looking
out of the door of a hut, and he asked her if she would kindly lend him
a body.

 The old woman willingly lent him the body of her slave, and the Head
thanked her and went on his way.

 Later he came upon a young man sleeping under a tree, and asked him if
he <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> would kindly lend him a pair of arms,
as he did not appear to be using them. The young man agreed, and the
Head thanked him and went on his way.

 Later still he reached a river-bank where fishermen sat singing and
mending their cone-shaped net. The Head asked if any one of them would
lend him a pair of legs, as they were all sitting and not walking. One
of the fishermen agreed, and the Head thanked him and went on his way.

 But now he had legs, arms, and a body, and so appeared like any other
man.

 In the evening he reached a town and saw maidens dancing while the
onlookers threw coins to those they favoured. The Head threw all his
coins to one of the dancers, and she so much admired his handsome form
that she consented to marry him and go to live with him in his own
country.

 Next day they set out, but when they came to the river-bank, the
stranger took off his legs and gave them back to the fisherman. Later
they reached the young <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> man, who still
lay sleeping under the tree, and to him the Head gave back his arms.
Finally they came to the cottage, where the old woman stood watching,
and here the stranger gave up his body.

 When the bride saw that her husband was merely a Head, she was filled
with horror, and ran away as fast as she could go.

 Now that the Head had neither body, arms, nor legs, he could not
overtake her, and so lost her for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl24)
