[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl23) [Next](yl25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XXII OLE AND THE ANTS

T<span class="small">HERE</span> was a certain lazy and disagreeable man
whom everyone called “Ole,” or “Lazy one.” He liked to profit by the
work of others, and was also very inquisitive about other people’s
affairs.

 Once he saw that the ants had begun building a pillar in the compound
of his house. But though the ants destroyed <span id="page_41">p.
41</span> all the plants in the compound, and stripped all the trees,
Ole would not trouble to kill them, or to break down their pillar.

 Instead, he thought to himself: “When the ants have made this pillar
very high, I will sit on the top of it, and then I shall be able to see
all that my neighbours are doing without leaving my compound.”

 This thought pleased him, and he was glad that the ants swarmed in his
compound. Each day the pillar grew higher, and at last the ants ceased
their building and began again elsewhere. Ole then climbed up on to the
pillar and spent the whole day observing the doings of his neighbours,
and laughing at their activity.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Here sit I like a great Chief,<br />
And I see all things!”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

sang Ole.

 But while he sat on the pillar, the ants began to demolish his house
and all that it contained, and in a short time there was nothing left of
all his food and possessions.

 Ole thus became the laughing-stock of the village, and everyone who saw
him <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> cried: “Ku ijoko!” or “Greetings to
you on your sitting!”

 Soon afterwards he died, and it is not known to this day whether he
died of shame or of laziness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl25)
