[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl29) [Next](yl31)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XXVIII THE TEN GOLDSMITHS

A <span class="small">GOLDSMITH</span> in a small village had ten sons,
to all of whom he taught his trade. In time they became skilful
craftsmen, <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> and when the old man was
dying he called the ten around him and addressed them thus:

 “My sons, in this small village there is certainly not enough work for
ten goldsmiths. I have therefore decided that the most skilful of you
shall remain here in my place, while the rest must go out into the world
and seek their fortunes elsewhere.”

 At this all the sons exclaimed that the plan was good, but who was to
say which of them was the most skilful? The old man smiled and answered:

 “I have thought of this also. I shall allow you all a month in which to
make some article of gold, and at the end of that time I will judge
which has been most skilfully executed.”

 The ten sons immediately set to work to fashion some article, and all
displayed great industry during the allotted space of time. At the end
of the month they came to their father, as he lay dying on the ground,
and placed before him the articles they had made.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

 One had made a chain of fine gold, every link of which was the perfect
shape of an elephant; another had made a knife, beautifully ornamented;
another a little casket; another a ring representing serpents twisted
together, with shining scales; another a water-pot of pleasing shape;
and so on.

 The old man smiled with pleasure to see what the industry of his sons
had accomplished, but when he counted the articles before him, he found
there were only nine. When he found that one of his sons had produced
nothing, he was angered, especially when this proved to be the eldest
son, whom he had secretly thought to be more skilful than his brothers.
After bitterly reproaching this son, whose name was Ayo, for his
laziness, the father prepared to give his decision on the work of the
other brothers; but Ayo suddenly stepped forward and begged him to wait
for another hour before making his choice.

 “Meanwhile, Father,” said he, “let us sit round the fire all together
for the last time, parching corn and telling stories.”

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

 This was how the family spent their time in the rainy season, and all
gladly consented.

 As they seated themselves upon the ground, the father took up a full
ripe ear of corn which lay near him. What was his astonishment when he
tried to pick the grains to discover that it was made of gold!

 For this was what Ayo had made, and he had prepared a little trick to
test the perfection of his work. So skilfully was it executed that all
had been deceived, thinking it a real ear of corn, and on this account
the father and nine brothers all agreed that Ayo’s work was certainly
the best.

 Thus Ayo took his father’s place, and the rest set out in different
directions to seek their fortune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl31)
