[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](md13)  [Next](md15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNCW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Morals and Dogma*, by Albert Pike, \[1871\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

<span id="img_20400"></span> ![](img/20400.jpg)

### XIII.

### ROYAL ARCH OF SOLOMON.

WHETHER the legend and history of this Degree are historically true, or
but an allegory, containing in itself a deeper truth and a profounder
meaning, we shall not now debate. If it be but a legendary myth, you
must find out for yourself what it means. It is certain that the word
which the Hebrews are not now permitted to pronounce was in common use
by Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Laban, Rebecca, and even among tribes
foreign to the Hebrews, before the time of Moses; and that it recurs a
hundred times in the lyrical effusions of David and other Hebrew poets.

We know that for many centuries the Hebrews have been forbidden to
pronounce the Sacred Name; that wherever it occurs, they have for ages
read the word *Adonaï* instead; and that under it, when the masoretic
points, which represent the vowels, came to be used, they placed those
which belonged to the latter word. The possession of the true
pronunciation was deemed to confer on him who had it extraordinary and
supernatural powers; and the Word itself, worn upon the person, was
regarded as an amulet, a protection against personal danger, sickness,
and evil spirits. We know that all this was a vain superstition, natural
to a rude people, necessarily disappearing as the intellect of man
became enlightened; and wholly unworthy of a Mason.

It is noticeable that this notion of the sanctity of the Divine Name or
Creative Word was common to all the ancient nations. The Sacred Word HOM
was supposed by the ancient Persians (who were among the earliest
emigrants from Northern India) to

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

be pregnant with a mysterious power; and they taught that by its
utterance the world was created. In India it was forbidden to pronounce
the word AUM or OM, the Sacred Name of the One Deity, manifested as
Brahma, Vishna, and Seeva.

These superstitious notions in regard to the efficacy of the Word, and
the prohibition against pronouncing it, could, being errors, have formed
no part of the pure primitive religion, or of the esoteric doctrine
taught by Moses, and the full knowledge of which was confined to the
Initiates; unless the whole was but an ingenious invention for the
concealment of some other Name or truth, the interpretation and meaning
whereof was made known only to the *select few*. If so, the common
notions in regard to the Word grew up in the minds of the people, like
other errors and fables among all the ancient nations, out of original
truths and symbols and allegories misunderstood. So it has always been
that allegories, intended as vehicles of truth, to be understood by the
sages, have become or bred errors, by being literally accepted.

It is true, that before the masoretic points were invented (which was
after the beginning of the Christian era), the pronunciation of a word
in the Hebrew language could not be known from the characters in which
it was written. It was, therefore, *possible* for that of the name of
the Deity to have been forgotten and lost. It is certain that its true
pronunciation is not that represented by the word Jehovah; and therefore
that *that* is not the true name of Deity, nor the Ineffable Word.

The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one
interpretation. They always had a *double* meaning, and sometimes *more*
than two, one serving as the envelope of the other. Thus the
*pronunciation* of the word was a symbol; and that pronunciation and the
word itself were lost, when the knowledge of the true nature and
attributes of God faded out of the minds of the Jewish people. That is
*one* interpretation--*true, but not the inner and profoundest one*.

Men were figuratively said to forget the *name* of God, when they lost
that *knowledge*, and worshipped the heathen deities, and burned incense
to them on the high places, and passed their children through the fire
to Moloch.

Thus the attempts of the ancient Israelites and of the Initiates to
ascertain the True Name of the Deity, and its pronunciation, and the
loss of the True Word, are an allegory, in which are represented

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

the general ignorance of the true nature and attributes of God, the
proneness of the people of Judah and Israel to worship other deities,
and the low and erroneous and dishonoring notions of the Grand Architect
of the Universe, which all shared except a few favored persons; for even
Solomon built altars and sacrificed to Astarat, the goddess of the
Tsidunim, and Malcu\_m, the Aamu\_nite god, and built high places for
Kamu\_s, the Moabite deity, and Malec the god of the Beni-Aamu\_n. The
true nature of God was unknown to them, like His name; and they
worshipped the calves of Jeroboam, as in the desert they did that made
for them by Aaru\_n.

The mass of the Hebrews did not believe in the existence of one only God
until a late period in their history. Their early and popular ideas of
the Deity were singularly low and unworthy. Even while Moses was
receiving the law upon Mount Sinai, they forced Aaron to make them an
image of the Egyptian god Apis, and fell down and adored it. They were
ever ready to return to the worship of the gods of the Mitzraim; and
soon after the death of Joshua they became devout worshippers of the
false gods of all the surrounding nations. "Ye have borne," Amos, the
prophet, said to them, speaking of their forty years' journeying in the
desert, under Moses, "the tabernacle of your Malec and Kaiu\_n your
idols, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves."

Among them, as among other nations, the conceptions of God formed by
individuals varied according to their intellectual and spiritual
capacities; poor and imperfect, and investing God with the commonest and
[coarsest](errata.htm#3) attributes of humanity, among the ignorant and
coarse; pure and lofty among the virtuous and richly gifted. These
conceptions gradually improved and became purified and ennobled, as the
nation advanced in civilization--being lowest in the historical books,
amended in the prophetic writings, and reaching their highest elevation
among the poets.

Among *all* the ancient nations there was one faith and one idea of
Deity for the enlightened, intelligent, and educated, and another for
the common people. To this rule the Hebrews were no exception. Yehovah,
to the mass of the people, was like the gods of the nations around them,
except that he was the *peculiar* God, first of the family of Abraham,
of that of Isaac, and of that of Jacob, and afterward the *National*
God; and, as they believed, *more powerful* than the other gods of the
same nature worshipped

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

by their neighbors--"Who among the Baalim is like unto thee, O
Yehovah?"--expressed their whole creed.

The Deity of the early Hebrews talked to Adam and Eve in the garden of
delight, as he walked in it in the cool of the day; he conversed with
Kayin; he sat and ate with Abraham in his tent; that patriarch required
a visible token, before he would believe in his positive promise; he
permitted Abraham to expostulate with him, and to induce him to change
his first determination in regard to Sodom; he wrestled with Jacob; he
showed Moses his person, though not his face; he dictated the minutest
police regulations and the dimensions of the tabernacle and its
furniture, to the Israelites; he insisted on and delighted in sacrifices
and burnt-offerings; he was angry, jealous, and revengeful, as well as
wavering and irresolute; he allowed Moses to reason him out of his fixed
resolution utterly to destroy his people; he commanded the performance
of the most shocking and hideous acts of cruelty and barbarity. He
hardened the heart of Pharaoh; he repented of the evil that he had said
he would do unto the people of Nineveh; and he did it not, to the
disgust and anger of Jonah.

Such were the popular notions of the Deity; and either the priests had
none better, or took little trouble to correct these notions; or the
popular intellect was not enough enlarged to enable them to entertain
any higher conceptions of the Almighty.

But such were not the ideas of the intellectual and enlightened few
among the Hebrews. It is certain that *they* possessed a knowledge of
the true nature and attributes of God; as the same class of men did
among the other nations--Zoroaster, Menu, Confucius, Socrates, and
Plato. But their doctrines on this subject were esoteric; they did not
communicate them to the people at large, but only to a favored few; and
as they were communicated in Egypt and India, in Persia and Phœnicia, in
Greece and Samothrace, in the greater mysteries, to the Initiates.

The communication of this knowledge and other secrets, some of which are
perhaps lost, constituted, under other names, what we now call
*Masonry*, or *Free* or *Frank-Masonry*. That knowledge was, in one
sense, *the Lost Word*, which was made known to the Grand Elect,
Perfect, and Sublime Masons. It would be folly to pretend that the
*forms* of Masonry were the same in those ages as they are now. The
present name of the Order, and its titles, and the names of the Degrees
now in use, were not then known.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Even Blue Masonry
cannot trace back its *authentic* history, *with its present Degrees*,
further than the year 1700, *if so far*. But, by whatever *name* it was
known in this or the other country, Masonry existed as it now exists,
the same in spirit and at heart, not only when Solomon builded the
temple, but centuries before--before even the first colonies emigrated
into Southern India, Persia, and Egypt, from the cradle of the human
race.

The Supreme, Self-existent, Eternal, All-wise, All-powerful, Infinitely
Good, Pitying, Beneficent, and Merciful Creator and Preserver of the
Universe was the same, by whatever name he was called, to the
intellectual and enlightened men of all nations. The name was nothing,
if not a symbol and representative hieroglyph of his nature and
attributes. The name AL represented his remoteness *above* men, his
*inaccessibility*; BAL and BALA, his *might*; ALOHIM, his various
*potencies*; IHUH, *existence* and the *generation* of things. None of
his names, among the Orientals, were the symbols of a divinely infinite
love and tenderness, and all-embracing mercy. As MOLOCH or MALEK he was
but an omnipotent *monarch*, a tremendous and irresponsible *Will*; as
ADONAÏ, only an arbitrary LORD and *Master*; as AL *Shadaï*, *potent*
and a DESTROYER.

To communicate true and correct ideas in respect of the Deity was one
chief object of the mysteries. In them, Khu\_ru\_m the King, and
Khu\_ru\_m the Master, obtained their knowledge of him and his
attributes; and in them that knowledge was taught to Moses and
Pythagoras.

Wherefore nothing forbids you to consider the whole legend of this
Degree, like that of the Master's, an allegory, representing the
perpetuation of the knowledge of the True God in the sanctuaries of
initiation. By the subterranean vaults you may understand the places of
initiation, which in the ancient ceremonies were generally under ground.
The Temple of Solomon presented a symbolic image of the Universe; and
resembled, in its arrangements and furniture, all the temples of the
ancient nations that practised the mysteries. The system of numbers was
intimately connected with their religions and worship, and has come down
to us in Masonry; though the esoteric meaning with which the numbers
used by us are pregnant is unknown to the vast majority of those who use
them. Those numbers were especially employed that had a reference to the
Deity, represented his attributes, or figured in the

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

frame-work of the world, in time and space, and formed more or less the
bases of that frame-work. These were universally regarded as sacred,
being the expression of order and intelligence, the utterances of
Divinity Himself.

The Holy of Holies of the Temple formed a cube; in which, drawn on a
plane surface, there are 4+3+2=9 *lines* visible, and three sides or
faces. It corresponded with the number *four*, by which the ancients
presented *Nature*, it being the number of substances or corporeal
forms, and of the elements, the cardinal points and seasons, and the
*secondary* colors. The number *three* everywhere represented the
Supreme Being. Hence the name of the Deity, engraven upon the
*triangular* plate, and that sunken into the *cube* of agate, taught the
ancient Mason, and teaches us, that the true knowledge of God, of His
nature and His attributes, is written by Him upon the leaves of the
great Book of Universal Nature, and may be read there by all who are
endowed with the requisite amount of intellect and intelligence. This
knowledge of God, so written there, and of which Masonry has in all ages
been the interpreter, is the *Master Mason's Word*.

Within the Temple, all the arrangements were mystically and symbolically
connected with the same system. The vault or ceiling, starred like the
firmament, was supported by twelve columns, representing the twelve
months of the year. The border that ran around the columns represented
the zodiac, and one of the twelve celestial signs was appropriated to
each column. The brazen sea was supported by twelve oxen, three looking
to each cardinal point of the compass.

And so in our day every Masonic Lodge represents the Universe. Each
extends, we are told, from the rising to the setting sun, from the South
to the North, from the surface of the Earth to the Heavens, and from the
same to the centre of the globe. In it are represented the sun, moon,
and stars; three great torches in the East, West, and South, forming a
triangle, give it light; and, like the Delta or Triangle suspended in
the East, and inclosing the Ineffable Name, indicate, by the
mathematical equality of the angles and sides, the beautiful and
harmonious proportions which govern in the aggregate and details of the
Universe; while those sides and angles represent, by their number,
three, the Trinity of Power, Wisdom, and Harmony, which presided at the
building of this marvellous work, These three great lights also
represent the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

great mystery of the three principles, of creation, dissolution or
destruction, and reproduction or regeneration, consecrated by all creeds
in their numerous Trinities.

The luminous pedestal, lighted by the perpetual flame within, is a
symbol of that light of *Reason*, given by God to man, by which he is
enabled to read in the Book of Nature the record of the thought, the
revelation of the attributes of the Deity.

The three Masters, Adoniram, Joabert, and Stolkin, are types of the True
Mason, who seeks for knowledge from pure motives, and that he may be the
better enabled to serve and benefit his fellow-men; while the
discontented and presumptuous Masters who were buried in the ruins of
the arches represent those who strive to acquire it for unholy purposes,
to gain power over their fellows, to gratify their pride, their vanity,
or their ambition.

The Lion that guarded the Ark and held in his mouth the key wherewith to
open it, figuratively represents Solomon, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, who preserved and communicated the key to the true knowledge of
God, of His laws, and of the profound mysteries of the moral and
physical Universe.

ENOCH \[‏ו ?X?Wןכ‎ Khano\_c\], we are told, walked with God three
hundred years, after reaching the age of sixty-five--"walked with God,
and he was no more, for God had taken him." His name signified in the
Hebrew, INITIATE or INITIATOR. The legend of the columns, of granite and
brass or bronze, erected by him, is probably symbolical. That of bronze,
which survived the flood, is supposed to symbolize the mysteries, of
which Masonry is the legitimate successor--from the earliest times the
custodian and depository of the great philosophical and religious
truths, unknown to the world at large, and handed down from age to age
by an unbroken current of tradition, embodied in symbols, emblems, and
allegories.

The legend of this Degree is thus, partially, interpreted. It is of
little importance whether it is in anywise historical. For its value
consists in the lessons which it inculcates, and the duties which it
prescribes to those who receive it. The parables and allegories of the
Scriptures are not less valuable than history. Nay, they are more so,
because ancient history is little instructive, and truths are concealed
in and symbolized by the legend and the myth.

There are profounder meanings concealed in the symbols of this .Degree,
connected with the philosophical system of the Hebrew

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kabalists, which
you will learn hereafter, if you should be so fortunate as to advance.
They are unfolded in the higher Degrees. The lion \[‏ו ?A?R?Y‎, ‏ו
?A?R?Y?H‎, *Arai*, *Araiah*, which also means the altar\] still holds in
his mouth the key of the enigma of the sphynx.

But there is one application of this Degree, that you are now entitled
to know; and which, remembering that Khu\_ru\_m, the Master, is the
symbol of human freedom, you would probably discover for yourself.

It is not enough for a people to *gain* its liberty. It must *secure*
it. It must not intrust it to the keeping, or hold it at the pleasure,
of any one man. The keystone of the Royal Arch of the great Temple of
Liberty is a fundamental law, charter, or constitution; the expression
of the fixed habits of thought of the people, embodied in a written
instrument, or the result of the slow accretions and the consolidation
of centuries; the same in war as in peace; that cannot be hastily
changed, nor be violated with impunity, but is sacred, like the Ark of
the Covenant of God, which none could touch and live.

A permanent constitution, rooted in the affections, expressing the will
and judgment, and built upon the instincts and settled habits of thought
of the people, with an independent judiciary, an elective legislature of
two branches, an executive responsible to the people, and the right of
trial by jury, will guarantee the liberties of a people, if it be
virtuous and temperate, without luxury, and without the lust of conquest
and dominion, and the follies of visionary theories of impossible
perfection.

Masonry teaches its Initiates that the pursuits and occupations of this
life, its activity, care, and ingenuity, the predestined developments of
the nature given us by God, tend to promote His great design, in making
the world; and are not at war with the great purpose of life. It teaches
that everything is beautiful in its time, in its place, in its appointed
office; that everything which man is put to do, if rightly and
faithfully done, naturally helps to work out his salvation; that if he
obeys the genuine principles of his calling, he will be a good man: and
that it is only by neglect and non-performance of the task set for him
by Heaven, by wandering into idle dissipation, or by violating their
beneficent and lofty spirit, that he becomes a bad man. The appointed
action of life is the great training of Providence; and if man yields
himself

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

to it, he will need neither churches nor ordinances, except for the
*expression* of his religious homage and gratitude.

For there is a religion of toil. It is not all drudgery, a mere
stretching of the limbs and straining of the sinews to tasks. It has a
meaning and an intent. A living heart pours life-blood into the toiling
arm; and warm affections inspire and mingle with man's labors. They are
the *home* affections. Labor toils a-field, or plies its task in cities,
or urges the keels of commerce over wide oceans; but home is its centre;
and thither it ever goes with its earnings, with the means of support
and comfort for others; offerings sacred to the thought of every true
man, as a sacrifice at a golden shrine. Many faults there are amidst the
toils of life; many harsh and hasty words are uttered; but still the
toils go on, weary and hard and exasperating as they often are. For in
that home is age or sickness, or helpless infancy, or gentle childhood,
or feeble woman, that must not want. If man had no other than mere
selfish impulses, the scene of labor which we behold around us would not
exist.

The advocate who fairly and honestly presents his case, with a feeling
of true self-respect, honor, and conscience, to help the tribunal on
towards the right conclusion, with a conviction that God's justice
reigns there, is acting a religious part, leading that day a religious
life; or else right and justice are no part of religion. Whether, during
all that day, he has once appealed, in form or in terms, to his
conscience, or not; whether he has once spoken of religion and God, or
not; if there has been the inward purpose, the conscious intent and
desire, that sacred justice should triumph, he has that day led a good
and *religious* life, and made a most essential contribution to that
religion of life and of society, the cause of equity between man and
man, and of truth and right action in the world.

Books, to be of religious tendency in the Masonic sense, need not be
books of sermons, of pious exercises, or of prayers. What-ever
inculcates pure, noble, and patriotic sentiments, or touches the heart
with the beauty of virtue, and the excellence of an up-right life,
accords with the religion of Masonry, and is the Gospel of literature
and art. That Gospel is preached from many a book and painting, from
many a poem and fiction, and review and newspaper; and it is a painful
error and miserable narrowness, not to recognize these wide-spread
agencies of Heaven's providing; not

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

to see and welcome these many-handed coadjutors, to the great and good
cause. The oracles of God do not speak from the pulpit alone.

There is also a religion of society. In business, there is much more
than sale, exchange, price, payment; for there is the sacred faith of
man in man. When we repose perfect confidence in the integrity of
another; when we feel that he will not swerve from the right, frank,
straightforward, conscientious course, for any temptation; his integrity
and conscientiousness are the image of God to us; and when we believe in
it, it is as great and generous an act, as when we believe in the
rectitude of the Deity.

In gay assemblies for amusement, the good affections of life gush and
mingle. If *they* did not, these gathering-places would be as dreary and
repulsive as the caves and dens of outlaws and robbers. When friends
meet, and hands are warmly pressed, and the eye kindles and the
countenance is suffused with gladness, there is a religion between their
hearts; and each loves and worships the True and Good that is in the
other. It is not policy, or self-interest, or selfishness that spreads
such a charm around that meeting, but the halo of bright and beautiful
affection.

The same splendor of kindly liking, and affectionate regard, shines like
the soft overarching sky, over all the world; over all places where men
meet, and walk or toil together; not over lovers' bowers and
marriage-altars alone, not over the homes of purity and tenderness
alone; but over all tilled fields, and busy workshops, and dusty
highways, and paved streets. There is not a worn stone upon the
sidewalks, but has been the altar of such offerings of mutual kindness;
nor a wooden pillar or iron railing against which hearts beating with
affection have not leaned. How many soever other elements there are in
the stream of life flowing through these channels, *that* is surely here
and everywhere; honest, heartfelt, disinterested, inexpressible
affection.

Every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings are
instruction in religion. For here are inculcated disinterestedness,
affection, toleration, devotedness, patriotism, truth, a generous
sympathy with those who suffer and mourn, pity for the fallen, mercy for
the erring, relief for those in want, Faith, Hope, and .Charity. Here we
meet as brethren, to learn to know and love each other. Here we greet
each other gladly, are lenient to each other's faults, regardful of each
other's feelings, ready to relieve

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

each other's wants. This is the true religion revealed to the ancient
patriarchs; which Masonry has taught for many centuries, and which it
will continue to teach as long as time endures. If unworthy passions, or
selfish, bitter, or revengeful feelings, contempt, dislike, hatred,
enter here, they are intruders and not welcome, strangers uninvited, and
not guests.

Certainly there are many evils and bad passions, and much hate and
contempt and unkindness everywhere in the world. We cannot refuse to see
the evil that is in life. But all is not evil. We still see God in the
world. There is good amidst the evil. The hand of mercy leads wealth to
the hovels of poverty and sorrow. Truth and simplicity live amid many
wiles and sophistries. There are good hearts underneath gay robes, and
under tattered garments also.

Love clasps the hand of love, amid all the envyings and distractions of
showy competition; fidelity, pity, and sympathy hold the long
night-watch by the bedside of the suffering neighbor, amidst the
surrounding poverty and squalid misery. Devoted men go from city to city
to nurse those smitten down by the terrible pestilence that renews at
intervals its mysterious marches. Women well-born and delicately
nurtured nursed the wounded soldiers in hospitals, before it became
fashionable to do so; and even poor lost women, whom God alone loves and
pities, tend the plague-stricken with a patient and generous heroism.
Masonry and its kindred Orders teach men to love each other, feed the
hungry, clothe the naked, comfort the sick, and bury the friendless
dead. Everywhere God finds and blesses the kindly office, the pitying
thought, and the loving heart.

There is an element of good in all men's lawful pursuits and a divine
spirit breathing in all their lawful affections. The ground on which
they tread is holy ground. There is a natural religion of life,
answering, with however many a broken tone, to the religion of nature.
There is a beauty and glory in Humanity, in man, answering, with however
many a mingling shade, to the loveliness of soft landscapes, and
swelling hills, and the wondrous glory of the starry heavens.

Men may be virtuous, self-improving, and religious in their employments.
Precisely for that, those employments were made. All their social
relations, friendship, love, the ties of family, were made to be holy,
They may be religious, not by a kind of protest

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

and resistance against their several vocations; but by conformity to
their true spirit. Those vocations do not *exclude* religion; but
*demand* it, for their own perfection. They may be religious laborers,
whether in field or factory; religious physicians, lawyers, sculptors,
poets, painters, and musicians. They may be religions in all the toils
and in all the amusements of life. Their life may be a religion; the
broad earth its altar; its incense the very breath of life; its fires
ever kindled by the brightness of Heaven.

Bound up with our poor, frail life, is the mighty thought that spurns
the narrow span of all visible existence. Ever the soul reaches outward,
and asks for freedom. It looks forth from the narrow and grated windows
of sense, upon the wide immeasurable creation; it knows that around it
and beyond it lie outstretched the infinite and everlasting paths.

Everything within us and without us ought to stir our minds to
admiration and wonder. We are a mystery encompassed with mysteries. The
connection of mind with matter is a mystery; the wonderful telegraphic
communication between the brain and every part of the body, the power
and action of the will. Every familiar step is more than a story in a
land of enchantment. The power of movement is as mysterious as the power
of thought. Memory, and dreams that are the indistinct echoes of dead
memories are alike inexplicable. Universal harmony springs from infinite
complication. The momentum of every step we take in our dwelling
contributes in part to the order of the Universe. We are connected by
ties of thought, and even of matter and its forces, with the whole
boundless Universe and all the past and coming generations of men.

The humblest object beneath our eye as completely defies our scrutiny as
the economy of the most distant star. Every leaf and every blade of
grass holds within itself secrets which no human penetration will ever
fathom. No man can tell what is its principle of life. No man can know
what his power of secretion is. Both are inscrutable mysteries. Wherever
we place our hand we lay it upon the locked bosom of mystery. Step where
we will, we tread upon wonders. The sea-sands, the clods of the field,
the water-worn pebbles on the hills, the rude masses of rock, are traced
over and over, in every direction, with a hand-writing older and more
significant and sublime than all the ancient ruins, and all the
overthrown and buried cities that past generations

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

have left upon the earth; for it is the handwriting of the Almighty.

A Mason's great business with life is to read the book of its teaching;
to find that life is not the doing of drudgeries, but the hearing of
oracles. The old mythology is but a leaf in that book; for it peopled
the world with spiritual natures; and science, many-leaved, still
spreads before us the same tale of wonder.

We shall be just as happy hereafter, as we are pure and up-right, and no
more, just as happy as our character prepares us to be, and no more. Our
moral, like our mental character, is not formed in a moment; it is the
habit of our minds; the result of many thoughts and feelings and
efforts, bound together by many natural and strong ties. The great law
of Retribution is, that all coming experience is to be affected by every
present feeling; every future moment of being must answer for every
present moment; one moment, sacrificed to vice, or lost to improvement,
is *forever* sacrificed and lost; an hour's delay to enter the right
path, is to put us back so far, in the everlasting pursuit of happiness;
and every sin, even of the best men, is to be thus answered for, if not
according to the full measure of its ill-desert, yet according to a rule
of unbending rectitude and impartiality.

The law of retribution presses upon every man, whether he thinks of it
or not. It pursues him through all the courses of life, with a step that
never falters nor tires, and with an eye that never sleeps. If it were
not so, God's government would not be impartial; there would be no
discrimination; no moral dominion; no light shed upon the mysteries of
Providence.

Whatsoever a man soweth, that, and not something else, shall he reap.
That which we are doing, good or evil, grave or gay, that which we do
to-day and shall do to-morrow; each thought, each feeling, each action,
each event; every passing hour, every breathing moment; all are
contributing to form the character, according to which we are to be
judged. Every particle of influence that goes to form that
aggregate,--our character,--will, in that future scrutiny, be sifted out
from the mass; and, particle by particle, with ages perhaps intervening,
fall a distinct contribution to the sum of our joys or woes. Thus every
idle word and idle hour will give answer in the judgment.

Let us take care, therefore, what we sow. An evil temptation comes upon
us; the opportunity of unrighteous gain, or of unhallowed

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

indulgence, either in the sphere of business or pleasure, of society or
solitude. We yield; and plant a seed of bitterness and sorrow. To-morrow
it will threaten discovery. Agitated and alarmed, we cover the sin, and
bury it deep in falsehood and hypocrisy. In the bosom where it lies
concealed, in the fertile soil of kindred vices, that sin dies not, but
thrives and grows; and other and still other germs of evil gather around
the accursed root; until, from that single seed of corruption, there
springs up in the soul all that is horrible in habitual lying, knavery,
or vice. Loathingly, often, we take each downward step; but a frightful
power urges us onward; and the hell of debt, disease, ignominy, or
remorse gathers its shadows around our steps even on earth; and are yet
but the beginnings of sorrows. The evil deed may be done in a single
moment; but conscience never dies, memory never sleeps; guilt never can
become innocence; and remorse can never whisper peace.

Beware, thou who art tempted to evil! Beware what thou layest up for the
future! Beware what thou layest up in the archives of eternity! Wrong
not thy neighbor! lest the thought of him thou injurest, and who suffers
by thy act, be to thee a pang which years will not deprive of its
bitterness! Break not into the house of innocence, to rifle it of its
treasure; lest when many years have passed over thee, the moan of its
distress may not have died away from thine ear! Build not the desolate
throne of ambition in thy heart; nor be busy with devices, and
circumventings, and selfish schemings; lest desolation and loneliness be
on thy path, as it stretches into the long futurity! Live not a useless,
an impious, or an injurious life! for bound up with that life is the
immutable principle of an endless retribution, and elements of God's
creating, which will never spend their force, but continue ever to
unfold with the ages of eternity. Be not deceived! God has formed thy
nature, thus to answer to the future. His law can never be abrogated,
nor His justice eluded; and forever and ever it will be true, that
"*Whatsoever a man soweth, that also he shall reap*."

<span id="img_21700"></span> ![](img/21700.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason](md15)
