[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](md25)  [Next](md27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNCW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Morals and Dogma*, by Albert Pike, \[1871\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

<span id="img_43500"></span> ![](img/43500.jpg)

### XXV.

### KNIGHT OF THE BRAZEN SERPENT.

THIS Degree is both philosophical and moral. While it teaches the
necessity of reformation as well as repentance, as a means of obtaining
mercy and forgiveness, it is also devoted to an explanation of the
symbols of Masonry; and especially to those which are connected with
that ancient and universal legend, of which that of Khir-Om Abi is but a
variation; that legend which, representing a murder or a death, and a
restoration to life, by a drama in which figure Osiris, Isis and Horus,
Atys and Cybele, Adonis and Venus, the Cabiri, Dionusos, and many
another representative of the active and passive Powers of Nature,
taught the Initiates in the Mysteries that the rule of Evil and Darkness
is but temporary, and that that of Light and Good will be eternal.

Maimonides says: "In the days of Enos, the son of Seth, men fell into
grievous errors, and even Enos himself partook of their infatuation.
Their language was, that since God has placed on high the heavenly
bodies, and used them as His ministers, it was evidently His will that
they should receive from man the same

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

veneration as the servants of a great prince justly claim from the
subject multitude. Impressed with this notion, they began to build
temples to the Stars, to sacrifice to them, and to worship them, in the
vain expectation that they should thus please the Creator of all things.
At first, indeed, they did not suppose the Stars to be the only Deities,
but adored in conjunction with them the Lord God Omnipotent. In process
of time, however, that great and venerable Name was totally forgotten,
and the whole human race retained no other religion than the idolatrous
worship of the Host of Heaven."

The first learning in the world consisted chiefly in symbols. The wisdom
of the Chaldæans, Phœnicians, Egyptians, Jews; of Zoroaster,
Sanchoniathon, Pherecydes, Syrus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, of all
the ancients, that is come to our hand, is symbolic. It was the mode,
says Serranus on Plato's Symposium, of the Ancient Philosophers, to
represent truth by certain symbols and hidden images.

"All that can be said concerning the Gods," says Strabo, "must be by the
exposition of old opinions and fables; it being the custom of the
ancients to wrap up in enigma and allegory their thoughts and discourses
concerning Nature; which are therefore not easily explained."

As you learned in the 24th Degree, my Brother, the ancient Philosophers
regarded the soul of man as having had its origin in Heaven. That was,
Macrobius says, a settled opinion among them all; and they held it to be
the only true wisdom, for the soul, while united with the body, to look
ever toward its source, and strive to return to the place whence it
came. Among the fixed stars it dwelt, until, seduced by the desire of
animating a body, it descended to be imprisoned in matter. Thenceforward
it has no other resource than recollection, and is ever attracted toward
its birth-place and home. The means of return are to be sought for in
itself. To re-ascend to its source, it must do and suffer in the body.

Thus the Mysteries taught the great doctrine of the divine nature and
longings after immortality of the soul, of the nobility of its origin,
the grandeur of its destiny, its superiority over the animals who have
no aspirations heavenward. If they struggled in vain to express its
*nature*, by comparing it to Fire and Light,--if they erred as to its
original place of abode, and the mode of its

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

descent, and the path which, descending and ascending, it pursued among
the stars and spheres, these were the accessories of the Great Truth,
and mere allegories designed to make the idea more impressive, and, as
it were, tangible, to the human mind.

Let us, in order to understand this old Thought, first follow the soul
in its descent. The sphere or Heaven of the fixed stars was that Holy
Region, and those Elysian Fields, that were the native domicile of
souls, and the place to which they re-ascended, when they had recovered
their primitive purity and simplicity. From that luminous region the
soul set forth, when it journeyed toward the body; a destination which
it did not reach until it had undergone three degradations, designated
by the name of Deaths; and until it had passed through the several
spheres and the elements. All souls remained in possession of Heaven and
of happiness, so long as they were wise enough to avoid the contagion of
the body, and to keep themselves from any contact with matter. But those
who, from that lofty abode, where they were lapped in eternal light,
have looked longingly toward the body, and toward that which we here
below call *life*, but which is to the soul a real *death*; and who have
conceived for it a secret desire,--those souls, victims of their
concupiscence, are attracted by degrees toward the inferior regions of
the world, by the mere weight of thought and of that terrestrial desire.
The soul, perfectly incorporeal, does not at once invest itself with the
gross envelope of the body, but little by little, by successive and
insensible alterations, and in proportion as it removes further and
further from the simple and perfect substance in which it dwelt at
first. It first surrounds itself with a body composed of the substance
of the stars; and afterward, as it descends through the several spheres,
with ethereal matter more and more gross, thus by degrees descending to
an earthly body; and its number of degradations or deaths being the same
as that of the spheres which it traverses.

The Galaxy, Macrobius says, crosses the Zodiac in two opposite points,
Cancer and Capricorn, the tropical points in the sun's course,
ordinarily called the Gates of the Sun. These two tropics, before his
time, corresponded with those constellations, but in his day with Gemini
and Sagittarius, in consequence of the precession of the equinoxes; but
the *signs* of the Zodiac remained unchanged; and the Milky Way crossed
at the *signs* Cancer and Capricorn, though not at those
*constellations*.

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

Through these *gates* souls were supposed to descend to earth and
re-ascend to Heaven. One, Macrobius says, in his dream of Scipio, was
styled the Gate of Men; and the other, the Gate of the Gods. Cancer was
the former, because souls descended by it to the earth; and Capricorn
the latter, because by it they re-ascended to their seats of
immortality, and became Gods. From the. Milky Way, according to
Pythagoras, diverged the route to the dominions of Pluto. Until they
left the Galaxy, they were not deemed to have commenced to descend
toward the terrestrial bodies. From that they departed, and to that they
returned. Until they reached the sign Cancer, they had not left it, and
were still Gods. When they reached Leo, they commenced their
apprenticeship for their future condition; and when they were at
Aquarius, the sign opposite Leo, they were furthest removed from human
life.

The soul, descending from the celestial limits, where the Zodiac and
Galaxy unite, loses its spherical shape, the shape of all Divine Nature,
and is lengthened into a cone, as a point is lengthened into a line; and
then, an indivisible monad before, it divides itself and becomes a
dead--that is, unity becomes division, disturbance, and conflict. Then
it begins to experience the disorder which reigns in matter, to which it
unites itself, becoming, as it were, intoxicated by draughts of grosser
matter: of which inebriation the cup of Bakchos, between Cancer and Leo,
is a symbol. It is for them the cup of forgetfulness. They assemble,
says Plato, in the fields of oblivion, to drink there the water of the
river Ameles, which causes men to forget everything. This fiction is
also found in Virgil. "If souls," says Macrobius, "carried with them
into the bodies they occupy all the knowledge which they had acquired of
divine things, during their sojourn in the Heavens, men would not differ
in opinion as to the Deity; but some of them forget more, and some less,
of that which they had learned."

We smile at these notions of the ancients; but we must learn to look
through these material images and allegories, to the ideas, struggling
for utterance, the great speechless thoughts which they envelop: and it
is well for us to consider whether we ourselves have yet found out any
*better* way of representing to ourselves the soul's origin and its
advent into this body, so entirely foreign to it; if, indeed, we have
ever thought about it at all; or have not ceased to think, in despair.

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

The highest and purest portion of matter, which nourishes and
constitutes divine existences, is what the poets term *nectar*, the
beverage of the Gods. The lower, more disturbed and grosser portion, is
what intoxicates souls. The ancients symbolized it as the River Lethe,
dark stream of oblivion. How [do](errata.htm#17) *we* explain the soul's
forgetfulness of its antecedents, or reconcile that utter absence of
remembrance of its former condition, with its essential immortality? In
truth, we for the most part dread and shrink from any attempt at
explanation of it to ourselves.

Dragged down by the heaviness produced by this inebriating draught, the
soul falls along the zodiac and the milky way to the lower spheres, and
in its descent not only takes, in each sphere, a new envelope of the
material composing the luminous bodies of the planets, but receives
there the different faculties which it is to exercise while it inhabits
the body.

In Saturn, it acquires the power of reasoning and intelligence, or what
is termed the logical and contemplative faculty. From Jupiter it
receives the power of action. Mars gives it valor, enterprise, and
impetuosity. From the Sun it receives the senses and imagination, which
produce sensation, perception, and thought. Venus inspires it with
desires. Mercury gives it the faculty of expressing and enunciating what
it thinks and feels. And, on entering the sphere of the Moon, it
acquires the force of generation and growth. This lunary sphere, lowest
and basest to divine bodies, is first and highest to terrestrial bodies.
And the lunary body there assumed by the soul, while, as it were, the
sediment of celestial matter, is also the first substance of animal
matter.

The celestial bodies, Heaven, the Stars, and the other Divine elements,
ever aspire to rise. The soul reaching the region which mortality
inhabits, tends toward terrestrial bodies, and is deemed to die. Let no
one, says Macrobius, be surprised that we so frequently speak of the
*death* of this soul, which yet we call immortal. It is neither annulled
nor destroyed by such death: but merely enfeebled for a time; and does
not thereby forfeit its prerogative of immortality; for afterward, freed
from the body, when it has been purified from the vice-stains contracted
during that connection, it is re-established in all its privileges, and
returns to the luminous abode of its immortality.

On its return, it restores to each sphere through which it ascends, the
passions and earthly faculties received from them: to

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

the Moon, the faculty of increase and diminution of the body; to
Mercury, fraud, the architect of evils; to Venus, the seductive love of
pleasure; to the Sun, the passion for greatness and empire; to Mars,
audacity and temerity; to Jupiter, avarice; and to Saturn, falsehood and
deceit: and at last, relieved of all, it enters naked and pure into the
eighth sphere or highest Heaven.

All this agrees with the doctrine of Plato, that the soul cannot
re-enter into Heaven, until the revolutions of the Universe shall have
restored it to its primitive condition, and purified it from the effects
of its contact with the four elements.

This opinion of the pre-existence of souls, as pure and celestial
substances, before their union with our bodies, to put on and animate
which they descend from Heaven, is one of great antiquity. A modern
Rabbi, Manasseh Ben Israel, says it was always the belief of the
Hebrews. It was that of most philosophers who admitted the immortality
of the soul: and therefore it was taught in the Mysteries; for, as
Lactantius says, they could not see how it was possible that the soul
should exist *after* the body, if it had not existed *before* it, and if
its nature was not independent of that of the body. The same doctrine
was adopted by the most learned of the Greek Fathers, and by many of the
Latins: and it would probably prevail largely at the present day, if men
troubled themselves to think upon this subject at all, and to inquire
whether the soul's immortality involved its prior existence.

Some philosophers held that the soul was incarcerated in the body, by
way of punishment for sins committed by it in a prior state. How they
reconciled this with the same soul's unconsciousness of any such prior
state, or of sin committed there, does not appear. Others held that God,
of his mere will, sent the soul to inhabit the body. The Kabalists
united the two opinions. They held that there are four worlds,
*Aziluth*, *Briarth*, *Jezirath*, and *Aziath*; the world of
*emanation*, that of *creation*, that of *forms*, and the *material*
world; one above and more perfect than the other, in that order, both as
regards their own nature and that of the beings who inhabit them. All
souls are originally in the world Aziluth, the Supreme Heaven, abode of
God, and of pure and immortal spirits. Those who descend from it without
fault of their own, by God's order, are gifted with a divine fire, which
preserves them from the contagion of matter, and restores them to Heaven
so soon as their mission is ended. Those who descend through,

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

their own fault, go from world to world, insensibly losing their love of
Divine things, and their self-contemplation; until they reach the world
Aziath, falling by their own weight. This is a pure Platonism, clothed
with the images and words peculiar to the Kabalists. It was the doctrine
of the Essenes, who, says Porphyry, "believe that souls descend from the
most subtile ether, attracted to bodies by the seductions of matter." It
was in substance the doctrine of Origen; and it came from the Chaldæans,
who largely studied the theory of the Heavens, the spheres, and the
influences of the signs and constellations.

The Gnostics made souls ascend and descend through eight Heavens, in
each of which were certain Powers that opposed their return, and often
drove them back to earth, when not sufficiently purified. The last of
these Powers, nearest the luminous abode of souls, was a serpent or
dragon.

In the ancient doctrine, certain Genii were charged with the duty of
conducting souls to the bodies destined to receive them, and of
withdrawing them from those bodies. According to Plutarch, these were
the functions of Proserpine and Mercury. In Plato, a familiar Genius
accompanies man at his birth, follows and watches him all his life, and
at death conducts him to the tribunal of the Great Judge. These Genii
are the media of communication between man and the Gods; and the soul is
ever in their presence. This doctrine is taught in the oracles of
Zoroaster: and these Genii were the Intelligences that resided in the
planets.

Thus the secret science and mysterious emblems of initiation were
connected with the Heavens, the Spheres, and the Constellations: and
this connection must be studied by whomsoever would understand the
ancient mind, and be enabled to interpret the allegories, and explore
the meaning of the symbols, in which the old sages endeavored to
delineate the ideas that struggled within them for utterance, and could
be but insufficiently and inadequately expressed by language, whose
words are images of those things alone that can be grasped by and are
within the empire of the senses.

It is not possible for us thoroughly to appreciate the feelings with
which the ancients regarded the Heavenly bodies, and the ideas to which
their observation of the Heavens gave rise, because we cannot put
ourselves in their places, look at the stars with their eyes in the
world's youth, and divest ourselves .of the knowledge

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

which even the commonest of us have, that makes us regard the Stars and
Planets and all the Universe of Suns and Worlds, as a mere inanimate
machine and aggregate of senseless orbs, no more astonishing, except in
degree, than a clock or an orrery. *We* wonder and are amazed at the
Power and Wisdom (to most men it seems only a kind of Infinite
*Ingenuity*) of the MAKER: they wondered at the *Work*, and endowed it
with Life and Force and mysterious Powers and mighty Influences.

Memphis, in Egypt, was in Latitude 29° 5" North, and in Longitude 30°
18' East. Thebes, in Upper Egypt, in Latitude 25° 45' North, and
Longitude 32° 43' East. Babylon was in Latitude 32° 30' North, and
Longitude 44° 23' East: while Saba, the ancient Sabæan capital of
Ethiopia, was about in Latitude 15° North.

Through Egypt ran the great River Nile, coming from beyond Ethiopia, its
source in regions wholly unknown, in the abodes of heat and fire, and
its course from South to North. Its inundations had formed the alluvial
lands of Upper and Lower Egypt, which they continued to raise higher and
higher, and to fertilize by their deposits. At first, as in all
newly-settled countries, those inundations, occurring annually and
always at the same period of the year, were calamities: until, by means
of levees and drains and artificial lakes for irrigation, they became
blessings, and were looked for with joyful anticipation, as they had
before been awaited with terror. Upon the deposit left by the Sacred
River, as it withdrew into its banks, the husbandman sowed his seed; and
the rich soil and the genial sun insured him an abundant harvest.

Babylon lay on the Euphrates, which ran from Southeast to Northwest,
blessing, as all rivers in the Orient do, the arid country through which
it flowed; but its rapid and uncertain overflows bringing terror and
disaster.

To the ancients, as yet inventors of no astronomical instruments, and
looking at the Heavens with the eyes of children, this earth was a level
plain of unknown extent. About its boundaries there was speculation, but
no knowledge. The inequalities of its surface were the irregularities of
a plane. That it was a globe, or that anything lived on its under
surface, or on what it rested, they had no idea. Every twenty-four hours
the sun came up from beyond the Eastern rim of the world, and travelled
across the sky, over the earth, always South of, but sometimes nearer
and sometimes further from the point overhead; and sunk below the

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

world's Western rim. With him went light, and after him followed
darkness.

And every twenty-four hours appeared in the Heavens another body,
visible chiefly at night, but sometimes even when the sun shone, which
likewise, as if following the sun at a greater or less distance,
travelled across the sky; sometimes as a thin crescent, and thence
increasing to a full orb resplendent with silver light; and sometimes
more and sometimes less to the Southward of the point overhead, within
the same limits as the Sun.

Man, enveloped by the thick darkness of profoundest night, when
everything around him has disappeared, and he seems alone with himself
and the black shades that surround him, feels his existence a blank and
nothingness, except so far as memory recalls to him the glories and
splendors of light. Everything is dead to him, and he, as it were, to
Nature. How crushing and overwhelming the thought, the fear, the dread,
that perhaps that darkness may be eternal, and that day may possibly
never return; if it ever occurs to his mind, while the solid gloom
closes up against him like a wall! What then can restore him to like, to
energy, to activity, to fellowship and communion with the great world
which God has spread around him, and which perhaps in the darkness may
be passing away? LIGHT restores him to himself and to nature which
seemed lost to him. Naturally, therefore, the primitive men regarded
light as the principle of their real existence, without which life would
be but one continued weariness and despair. This necessity for light,
and its actual creative energy, were felt by all men: and nothing was
more alarming to them than its absence. It became their first Divinity,
a single ray of which, flashing into the dark tumultuous bosom of chaos,
caused man and all the Universe to emerge from it. So all the poets sung
who imagined Cosmogonies; such was the first dogma of Orpheus, Moses,
and the Theologians. Light was Ormuzd, adored by the Persians, and
Darkness Ahriman, origin of all evils: Light was the life of the
Universe, the friend of man, the substance of the Gods and of the Soul.

The sky was to them a great, solid, concave arch; a hemisphere of
unknown material, at an unknown distance above the flat level earth; and
along it journeyed in their courses the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, and
the Stars.

The Sun was to them a great globe of fire, of unknown dimensions,

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

at an unknown distance. The Moon was a mass of softer light; the stars
and planets lucent bodies, armed with unknown and supernatural
influences.

It could not fail to be soon observed, that at regular intervals the
days and nights were equal; and that two of these intervals measured the
same space of time as elapsed between the successive inundations, and
between the returns of spring-time and harvest. Nor could it fail to be
perceived that the changes of the moon occurred regularly; the same
number of days always elapsing between the first appearance of her
silver crescent in the West at evening and that of her full orb rising
in the East at the same hour; and the same again, between that and the
new appearance of the crescent in the West.

It was also soon observed that the Sun crossed the Heavens in a
different line each day, the days being longest and the nights shortest
when the line of his passage was furthest North, and the days shortest
and nights longest when that line was furthest South: that his progress
North and South was perfectly regular, marking four periods that were
always the same,--those when the days and nights were equal, or the
Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes; that when the days were longest, or the
Summer Solstice; and that when they were shortest, or the Winter
Solstice.

With the Vernal Equinox, or about the 25th of March of our Calendar,
they found that there unerringly came soft winds, the return of warmth,
caused by the Sun turning back to the Northward from the middle ground
of his course, the vegetation of the new year, and the impulse to
amatory action on the part of the animal creation. Then the Bull and the
Ram, animals most valuable to the agriculturist, and symbols themselves
of vigorous generative power, recovered their vigor, the birds mated and
budded their nests, the seeds germinated, the grass grew, and the trees
put forth leaves. With the Summer Solstice, when the Sun reached the
extreme northern limit of his course, came great heat, and burning
winds, and lassitude and exhaustion; then vegetation withered, man
longed for the cool breezes of Spring and Autumn, and the cool water of
the wintry Nile or Euphrates, and the Lion sought for that element far
from his home in the desert.

With the Autumnal Equinox came ripe harvests, and fruits of the tree and
vine, and falling leaves, and cold evenings presaging wintry frosts; and
the Principle and Powers of Darkness, prevailing

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

over those of Light, drove the Sun further to the South, so that the
nights grew longer than the days. And at the Winter Solstice the earth,
was wrinkled with frost, the trees were leafless, and the Sun reaching
the most Southern point in his career, seemed to hesitate whether to
continue descending, to leave the world to darkness and despair, or to
turn upon his steps and retrace his course to the Northward, bringing
back seed-time and Spring, and green leaves and flowers, and all the
delights of love.

Thus, naturally and necessarily, time was divided, first into days, and
then into moons or months, and years; and with these divisions and the
movements of the Heavenly bodies that marked them, were associated and
connected all men's physical enjoyments and privations. Wholly
agricultural, and in their frail habitations greatly at the mercy of the
elements and the changing seasons, the primitive people of the Orient
were most deeply interested in the recurrence of the periodical
phenomena presented by the two great luminaries of Heaven, on whose
regularity all their prosperity depended.

And the attentive observer soon noticed that the smaller lights of
Heaven were, apparently, even more regular than the Sun and Moon, and
foretold with unerring certainty, by their risings and settings, the
periods of recurrence of the different phenomena and seasons on which
the physical well-being of all men depended. They soon felt the
necessity of distinguishing the individual stars, or groups of stars,
and giving them names, that they might understand each other, when
referring to and designating them. Necessity produced designations at
once natural and artificial. Observing that, in the circle of the year,
the renewal and periodical appearance of the productions of the earth
were constantly associated, not only with the courses of the Sun, but
also with the rising and setting of certain Stars, and with their
position relatively to the Sun, the centre to which they referred the
whole starry host, the mind naturally connected the celestial and
terrestrial objects that were *in fact* connected: and they commenced by
giving to particular Stars or groups of Stars the names of those
terrestrial objects which seemed connected with them; and for those
which still remained unnamed by this nomenclature, they, to complete a
system, assumed arbitrary and fanciful names.

Thus the Ethiopian of Thebes or Saba styled those Stars under

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

which the Nile commenced to overflow, Stars of Inundation, or that
*poured out water* (AQUARIUS).

Those Stars among which the Sun was, when he had reached the Northern
Tropic and began to *retreat* Southward, were termed, from his
retrograde motion, the Crab (CANCER).

As he approached, in Autumn, the middle point between the Northern and
Southern extremes of his journeying, the days and nights became equal;
and the Stars among which he was then found were called Stars of the
Balance (LIBRA).

Those stars among which the Sun was, when the Lion, driven from the
Desert by thirst, came to slake it at the Nile, were called Stars of the
Lion (LEO).

Those among which the Sun was at harvest, were called those of the
Gleaning Virgin, holding a Sheaf of Wheat (VIRGO).

Those among which he was found in February, when the Ewes brought forth
their young, were called Stars of the Lamb (Arms).

Those in March, when it was time to plough, were called Stars of the Ox
(TAURUS).

Those under which hot and burning winds came from the desert, venomous
like poisonous reptiles, were called Stars of the Scorpion (SCORPIO).

Observing that the annual return of the rising of the Nile was always
accompanied by the appearance of a beautiful Star, which at that period
showed itself in the direction of the sources of that river, and seemed
to warn the husbandman to be careful not to be surprised by the
inundation, the Ethiopian compared this act of that Star to that of the
Animal which by barking gives warning of danger, and styled it the Dog
(SIRIUS).

Thus commencing, and as astronomy came to be more studied, imaginary
figures were traced all over the Heavens, to which the different Stars
were assigned. Chief among them were those that lay along the path which
the Sun travelled as he climbed toward the North and descended to the
South: lying within certain limits and extending to an equal distance on
each side of the line of equal nights and days. This belt, curving like
a Serpent, was termed the Zodiac, and divided into twelve Signs.

At the Vernal Equinox, 2455 years before our Era, the Sun was entering
the sign and constellation Taurus, or the Bull; having passed through,
since he commenced, at the Winter Solstice, to ascend Northward, the
Signs Aquarius, Pisces and Aries; on

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

entering the first of which he reached the lowest limit of his journey
Southward.

From TAURUS, he passed through Gemini and Cancer, and reached LEO when
he arrived at the terminus of his journey Northward. Thence, through
Leo, Virgo, and Libra, he entered SCORPIO at the Autumnal Equinox, and
journeyed Southward through Scorpia, Sagittarius, and Capricornus to
AQUARIUS, the terminus of his journey South.

The path by which he journeyed through these signs became the
*Ecliptic*; and that which passes through the two equinoxes, the
*Equator*.

They knew nothing of the immutable laws of nature; and whenever the Sun
commenced to tend Southward, they feared lest he might continue to do
so, and by degrees disappear forever, leaving the earth to be ruled
forever by darkness, storm, and cold.

Hence they rejoiced when he commenced to re-ascend after the Winter
Solstice, struggling against the malign influences of Aquarius and
Pisces, and amicably received by the Lamb. And when at the Vernal
Equinox he entered Taurus, they still more rejoiced at the assurance
that the days would again be longer than the nights, that the season of
seed-time had come, and the Summer and harvest would follow.

And they lamented when, after the Autumnal Equinox, the malign influence
of the venomous Scorpion, and vindictive Archer, and the filthy and
ill-omened He-Goat dragged him down toward the Winter Solstice.

Arriving there, they said he had been slain, and had gone to the realm
of darkness. Remaining there three days, he rose again, and again
ascended Northward in the heavens, to redeem the earth from the gloom
and darkness of Winter, which soon became emblematical of sin, and evil,
and suffering; as the Spring, Summer, and Autumn became emblems of
happiness and immortality.

Soon they personified the Sun, and worshipped him under the name of
OSIRIS, and transmuted the legend of his descent among the Winter Signs,
into 'a fable of his death, his descent into the infernal regions, and
his resurrection.

The Moon became Isis, the wife of Osiris; and Winter, as well as the
desert or the ocean into which the Sun descended, became TYPHON, the
Spirit or Principle of Evil, warring against and destroying Osiris.

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

From the journey of the Sun through the twelve signs came the legend of
the twelve labors of Hercules, and the incarnations of Vishnu and
Buddha. Hence came the legend of the murder of Khu\_ru\_m,
representative of the Sun, by the three Fellow-crafts, symbols of the
three Winter signs, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, who assailed him
at the three gates of Heaven and slew him at the Winter Solstice. Hence
the search for him by the nine Fellow-crafts, the other nine signs, his
finding, burial, and resurrection.

The celestial Taurus, opening the new year, was the Creative Bull of the
Hindus and Japanese, breaking with his horn the egg out of which the
world is born. Hence the bull Arts was worshipped by the Egyptians, and
reproduced as a golden calf by Aaron in the desert. Hence the cow was
sacred to the Hindus. Hence, from the sacred and beneficent signs of
Taurus and Leo, the human-headed winged lions and bulls in the palaces
at Kouyounjik and Nimroud, like which were the Cherubim set by Solomon
in his Temple: and hence the twelve brazen or bronze oxen, on which the
laver of brass was supported.

The Celestial Vulture or Eagle, rising and setting with the Scorpion,
was substituted in its place, in many cases, on account of the malign
influences of the latter: and thus the four great periods of the year
were marked by the Bull, the Lion, the Man (Aquarius) and the Eagle;
which were upon the respective standards of Ephraim, Judah, Reuben, and
Dan; and still appear on the shield of American Royal Arch Masonry.

Afterward the Ram or Lamb became an object of adoration, when, in his
turn, he opened the equinox, to deliver the world from the wintry reign
of darkness and evil.

Around the central and simple idea of the annual death and resurrection
of the Sun a multitude of circumstantial details soon clustered. Some
were derived from other astronomical phenomena; while many were merely
poetical ornaments and inventions.

Besides the Sun and Moon, those ancients also saw a beautiful Star,
shining with a soft, silvery light, always following the Sun at no great
distance when he set, or preceding him when he rose. Another of a red
and angry color, and still another more kingly and brilliant than all,
early attracted their attention, by their free movements among the fixed
hosts of Heaven: and the latter by his unusual brilliancy, and the
regularity with which he rose and set. These were Venus, Mars, and
Jupiter. Mercury and Saturn

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

could scarcely have been noticed in the world's infancy, or until
astronomy began to assume the proportions of a science.

In the projection of the celestial sphere by the astronomical priests,
the zodiac and constellations, arranged in a circle, presented their
halves in diametrical opposition; and the hemisphere of Winter was said
to be adverse, opposed, contrary, to that of Summer. Over the angels of
the latter ruled a king (OSIRIS or ORMUZD), enlightened, intelligent,
creative, and beneficent. Over the fallen angels or evil genii of the
former, the demons or Devs of the subterranean empire of darkness and
sorrow, and its stars, ruled also a chief. In Egypt the Scorpion first
ruled, the sign next the Balance, and long the chief of the Winter
signs; and then the Polar Bear or Ass, called Typhon, that is, *deluge*,
on account of the rains which inundated the earth while that
constellation domineered. In Persia, at a later day, it was the serpent,
which, personified as Ahriman, was the Evil Principle of the religion of
Zoroaster.

The Sun does not arrive at the same moment in each year at the
equinoctial point on the equator. The explanation of his anticipating
that point belongs to the science of astronomy; and to that we refer you
for it. The consequence is, what is termed the precession of the
equinoxes, by means of which the Sun is constantly changing his place in
the zodiac, at each vernal equinox; so that now, the signs retaining the
names which they had 300 years before Christ, they and the
constellations do not correspond; the Sun being now in the
*constellation* Pisces, when he is in the *sign* Aries.

The annual amount of precession is 50 seconds and a little over \[50"
1.\]. The period of a complete Revolution of the Equinoxes, 25,856
years. The precession amounts to 30° or a sign, in 2155.6 years. So
that, as the sun now enters Pisces at the Vernal Equinox, he entered
Aries at that period, 300 years B. C., and Taurus 2455 B. C. And the
division of the Ecliptic, now *called* Taurus, lies in the Constellation
Aries; while the *sign* Gemini is in the *Constellation* Taurus. Four
thousand six hundred and ten years before Christ, the sun entered Gemini
at the Vernal Equinox.

At the two periods, 2455 and 300 years before Christ, and now, the
entrances of the sun at the Equinoxes and Solstices into the signs, were
and are as follows:--

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

*B. C.* 2455.

<div align="center">

|                  |            |          |                   |
|------------------|------------|----------|-------------------|
| Vern. Equinox,   | he entered | Taurus   | from Aries.       |
| Summer Solstice  |            | Leo      | from Cancer.      |
| Autumnal Equinox |            | Scorpio  | from Libra.       |
| Winter Solstice  |            | Aquarius | from Capricornus. |

</div>

*B. C.* 300.

<div align="center">

|              |     |             |                   |
|--------------|-----|-------------|-------------------|
| Vern. Eq.    |     | Aries       | from Pisces.      |
| Summer Sols. |     | Cancer      | from Gemini.      |
| Autumn Eq.   |     | Libra       | from Virgo.       |
| Winter Sols. |     | Capricornus | from Sagittarius. |

</div>

1872\.

<div align="center">

|              |     |             |                |
|--------------|-----|-------------|----------------|
| Vern. Eq.    |     | Pisces      | from Aquarius. |
| Sum. Sols.   |     | Gemini      | from Taurus.   |
| Aut. Eq.     |     | Virgo       | from Leo.      |
| Winter Sols. |     | Sagittarius | from Scorpio.  |

</div>

From confounding *signs* with *causes* came the worship of the sun and
stars. "If," says Job, "I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon
progressive in brightness; and my heart hath been secretly enticed, or
my mouth hath kissed my hand, this were an iniquity to be punished by
the Judge; for I should have denied the God that is above."

Perhaps we are not, on the whole, much wiser than those simple men of
the old time. For what do we know of *effect* and *cause*, except that
one thing regularly or habitually *follows* another?

So, because the heliacal rising of Sirius *preceded* the rising of the
Nile, it was deemed to *cause* it; and other stars were in like manner
held to *cause* extreme heat, bitter cold, and watery storm.

A religious reverence for the zodiacal Bull \[TAURUS\] appears, from a
very early period, to have been pretty general, perhaps it was
universal, throughout Asia; from that chain or region of Caucasus to
which it gave name; and which is still known under the appellation of
Mount Taurus, to the Southern extremities of the Indian Peninsula;
extending itself also into Europe, and through the Eastern parts of
Africa.

This evidently originated during those remote ages of the world, when
the colure of the vernal equinox passed across the stars in the head of
the sign Taurus \[among which was Aldebarán\]; a

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

period when, as the most ancient monuments of all the oriental nations
attest, the light of arts and letters first shone forth.

The Arabian word AL-DE-BARÁN, means the *foremost*, or *leading*, star:
and it could only have been so named, when it *did* precede, or *lead*,
all others. The year then opened with the sun in Taurus; and the
multitude of ancient sculptures, both in Assyria and Egypt, wherein the
bull appears with lunette or crescent horns, and the disk of the sun
between them, are direct allusions to the important festival of the
first new moon of the year: and there was everywhere an annual
celebration of the festival of the first new moon, when the year opened
with Sol and Luna in Taurus.

David sings: "Blow the trumpet in *the New Moon*; in the time appointed;
on our solemn feast-day: for this is a statute unto Israel, and a law of
the God of Jacob. This he ordained to Joseph, for a testimony, when he
came out of the land of Egypt."

The reverence paid to Taurus continued long after, by the precession of
the Equinoxes, the colure of the vernal equinox had come to pass through
Aries. The Chinese still have a temple, called "The Palace of the horned
Bull"; and the same symbol is worshipped in Japan and all over
Hindostan. The Cimbrians carried a brazen bull with them, as the image
of their God, when they overran Spain and Gaul; and the representation
of the Creation, by the Deity in the shape of a bull, breaking the shell
of an egg with his horns, meant Taurus, opening the year, and bursting
the symbolical shell of the annually-recurring orb of the new year.

Theophilus says that the Osiris of Egypt was supposed to be dead or
absent fifty days in each year. Landseer thinks that this was because
the Sabæan priests were accustomed to see, in the lower latitudes of
Egypt and Ethiopia, the first or chief stars of the Husbandman
\[BOÖTES\] sink achronically beneath the Western horizon; and then to
begin their lamentations, or hold forth the signal for others to weep:
and when his prolific virtues were supposed to be transferred to the
vernal sun, bacchanalian revelry became devotion.

Before the colure of the Vernal Equinox had passed into Aries, and after
it had left Aldebarán and the Hyades, the Pleiades were, for seven or
eight centuries, the leading stars of the Sabæan year. And thus we see,
on the monuments, the disk and crescent, symbols

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

of the sun and moon in conjunction, appear successively,--first on the
head, and then on the neck and back of the Zodiacal Bull, and more
recently on the forehead of the Ram.

The diagrammatical character or symbol, still in use to denote Taurus,
♉, is this very crescent and disk: a symbol that has come down to us
from those remote ages when this memorable conjunction in Taurus, by
marking the commencement, at once of the Sabæan year and of the cycle of
the Chaldæan Saros, so pre-eminently distinguished that sign as to
become its characteristic symbol. On a bronze bull from China, the
crescent is attached to the back of the Bull, by means of a cloud, and a
curved groove is provided for the occasional introduction of the disk of
the sun, when solar and lunar time were coincident and conjunctive, at
the commencement of the year, and of the lunar cycle. When that was
made, the year did not open with the stars in the *head* of the Bull,
but when the colure of the vernal equinox passed across the middle or
later degrees of the asterism Taurus, and the Pleiades were, in China,
as in Canaan, the leading stars of the year.

The crescent and disk combined always represent the conjunctive Sun and
Moon; and when placed on the head of the Zodiacal Bull, the commencement
of the cycle termed SAROS by the Chaldæans, and Metonic by the Greeks;
and supposed to be alluded to in Job, by the phrase, "Mazzaroth in his
season"; that is to say, when the first new Moon and new Sun of the year
were coincident, which happened once in eighteen years and a fraction.

On the sarcophagus of Alexander, the same symbol appears on the head of
a Rain, which, in the time of that monarch, was the leading sign. So too
in the sculptured temples of the Upper Nile, the crescent and disk
appear, not on the head of Taurus, but on the forehead of the Ram or the
Ram-headed God, whom the Grecian Mythologists called Jupiter Ammon,
really the Sun in Aries.

If we now look for a moment at the individual stars which composed and
were near to the respective constellations, we may find something that
will connect itself with the symbols of the Ancient Mysteries and of
Masonry.

It is to be noticed that when the Sun is in a particular constellation,
no part of that constellation will be seen, except just before sunrise
and just after sunset; and then only the edge of it: but the
constellations *opposite* to it will be visible. When the Sun is in
Taurus, for example, that is, when Taurus *sets with* the Sun,

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Scorpio rises as
he sets, and continues visible throughout the night. And if Taurus rises
and sets with the Sun to-day, he will, six months hence, rise at sunset
and set at sunrise; for the stars thus gain on the Sun two hours a
month.

Going back to the time when, watched by the Chaldæan shepherds, and the
husbandmen of Ethiopia and Egypt,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The milk-white Bull with golden horns  
"Led on the new-born year,"</span>

</div>

we see in the neck of TAURUS, the Pleiades, and in his face the Hyades,
"which Grecia from their showering names," and of whom the brilliant
Aldebarán is the chief; while to the southwestward is that most splendid
of all the constellations, Orion, with Betelgueux in his right shoulder,
Bellatrix in his left shoulder, Rigel on the left foot, and in his belt
the three stars known as the Three Kings, and now as the Yard and Ell.
Orion, ran the legend, persecuted the Pleiades; and to save them from
his fury, Jupiter placed them in the Heavens, where he still pursues
them, but in vain. They, with Arcturus and the Bands of Orion, are
mentioned in the Book of Job. They are usually called the Seven Stars,
and it is said there *were* seven, before the fall of Troy; though now
only six are visible.

The Pleiades were so named from a Greek word signifying *to sail*. In
all ages they have been observed for signs and seasons. Virgil says that
the sailors gave names to "the Pleiades, Hyades, and the Northern Car:
*Pleiadas, Hyadas, Claramque Lycaonis Arcton*." And Palinurus, he says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, Geminosque Triones,  
Armatumque auro circumspicit Oriona*,--</span>

</div>

studied Arcturus and the rainy Hyades and the Twin Triones, and Orion
cinctured with gold.

Taurus was the prince and leader of the celestial host for more than two
thousand years; and when his head set with the Sun about the last of
May, the Scorpion was seen to rise in the South-east.

The Pleiades were sometimes called *Vergiliæ*, or the Virgins of Spring;
because the Sun entered this cluster of stars in the season of blossoms.
Their Syrian name was *Succoth*, or *Succothbeneth*, derived from a
Chaldæan word signifying to speculate or observe.

The *Hyades* are five stars in the form of a V, 11° southeast of

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

the Pleiades. The Greeks counted them as seven. When the Vernal Equinox
was in Taurus, Aldebarán led up the starry host; and as he rose in the
East, Aries was about 27° high.

When he was close upon the meridian, the Heavens presented their most
magnificent appearance. Capella was a little further from the meridian,
to the north; and Orion still further from it to the southward. Procyon,
Sirius, Castor and Pollux had climbed about halfway from the horizon to
the meridian. Regulus had just risen upon the ecliptic. The Virgin still
lingered below the horizon. Fomalhaut was halfway to the meridian in the
Southwest; and to the Northwest were the brilliant constellations,
Perseus, Cepheus, Cassiopeia, and Andromeda; while the Pleiades had just
passed the meridian.

ORION is visible to all the habitable world. The equinoctial line passes
through the centre of it. When Aldebarán rose in the East, the Three
Kings in Orion followed him; and as Taurus set, the Scorpion, by whose
sting it was said Orion died, rose in the East.

Orion rises at noon about the 9th of March. His rising was accompanied
with great rains and storms, and it became very terrible to mariners.

In Boötes, called by the ancient Greeks *Lycaon*, from *lukos*, a wolf,
and by the Hebrews, Caleb Anubach, the Barking Dog, is the Great Star
ARCTURUS, which, when Taurus opened the year, corresponded with a season
remarkable for its great heat.

Next comes GEMINI, the Twins, two human figures, in the heads of which
are the bright Stars CASTOR and POLLUX, the Dioscuri, and the Cabiri of
Samothrace, patrons of navigation; while South of Pollux are the
brilliant Stars SIRIUS and PROCYON, the greater and lesser Dog: and
still further South, Canopus, in the Ship Argo.

Sirius is apparently the largest and brightest Star in the Heavens. When
the Vernal Equinox was in Taurus, he rose heliacally, that is, just
before the Sun, when, at the Summer Solstice, the Sun entered Leo, about
the 21st of June, fifteen days previous to the swelling of the Nile. The
heliacal rising of Canopus was also a precursor of the rising of the
Nile. Procyon was the forerunner of Sirius, and rose before him.

There are no important Stars in CANCER. In the Zodiacs of Esne and
Dendera, and in most of the astrological remains of

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egypt, the sign of
this constellation was a beetle (*Scarabæus*), which thence became
sacred, as an emblem of the gate through which souls descended from
Heaven. In the crest of Cancer is a cluster of Stars formerly called
*Præsepe*, the Manger, on each side of which is a small Star, the two of
which were called *Aselli* little asses.

In *Leo* are the splendid Stars, REGULUS, directly on the ecliptic, and
DENEBOLA in the Lion's tail. Southeast of Regulus is the fine Star COR
HYDRÆ.

The combat of Hercules with the Nemæan lion was his first labor. It was
the first sign into which the Sun passed, after falling below the Summer
Solstice; from which time he struggled to re-ascend.

The Nile overflowed in this sign. It stands first in the Zodiac of
Dendera, and is in all the Indian and Egyptian Zodiacs.

In the left hand of VIRGO (Isis or Ceres) is the beautiful Star SPICA
Virginis, a little South of the ecliptic. VINDEMIATRIX, of less
magnitude, is in the right arm; and Northwest of Spica, in Boötes (the
husbandman, Osiris), is the splendid star ARCTURUS.

The division of the first Decan of the Virgin, Aben Ezra says,
represents a beautiful Virgin with flowing hair, sitting in a chair,
with two ears of corn in her hand, and suckling an infant. In an Arabian
MS. in the Royal Library at Paris, is a picture of the Twelve Signs.
That of Virgo is a young girl with an infant by her side. Virgo was
Isis; and her representation, carrying a child (Horus) in her arms,
exhibited in her temple, was accompanied by this inscription: "I AM ALL
THAT IS, THAT WAS, AND THAT SHALL BE; and the fruit which I brought
forth is the Sun."

Nine months after the Sun enters Virgo, he reaches the Twins. When
Scorpio begins to rise, Orion sets: when Scorpio comes to the meridian,
Leo begins to set, Typhon reigns, Osiris is slain, and Isis (the Virgin)
his sister and wife, follows him to the tomb, weeping.

The Virgin and Boötes, setting heliacally at the Autumnal Equinox,
delivered the world to the wintry constellations, and introduced into it
the genius of Evil, represented by Ophiucus, the Serpent.

At the moment of the Winter Solstice, the Virgin rose heliacally (*with*
the Sun), having the Sun (Horus) in her bosom.

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

In LIBRA are four Stars of the second and third magnitude, which we
shall mention hereafter. They are Zuben-es-Chamali, Zuben-el-Gemabi,
Zuben-hak-rabi, and Zuben-el-Gubi. Near the last of these is the
brilliant and malign Star, ANTARES in Scorpio.

In SCORPIO, ANTARES, of the 1st magnitude, and remarkably red, was one
of the four great Stars, FOMALHAUT, in Cetus, ALDEBARAN in Taurus,
REGULUS in Leo, and ANTARES, that formerly answered to the Solstitial
and Equinoctial points, and were much noticed by astronomers. This sign
was sometimes represented by a Snake, and sometimes by a Crocodile, but
generally by a Scorpion, which last is found on the Mithriac Monuments,
and on the Zodiac of Dendera. It was considered a sign accursed, and the
entrance of the Sun into it commenced the reign of Typhon.

In Sagittarius, Capricornus, and Aquarius there are no Stars of
importance.

Near Pisces is the brilliant Star FOMALHAUT. No sign in the Zodiac is
considered of more malignant influence than this. It was deemed
indicative of *Violence* and *Death*. Both the Syrians and Egyptians
abstained from eating fish, out of dread and abhor-hence; and when the
latter would represent anything as odious, or express hatred by
Hieroglyphics, they painted a fish.

In Auriga is the bright Star CAPELLA, which to the Egyptians never set.

And, circling ever round the North Pole are Seven Stars, known as Ursa
Major, or the Great Bear, which have been an object of universal
observation in all ages of the world. They were venerated alike by the
Priests of Bel, the Magi of Persia, the Shepherds of Chaldea, and the
Phœnician navigators, as well as by the astronomers of Egypt. Two of
them, MERAK and DUBHE, always point to the North Pole.

The Phœnicians and Egyptians, says Eusebius, were the first who ascribed
divinity to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and regarded them as the sole
causes of the production and destruction of all beings. From them vent
abroad over all the world all known opinions as to the generation and
descent of the Gods. Only the Hebrews looked beyond the visible world to
an invisible Creator. All the rest of the world regarded as Gods those
luminous bodies that blaze in the firmament, offered them sacrifices,
bowed down

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

before them, and raised neither their souls nor their worship above the
visible heavens.

The Chaldæans, Canaanites, and Syrians, among whom Abraham lived, did
the same. The Canaanites consecrated horses and chariots to the Sun. The
inhabitants of Emesa in Phœnicia adored him under the name of
Elagabalus; and the Sun, as Hercules, was the great Deity of the
Tyrians. The Syrians worshipped, with fear and dread, the Stars of the
Constellation Pisces, and consecrated images of them in their temples.
The Sun as Adonis was worshipped in Byblos and about Mount Libanus.
There was a magnificent Temple of the Sun at Palmyra, which was pillaged
by the soldiers of Aurelian, who rebuilt it and dedicated it anew. The
Pleiades, under the name of Succoth-Beneth, were worshipped by the
Babylonian colonists who settled in the country of the Samaritans.
Saturn, under the name of Remphan, was worshipped among the Copts. The
planet Jupiter was worshipped as Bel or Baal; Mars as Malec, Melech, or
Moloch; Venus as Ashtaroth or Astarte, and Mercury as Nebo, among the
Syrians, Assyrians, Phœnicians, and Canaanites.

Sanchoniathon says that the earliest Phœnicians adored the Sun, whom
they deemed sole Lord of the Heavens; and honored him, under the name of
BEEL-SAMIN, signifying *King of Heaven*. They raised columns to the
elements, fire, and air or wind, and worshipped them; and Sabæism, or
the worship of the Stars, flourished everywhere in Babylonia. The Arabs,
under a sky always clear and serene, adored the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
Abulfaragius so informs us, and that each of the twelve Arab Tribes
invoked a particular Star as its Patron. The Tribe Hamyar was
consecrated to the Sun, the Tribe Cennah to the Moon; the Tribe Misa was
under the protection of the beautiful Star in Taurus, Aldebarán; the
Tribe Tai under that of Canopus; the Tribe Kais, of Sirius; the Tribes
Lachamus and Idamus, of Jupiter; the Tribe Asad, of Mercury; and so on.

The Saracens, in the time of Heraclius, worshipped Venus, whom they
called CABAR, or The Great; and they swore by the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
Shahristan, an Arabic author, says that the Arabs and Indians before his
time had temples dedicated to the seven Planets. Abulfaragius says that
the seven great primitive nations, from whom all others descended, the
Persians, Chaldæans, Greeks, Egyptians, Turks, Indians, and Chinese, all
originally were Sabæists, and worshipped the Stars. They all, he says,
like the Chaldæans, prayed, turning toward the North Pole.

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

three times a day, at Sunrise, Noon, and Sunset, bowing themselves three
times before the Sun. They invoked the Stars and the Intelligences which
inhabited them, offered them sacrifices, and called the fixed stars and
planets gods. Philo says that the Chaldæans regarded the stars as
sovereign arbiters of the order of the world, and did not look beyond
the visible causes to any invisible and intellectual being. They
regarded NATURE as the great divinity, that exercised its powers through
the action of its parts, the Sun, Moon, Planets, and Fixed Stars, the
successive revolutions of the seasons, and the combined action of Heaven
and Earth. The great feast of the Sabæans was when the Sun reached the
Vernal Equinox: and they had five other feasts, at the times when the
five minor planets entered the signs in which they had their exaltation.

Diodorus Siculus informs us that the Egyptians recognized two great
Divinities, primary and eternal, the Sun and Moon, which they thought
governed the world, and from which everything receives its nourishment
and growth: that on them depended all the great work of generation, and
the perfection of all effects produced in nature. We know that the two
great Divinities of Egypt were Osiris and Isis, the greatest agents of
nature; according to some, the Sun and Moon, and according to others,
Heaven and Earth, or the active and passive principles of generation.

And we learn from Porphyry that Chæremon, a learned priest of Egypt, and
many other learned men of that nation, said that the Egyptians
recognized as gods the stars composing the zodiac, and all those that by
their rising or setting marked its divisions; the subdivisions of the
signs into decans, the horoscope and the stars that presided therein,
and which were called Potent Chiefs of Heaven: that considering the Sun
as the Great God, Architect, and Ruler of the World, they explained not
only the fable of Osiris and Isis, but generally all their sacred
legends, by the stars, by their appearance and disappearance, by their
ascension, by the phases of the moon, and the increase and diminution of
her light; by the march of the sun, the division of time and the heavens
into two parts, one assigned to darkness and the other to light; by the
Nile and, in fine, by the whole round of physical causes.

Lucian tells us that the bull Apis, sacred to the Egyptians, was the
image of the celestial Bull, or Taurus; and that Jupiter Ammon, horned
like a ram, was an image of the constellation Aries. Arid Clemens of
Alexandria assures us that the four principal

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

sacred animals, carried in their processions, were emblems of the four
signs or cardinal points which fixed the seasons at the equinoxes and
solstices, and divided into four parts the yearly march of the sun. They
worshipped fire also, and water, and the Nile, which river they styled
Father, Preserver of Egypt, sacred emanation from the Great God Osiris;
and in their hymns in which they called it the god crowned with millet
(which grain, represented by the *pschent*, was part of the head-dress
of their kings), bringing with him abundance. The other elements were
also revered by them: and the Great Gods, whose names are found
inscribed on an ancient column, are the Air, Heaven, the Earth, the Sun,
the Moon, Night, and Day. And, in fine, as Eusebius says, they regarded
the Universe as a great Deity, composed of a great number of gods, the
different parts of itself.

The same worship of the Heavenly Host extended into every part of
Europe, into Asia Minor, and among the Turks, Scythians, and Tartars.
The ancient Persians adored the Sun as Mithras, and also the Moon,
Venus, Fire, Earth, Air, and Water; and, having no statues or altars,
they sacrificed on high places to the Heavens and to the Sun. On seven
ancient *pyrea* they burned incense to the Seven Planets, and considered
the elements to be divinities. In the Zend-Avesta we find invocations
addressed to Mithras, the stars, the elements, trees, mountains, and
every part of nature. The Celestial Bull is invoked there, to which the
Moon unites herself; and the four great stars, Taschter, Satevis,
Haftorang, and Venant, the great Star Rapitan, and the other
constellations which watch over the different portions of the earth.

The Magi, like a multitude of ancient nations, worshipped fire, above
all the other elements and powers of nature. In India, the Ganges and
the Indus were worshipped, and the Sun was the Great Divinity. They
worshipped the Moon also, and kept up the sacred fire. In Ceylon, the
Sun, Moon, and other planets were worshipped: in Sumatra, the Sun,
called Iri, and the Moon, called Handa. And the Chinese built Temples to
Heaven, the Earth, and genii of the air, of the water, of the mountains,
and of the stars, to the sea-dragon, and to the planet Mars.

The celebrated Labyrinth was built in honor of the Sun; and its twelve
palaces, like the twelve superb columns of the Temple at Hieropolis,
covered with symbols relating to the twelve signs and the occult
qualities of the elements, were consecrated to the twelve gods or
tutelary genii of the signs of the Zodiac. The

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

figure of the pyramid and that of the obelisk, resembling the shape of a
flame, caused these monuments to be consecrated to the Sun and to Fire.
And Timæus of Locria says: "The equilateral triangle enters into the
composition of the pyramid, which has four equal faces and equal angles,
and which in this is like fire, the most subtle and mobile of the
elements." They and the obelisks were erected in honor of the Sun,
termed in an inscription upon one of the latter, translated by the
Egyptian Hermapion, and to be found in Ammianus Marcellinus, "Apollo the
strong, Son of God, He who made the world, true Lord of the diadems, who
possesses Egypt and fills it with His glory."

The two most famous divisions of the Heavens, by seven, which is that of
the planets, and by twelve, which is that of the signs, are found on the
religious monuments of all the people of the ancient world. The twelve
Great Gods of Egypt are met with everywhere. They were adopted by the
Greeks and Romans; and the latter assigned one of them to each sign of
the Zodiac. Their images were seen at Athens, where an altar was erected
to each; and they were painted on the porticos. The People of the North
had their twelve *Azes*, or Senate of twelve great gods, of whom Odin
was chief. The Japanese had the same number, and like the Egyptians
divided them into classes, seven, who were the most ancient, and five,
afterward added: both of which numbers are well known and consecrated in
Masonry.

There is no more striking proof of the universal adoration paid the
stars and constellations, than the arrangement of the Hebrew camp in the
Desert, and the allegory in regard to the twelve Tribes of Israel,
ascribed in the Hebrew legends to Jacob. The Hebrew camp was a
quadrilateral, in sixteen divisions, of which the central four were
occupied by images of the four elements. The four divisions at the four
angles of the quadrilateral exhibited the four signs that the
astrologers called fixed, and which they regard as subject to the
influence of the four great Royal Stars, Regulus in Leo, Aldebarán in
Taurus, Antares in Scorpio, and Fomalhaut in the mouth of Pisces, on
which falls the water poured out by Aquarius; of which constellations
the Scorpion was represented in the Hebrew blazonry by the Celestial
Vulture or Eagle, that rises at the same time with it and is its
paranatellon. The other signs were arranged on the four faces of the
[quadrilateral](errata.htm#18), and in the parallel and interior
divisions.

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

There is an astonishing coincidence between the characteristics assigned
by Jacob to his sons, and those of the signs of the Zodiac, or the
planets that have their domicile in those signs.

*Reuben* is compared to running water, unstable, and that cannot excel;
and he answers to Aquarius, his ensign being a man. The water poured out
by Aquarius flows toward the South Pole, and it is the first of the four
Royal Signs, ascending from the Winter Solstice.

The Lion (Leo) is the device of *Judah*; and Jacob compares him to that
animal, whose constellation in the Heavens is the domicile of the Sun;
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; by whose grip, when that of apprentice
and that of fellow-craft,--of Aquarius at the Winter Solstice and of
Cancer at the Vernal Equinox,--had not succeeded in raising him,
Khu\_ru\_m was lifted out of the grave.

*Ephraim*, on whose ensign appears the Celestial Bull, Jacob compares to
the ox. *Dan*, bearing as his device a Scorpion, he compares to the
Cerastes or horned Serpent, synonymous in astrological language with the
vulture or pouncing eagle; and which bird was often substituted on the
flag of Dan, in place of the venomous scorpion, on account of the terror
which that reptile inspired, as the symbol of Typhon and his malign
influences; wherefore the Eagle, as its paranatellon, that is, rising
and setting at the same time with it, was naturally used in its stead.
Hence the four famous figures in the sacred pictures of the Jews and
Christians, and in Royal Arch Masonry, of the Lion, the Ox, the Man, and
the Eagle, the four creatures of the Apocalypse, copied there from
Ezekiel, in whose reveries and rhapsodies they are seen revolving around
blazing circles.

The Ram, domicile of Mars, chief of the Celestial Soldiery and of the
twelve Signs, is the device of *Gad*, whom Jacob characterizes as a
warrior, chief of his army.

Cancer, in which are the stars termed *Aselli*, or little asses, is the
device of the flag of *Issachar*, whom Jacob compares to an ass.

Capricorn, of old represented with the tail of a fish, and called by
astronomers the Son of Neptune, is the device of *Zebulon*, of whom
Jacob says that he dwells on the shore of the sea.

Sagittarius, chasing the Celestial Wolf, is the emblem of *Benjamin*,
whom Jacob compares to a hunter: and in that constellation the Romans
placed the domicile of Diana the huntress. Virgo,

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

the domicile of Mercury, is borne on the flag of *Naphtali*, whose
eloquence and agility Jacob magnifies, both of which are attributes of
the Courier of the Gods. And of *Simeon* and *Levi* he speaks as united,
as are the two fishes that make the Constellation Pisces, which is their
armorial emblem.

Plato, in his Republic, followed the divisions of the Zodiac and the
planets. So also did Lycurgus at Sparta, and Cecrops in the Athenian
Commonwealth. Chun, the Chinese legislator, divided China into twelve
Tcheou, and specially designated twelve mountains. The Etruscans divided
themselves into twelve Cantons. Romulus appointed twelve Lictors. There
were twelve tribes of Ishmael and twelve disciples of the Hebrew
Reformer. The New Jerusalem of the Apocalypse has twelve gates.

The Souciet, a Chinese book, speaks of a palace composed of four
buildings, whose gates looked toward the four corners of the world. That
on the East was dedicated to the new moons of the months of Spring; that
on the West to those of Autumn; that on the South to those of Summer;
and that on the North to those of Winter: and in this palace the Emperor
and his grandees sacrificed a lamb, the animal that represented the Sun
at the Vernal Equinox.

Among the Greeks, the march of the Choruses in their theatres
represented the movements of the Heavens and the planets, and the
Strophe and Anti-Strophe imitated, Aristoxenes says, the movements of
the Stars. The number five was sacred among the Chinese, as that of the
planets other than the Sun and Moon. Astrology consecrated the numbers
twelve, seven, thirty, and three hundred and sixty; and everywhere
*seven*, the number of the planets, was as sacred as *twelve*, that of
the signs, the months, the oriental cycles, and the sections of the
horizon. We shall speak more at large hereafter, in another Degree, as
to these and other numbers, to which the ancients ascribed mysterious
powers.

The Signs of the Zodiac and the Stars appeared on many of the ancient
coins and medals. On the public seal of the Locrians, Ozoles was
Hesperus, or the planet Venus. On the medals of Antioch on the Orontes
was the ram and crescent; and the Ram was the special Deity of Syria,
assigned to it in the division of the earth among the twelve signs. On
the Cretan coins was the Equinoctial Bull; and he also appeared on those
of the Mamertins and of Athens. Sagittarius appeared on those of the
Persians. In

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> India the twelve
signs appeared upon the ancient coins. The Scorpion was engraved on the
medals of the Kings of Comagena, and Capricorn on those of Zeugma,
Anazorba, and other cities. On the medals of Antoninus are found nearly
all the signs of the Zodiac.

Astrology was practised among all the ancient nations. In Egypt, the
book of Astrology was borne reverentially in the religious processions;
in which the few sacred animals were also carried, as emblems of the
equinoxes and solstices. The same science flourished among the
Chaldæans, and over the whole of Asia and Africa. When Alexander invaded
India, the astrologers of the Oxydraces came to him to disclose the
secrets of their science of Heaven and the Stars. The Brahmins whom
Apollonius consulted, taught him the secrets of Astronomy, with the
ceremonies and prayers whereby to appease the gods and learn the future
from the stars. In China, astrology taught the mode of governing the
State and families. In Arabia it was deemed the mother of the sciences;
and old libraries are full of Arabic books on this pretended science. It
flourished at Rome. Constantine had his horoscope drawn by the
astrologer Valens. It was a science in the middle ages, and even to this
day is neither forgotten nor unpractised. Catherine de Medici was fond
of it. Louis XIV. consulted his horoscope, and the learned Casini
commenced his career as an astrologer.

The ancient Sabæans established feasts in honor of each planet, on the
day, for each, when it entered its place of *exaltation*, or reached the
particular degree in the particular sign of the zodiac in which
astrology had fixed the place of its exaltation; that is, the place in
the Heavens where its influence was supposed to be greatest, and where
it acted on Nature with the greatest energy. The place of exaltation of
the Sun was in Aries, because, reaching that point, he awakens all
Nature, and warms into life all the germs of vegetation; and therefore
his most solemn feast among all nations, for many years before our Era,
was fixed at the time of his entrance into that sign. In Egypt, it was
called the Feast of Fire and Light. It was the Passover, when the
Paschal Lamb was slain and eaten, among the Jews, and Neurouz among the
Persians. The Romans preferred the place of *domicile* to that of
exaltation; and celebrated the feasts of the planets under the signs
that were their *houses*. The Chaldæans, whom, and not the Egyptians,
the Sabæans followed in this, preferred the places of exaltation.

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

Saturn, from the length of time required for his apparent revolution,
was considered the most remote, and the Moon the nearest planet. After
the Moon came Mercury and Venus, then the Sun, and then Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn.

So the risings and settings of the Fixed Stars, and their conjunctions
with the Sun, and their first appearance as they emerged from his rays,
fixed the epochs for the feasts instituted in their honor; and the
Sacred Calendars of the ancients were regulated accordingly.

In the Roman games of the circus, celebrated in honor of the Sun and of
entire Nature, the Sun, Moon, Planets, Zodiac, Elements, and the most
apparent parts and potent agents of Nature were personified and
represented, and the courses of the Sun in the Heavens were imitated in
the Hippodrome; his chariot being drawn by four horses of different
colors, representing the four elements and seasons. The courses were
from East to West, like the circuits round the Lodge, and seven in
number, to correspond with the number of planets. The movements of the
Seven Stars that revolve around the pole were also represented, as were
those of Capella, which by its heliacal rising at the moment when the
Sun reached the Pleiades, in Taurus, announced the commencement of the
annual revolution of the Sun.

The intersection of the Zodiac by the colures at the Equinoctial and
Solstitial points, fixed four periods, each of which has, by one or more
nations, and in some cases by the same nation at different periods, been
taken for the commencement of the year. Some adopted the Vernal Equinox,
because then day began to prevail over night, and light gained a victory
over darkness. Sometimes the Summer Solstice was preferred; because then
day attained its maximum of duration, and the acme of its glory and
perfection. In Egypt, another reason was, that then the Nile began to
over-flow, at the heliacal rising of Sirius. Some preferred the Autumnal
Equinox, because then the harvests were gathered, and the hopes of a new
crop were deposited in the bosom of the earth. And some preferred the
Winter Solstice, because then, the shortest day having arrived, their
length commenced to increase, and Light began the career destined to end
in victory at the Vernal Equinox.

The Sun was figuratively said to *die* and be *born again* at the Winter
Solstice; the games of the Circus, in honor of the invincible God-Sun,
were then celebrated, and the Roman year, established

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

or reformed by Numa, commenced. Many peoples of Italy commenced their
year, Macrobius says, at that time; and represented by the four ages of
man the gradual succession of periodical increase and diminution of day,
and the light of the Sun; likening him to an infant born at the Winter
Solstice, a young man at the Vernal Equinox, a robust man at the Summer
Solstice, and an old man at the Autumnal Equinox.

This idea was borrowed from the Egyptians, who adored the Sun at the
Winter Solstice, under the figure of an infant.

The image of the Sign in which each of the four seasons commenced,
became the form under which was figured the Sun of that particular
season. The Lion's skin was worn by Hercules; the horns of the Bull
adorned the forehead of Bacchus; and the autumnal serpent wound its long
folds round the Statue of Serapis, 2500 years before our era; when those
Signs corresponded with the commencement of the Seasons. When other
constellations replaced them at those points, by means of the precession
of the Equinoxes, those attributes were changed. Then the Ram furnished
the horns for the head of the Sun, under the name of Jupiter Ammon. He
was no longer born exposed to the waters of Aquarius, like Bacchus, nor
enclosed in an urn like the God Canopus; but in the Stables of Augeas or
the Celestial Goat. He then completed his triumph, mounted on an ass, in
the constellation Cancer, which then occupied the Solstitial point of
Summer.

Other attributes the images of the Sun borrowed from the constellations
which, by their rising and setting, fixed the points of departure of the
year, and the commencements of its four principal divisions.

First the Bull and afterward the Ram (called by the Persians the Lamb),
was regarded as the regenerator of Nature, through his union with the
Sun. Each, in his turn, was an emblem of the Sun overcoming the winter
darkness, and repairing the disorders of Nature, which every year was
regenerated under these Signs, after the Scorpion and Serpent of Autumn
had brought upon it barrenness, disaster, and darkness. Mithras was
represented sitting on a Bull; and that animal was an image of Osiris:
while the Greek Bacchus armed his front with its horns, and was pictured
with its tail and feet.

The Constellations also became noteworthy to the husbandman, which by
their rising or setting, at morning or evening, indicated

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

the coming of this period of renewed fruitfulness and new life. Capella,
or the kid Amalthea, whose horn is called that of abundance, and whose
place is over the equinoctial point, or Taurus; and the Pleiades, that
long indicated the Seasons, and gave rise to a multitude of poetic
fables, were the most observed and most celebrated in antiquity.

The original Roman year commenced at the Vernal Equinox. July was
formerly called *Quintilis*, the 5th month, and August *Sextilis*, the
6th, as *September* is still the 7th month, *October* the 8th, and so
on. The Persians commenced their year at the same time, and celebrated
their great feast of Neurouz when the Sun entered Aries and the
Constellation Perseus rose,--Perseus, who first brought down to earth
the heavenly fire consecrated in their temples: and all the ceremonies
then practised reminded men of the renovation of Nature and the triumph
of Ormuzd, the Light-God, over the powers of Darkness and Ahriman their
Chief.

The Legislator of the Jews fixed the commencement of their year in the
month Nisan, at the Vernal Equinox, at which season the Israelites
marched out of Egypt and were relieved of their long bondage; in
commemoration of which Exodus, they ate the Paschal Lamb at that
Equinox. And when Bacchus and his army had long marched in burning
deserts, they were led by a Lamb or Ram into beautiful meadows, and to
the Springs that watered the Temple of Jupiter Ammon. For, to the Arabs
and Ethiopians, whose great Divinity Bacchus was, nothing was so perfect
a type of Elysium as a Country abounding in springs and rivulets.

Orion, on the same meridian with the Stars of Taurus, died of the sting
of the celestial Scorpion, that rises when he sets; as dies the Bull of
Mithras in Autumn: and in the Stars that correspond with the Autumnal
Equinox we find those malevolent genii that ever war against the
Principle of good, and that take from the Sun and the Heavens the
fruit-producing power that they communicate to the earth.

With the Vernal Equinox, dear to the sailor as to the husbandman, came
the Stars that, with the Sun, open navigation, and rule the stormy Seas.
Then the Twins plunge into the solar fires, or disappear at setting,
going down with the Sun into the bosom of the waters. And these tutelary
Divinities of mariners, the Dioscuri or Chief Cabiri of Samothrace,
sailed with Jason to possess themselves of the golden-fleeced ram, or
Aries, whose rising in the

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

morning announced the Sun's entry into Taurus, when the Serpent-bearer
Jason rose in the evening, and, in aspect with the Dioscuri, was deemed
their brother. And Orion, son of Neptune, and most potent controller of
the tempest-tortured ocean, announcing sometimes calm and sometimes
tempest, rose after Taurus, rejoicing in the forehead of the new year.

The Summer Solstice was not less an important point in the Sun's march
than the Vernal Equinox, especially to the Egyptians, to whom it not
only marked the end and term of the increasing length of the days and of
the domination of light, and the maximum of the Sun's elevation; but
also the annual recurrence of that phenomenon peculiar to Egypt, the
rising of the Nile, which, ever accompanying the Sun in his course,
seemed to rise and fall as the days grew longer and shorter, being
lowest at the Winter Solstice, and highest at that of Summer. Thus the
Sun seemed to regulate its swelling; and the time of his arrival at the
solstitial point being that of the first rising of the Nile, was
selected by the Egyptians as the beginning of a year which they called
the Year of God, and of the Sothiac Period, or the period of Sothis, the
Dog-Star, who, rising in the morning, fixed that epoch, so important to
the people of Egypt. This year was also called the Heliac, that is the
Solar year, and the Canicular year; and it consisted of three hundred
and sixty-five days, without intercalation; so that at the end of four
years, or of four times three hundred and sixty-five days, making 1460
days, it needed to add a day, to make four complete revolutions of the
Sun. To correct this, some Nations made every fourth year consist, as we
do now, of 366 days: but the Egyptians preferred to add nothing to the
year of 365 days, which, at the end of 120 years, or of 30 times 4
years, was short 30 days or a month; that is to say, it required a month
more to complete the 120 revolutions of the Sun, though so many were
counted, that is, so many years. Of course the commencement of the 121st
year would not correspond with the Summer Solstice, but would precede it
by a month: so that, when the Sun arrived at the Solstitial point whence
he at first set out, and whereto he must needs return, to make in
reality 120 years, or 120 complete revolutions, the first month of the
121st year would have ended.

Thus, if the commencement of the year went back 30 days every 120 years,
this commencement of the year, continuing to

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

recede, would, at the end of 12 times 120 years, or of 1460 years, get
back to the Solstitial point, or primitive point of departure of the
period. The Sun would then have made but 1459 revolutions, though 1460
were counted; to make up which, a year more would need to be added. So
that the Sun would not have made his 1460 revolutions until the end of
1461 years of 365 days each,--each revolution being in reality not 365
days exactly, but 365¼.

This period of 1461 years, each of 365 days, bringing back the
commencement of the Solar year to the Solstitial point, at the rising of
Sirius, after 1460 complete Solar revolutions, was called in Egypt the
*Sothiac* period, the point of departure whereof was the Summer
Solstice, first occupied by the Lion and afterward by Cancer, under
which sign is Sirius, which opened the period. It was, says Porphyry, at
this Solstitial New Moon, accompanied by the rising of Seth or the
Dog-Star, that the beginning of the year was fixed, and that of the
generation of all things, or, as it were, the natal hour of the world.

Not Sirius alone determined the period of the rising of the Nile.
Aquarius, his urn, and the stream flowing from it, in opposition to the
sign of the Summer Solstice then occupied by the Sun, opened in the
evening the march of Night, and received the full Moon in his cup. Above
him and with him rose the feet of Pegasus, struck wherewith the waters
flow forth that the Muses drink. The Lion and the Dog, indicating, were
supposed to cause the inundation, and so were worshipped. While the Sun
passed through Leo, the waters doubled their depth; and the sacred
fountains poured their streams through the heads of lions. Hydra, rising
between Sirius and Leo, extended under three signs. Its head rose with
Cancer, and its tail with the feet of the Virgin and the beginning of
Libra; and the inundation continued while the Sun passed along its whole
extent.

The successive contest of light and darkness for the possession of the
lunar disk, each being by turns victor and vanquished, exactly resembled
what passed upon the earth by the action of the Sun and his journeys
from one Solstice to the other. The lunary revolution presented the same
periods of light and darkness as the year, and was the object of the
sane religious fictions. Above the Moon, Pliny said, everything is pure,
and filled with eternal light. There ends the cone of shadow which the
earth projects, and which produces night; there ends the sojourn of
night and

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

darkness; to it the air extends; but there we enter the pure substance.

The Egyptians assigned to the Moon the demiurgic or creative force of
Osiris, who united himself to her in the spring, when the Sun
communicated to her the principles of generation which she afterward
disseminated in the air and all the elements. The Persians considered
the Moon to have been impregnated by the Celestial Bull, first of the
signs of spring. In all ages, the Moon has been supposed to have great
influence upon vegetation, and the birth and growth of animals; and the
belief is as widely entertained now as ever, and that influence regarded
as a mysterious and inexplicable one. Not the astrologers alone, but
Naturalists like Pliny, Philosophers like Plutarch and Cicero,
Theologians like the Egyptian Priests, and Metaphysicians like Proclus,
believed firmly in these lunar influences.

"The Egyptians," says Diodorus Siculus, "acknowledged two great gods,
the Sun and Moon, or Osiris and Isis, who govern the world and regulate
its administration by the dispensation of the seasons. . . . Such is the
nature of these two great Divinities, that they impress an active and
fecundating force, by which the generation of beings in effected; the
Sun, by heat and that spiritual principle that forms the breath of the
winds; the Moon by humidity and dryness; and both by the forces of the
air which they share in common. By this beneficial influence everything
is born, grows, and vegetates. Wherefore this whole huge body, in which
nature resides, is maintained by the combined action of the Sun and
Moon, and their five qualities, the principles spiritual, fiery, dry,
humid, and airy."

So five primitive powers, elements, or elementary qualities, are united
with the Sun and Moon in the Indian theology: air, spirit, fire, water,
and earth: and the same five elements are recognized by the Chinese. The
Phœnicians, like the Egyptians, regarded the Sun and Moon and Stars as
sole causes of generation and destruction here below.

The Moon, like the Sun, changed continually the track in which she
crossed the Heavens, moving ever to and fro between the upper and lower
limits of the Zodiac; and her different places, phases, and aspects
there, and her relations with the Sun and the constellations, have been
a fruitful source of mythological fables.

All the planets had what astrology termed their *houses*, in the

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zodiac. The House
of the Sun was in Leo, and that of the Moon in Cancer. Each other planet
had two signs; Mercury had Gemini and Virgo; Venus, Taurus and Libra;
Mars, Aries and Scorpio; Jupiter, Pisces and Sagittarius; and Saturn,
Aquarius and Capricornus. From this distribution of the signs also came
many mythological emblems and fables; as also many came from the places
of exaltation of the planets. Diana of Ephesus, the Moon, wore the image
of a crab on her bosom, because in that sign was the Moon's domicile;
and lions bore up the throne of Horns, the Egyptian Apollo, the Sun
personified, for a like reason: while the Egyptians consecrated the
tauriform scarabæus to the Moon, because she had her place of exaltation
in Taurus; and for the same reason Mercury is said to have presented
Isis with a helmet like a bull's head.

A further division of the Zodiac was of each sign into three parts of
10° each, called Decans, or, in the whole Zodiac, 36 parts, among which
the seven planets were apportioned anew, each planet having an equal
number of Decans, except the first, which, opening and closing the
series of planets five times repeated, necessarily had one Decan more
than the others. This subdivision was not invented until after Aries
opened the Vernal Equinox; and accordingly Mars, having his house in
Aries, opens the series of decans and closes it; the planets following
each other, five times in succession, in the following order, Mars, the
Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc.; so that to
each sign are assigned three planets, each occupying 10 degrees. To each
Decan a God or Genius was assigned, making thirty-six in all, one of
whom, the Chaldæans said, came down upon earth every ten days, remained
so many days, and re-ascended to Heaven. This division is found on the
Indian sphere, the Persian, and that Barbaric one which Aben Ezra
describes. Each genius of the Decans had a name and special
characteristics. They concur and aid in the effects produced by the Sun,
Moon, and other planets charged with the administration of the world:
and the doctrine in regard to them, secret and august as it was held,
was considered of the gravest importance; and its principles, Firmicus
says, were not entrusted by the ancients, inspired as they were by the
Deity, to any but the Initiates, and to them only with great reserve,
and a kind of fear, and when cautiously enveloped with an obscure veil,
that they might not come to be known by the profane,

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

With these Decans were connected the *paranatellons* or those stars
*outside* of the Zodiac, that rise and set at the same moment with the
several divisions of 10° of each sign. As there were anciently only
forty-eight celestial figures or constellations, of which twelve were in
the Zodiac, it follows that there were, outside of the Zodiac,
thirty-six other asterisms, paranatellons of the several thirty-six
Decans. For example, as when Capricorn set, Sirius and Procyon, or Canis
Major and Canis Minor, rose, they were the Paranatellons of Capricorn,
though at a great distance from it in the heavens. The rising of Cancer
was known from the setting of Corona Borealis and the rising of the
Great and Little Dog, its three paranatellons.

The risings and settings of the Stars are always spoken of as connected
with the Sun. In that connection there are three kinds of them,
cosmical, achronical, and heliacal, important to be distinguished by all
who would understand this ancient learning.

When any Star rises or sets with the same degree of the same sign of the
Zodiac that the Sun occupies at the time, it rises and sets
simultaneously with the Sun, and this is termed rising or setting
*cosmically*; but a star that so rises and sets can never be seen, on
account of the light that precedes, and is left behind by the Sun. It is
therefore necessary, in order to know his place in the Zodiac, to
observe stars that rise just before or set just after him.

A Star that is in the East when night commences, and in the West when it
ends, is said to rise and set *achronically*. A Star so rising or
setting was in *opposition* to the Sun, rising at the end of evening
twilight, and setting at the beginning of morning twilight, and this
happened to each Star but once a year, because the Sun moves from West
to East, with reference to the Stars, one degree a day.

When a Star rises as night ends in the morning, or sets as night
commences in the evening, it is said to rise or set *heliacally*,
because the Sun (*Helios*) seems to touch it with his luminous
atmosphere. A Star thus reappears after a disappearance, often, of
several months, and thenceforward it rises an hour earlier each day,
gradually emerging from the Sun's rays, until at the end of three months
it precedes the Sun six hours, and rises at midnight. A Star sets
heliacally, when no longer remaining visible above the western horizon
after sunset, the day arrives when they cease to

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

be seen setting in the West. They so remain invisible, until the Sun
passes so far to the Eastward as not to eclipse them with his light; and
then they reappear, but in the East, about an hour and a half before
sunrise: and this is their *heliacal* rising. In this interval, the
cosmical rising and setting take place.

Besides the relations of the constellations and their paranatellons with
the houses and places of exaltation of the Planets, and with their
places in the respective Signs and Decans, the Stars were supposed to
produce different effects according as they rose or set, and according
as they did so either cosmically, achronically, or heliacally; and also
according to the different seasons of the year in which 'these phenomena
occurred; and these differences were carefully marked on the old
Calendars; and many things in the ancient allegories are referable to
them.

Another and most important division of the Stars was into good and bad,
beneficent and malevolent. With the Persians, the former, of the
Zodiacal Constellations, were from Aries to Virgo, inclusive; and the
latter from Libra to Pisces, inclusive. Hence the good Angels and Genii,
and the bad Angels, Devs, Evil Genii, Devils, Fallen Angels, Titans, and
Giants of the Mythology. The other thirty-six Constellations were
equally divided, eighteen on each side, or, with those of the Zodiac,
twenty-four.

Thus the symbolic Egg, that issued from the mouth of the invisible
Egyptian God KNEPH; known in the Grecian Mysteries as the Orphic Egg;
from which issued the God CHUMONG of the Coresians, and the Egyptian
OSIRIS, and PHANES, God and Principle of Light; from which, broken by
the Sacred Bull of the Japanese, the world emerged; and which the Greeks
placed at the feet of BACCHUS TAURI-CORNUS; the Magian Egg of ORMUZD,
from which came the Amshaspands and Devs; was divided into two halves,
and equally apportioned between the Good and Evil Constellations and
Angels. Those of Spring, as for example Aries and Taurus, Auriga and
Capella, were the beneficent stars; and those of Autumn, as the Balance,
Scorpio, the Serpent of Ophiucus, and the Dragon of the Hesperides, were
types and subjects of the Evil Principle, and regarded as malevolent
causes of the ill effects experienced in Autumn and Winter. Thus are
explained the mysteries of the journeyings of the human soul through the
spheres, when it descends to the earth by the Sign of the Serpent, and
returns to the Empire of light by that of the Lamb or Bull.

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

The creative action of Heaven was manifested, and all its demiurgic
energy developed, most of all at the Vernal Equinox, to which refer all
the fables that typify the victory of Light over Darkness, by the
triumphs of Jupiter, Osiris, Ormuzd, and Apollo. Always the triumphant
god takes the form of the Bull, the Ram, or the Lamb. Then Jupiter
wrests from Typhon his thunderbolts, of which that malignant Deity had
possessed himself during the Winter. Then the God of Light overwhelms
his foe, pictured as a huge Serpent. Then Winter ends; the Sun, seated
on the Bull and accompanied by Orion, blazes in the Heavens. All nature
rejoices at the victory; and Order and Harmony are everywhere
re-established, in place of the dire confusion that reigned while gloomy
Typhon domineered, and Ahriman prevailed against Ormuzd.

The universal Soul of the World, motive power of Heaven and of the
Spheres, it was held, exercises its creative energy chiefly through the
medium of the Sun, during his revolution along the signs of the Zodiac,
with which signs unite the paranatellons that modify their influence,
and concur in furnishing the symbolic attributes of the Great Luminary
that regulates Nature and is the depository of her greatest powers. The
action of this Universal Soul of the World is displayed in the movements
of the Spheres, and above all in that of the Sun, in the successions of
the risings and settings of the Stars, and in their periodical returns.
By these are explainable all the metamorphoses of that Soul, personified
as Jupiter, as Bacchus, as Vishnu, or as Buddha, and all the various
attributes ascribed to it; and also the worship of those animals that
were consecrated in the ancient Temples, representatives on earth of the
Celestial Signs, and supposed to receive by transmission from them the
rays and emanations which in them flow from the Universal Soul.

All the old Adorers of Nature, the Theologians, Astrologers. and Poets,
as well as the most distinguished Philosophers, supposed that the Stars
were so many animated and intelligent beings, or eternal bodies, active
causes of effect here below, animated by a living principle, and
directed by an intelligence that was itself but an emanation from and a
part of the life and universal intelligence of the world: and we find in
the hierarchical order and distribution of their eternal and divine
Intelligences, known by the names of Gods, Angels, and Genii, the same
distributions and

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

the same divisions as those by which the ancients divided the visible
Universe and distributed its parts. And the famous divisions by seven
and by twelve, appertaining to the planets and the signs of the zodiac,
is everywhere found in the hierarchical order of the Gods, and Angels,
and the other Ministers that are the depositaries of that Divine Force
which moves and rules the world.

These, and the other Intelligences assigned to the other Stars, have
absolute dominion over all parts of Nature; over the elements, the
animal and vegetable kingdoms, over man and all his actions, over his
virtues and vices, and over good and evil, which divide between them his
life. The passions of his soul and the maladies of his body,--these and
the entire man are dependent on the heavens and the genii that there
inhabit, who preside at his birth, control his fortunes during life, and
receive his soul or active and intelligent part when it is to be
re-united to the pure life of the lofty Stars. And all through the great
body of the world are disseminated portions of the universal Soul,
impressing movement on everything that seems to move of itself, giving
life to the plants and trees, directing by a regular and settled plan
the organization and development of their germs, imparting constant
mobility to the running waters and maintaining their eternal motion,
impelling the winds and changing their direction or stilling them,
calming and arousing the ocean, unchaining the storms, pouring out the
fires of volcanoes, or with earthquakes shaking the roots of huge
mountains and the foundations of vast continents; by means of a force
that, belonging to Nature, is a mystery to man.

And these invisible Intelligences, like the stars, are marshalled in two
great divisions, under the banners of the two Principles of Good and
Evil, Light and Darkness; under Ormuzd and Ahriman, Osiris and Typhon.
The Evil Principle was the motive power of brute matter; and it,
personified as Ahriman and Typhon, had its hosts and armies of Devs and
Genii, Fallen Angels and Malevolent Spirits, who waged continual wage
with the Good Principle, the Principle of Empyreal Light and Splendor,
Osiris, Ormuzd, Jupiter or Dionusos, with 'his bright hosts of
Amshaspands, Izeds, Angels, and Archangels; a warfare that goes on from
birth until death, in the soul of every man that lives.

We have heretofore, in the 24th Degree, recited the principal incidents
in the legend of Osiris and Isis, and it remains but to point

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

out the astronomical phenomena which it has converted into mythological
facts.

The Sun, at the Vernal Equinox, was the fruit-compelling star that by
his warmth provoked generation and poured upon the sublunary world all
the blessings of Heaven; the beneficent god, tutelary genius of
universal vegetation, that communicates to the dull earth new activity,
and stirs her great heart, long chilled by Winter and his frosts, until
from her bosom burst all the greenness and perfume of spring, making her
rejoice in leafy forests and grassy lawns and flower-enamelled meadows,
and the promise of abundant crops of grain and fruits and purple grapes
in their due season.

He was then called Osiris, Husband of Isis, God of Cultivation and
Benefactor of Men, pouring on them and on the earth the choicest
blessings within the gift of the Divinity. Opposed to him was Typhon,
his antagonist in the Egyptian mythology, as Ahriman was the foe of
Ormuzd, the Good Principle, in the theology of the Persians.

The first inhabitants of Egypt and Ethiopia, as Diodorus Siculus informs
us, saw in the Heavens two first eternal causes of things, or great
Divinities, one the Sun, whom they called Osiris, and the other the
Moon, whom they called Isis; and these they considered the causes of all
the generations of earth. This idea, we learn from Eusebius, was the
same as that of the Phœnicians. On these two great Divinities the
administration of the world depended. All sublunary bodies received from
them their nourishment and increase, during the annual revolution which
they controlled, and the different seasons into which it was divided.

To Osiris and Isis, it was held, were owing civilization, the discovery
of agriculture, laws, arts of all kinds, religious worship, temples, the
invention of letters, astronomy, the gymnastic arts, and music; and thus
they were the universal benefactors. Osiris travelled to civilize the
countries which he passed through, and communicate to them his valuable
discoveries. He built cities, and taught men to cultivate the earth.
Wheat and wine were his first presents to men. Europe, Asia, and Africa
partook of the blessings which he communicated, and the most remote
regions of India remembered him, and claimed him as one of their great
gods.

You have learned how Typhon, his brother, slew him. His body was cut
into pieces, all of which were collected by Isis, except his

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

organs of generation, which had been thrown into and devoured in the
waters of the river that every year fertilized Egypt. The other portions
were buried by Isis, and over them she erected a tomb. Thereafter she
remained single, loading her subjects with blessings. She cured the
sick, restored sight to the blind, made the paralytic whole, and even
raised the dead. From her Horus or Apollo learned divination and the
science of medicine.

Thus the Egyptians pictured the beneficent action of the two luminaries
that, from the bosom of the elements, produced all animals and men, and
all bodies that are born, grow, and die in the eternal circle of
generation and destruction here below.

When the Celestial Bull opened the new year at the Vernal Equinox,
Osiris, united with the Moon, communicated to her the seeds of
fruitfulness which she poured upon the air, and therewith impregnated
the generative principles which gave activity to universal vegetation.
Apis, represented by a bull, was the living and sensible image of the
Sun or Osiris, when in union with Isis or the Moon at the Vernal
Equinox, concurring with her in provoking everything that lives to
generation. This conjunction of the Sun with the Moon at the Vernal
Equinox, in the constellation Taurus, required the Bull Apis to have on
his shoulder a mark resembling the Crescent Moon. And the fecundating
influence of these two luminaries was expressed by images that would now
be deemed gross and indecent, but which then were not misunderstood.

Everything good in Nature comes from Osiris,--order, harmony, and the
favorable temperature of the seasons and celestial periods. From Typhon
come the stormy passions and irregular impulses that agitate the brute
and material part of man; maladies of the body, and violent shocks that
injure the health and derange the system; inclement weather, derangement
of the seasons, and eclipses. Osiris and Typhon were the Ormuzd and
Ahriman of the Persians; principles of good and evil, of light and
darkness, ever at war in the administration of the Universe.

Osiris was the image of generative power. This was expressed by his
symbolic statues, and by the sign into which he entered at the Vernal
Equinox. He especially dispensed the humid principle of Nature,
generative element of all things; and the Nile and all moisture were
regarded as emanations from him, without which there could be no
vegetation.

That Osiris and Isis were the Sun and Moon, is attested by

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

many ancient writers; by Diogenes Laertius, Plutarch, Lucian, Suidas,
Macrobius, Martianus Capella, and others. His power was symbolized by an
Eye over a Sceptre. The Sun was termed by the Greeks the Eye of Jupiter,
and the Eye of the World; and his is the All-Seeing Eye in our Lodges.
The oracle of Claros styled him King of the Stars and of the Eternal
Fire, that en-genders the year and the seasons, dispenses rain and
winds, and brings about daybreak and night. And Osiris was invoked as
the God that resides in the Sun and is enveloped by his rays, the
invisible and eternal force that modifies the sublunary world by means
of the Sun.

Osiris was the same God known as Bacchus, Dionusos, and Serapis. Serapis
is the author of the regularity and harmony of the world. Bacchus,
jointly with Ceres (identified by Herodotus with Isis) presides over the
distribution of all our blessings; and from the two emanates everything
beautiful and good in Nature. One furnishes the germ and principle of
every good; the other receives and preserves it as a deposit; and the
latter is the function of the Moon in the theology of the Persians. In
each theology, Persian and Egyptian, the Moon acts directly on the
earth; but she is fecundated, in one by the Celestial Bull and in the
other by Osiris, with whom she is united at the Vernal Equinox, in the
sign Taurus, the place of her exaltation or greatest influence on the
earth. The force of Osiris, says Plutarch, is exercised through the
Moon. She is the passive cause relatively to him, and the active cause
relatively to the earth, to which she transmits the germs of
fruitfulness received from him.

In Egypt the earliest movement in the waters of the Nile began to appear
at the Vernal Equinox, when the new Moon occurred at the entrance of the
Sun into the constellation Taurus; and thus the Nile was held to receive
its fertilizing power from the combined action of the equinoctial Sun
and the new Moon, meeting in Taurus. Osiris was often confounded with
the Nile, and Isis with the earth; and Osiris was deemed to act on the
earth, and to transmit to it his emanations, through both the Moon and
the Nile; whence the fable that his generative organs were thrown into
that river. Typhon, on the other hand, was the principle of aridity and
barrenness; and by his mutilation of Osiris was meant that drought which
caused the Nile to retire within his bed and shrink up in Autumn.

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

Elsewhere than in Egypt, Osiris was the symbol of the refreshing rains
that descend to fertilize the earth; and Typhon the burning winds of
Autumn; the stormy rains that rot the flowers, the plants, and leaves;
the short, cold days; and everything injurious in Nature, and that
produces corruption and destruction.

In short, Typhon is the principle of corruption, of darkness, of the
lower world from which come earthquakes, tumultuous corn-motions of the
air, burning heat, lightning, and fiery meteors, and plague and
pestilence. Such too was the Ahriman of the Persians; and this revolt of
the Evil Principle against the Principle of Good and Light, has been
represented in every cosmogony, under many varying forms. Osiris, on the
contrary, by the intermediation of Isis, fills the material world with
happiness, purity, and order, by which the harmony of Nature is
maintained. It was said that he died at the Autumnal Equinox, when
Taurus or the Pleiades rose in the evening, and that he rose to life
again in the Spring, when vegetation was inspired with new activity.

Of course the two signs of Taurus and Scorpio will figure most largely
in the mythological history of Osiris, for they marked the two
equinoxes, 2500 years before our Era; and next to them the other
constellations, near the equinoxes, that fixed the limits of the
duration of the fertilizing action of the Sun; and it is also to be
remarked that Venus, the Goddess of Generation, has her domicile in
Taurus, as the Moon has there her place of exaltation.

When the Sun was in Scorpio, Osiris lost his life, and that fruitfulness
which, under the form of the Bull, he had communicated, through the
Moon, to the Earth. Typhon, his hands and feet horrid with serpents, and
whose habitat in the Egyptian planisphere was under Scorpio, confined
him in a chest and flung him into the Nile, under the 17th degree of
Scorpio. Under that sign he lost his life and virility; and he recovered
them in the Spring, when he had connection with the Moon. When he
entered Scorpio, his light diminished, Night reassumed her dominion, the
Nile shrunk within its banks, and the earth lost her verdure and the
trees their leaves. Therefore it is that on the Mithriac Monuments, the
Scorpion bites the testicles of the Equinoctial Bull, on which sits
Mithras, the Sun of Spring and God of Generation; and that, on the same
monuments, we see two trees, one covered with young leaves, and at its
foot a little bull and a torch burning; and the

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

other loaded with fruit, and at its foot a Scorpion, and a torch
reversed and extinguished.

Ormuzd or Osiris, the beneficent Principle that gives the world light,
was personified by the Sun, apparent source of light. Darkness,
personified by Typhon or Ahriman, was his natural enemy. The Sages of
Egypt described the necessary and eternal rivalry or opposition of these
principles, ever pursuing one the other, and one dethroning the other in
every annual revolution, and at a particular period, one in the Spring
under the Bull, and the other in Autumn under the Scorpion, by the
legendary history of Osiris and Typhon, detailed to us by Diodorus and
Synesius; in which history were also personified the Stars and
constellations Orion, Capella, the Twins, the Wolf, Sirius, and
Hercules, whose risings and settings noted the advent of one or the
other equinox.

Plutarch gives us the positions in the Heavens of the Sun and Moon, at
the moment when Osiris was murdered by Typhon. The Sun, he says, was in
the Sign of the Scorpion, which he then entered at the Autumnal Equinox.
The Moon was full, the adds; and consequently, as it rose at sunset, it
occupied Taurus, which, opposite to Scorpio, rose as it and the Sun sank
together, so that she was then found alone in the sign Taurus, where,
six months before, she had been in union or conjunction with Osiris, the
Sun, receiving from him those germs of universal fertilization which he
communicated to her. It was the sign through which Osiris first ascended
into his empire of light and good. It rose with the Sun on the day of
the Vernal Equinox; it remained six months in the luminous hemisphere,
ever preceding the Sun and above the horizon during the day; until in
Autumn, the Sun arriving at Scorpio, Taurus was in complete opposition
with him, rose when he set, and completed its entire course above the
horizon during the night; presiding, by rising in the evening, over the
commencement of the long nights. Hence in the sad ceremonies
commemorating the death of Osiris, there was borne in procession a
golden bull covered with black crape, image of the darkness into which
the familiar sign of Osiris was entering, and which was to spread over
the Northern regions, while the Sun, prolonging the nights, was to be
absent, and each to remain under the dominion of Typhon, Principle of
Evil and Darkness.

Setting out from the sign Taurus, Isis, as the Moon, went seeking for
Osiris through all the superior signs, in each of which she

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

became full in the successive months from the Autumnal to the Vernal
Equinox, without finding him in either. Let us follow her in her
allegorical wanderings.

Osiris was slain by Typhon his rival, with whom conspired a Queen of
Ethiopia, by whom, says Plutarch, were designated the winds. The
paranatellons of Scorpio, the sign occupied by the Sun when Osiris was
slain, were the Serpents, reptiles which sup-plied the attributes of the
Evil Genii and of Typhon, who himself bore the form of a serpent in the
Egyptian planisphere. And in the division of Scorpio is also found
Cassiopeia, Queen of Ethiopia, whose setting brings stormy winds.

Osiris descended to the shades or infernal regions. There he took the
name of Serapis, identical with Pluto, and assumed his nature. He was
then in conjunction with Serpentarius, identical with Æsculapius, whose
form he took in his passage to the lower signs, where he takes the names
of Pluto and Ades.

Then Isis wept for the death of Osiris, and the golden bull covered with
crape was carried in procession. Nature mourned the impending loss of
her Summer glories, and the advent of the empire of night, the
withdrawing of the waters, made fruitful by the Bull in Spring, the
cessation of the winds that brought rains to swell the Nile, the
shortening of the days, and the despoiling of the earth. Then Taurus,
directly opposite the Sun, entered into the cone of shadow which the
earth projects, by which the Moon is eclipsed at full, and with which,
making night, the Bull rises and descends as if covered with a veil,
while he remains above our horizon.

The body of Osiris, enclosed in a chest or coffin, was cast into the
Nile. Pan and the Satyrs, near Chemmis, first discovered his death,
announced it by their cries, and everywhere created sorrow and alarm.
Taurus, with the full Moon, then entered into the cone of shadow, and
under him was the Celestial River, most properly called the Nile, and
below, Perseus, the God of Chemmis, and Auriga, leading a she-goat,
himself identical with Pan, whose wife Aiga the she-goat was styled.

Then Isis went in search of the body. She first met certain children who
had seen it, received from them their information, and gave them in
return the gift of divination. The second full Moon occurred in Gemini,
the Twins, who presided over the oracles of Didymus, and one of whom was
Apollo, the God of Divination,

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

She learned that Osiris had, through mistake, had connection with her
sister Nephte, which she discovered by a crown of leaves of the melilot,
which he had left behind him. Of this connection a child was born, whom
Isis, aided by her dogs, sought for, found, reared, and attached to
herself, by the name of Anubis, her faithful guardian. The third full
Moon occurs in Cancer, domicile of the Moon. The paranatellons of that
sign are, the crown of Ariadne or Proserpine, made of leaves of the
melilot, Procyon and Canis Major, one star of which was called the Star
of Isis, while Sirius himself was honored in Egypt under the name of
Anubis.

Isis repaired to Byblos, and seated herself near a fountain, where she
was found by the women of the Court of a King. She was induced to visit
his Court, and became the nurse of his son. The fourth full Moon was in
Leo, domicile of the Sun, or of Adonis, King of Byblos. The
paranatellons of this sign are the flowing water of Aquarius, and
Cepheus, King of Ethiopia, called Regulus, or simply The King. Behind
him rise Cassiopeia his wife, Queen of Ethiopia, Andromeda his daughter,
and Perseus his son-in-law, all paranatellons in part of this sign, and
in part of Virgo.

Isis suckled the child, not at her breast, but with the end of her
finger, at night. She burned all the mortal parts of its body, and then,
taking the shape of a swallow, she flew to the great column of the
palace, made of the tamarisk-tree that grew up round the coffin
containing the body of Osiris, and within which it was still enclosed.
The fifth full Moon occurred in Virgo, the true image of Isis, and which
Eratosthenes calls by that name. It pictured a woman suckling an infant,
the son of Isis, born near the Winter Solstice. This sign has for
paranatellons the mast of the Celestial Ship, and the swallow-tailed
fish or swallow above it, and a portion of Perseus, son-in-law of the
King of Ethiopia.

Isis, having recovered the sacred coffer, sailed from Byblos in a vessel
with the eldest son of the King, toward Boutos, where Anubis was, having
charge of her son Horus; and in the morning dried up a river, whence
arose a strong wind. Landing, she hid the coffer in a forest. Typhon,
hunting a wild boar by moonlight, discovered it, recognized the body of
his rival, and cut it into fourteen pieces, the number of days between
the full and new Moon, and in every one of which days the Moon loses a
portion of the light that at the commencement filled her whole disk. The
sixth full Moon occurred in Libra, over the divisions separating which

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

from Virgo are the Celestial Ship, Perseus, son of the King of Ethiopia
and Boötes, said to have nursed Horus. The river of Orion that sets in
the morning is also a paranatellon of Libra, as are Ursa Major, the
Great Bear or Wild Boar of Erymanthus, and the Dragon of the North Pole,
or the celebrated Python from which the attributes of Typhon were
borrowed. All these surround the full Moon of Libra, last of the
Superior Signs, and the one that precedes the new Moon of Spring, about
to be reproduced in Taurus, and there be once more in conjunction with
the Sun.

Isis collects the scattered fragments of the body of Osiris, buries
them, and consecrates the phallus, carried in pomp at the *Pamylia*, or
feasts of the Vernal Equinox, at which time the congress of Osiris and
the Moon was celebrated. Then Osiris had returned from the shades, to
aid Horus his son and Isis his wife against the forces of Typhon. He
thus reappeared, say some, under the form of a wolf, or, others say,
under that of a horse. The Moon, fourteen days after she is full in
Libra, arrives at Taurus and unites herself to the Sun, whose fires she
thereafter for fourteen days continues to accumulate on her disk from
new Moon to full. Then she unites with herself all the months in that
superior portion of the world where light always reigns, with harmony
and order, and she borrows from him the force which is to destroy the
germs of evil that Typhon had, during the winter, planted everywhere in
nature. This passage of the Sun into Taurus, whose attributes he assumes
on his return from the lower hemisphere or the shades, is marked by the
rising in the evening of the Wolf and the Centaur, and by the heliacal
setting of Orion, called the Star of Horns, and which thenceforward is
in conjunction with the Sun of Spring, in his triumph over the darkness
or Typhon.

Isis, during the absence of Osiris, and after she had hidden the coffer
in the place where Typhon found it, had rejoined that malignant enemy;
indignant at which, Horns her son deprived her of her ancient diadem,
when she rejoined Osiris as he was about to attack Typhon: but Mercury
gave her in its place a helmet shaped like the head of a bull. Then
Horus, as a mighty warrior, such as Orion was described, fought with and
defeated Typhon; who, in the shape of the Serpent or Dragon of the Pole,
had assailed his father. So, in Ovid, Apollo destroys the same Python,
when Io, fascinated by Jupiter, is metamorphosed into a cow, and placed
in the sign of the Celestial Bull, where she becomes Isis. The
equinoctial

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

year ends at the moment when the Sun and Moon, at the Vernal Equinox,
are united with Orion, the Star of Horus, placed in the Heavens under
Taurus. The new Moon becomes young again in Taurus, and shows herself as
a crescent, for the first time, in the next sign, Gemini, the domicile
of Mercury. Then Orion, in conjunction with the Sun, with whom he rises,
precipitates the Scorpion, his rival, into the shades of night, causing
him to set whenever he himself reappears on the eastern horizon, with
the Sun. Day lengthens and the germs of evil are by degrees eradicated:
and Horus (from *Aur*, Light) reigns triumphant, symbolizing, by his
succession to the characteristics of Osiris, the eternal renewal of the
Sun's youth and creative vigor at the Vernal Equinox.

Such are the coincidences of astronomical phenomena with the legend of
Osiris and Isis; sufficing to show the origin of the legend, overloaded
as it became at length with all the ornamentation natural to the
poetical and figurative genius of the Orient.

Not only into this legend, but into those of all the ancient nations,
enter the Bull, the Lamb, the Lion, and the Scorpion or the Serpent; and
traces of the worship of the Sun yet linger in all religions.
Everywhere, even in our Order, survive the equinoctial and solstitial
feasts. Our ceilings still glitter with the greater and lesser
luminaries of the Heavens, and our lights, in their number and
arrangement, have astronomical references. In all churches and chapels,
as in all Pagan temples and pagodas, the altar is in the East; and the
ivy over the east windows of old churches is the Hedera Helix of
Bacchus. Even the cross had an astronomical origin; and our Lodges are
full of the ancient symbols.

The learned author of the Sabæan Researches, Landseer, advances another
theory in regard to the legend of Osiris; in which he makes the
constellation Boötes play a leading part. He observes that, as none of
the stars were visible at the same time with the Sun, his actual place
in the Zodiac, at any given time, could only be ascertained by the
Sabæan astronomers by their observations of the stars, and of their
heliacal and achronical risings and settings. There were many solar
festivals among the Sabæans, and part of them agricultural ones; and the
concomitant signs of those festivals were the risings and settings of
the stars of the Husbandman, Bear-driver, or Hunter, BOÖTES. His stars
were,

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

among the Hierophants, the established nocturnal indices or signs of the
Sun's place in the ecliptic at different seasons of the year, and the
festivals were named, one, that of the *Aphanism* or disappearance;
another, that of the *Zetesis*, or search, etc., of Osiris or Adonis,
that is, of *Boötes*.

The returns of certain stars, as connected with their concomitant
seasons of spring (or seed-time) and harvest, seemed to the ancients,
who had not yet discovered that gradual change, resulting from the
apparent movement of the stars in longitude, which has been termed the
precession of the equinoxes, to be eternal and immutable; and those
periodical returns were to the initiated, even more than to the vulgar,
celestial oracles, announcing the approach of those important changes,
upon which the prosperity, and even the very existence of man must ever
depend; and the oldest of the Sabæan constellations seem to have been,
an astronomical *Priest*, a *King*, a *Queen*, a *Husbandman*, and a
*Warrior*; and these more frequently recur on the Sabæan cylinders than
any other constellations whatever. The *King* was *Cepheus* or
*Chepheus* of Ethiopia: the *Husbandman*, *Osiris*, *Bacchus*,
*Sabazeus*, *Noah* or *Boötes*. To the latter sign, the Egyptians were
nationally, traditionally and habitually grateful; for they conceived
that from Osiris all the greatest of terrestrial enjoyments were
derived. The stars of the Husbandman were the signal for those
successive agricultural labors on which the annual produce of the soil
depended; and they came in consequence to be considered and hailed, in
Egypt and Ethiopia, as the genial stars of terrestrial productiveness;
to which the oblations, prayers, and vows of the pious Sabæan were
regularly offered up.

Landseer says that the stars in Boötes, reckoning down to those of the
5th magnitude inclusive, are *twenty-six*, which, seeming achronically
to disappear in succession, produced the fable of the cutting of Osiris
into twenty-six pieces by Typhon. There are more stars than this in the
constellation; but no more that the ancient votaries of Osiris, even in
the clear atmosphere of the Sabæan climates, could observe without
telescopes.

Plutarch says Osiris was cut into *fourteen* pieces: Diodorus, into
*twenty-six*; in regard to which, and to the whole legend, Landseer's
ideas, varying from those commonly entertained, are as follows:

Typhon, Landseer thinks, was the *ocean*, which the ancients

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

fabled or believed surrounded the Earth, and into which all the stars in
their turn appear successively to sink; \[perhaps it was DARKNESS
personified, which the ancients called TYPHON. He was hunting by
moonlight, says the old legend, when he met with Osiris\].

The ancient Saba must have been near latitude 15° north. Axoum is nearly
in 14°, and the Western Saba or Meroe is to the north of that.
Forty-eight centuries ago, Aldebarán, the leading star of the year, had,
at the Vernal Equinox, attained at daylight in the morning, an elevation
of about 14 degrees, sufficient for him to have ceased to be *combust*,
that is, to have emerged from the Sun's rays, so as to be visible. The
ancients allowed *twelve* days for a star of the first magnitude to
emerge from the solar rays; and there is less twilight, the further
South we go.

At the same period, too, Cynosura was not the pole-star, but Alpha
Draconis was; and the stars rose and set with very different degrees of
obliquity from those of their present risings and settings. By having a
globe constructed with circumvolving poles, capable of any adjustment
with regard to the colures, Mr. Landseer ascertained that, at that
remote period, in lat. 15° north, the 26 stars in Boötes, or 27,
including Arcturus, did not set anchronically in succession; but several
set simultaneously in couples, and six by threes simultaneously; so
that, in all, there were but fourteen separate settings or
disappearances, corresponding with the *fourteen* pieces into which
Osiris was cut, according to Plutarch. Kappa, Iota, and Theta, in the
uplifted western hand, disappeared together, and last of all. They
really skirted the horizon; but were invisible in that low latitude, for
the three or four days mentioned in some of the versions; while the
*Zetesis* or search was proceeding, and the women of Phœnicia and
Jerusalem sat weeping for the Wonder, Thammuz; after which they
immediately reappeared, below and to the eastward of α Draconis.

And, on the very morning after the achronical departure of the last star
of the Husbandman, Aldebarán rose heliacally, and became visible in the
East in the morning before day.

And precisely at the moment of the heliacal rising of Arcturus, also
rose Spica Virginis. One is near the middle of the Husbandman, and the
other near that of the Virgin; and Arcturus may have been the part of
Osiris which Isis did not recover with the other pieces of the body.

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

At Dedan and Saba it was thirty-six days, from the beginning of the
*aphanism*, *i.e.*, the *disappearances* of these stars, to the heliacal
rising of Aldebarán. During these days, or forty at Medina, or a few
more at Babylon and Byblos, the stars of the Husbandman successively
sank out of sight, during the *crepusculum* or short-lived morning
twilight of those Southern climes. They disappear during the glancings
of the dawn, the special season of ancient sidereal observation.

Thus the forty days of mourning for Osiris were measured out by the
period of the departure of his Stars. When the last had sunken out of
sight, the vernal season was ushered in; and the Sun arose with the
splendid Aldebarán, the Tauric leader of the Hosts of Heaven; and the
whole East rejoiced and kept holiday.

With the exception of the Stars χ, ι and δ, Boötes did not begin to
reappear in the Eastern quarter of the Heavens till after the lapse of
about four months. Then the Stars of Taurus had declined Westward, and
Virgo was rising heliacally. In that latitude, also, the Stars of Ursa
Major \[termed anciently the Ark of Osiris\] set; and Benetnasch, the
last of them, returned to the Eastern horizon, with those in the head of
Leo, a little before the Summer Solstice. In about a month, followed the
Stars of the Husbandman; the chief of them, Ras, Mirach, and Arcturus,
being very nearly simultaneous in their heliacal rising.

Thus the Stars of Boötes rose in the East immediately after
Vindemiatrix, and as if under the genial influence of its rays; he had
his annual career of prosperity; he revelled orientally for a quarter of
a year, and attained his meridian altitude with Virgo; and then, as the
Stars of the Water-Urn rose, and Aquarius began to pour forth his annual
deluge, he declined Westward, preceded by the Ark of Osiris. In the
East, he was the sign of that happiness in which Nature, the great
Goddess of passive production, rejoiced. Now, in the West, as he
declines toward the Northwestern horizon, his generative vigor gradually
abates; the Solar year grows old; and as his Stars descend beneath the
Western Wave, Osiris dies, and the world mourns.

The Ancient Astronomers saw all the great Symbols of Masonry in the
Stars. Sirius still glitters in our Lodges as the Blazing Star,
(*l’Etoile Flamboyante*). The Sun is still symbolized by the point
within a Circle; and, with the Moon and Mercury or Anubis, in the three
Great Lights of the Lodge. Not only to these, but

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

to the figures and numbers exhibited by the Stars, were ascribed
peculiar and divine powers. The veneration paid to numbers had its
source there. The three Kings in Orion are in a straight line, and
equidistant from each other, the two extreme Stars being 3° apart, and
each of the three distant from the one nearest it 1° 30'. And as the
number *three* is peculiar to apprentices, so the straight line is the
first principle of Geometry, having length but no breadth, and being but
the extension of a point, and an emblem of Unity, and thus of Good, as
the divided or broken line is of Duality or Evil. Near these Stars are
the Hyades, *five* in number, appropriate to the Fellow-Craft; and close
to them the Pleiades, of the master's number, *seven*; and thus these
three sacred numbers, consecrated in Masonry as they were in the
Pythagorean philosophy, always appear together in the Heavens, when the
Bull, emblem of fertility and production, glitters among the Stars, and
Aldebarán leads the Hosts of Heaven (*Tsbauth*).

Algenib in Perseus and Almaach and Algol in Andromeda form a
right-angled triangle, illustrate the 47th problem, and display the
Grand Master's square upon the skies. Denebola in Leo, Arcturus in
Boötes, and Spica in Virgo form an equilateral triangle, universal
emblem of Perfection, and the Deity with His Trinity of Infinite
Attributes, Wisdom, Power, and Harmony; and that other, the generative,
preserving, and destroying Powers. The Three Kings form, with Rigel in
Orion, two triangles included in one: and Capella and Menkalina in
Auriga, with Bellatrix and Betelgueux in Orion, form two isosceles
triangles with β Tauri, that is equidistant from each pair; while the
first four make a right-angled parallelogram,--the oblong square so
often mentioned in our Degrees.

Julius Firmicus, in his description of the Mysteries, says, "But in
those funerals and lamentations which are annually celebrated in honor
of Osiris, their defenders pretend a physical reason. They call the
seeds of fruit, Osiris; the Earth, Isis; the natural heat, Typhon: and
because the fruits are ripened by the natural heat, and collected for
the life of man, and are separated from their marriage to the earth, and
are sown again when Winter approaches, this they would have to be the
death of Osiris: but when the fruits, by the genial fostering of the
earth, begin again to be generated by a new procreation, this is the
finding of Osiris."

No doubt the decay of vegetation and the falling of the leaves,

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

emblems of dissolution and evidences of the action of that Power that
changes Life into Death, in order to bring Life again out of Death, were
regarded as signs of that Death that seemed coming upon all Nature; as
the springing of leaves and buds and flowers in the spring was a sign of
restoration to life: but these were all secondary, and referred to the
Sun as first cause. It was *his* figurative death that was mourned, and
not theirs; and that with that death, as with his return to life, many
of the stars were connected.

We have already alluded to the relations which the twelve signs of the
Zodiac bear to the legend of the Master's Degree. Some other
coincidences may have sufficient interest to warrant mention.

Khir-Om was assailed at the East, West, and South Gates of the Temple.
The two equinoxes were called, we have seen, by all the Ancients, the
Gates of Heaven, and the Syrians and Egyptians considered the Fish (the
Constellation near Aquarius, and one of the Stars whereof is Fomalhaut)
to be indicative of violence and death.

Khir-Om lay several days in the grave; and, at the Winter Solstice, for
five or six days, the length of the days did not perceptibly increase.
Then, the Sun commencing again to climb Northward, as Osiris was said to
arise from the dead, so Khir-Om was raised, by the powerful attraction
of the Lion (Leo), who waited for him at the Summer Solstice, and drew
him to himself.

The names of the three assassins may have been adopted from three Stars
that we have already named. We search in vain in the Hebrew or Arabic
for the names *Jubelo*, *Jubela*, and *Jubelum*. They embody an utter
absurdity, and are capable of no explanation in those languages. Nor are
the names *Gibs*, *Gravelot*, *Hobhen*, and the like, in the Ancient and
Accepted Rite, any more plausible, or better referable to any ancient
language. But when, by the precession of the Equinoxes, the Sun was in
Libra at the Autumnal Equinox, he met in that sign, where the reign of
Typhon commenced, three Stars forming a triangle, *Zuben-es Chamali* in
the West, *Zuben-Hak-Rabi* in the East, and *Zuben-El-Gubi* in the
South, the latter immediately below the Tropic of Capricorn, and so
within the realm of Darkness. From these names, those of the murderers
have perhaps been corrupted. In Zuben-Hak-Rabi we may see the original
of Jubelum Akirop; and in Zuben-El-Gubi, that of Jubelo Gibs: and time
and ignorance may even have transmuted the words Es Chamali into one as
little like them as Gravelot.

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

Isis, the Moon personified, sorrowing sought for her husband. Nine or
twelve Fellow-Crafts (the Rites vary as to the number), in white aprons,
were sent to search for Khir-Om, in the Legend of the Master's Degree;
or, in this Rite, the Nine Knights Elu. Along the path that the Moon
travels are nine conspicuous Stars, by which nautical men determine
their longitude at Sea;--Arietis, Aldebarán, Pollux, Regulus, Spica
Virginis, Antares, Altair, Fomalhaut, and Markab. These might well be
said to accompany Isis in her search.

In the York Rite, *twelve* Fellow-Crafts were sent to search for the
body of Khir-Om and the murderers. Their number corresponds with that of
the Pleiades and Hyades in Taurus, among which Stars the Sun was found
when Light began to prevail over Darkness, and the Mysteries were held.
These Stars, we have shown, received early and particular attention from
the astronomers and poets. The Pleiades were the Stars of the ocean to
the benighted mariner; the. Virgins of Spring, heralding the season of
blossoms.

As six Pleiades only are now visible, the number twelve may have been
obtained by them, with Aldebarán, and five far more brilliant Stars than
any other of the Hyades, in the same region of the Heavens, and which
were always spoken of in connection with the Pleiades;--the Three Kings
in the belt of Orion, and Bellatrix and Betelgueux on his shoulders;
brightest of the flashing starry hosts.

"Canst thou," asks Job, "bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades or
loose the bands of Orion?" And in the book of Amos we find these Stars
connected with the victory of Light over Darkness: "Seek Him," says that
Seer, "that maketh the Seven Stars (the familiar name of the Pleiades),
and Orion, AND TURNETH THE SHADOW OF DEATH INTO MORNING."

An old legend in Masonry says that a dog led the Nine this to the cavern
where Abiram was hid. Boötes was anciently called Caleb Anubach, a
Barking Dog; and was personified in Anubis, who bore the head of a dog,
and aided Isis in her search. Arcturus, one of his Stars, fiery red, as
if fervent and zealous, is also connected by Job with the Pleiades and
Orion. When Taurus opened the year, Arcturus rose after the Sun, at the
time of the Winter Solstice, and seemed searching him through the
darkness, until, sixty days afterward, he rose at the same hour, Orion
then

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

also, at the Winter Solstice, rose at noon, and at night seemed to be in
search of the Sun.

So, referring again to the time when the Sun entered the Autumnal
Equinox, there are nine remarkable Stars that come to the meridian
nearly at the same time, rising as Libra sets, and so seeming to chase
that Constellation. They are Capella and Menkalina in the Charioteer,
Aldebarán in Taurus, Bellatrix, Betelgueux, the Three Kings, and Rigel
in Orion. Aldebarán passes the meridian first, indicating his right to
.his peculiar title of *Leader*. Nowhere in the heavens are there, near
the same meridian, so many splendid Stars. And close behind them, but
further South, follows Sirius, the Dog-Star, who showed the nine Elus
the way to the murderer's cave.

Besides the division of the signs into the ascending and descending
series (referring to the upward and downward progress of the soul), the
latter from Cancer to Capricorn, and the former from Capricorn to
Cancer, there was another division of them not less important; that of
the six superior and six inferior signs; the former, 2455 years before
our era, from Taurus to Scorpio, and 300 years before our era, from
Aries to Libra; and the latter, 2455 years B. C. from Scorpio to Taurus,
and 300 years B. C. from Libra to Aries; of which we have already
spoken, as the two Hemispheres, or Kingdoms of Good and Evil, Light and
Darkness; of Ormuzd and Ahriman among the Persians, and Osiris and
Typhon among the Egyptians.

With the Persians, the first six Genii, created by Ormuzd, presided over
the first six signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo: and
the six evil Genii, or Devs, created by Ahriman, over the six others,
Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. The soul
was fortunate and happy under the Empire of the first six; and began to
be sensible of evil, when it passed under the Balance or Libra, the
seventh sign. Thus the soul entered the realm of Evil and Darkness when
it passed into the Constellations that belong to and succeed the
Autumnal Equinox; and it re-entered the realm of Good and Light, when it
arrived, returning, at those of the Vernal Equinox. It lost its felicity
by means of the Balance, and regained it by means of the Lamb. This is a
necessary consequence of the premises; and it is confirmed by the
authorities and by emblems still extant.

Sallust the Philosopher, speaking of the Feasts of Rejoicing

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

celebrated at the Vernal Equinox, and those of Mourning, in memory of
the rape of Proserpine, at the Autumnal Equinox, says that the former
were celebrated, because then is effected, as it were, the return of the
soul toward the Gods; that the time when the principle of Light
recovered its superiority over that of Darkness, or day over night, was
the most favorable one for souls that tend to re-ascend to their
Principle; and that when Darkness and the Night again become victors,
was most favorable to the descent of souls toward the infernal regions.

For that reason, the old astrologers, as Firmicus states, fixed the
locality of the river Styx in the 8th degree of the Balance. And he
thinks that by Styx was allegorically meant the earth.

The Emperor Julian gives the same explanation, but more fully developed.
He states, as a reason why the august Mysteries of Ceres and Proserpine
were celebrated at the Autumnal Equinox, that at that period of the year
men feared lest the impious and dark power of the Evil Principle, then
commencing to conquer, should do harm to their souls. They were a
precaution and means of safety, thought to be necessary at the moment
when the God of Light was passing into the opposite or adverse region of
the world; while at the Vernal Equinox there was less to be feared,
because then that God, present in one portion of the world, *recalled
souls to Him*, he says, and *showed Himself to be their Saviour*. He had
a little before developed that theological idea, of the attractive force
which the Sun exercises over souls, drawing them to him and raising them
to his luminous sphere. He attributes this effect to him at the feasts
of Atys, dead and restored to life, or the feasts of Rejoicing, which at
the end of three days succeeded the mourning for that death; and he
inquires why those Mysteries were celebrated at the Vernal Equinox. The
reason, he says, is evident. As the sun, arriving at the equinoctial
point of Spring, drawing nearer to us, increases the length of the days,
that period seems most appropriate for those ceremonies. For, besides
that there is a great affinity between the substance of Light and the
nature of the Gods, the Sun has that occult force of attraction, by
which he draws matter toward himself, by means of his warmth, making
plants to shoot and grow, etc.; and why can he not, by the same divine
and pure action of his rays, attract and draw to him fortunate souls?
Then, as light is analogous to the Divine Nature, and favorable to
souls. struggling to return to

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

their First Principle, and as that light so increases at the Vernal
Equinox, that the days prevail in duration over the nights, and as the
Sun has an attractive force, besides the visible energy of his rays, it
follows that souls are attracted toward the solar light. He does not
further pursue the explanation; because, he says, it belongs to a
mysterious doctrine, beyond the reach of the vulgar and known only to
those who understand the mode of action of Deity, like the Chaldæan
author whom he cites, who had treated of the Mysteries of Light, or the
God with seven rays.

Souls, the Ancients held, having emanated from the Principle of Light,
partaking of its destiny here below, cannot be indifferent to nor
unaffected by these revolutions of the Great Luminary, alternately
victor and overcome during every Solar revolution.

This will be found to be confirmed by an examination of some of the
Symbols used in the Mysteries. One of the most famous of these was THE
SERPENT, the peculiar Symbol also of this Degree. The Cosmogony of the
Hebrews and that of the Gnostics designated this reptile as the author
of the fate of Souls. It was consecrated in the Mysteries of Bacchus and
in those of Eleusis. Pluto overcame the virtue of Proserpine under the
form of a serpent; and, like the Egyptian God Serapis, was always
pictured seated on a serpent, or with that reptile entwined about him.
It is found on the Mithriac Monuments, and supplied with attributes of
Typhon to the Egyptians. The sacred basilisc, in coil, with head and
neck erect, was the royal ensign of the Pharaohs. Two of them were
entwined around and hung suspended from the winged Globe on the Egyptian
[Monuments](errata.htm#19). On a tablet in one of the Tombs at Thebes, a
God with a spear pierces a serpent's head. On a tablet from the Temple
of Osiris at Philæ is a tree, with a man on one side, and a woman on the
other, and in front of the woman an erect basilisc, with horns on its
head and a disk between the horns. The head of Medusa was encircled by
winged snakes, which, the head removed, left the Hierogram or Sacred
Cypher of the Ophites or Serpent-worshippers. And the Serpent, in
connection with the Globe or circle, is found upon the monuments of all
the Ancient Nations.

Over Libra, the sign through which souls were said to descend or fall,
is found, on the Celestial Globe, the Serpent, grasped by Serpentarius,
the Serpent-bearer. The head of the reptile is under Corona Borealis,
the Northern Crown, called by Ovid, *Libera*, or

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Proserpine*; and
the two Constellations rise, with the Balance, after the Virgin (or
Isis), whose feet rest on the eastern horizon at Sunrise on the day of
the equinox. As the Serpent extends over both signs, Libra and Scorpio,
it has been the gate through which souls descend, during the whole time
that those two signs in succession marked the Autumnal Equinox. To this
alluded the Serpent, which, in the Mysteries of Bacchus Saba-Zeus, was
flung into the bosom of the Initiate.

And hence came the enigmatical expression, *the Serpent engenders the
Bull, and the Bull the Serpent*; alluding to the two ad-verse
constellations, answering to the two equinoxes, one of which rose as the
other set, and which were at the two points of the heavens through which
souls passed, ascending and descending. By the Serpent of Autumn, souls
fell; and they were regenerated again by the Bull on which Mithras sate,
and whose attributes Bacchus-Zagreus and the Egyptian Osiris assumed, in
their Mysteries, wherein were represented the fall and regeneration of
souls, by the Bull slain and restored to life.

Afterward the regenerating Sun assumed the attributes of *Aries* or the
Lamb; and in the Mysteries of Ammon, souls were regenerated by passing
through that sign, after having fallen through the Serpent.

The Serpent-bearer, or Ophicus, was Æsculapius, God of Healing. In the
Mysteries of Eleusis, that Constellation was placed in the eighth
Heaven: and on the eighth day of those Mysteries, the feast of
Æsculapius was celebrated. It was also termed Epidaurus, or the feast of
the Serpent of Epidaurus. The Serpent was sacred to Æsculapius; and was
connected in various ways with the mythological adventures of Ceres.

So the libations to Souls, by pouring wine on the ground, and looking
toward the two gates of Heaven, those of day and night, referred to the
ascent and descent of Souls.

Ceres and the Serpent, Jupiter Ammon and the Bull, all figured in the
Mysteries of Bacchus. Suppose Aries, or Jupiter Ammon occupied by the
Sun setting in the West;--Virgo (Ceres) will be on the Eastern horizon,
and in her train the Crown, or Proserpine. Suppose Taurus setting;--then
the Serpent is in the East; and reciprocally; so that Jupiter Ammon, or
the Sun of Aries, causes the Crown to rise after the Virgin, in the
train of which comes the Serpent. Place reciprocally the Sun at the
other equinox,

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

with the balance in the West, in conjunction with the Serpent under the
Crown; and we shall see the Bull and the Pleiades rise in the East. Thus
are explained all the fables as to the generation of the Bull by the
Serpent and of the Serpent by the Bull, the biting of the testicles of
the Bull by the Scorpion, on the Mithriac Monuments; and that Jupiter
made Ceres with child by tossing into her bosom the testicles of a Ram.

In the Mysteries of the bull-horned Bacchus, the officers held serpents
in their hands, raised them above their heads, and cried aloud "Eva!"
the generic oriental name of the serpent, and the particular name of the
constellation in which the Persians placed Eve and the serpent. The
Arabians call it *Hevan*, Ophiucus himself, *Hawa*, and the brilliant
star in his head, *Ras-al-Hawa*. The use of this word *Eva* or *Evoë*
caused Clemens of Alexandria to say that the priests in the Mysteries
invoked *Eve*, by whom evil was brought into the world.

The mystic winnowing-fan, encircled by serpents, was used in the feasts
of Bacchus. In the Isiac Mysteries a basilisc twined round the handle of
the mystic vase. The Ophites fed a serpent in a mysterious ark, from
which they took him when they celebrated the Mysteries, and allowed him
to glide among the sacred bread. The Romans kept serpents in the Temples
of Bona Dea and Æsculapius. In the Mysteries of Apollo, the pursuit of
Latona by the serpent Python was represented. In the Egyptian Mysteries,
the dragon Typhon pursued Isis.

According to Sanchoniathon, TAAUT, the interpreter of Heaven to men,
attributed something divine to the nature of the dragon and serpents, in
which die Phœnicians and Egyptians followed him. They have more
vitality, more spiritual force, than any other creature; of a fiery
nature, shown by the rapidity of their motions, without the limbs of
other animals. They assume many shapes and attitudes, and dart with
extraordinary quickness and force. When they have reached old age, they
throw off that age and are young again, and increase in size and
strength, for a certain period of years.

The Egyptian Priests fed the sacred serpents in the temple at Thebes.
Taaut himself had in his writings discussed these mysteries in regard to
the serpent. Sanchoniathon said in another work, that the serpent was
immortal, and re-entered into himself; which, according to some ancient
theosophists, particularly those

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

of India, was an attribute of the Deity. And he also said that the
serpent never died, unless by a violent death.

The Phœnicians called the serpent *Agathodemon* \[the good spirit\]; and
Kneph was the Serpent-God of the Egyptians.

The Egyptians, Sanchoniathon said, represented the serpent with the head
of a hawk, on account of the swift flight of that bird: and the chief
Hierophant, the sacred interpreter, gave very mysterious explanations of
that symbol; saying that such a serpent was a very divine creature, and
that, opening his eyes, he lighted with their rays the whole of
first-born space: when he closes them, it is darkness again. In reality,
the hawk-headed serpent, genius of light, or good genius, was the symbol
of the Sun.

In the hieroglyphic characters, a snake was the letter T or DJ. It
occurs many times on the Rosetta stone. The horned serpent was the
hieroglyphic for a God.

According to Eusebius, the Egyptians represented the world by a blue
circle, sprinkled with flames, within which was extended a serpent with
the head of a hawk. Proclus says they represented the four quarters of
the world by a cross, and the soul of the world, or Kneph, by a serpent
surrounding it in the form of a circle.

We read in Anaxagoras, that Orpheus said, that the water, and the vessel
that produced it, were the primitive principles of things, and together
gave existence to an animated being, which was a serpent, with two
heads, one of a lion and the other of a bull, between which was the
figure of a God whose name was Hercules or Kronos: that from Hercules
came the egg of the world, which produced Heaven and earth, by dividing
itself into two hemispheres: and that the God Phanes, which issued from
that egg, was in the shape of a serpent.

The Egyptian Goddess *Ken*, represented standing naked on a lion, held
two serpents in her hand. She is the same as the *Astarte* or
*Ashtaroth* of the Assyrians. *Hera*, worshipped in the Great Temple at
Babylon, held in her right hand a serpent by the head; and near *Khea*,
also worshipped there, were two large silver serpents.

In a sculpture from Kouyunjik, two serpents attached to poles are near a
fire-altar, at which two eunuchs are standing. Upon it is the sacred
fire, and a bearded figure leads a wild goat to the sacrifice.

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

The serpent of the Temple of Epidaurus was sacred to *Æsculapius*, the
God of Medicine, and 462 years after the building of the city, was taken
to Rome after a pestilence.

The Phœnicians represented the God *Nomu* (*Kneph* or *Amun-Kneph*) by a
serpent. In Egypt, a Sun supported by two asps was the emblem of
*Horhat* the good genius; and the serpent with the winged globe was
placed over the doors and windows of the Temples as a tutelary God.
Antipater of Sidon calls *Amun* "the renowned Serpent," and the Cerastes
is often found embalmed in the Thebaid.

On ancient Tyrian coins and Indian medals, a serpent was represented,
coiled round the trunk of a tree. *Python*, the Serpent Deity, was
esteemed oracular; and the tripod at Delphi was a triple-headed serpent
of gold.

The portals of all the Egyptian Temples are decorated with the hierogram
of the Circle and the Serpent. It is also found upon the Temple of
Naki-Rustan in Persia; on the triumphal arch at Pechin, in China; over
the gates of the great Temple of Chaundi Teeva, in Java; upon the walls
of Athens; and in the Temple of Minerva at Tegea. The Mexican hierogram
was formed by the intersecting of two great Serpents, which described
the circle with their bodies, and had each a human head in its mouth.

All the Buddhists crosses in Ireland had serpents carved upon them.
Wreaths of snakes are on the columns of the ancient Hindu Temple at
Burwah-Sangor.

Among the Egyptians, it was a symbol of Divine Wisdom, when extended at
length; and, with its tail in its mouth, of Eternity.

In the ritual of Zoroaster, the Serpent was a symbol of the Universe. In
China, the ring between two Serpents was the symbol of the world
governed by the power and wisdom of the Creator. The Bacchanals carried
serpents in their hands or round their heads.

The Serpent entwined round an Egg, was a symbol common to the Indians,
the Egyptians, and the Druids. It referred to the creation of the
Universe. A Serpent with an egg in his mouth was a symbol of the
Universe containing within itself the germ of all things that the Sun
develops.

The property possessed by the Serpent, of casting its skin, and
apparently renewing its youth, made it an emblem of eternity and
immortality. The Syrian women still employ it as a charm against

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

barrenness, as did the devotees of Mithras and Saba-Zeus. The Earth-born
civilizers of the early world, Fohi, Cecrops, and Erechtheus, were
half-man, half-serpent. The snake was the guardian of the Athenian
Acropolis. NAKHUSTAN, the brazen serpent of the wilderness, became
naturalized among the Hebrews as a token of healing power. "Be ye," said
Christ, "wise as serpents, and harmless as doves."

The Serpent was as often a symbol of malevolence and enmity. It appears
among the emblems of Siva-Roudra, the power of desolation and death: it
is the bane of Aëpytus, Idom, Archemorus, and Philoctetes: it gnaws the
roots of the tree of life in the Eddas, and bites the heel of
unfortunate Eurydice. In Hebrew writers it is generally a type of evil;
and is particularly so in the Indian and Persian Mythologies. When the
Sea is churned by Mount Mandar rotating within the coils of the Cosmical
Serpent Vasouki, to produce the Amrita or water of immortality, the
serpent vomits a hideous poison, which spreads through and infects the
Universe, but which Vishnu renders harmless by swallowing it. Ahriman in
serpent-form invades the realm of Ormuzd; and the Bull, emblem of life,
is wounded by him and dies. It was therefore a religious obligation with
every devout follower of Zoroaster to exterminate reptiles, and other
impure animals, especially serpents. The moral and astronomical
significance of the Serpent were connected. It became a maxim of the
Zend-Avesta, that Ahriman, the Principle of Evil, made the Great Serpent
of Winter, who assaulted the creation of Ormuzd.

A serpent-ring was a well-known symbol of time: and to express
dramatically how time preys upon itself, the Egyptian priests fed vipers
in a subterranean chamber, as it were in the sun's Winter abode on the
fat of bulls, or the year's plenteousness. The dragon of Winter pursues
Ammon, the golden ram, to Mount Casius. The Virgin of the zodiac is
bitten in the heel by Serpens, who, with Scorpio, rises immediately
behind her; and as honey, the emblem of purity and salvation, was
thought to be an antidote to the serpent's bite, so the bees of
Aristæus, the emblems of nature's abundance, are destroyed through the
agency of the serpent, and regenerated within the entrails of the Vernal
Bull.

The Sun-God is finally victorious. Chrishna crushes the head of the
serpent Calyia; Apollo destroys Python, and Hercules that Lernæan
monster whose poison festered in the foot of Philoctetes,

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

of Mopsus, of Chiron, or of Sagittarius. The infant Hercules destroys
the pernicious snakes detested of the gods, and ever, like St. George of
England and Michael the Archangel, wars against hydras and dragons.

The eclipses of the sun and moon were believed by the orientals to be
caused by the assaults of a dæmon in dragon-form; and they endeavored to
scare away the intruder by shouts and menaces. This was the original
Leviathan or Crooked Serpent of old, transfixed in the olden time by the
power of Jehovah, and suspended as a glittering trophy in the sky; yet
also the Power of Darkness supposed to be ever in pursuit of the Sun and
Moon. When it finally overtakes them, it will entwine them in its folds,
and prevent their shining. In the last Indian Avatara, as in the Eddas,
a serpent vomiting flames is expected to destroy the world, The serpent
presides over the close of the year, where it guards the approach to the
golden fleece of Aries, and the three apples or seasons of the
Hesperides; presenting a formidable obstacle to the career of the
Sun-God. The Great Destroyer of snakes is occasionally married to them;
Hercules with the northern dragon begets the three ancestors of Scythia;
for the Sun seems at one time to rise victorious from the contest with
darkness, and at another to sink into its embraces. The northern
constellation Draco, whose sinuosities wind like a river through the
wintry bear, was made the astronomical cincture of the Universe, as the
serpent encircles the mundane egg in Egyptian hieroglyphics.

The Persian Ahriman was called "The old serpent, the liar from the
beginning, the Prince of Darkness, and the rover up and down." The
Dragon was a well-known symbol of the waters and of great rivers; and it
was natural that by the pastoral Asiatic Tribes, the powerful nations of
the alluvial plains in their neighborhood who adored the dragon or Fish,
should themselves be symbolized under the form of dragons; and overcome
by the superior might of the Hebrew God, as monstrous Leviathans maimed
and destroyed by him. Ophioneus, in the old Greek Theology, warred
against Kronos, and was overcome and cast into his proper element, the
sea. There he is installed as the Sea-God Oannes or Dragon, the
Leviathan of the watery half of creation, the dragon who vomited a flood
of water after the persecuted woman of the Apocalypse, the monster who
threatened to devour Hesione and Andromeda, and who for a time became
the grave of Hercules and

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jonah; and he
corresponds with the obscure name of *Rahab*, whom Jehovah is said in
Job to have transfixed and overcome.

In the Spring, the year or Sun-God appears as Mithras or Europa mounted
on the Bull; but in the opposite half of the Zodiac he rides the emblem
of the waters, the winged horse of Nestor or Poseidon: and the Serpent,
rising heliacally at the Autumnal Equinox, besetting with poisonous
influence the cold constellation Sagittarius, is explained as the
reptile in the path who "bites the horse's heels, so that his rider
falls backward." The same serpent, the Oannes Aphrenos or Musaros of
Syncellus, was the Midgard Serpent which Odin sunk beneath the sea, but
which grew to such a size as to encircle the whole earth.

For these Asiatic symbols of the contest of the Sun-God with the Dragon
of darkness and Winter were imported not only into the Zodiac, but into
the more homely circle of European legend; and both Thor and Odin fight
with dragons, as Apollo did with Python, the great scaly snake, Achilles
with the Scamander, and Bellerophon with the Chimæra. In the apocryphal
book of Esther, dragons herald "a day of darkness and obscurity"; and
St. George of England, a problematic Cappadocian Prince, was originally
only a varying form of Mithras. Jehovah is said to have "cut Rahab and
wounded the dragon." The latter is not only the type of earthly
desolation, the dragon of the deep waters, but also the leader of the
banded conspirators of the sky, of the rebellious stars, which,
according to Enoch, "came not at the right time"; and his tail drew a
third part of the Host of Heaven, and cast them to the earth. Jehovah
"divided the sea by his strength, and broke the heads of the Dragons in
the waters." And according to the Jewish and Persian belief, the Dragon
would, in the latter days, the Winter of time, enjoy a short period of
licensed impunity, which would be a season of the greatest suffering to
the people of the earth; but he would finally be bound or destroyed in
the great battle of Messiah; or, as it seems intimated by the Rabbinical
figure of being eaten by the faithful, be, like Ahriman or Vasouki,
ultimately absorbed by and united with the Principle of good.

Near the image of Rhea, in the Temple of Bel at Babylon, were two large
serpents of silver, says Diodorus, each weighing thirty talents; and in
the same temple was an image of Juno, holding in her right hand the head
of a serpent. The Greeks called Bel

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Beliar*; and
Hesychius interprets that word to mean a dragon or great serpent. We
learn from the book of Bel and the Dragon, that in Babylon was kept a
great, live serpent, which the people worshipped.

The Assyrians, the Emperors of Constantinople, the Parthians, Scythians,
Saxons, Chinese, and Danes all bore the serpent as a standard, and among
the spoils taken by Aurelian from Zenobia were such standards, *Persici
Dracones*. The Persians represented Ormuzd and Ahriman by two serpents,
contending for the mundane egg. Mithras is represented with a lion's
head and human body, encircled by a serpent. In the Sadder is this
precept: "When you kill serpents, you will repeat the Zend-Avesta, and
thence you will obtain great merit; for it is the same as if you had
killed so many devils."

Serpents encircling rings and globes, and issuing from globes, are
common in the Persian, Egyptian, Chinese, and Indian monuments. Vishnu
is represented reposing on a coiled serpent, whose folds form a canopy
over him. Mahadeva is represented with a snake around his neck, one
around his hair, and armlets of serpents on both arms. Bhairava sits on
the coils of a serpent, whose head rises above his own. Parvati has
snakes about her neck and waist. Vishnu is the Preserving Spirit,
Mahadeva is Siva, the Evil Principle, Bhairava is his son, and Parvati
his consort. The King of Evil Demons was called in Hindu\_ Mythology,
*Naga*, the King of Serpents, in which name we trace the Hebrew
*Nachash*, serpent.

In Cashmere were seven hundred places where carved images of serpents
were worshipped; and in Thibet the great Chinese Dragon ornamented the
Temples of the Grand Lama. In China, the dragon was the stamp and symbol
of royalty, sculptured in all the Temples, blazoned on the furniture of
the houses, and interwoven with the vestments of the chief nobility. The
Emperor bears it as his armorial device; it is engraved on his sceptre
and diadem, and on all the vases of the imperial palace. The Chinese
believe that there is a dragon of extraordinary strength and sovereign
power, in Heaven, in the air, on the waters, and on the mountains. The
God Fohi is said to have had the form of a man, terminating in the tail
of a snake, a combination to be more fully explained to you in a
subsequent Degree.

The dragon and serpent are the 5th and 6th signs of the Chinese

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zodiac; and the
Hindus and Chinese believe that, at every eclipse, the sun or moon is
seized by a huge serpent or dragon, the serpent *Asootee* of the Hindus,
which enfolds the globe and the constellation Draco; to which also
refers "the War in Heaven, when Michael and his Angels fought against
the dragon."

Sanchoniathon says that Taaut was the author of the worship of serpents
among the Phœnicians. He "consecrated," he says, "the species of dragons
and serpents; and the Phœnicians and Egyptians followed him in this
superstition." He was "the first who made an image of Cœlus"; that is;
who represented the Heavenly Hosts of Stars by visible symbols; and was
probably the same as the Egyptian Thoth. On the Tyrian coins of the age
of Alexander, serpents are represented in many positions and attitudes,
coiled around trees, erect in front of altars, and crushed by the Syrian
Hercules.

The seventh letter of the Egyptian alphabet, called *Zeuta* or *Life*,
was sacred to Thoth, and was expressed by a serpent standing on his
tail; and that Deity, the God of healing, like Æsculapius, to whom the
serpent was consecrated, leans on a knotted stick around which coils a
snake. The Isiac tablet, describing the Mysteries of Isis, is charged
with serpents in every part, as her emblems. The *Asp* was specially
dedicated to her, and is seen on the heads of her statues, on the
bonnets of her priests, and on the tiaras of the Kings of Egypt. Serapis
was sometimes represented with a human head and serpentine tail: and in
one engraving two minor Gods are represented with him, one by a serpent
with a bull's head, and the other by a serpent with the radiated head of
a lion.

On an ancient sacrificial vessel found in Denmark, having several
compartments, a serpent is represented attacking a kneeling boy,
pursuing him, retreating before him, appealed to beseechingly by him,
and conversing with him. We are at once reminded of the Sun at the new
year represented by a child sitting on a lotus, and of the relations of
the Sun of Spring with the Autumnal Serpent, pursued by and pursuing
him, and in conjunction with him. Other figures on this vessel belong to
the Zodiac.

The base of the *tripod* of the Pythian Priestess was a triple-headed
serpent of brass, whose body, folded in circles growing wider and wider
toward the ground, formed a conical column, while the three heads,
disposed triangularly, upheld the *tripod* 

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

of gold. A similar column was placed on a pillar in the Hippodrome at
Constantinople, by the founder of that city; one of the heads of which
is said to have been broken off by Mahomet the Second, by a blow with
his iron mace.

The British God Hu was called "The Dragon--Ruler of the World," and his
car was drawn by serpents. His ministers were styled *adders*. A Druid
in a poem of Taliessin says, "I am a Druid, I am an *Architect*, I am a
Prophet, I am a *Serpent* (Gnadi)." The Car of the Goddess Ceridwen also
was drawn by serpents.

In the elegy of Uther Pendragon, this passage occurs in a description of
the religious rites of the Druids: "While the Sanctuary is earnestly
invoking *The Gliding King*, before whom the *Fair One* retreats, upon
the evil that covers the huge stones; whilst the Dragon moves round over
the places which contain vessels of drink-offering, whilst the
drink-offering is in *the Golden Horns*;" in which we readily discover
the mystic and obscure allusion to the Autumnal Serpent pursuing the Sun
along the circle of the Zodiac, to the celestial cup or crater, and the
Golden horns of Virgil's milk-white Bull; and, a line or two further on,
we find the Priest imploring the victorious *Beli*, the Sun-God of the
Babylonians.

With the serpent, in the Ancient Monuments, is very often found
associated the Cross. The Serpent upon a Cross was an Egyptian Standard.
It occurs repeatedly upon the Grand Stair-case of the Temple of Osiris
at Philæ; and on the pyramid of Ghizeh are represented two kneeling
figures erecting a Cross, on the top of which is a serpent erect. The
*Crux Ansata* was a Cross with a coiled Serpent above it; and it is
perhaps the most common of all emblems on the Egyptian Monuments,
carried in the hand of almost every figure of a Deity or a Priest. It
was, as we learn by the monuments, the form of the iron tether-pins,
used for making fast to the ground the cords by which young animals were
confined: and as used by shepherds, became a symbol of Royalty to the
Shepherd Kings.

A Cross like a Teutonic or Maltese one, formed by four curved lines
within a circle, is also common on the Monuments, and represented the
Tropics and the Colures.

The Caduceus, borne by Hermes or Mercury, and also by Cybele, Minerva,
Anubis, Hercules Ogmius the God of the Celts, and the personified
Constellation Virgo, was a winged wand, entwined by

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

two serpents. It was originally a simple Cross, symbolizing the equator
and equinoctial Colure, and the four elements proceeding from a common
centre. This Cross, surmounted by a circle, and that by a crescent,
became an emblem of the Supreme Deity--or of the active power of
generation and the passive power of production conjoined,--and was
appropriated to Thoth or Mercury. It then assumed an improved form, the
arms of the Cross being changed into wings, and the circle and crescent
being formed by two snakes, springing from the wand, forming a circle by
crossing each other, and their heads making the horns of the crescent;
in which form it is seen in the hands of Anubis.

The triple Tau, in the centre of a circle and a triangle, typifies the
Sacred Name; and represents the Sacred Triad, the Creating, Preserving,
and Destroying Powers; as well as the three great lights of Masonry. If
to the Masonic point within a Circle, and the two parallel lines, we add
the single Tau Cross, we have the Ancient Egyptian Triple Tau.

A column in the form of a cross, with a circle over it, was used by the
Egyptians to measure the increase of the inundations of the Nile. The
Tau and Triple Tau are found in many Ancient Alphabets.

With the Tau or the Triple Tau may be connected, within two circles, the
double cube, or perfection; or the perfect ashlar.

The *Crux Ansata* is found on the sculptures of Khorsabad; on the
ivories from Nimroud, of the same age, carried by an Assyrian Monarch;
and on cylinders of the later Assyrian period.

As the single Tau represents the one God, so, no doubt, the Triple Tau,
the origin of which cannot be traced, was meant to represent the Trinity
of his attributes, the three Masonic pillars, WISDOM, STRENGTH, and
HARMONY.

The Prophet Ezekiel, in the 4th verse of the 9th chapter, says: "And the
Lord said unto him, 'Go through the midst of the city, through the midst
of Jerusalem, and mark the letter TAU upon the foreheads of those that
sigh and mourn for all the abominations that be done in the midst
thereof." So the Latin Vulgate, and the probably most ancient copies of
the Septuagint translate the passage. This *Tau* was in the form of the
cross of this Degree, and it was the emblem of *life* and *salvation*.
The Samaritan Tau and the Ethiopic *Tavvi* are the evident prototype of
the Greek τ; and we learn from Tertullian, Origen, and St. Jerome,

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

that the Hebrew *Tau* was anciently written in the form of a Cross.

In ancient times the mark *Tau* was set on those who had been acquitted
by their judges, as a symbol of innocence. The military commanders
placed it on soldiers who escaped unhurt from the field of battle, as a
sign of their safety under the Divine Protection.

It was a sacred symbol among the Druids. Divesting a tree of part of its
branches, they left it in the shape of a Tau Cross, preserved it
carefully, and consecrated it with solemn ceremonies. On the tree they
cut deeply the word THAU, by which they meant God. On the right arm of
the Cross, they inscribed the word HESULS, on the left BELEN or BELENUS,
and on the middle of the trunk THARAMIS. This represented the sacred
*Triad*.

It is certain that the Indians, Egyptians, and Arabians paid veneration
to the sign of the Cross, thousands of years before the coming of
Christ. Everywhere it was a sacred symbol. The Hindus and the Celtic
Druids built many of their Temples in the form of a Cross, as the ruins
still remaining clearly show, and particularly the ancient Druidical
Temple at Classerniss in the Island of Lewis in Scotland. The Circle is
of 12 Stones. On each of the sides, east, west, and south, are three. In
the centre was the image of the Deity; and on the north an avenue of
twice nineteen stones, and one at the entrance. The Supernal Pagoda at
Benares is in the form of a Cross; and the Druidical subterranean grotto
at New Grange in Ireland.

The Statue of Osiris at Rome had the same emblem. Isis and Ceres also
bore it; and the caverns of initiation were constructed in that shape
with a pyramid over the *Sacellum*.

Crosses were cut in the stones of the Temple of Serapis in Alexandria;
and many Tau Crosses are to be seen in the sculptures of Alabastion and
Esné, in Egypt. On coins, the symbol of the Egyptian God Kneph was a
Cross within a Circle.

The Crux Ansata was the particular emblem of Osiris, and his sceptre
ended with that figure. It was also the emblem of Hermes, and was
considered a Sublime Hieroglyphic, possessing mysterious powers and
virtues, as a wonder-working amulet.

The Sacred Tau occurs in the hands of the mummy-shaped figures between
the forelegs of the row of Sphynxes, in the great avenue leading from
Luxor to Karnac. By the Tau Cross the

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cabalists
expressed the number 10, a perfect number, denoting Heaven, and the
Pythagorean Tetractys, or incommunicable name of God. The Taft Cross is
also found on the stones in front of the door of the Temple of Amunoth
III, at Thebes, who reigned about the time when the Israelites took
possession of Canaan: and the Egyptian Priests carried it in all the
sacred processions.

Tertullian, who had been initiated, informs us that the Tau was
inscribed on the forehead of every person who had been admitted into the
Mysteries of Mithras.

As the simple Tau represented Life, so, when the Circle, symbol of
Eternity, was added, it represented Eternal Life.

At the Initiation of a King, the Tau, as the emblem of life and key of
the Mysteries, was impressed upon his lips.

In the Indian Mysteries, the Tau Cross, under the name of *Tiluk*, was
marked upon the body of the candidate, as a sign that he was set apart
for the Sacred Mysteries.

On the upright tablet of the King, discovered at Nimroud, are the names
of thirteen Great Gods (among which are YAV and BEL); and the left-hand
character of every one is a cross composed of two cuneiform characters.

The Cross appears upon an Ancient Phœnician medal found in the ruins of
Citium; on the very ancient Buddhist Obelisk near Ferns in Ross-shire;
on the Buddhist Round Towers in Ireland, and upon the splendid obelisk
of the same era at Forres in Scot-land.

Upon the facade of a temple at Kalabche in Nubia are three regal
figures, each holding a Crux Ansata.

Like the Subterranean Mithriatic Temple at New Grange in Scotland, the
Pagodas of Benares and Mathura were in the form of a Cross. Magnificent
Buddhist Crosses were erected, and are still standing, at Clonmacnoise,
Finglas, and Kilcullen in Ireland. Wherever the monuments of Buddhism
are found, in India, Ceylon, or Ireland, we find the Cross: for Buddha
or Boudh was represented to have been crucified.

All the planets known to the Ancients were distinguished by the Mystic
Cross, in conjunction with the solar or lunar symbols; Saturn by a cross
over a crescent, Jupiter by a cross under a crescent, Mars by a cross
resting obliquely on a circle, Venus by a cross under a circle, and
Mercury by a cross surmounted by a circle and that by a crescent.

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

The Solstices, Cancer and Capricorn, the two Gates of Heaven, are the
two pillars of Hercules, beyond which he, the Sun, never journeyed: and
they still appear in our Lodges, as the two great columns, Jachin and
Boaz, and also as the two parallel lines that bound the circle, with a
point in the centre, emblem of the Sun, between the two tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn.

The Blazing Star in our Lodges, we have already said, represents Sirius,
Anubis, or Mercury, Guardian and Guide of Souls. Our Ancient English
brethren also considered it an emblem of the Sun. In the old Lectures
they said: "The Blazing Star or Glory in the centre refers us to that
Grand Luminary the Sun, which enlightens the Earth, and by its genial
influence dispenses blessings to mankind." It is also said in those
lectures to be an emblem of Prudence. The word *Prudentia* means, in its
original and fullest signification, *Foresight*: and accordingly the
Blazing Star has been regarded as an emblem of Omniscience, or the
All-Seeing Eye, which to the Ancients was the Sun.

Even the Dagger of the Elu of Nine is that used in the Mysteries of
Mithras; which, with its blade black and hilt white, was an emblem of
the two principles of Light and Darkness.

Isis, the same as Ceres, was, as we learn from Eratosthenes, the
Constellation Virgo, represented by a woman holding an ear of wheat. The
different emblems which accompany her in the description given by
Apuleius, a serpent on either side, a golden vase, with a serpent twined
round the handle, and the animals that marched in procession, the bear,
the ape, and Pegasus, represented the Constellations that, rising with
the. Virgin, when on the day of the Vernal Equinox she stood in the
Oriental gate of Heaven, brilliant with the rays of the full moon,
seemed to march in her train.

The cup, consecrated in the Mysteries both of Isis and Eleusis, was the
Constellation Crater or the Cup. The sacred vessel of the Isiac ceremony
finds its counterpart in the Heavens. The Olympic robe presented to the
Initiate, a magnificent mantle, covered with figures of serpents and
animals, and under which were twelve other sacred robes, wherewith he
was clothed in the sanctuary, alluded to the starry Heaven and the
twelve signs: while the seven preparatory immersions in the sea alluded
to the seven spheres, through which the soul plunged, to arrive here
below and take up its abode in a body.

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

The Celestial Virgin, during the last three centuries that preceded the
Christian era, occupied the horoscope or Oriental point, and that gate
of Heaven through which the Sun and Moon ascended above the horizon at
the two equinoxes. Again it occupied it at midnight, at the Winter
Solstice, the precise moment when the year commenced. Thus it was
essentially connected with the march of times and seasons, of the Sun,
the Moon, and day and night, at the principal epochs of the year. At the
equinoxes were celebrated the greater and lesser Mysteries of Ceres.
When souls descended past the Balance, at the moment when the Sun
occupied that point, the Virgin rose before him; she stood at the gates
of day and opened them to him. Her brilliant Star, Spica Virginis, and
Arcturus, in Boötes, northwest of it, heralded his coming. When he had
returned to the Vernal Equinox, at the moment when souls were generated,
again it was the Celestial Virgin that led the march of the signs of
night; and in her stars came the beautiful full moon of that month.
Night and day were in succession introduced by her, when they began to
diminish in length; and souls, before arriving at the gates of Hell,
were also led by her. In going through these signs, they passed the Styx
in the 8th Degree of Libra. She was the famous Sibyl who initiated
Eneas, and opened to him the way to the infernal regions.

This peculiar situation of the Constellation Virgo, has caused it to
enter into all the sacred fables in regard to nature, under different
names and the most varied forms. It often takes the name of Isis or the
Moon, which, when at its full at the Vernal Equinox, was in union with
it or beneath its feet. Mercury (or Anubis) having his domicile and
exaltation in the sign Virgo, was, in all the sacred fables and
Sanctuaries, the inseparable companion of Isis, without whose counsels
she did nothing.

This relation between the emblems and mysterious recitals of the
initiations, and the Heavenly bodies and order of the world, was still
more clear in the Mysteries of Mithras, adored as the Sun in Asia Minor,
Cappadocia, Armenia, and Persia, and whose Mysteries went to Rome in the
time of Sylla. This is amply proved by the descriptions we have of the
Mithriac cave, in which were figured the two movements of the Heavens,
that of the fixed Stars and that of the Planets, the Constellations, the
eight mystic gates of the spheres, and the symbols of the elements. So
on a celebrated monument of that religion, found at Rome, were figured,

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

the Serpent or Hydra under Leo, as in the Heavens, the Celestial Dog,
the Bull, the Scorpion, the Seven Planets, represented by seven altars,
the Sun, Moon, and emblems relating to Light, to Darkness, and to their
succession during the year, where each in turn triumphs for six months.

The Mysteries of Atys were celebrated when the Sun entered Aries; and
among the emblems was a ram at the foot of a tree which was being cut
down.

Thus, if not the whole truth, it is yet a large part of it, that the
Heathen Pantheon, in its infinite diversity of names and
personifications, was but a multitudinous, though in its origin
unconscious allegory, of which physical phenomena, and principally the
Heavenly Bodies, were the fundamental types. The glorious images of
Divinity which formed Jehovah's Host, were the Divine Dynasty or real
theocracy which governed the early world; and the men of the golden age,
whose looks held commerce with the skies, and who watched the radiant
rulers bringing Winter and Summer to mortals, might be said with poetic
truth to live in immediate communication with Heaven, and, like the
Hebrew Patriarchs, to see God face to face. Then the Gods introduced
their own worship among mankind: then Oannes, Oe or Aquarius rose from
the Red Sea to impart science to the Babylonians; then the bright Bull
legislated for India and Crete; and the Lights of Heaven, personified as
Liber and Ceres, hung the Bœotian hills with vine-yards, and gave the
golden sheaf to Eleusis. The children of men were, in a sense, allied or
married, to those sons of God who sang the jubilee of creation; and the
encircling vault with its countless Stars, which to the excited
imagination of the solitary Chaldæan wanderer appeared as animated
intelligences, might naturally be compared to a gigantic ladder, on
which, in their rising and setting, the Angel luminaries appeared to be
ascending and descending between earth and Heaven. The original
revelation died out of men's memories; they worshipped the Creature
instead of the Creator; and holding all earthly things as connected by
eternal links of harmony and sympathy with the heavenly bodies, they
united in one view astronomy, astrology, and religion. Long wandering
thus in error, they at length ceased to look upon the Stars and
.external nature as Gods; and by directing their attention to the
microcosm or narrower world of self, they again became acquainted with
the True Ruler and Guide of the Universe,

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

and used the old fables and superstitions as symbols and allegories, by
which to convey and under which to hide the great truths which had faded
out of most men's remembrance.

In the Hebrew writings, the term "Heavenly Hosts" includes not only the
counsellors and emissaries of Jehovah, but also the celestial
luminaries; and the stars, imagined in the East to be animated
intelligences, presiding over human weal and woe, are identified with
the more distinctly impersonated messengers or angels, who execute the
Divine decrees, and whose predominance in Heaven is in mysterious
correspondence and relation with the powers and dominions of the earth.
In Job, the Morning Stars and the Sons of God are identified; they join
in the same chorus of praise to the Almighty; they are both susceptible
of joy; they walk in brightness, and are liable to impurity and
imperfection in the sight of God. The Elohim originally included not
only foreign superstitious forms, but also all that host of Heaven which
was revealed in poetry to the shepherds of the desert, now as an
encampment of warriors, now as careering in chariots of fire, and now as
winged messengers, ascending and descending the vault of Heaven, to
communicate the will of God to mankind.

"The Eternal," says the Bereshith Rabba to Genesis, "called forth
Abraham and his posterity out of the dominion of the stars; by nature,
the Israelite was a servant to the stars, and born under their
influence, as are the heathen; but by virtue of the law given on Mount
Sinai, he became liberated from this degrading servitude." The Arabs had
a similar legend. The Prophet Amos explicitly asserts that the
Israelites, in the desert, worshipped, not Jehovah, but Moloch, or a
Star-God, equivalent to Saturn. The Gods El or Jehovah were not merely
planetary or solar. Their symbolism, like that of every other Deity, was
coextensive with nature, and with the mind of man. Yet the astrological
character is assigned even to Jehovah. He is described as seated on the
pinnacle of the Universe, leading forth the Hosts of Heaven, and telling
them unerringly by name and number. His stars are His sons and His eyes,
which run through the whole world, keeping watch over men's deeds. The
stars and planets were properly the angels. In Pharisaic tradition, as
in the phraseology of the New Testament, the Heavenly Host appears as an
Angelic Army, divided into regiments and brigades, under the command

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

of imaginary chiefs, such as Massaloth, Legion, Kartor Gistra,
etc.,--each Gistra being captain of 365,000 myriads of stars. The Seven
Spirits which stand before the throne, spoken of by several Jewish
writers, and generally presumed to have been immediately derived from
the Persian Amshaspands, were ultimately the seven planetary
intelligences, the original model of the seven-branched golden
candlestick exhibited to Moses on God's mountain. The stars were
imagined to have fought in their courses against Sisera. The heavens
were spoken of as holding a predominance over earth, as governing it by
signs and ordinances, and as containing the elements of that
astrological wisdom, more especially cultivated by the Babylonians and
Egyptians.

Each nation was supposed by the Hebrews to have its own guardian angel,
and its own provincial star. One of the chiefs of the Celestial Powers,
at first Jehovah Himself in the character of the Sun, standing in the
height of Heaven, overlooking and governing all things, afterward one of
the angels or subordinate planetary genii of Babylonian or Persian
mythology, was the patron and protector of their own nation, "the Prince
that standeth for the children of thy people." The discords of earth
were accompanied by a warfare in the sky; and no people underwent the
visitation of the Almighty, without a corresponding chastisement being
inflicted on its tutelary angel.

The fallen Angels were also fallen Stars; and the first allusion to a
feud among the spiritual powers in early Hebrew Mythology, where Rahab
and his confederates are defeated, like the Titans in a battle against
the Gods, seems to identify the rebellious Spirits as part of the
visible Heavens, where the "high ones on high" are punished or chained,
as a signal proof of God's power and justice. God, it is said--

"Stirs the sea with His might by His understanding He smote Rahab--His
breath clears the face of Heaven--His hand pierced the crooked Serpent.
. . . God withdraws not His anger; beneath Him bow the confederates of
Rahab."

Rahab always means a sea-monster: probably some such legendary monstrous
dragon, as in almost all mythologies is the adversary of Heaven and
demon of eclipse, in whose belly, significantly called the belly of
Hell, Hercules, like Jonah, passed three days, ultimately escaping with
the loss of his hair or rays. Chesil, the rebellious giant Orion,
represented in Job as riveted to the sky,

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

was compared to Ninus or Nimrod, the mythical founder of Nineveh (City
of Fish) the mighty hunter, who slew lions and panthers before the Lord.
Rahab's confederates are probably the "High ones on High," the Chesilim
or constellations in Isaiah, the Heavenly Host or Heavenly Powers, among
whose number were found folly and disobedience.

"I beheld," says Pseudo-Enoch, "seven stars like great blazing
mountains, and like Spirits, entreating me. And the angel said, This
place, until the consummation of Heaven and Earth, will be the prison of
the Stars and of the Host of Heaven. These are the Stars which
overstepped God's command before their time arrived; and came not at
their proper season; therefore was he offended with them, and bound
them, until the time of the consummation of their crimes in the secret
year." And again: "These Seven Stars are those which have transgressed
the commandment of the Most High God, and which are here bound until the
number of the days of their crimes be completed."

The Jewish and early Christian writers looked on the worship of the sun
and the elements with comparative indulgence. Justin Martyr and Clemens
of Alexandria admit that God had appointed the stars as legitimate
objects of heathen worship, in order to preserve throughout the world
some tolerable notions of natural religion. It seemed a middle point
between Heathenism and Christianity; and to it certain emblems and
ordinances of that faith seemed to relate. The advent of Christ was
announced by a Star from the East; and His nativity was celebrated on
the shortest day of the Julian Calendar, the day when, in the physical
commemorations of Persia and Egypt, Mithras or Osiris was newly found.
It was then that the acclamations of the Host of Heaven, the unfailing
attendants of the Sun, surrounded, as at the spring-dawn of creation,
the cradle of His birth-place, and that, in the words of Ignatius, "a
star, with light inexpressible, shone forth in the Heavens, to destroy
the power of magic and the bonds of wickedness; for God Himself had
appeared, in the form of man, for the renewal of eternal life."

But however infinite the variety of objects which helped to develop the
notion of Deity, and eventually assumed its place, substituting the
worship of the creature for that of the creator; of parts of the body,
for that of the soul, of the Universe, still the notion itself was
essentially one of unity. The idea of one

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God, of a
creative, productive, governing unity, resided in the earliest exertion
of thought: and this monotheism of the primitive ages, makes every
succeeding epoch, unless it be the present, appear only as a stage in
the progress of degeneracy and aberration. Everywhere in the old faiths
we find the idea of a supreme or presiding Deity. Amun or Osiris
presides among the many gods of Egypt; Pan, with the music of his pipe,
directs the chorus of the constellations, as Zeus leads the solemn
procession of the celestial troops in the astronomical theology of the
Pythagoreans. "Amidst an infinite diversity of opinions on all other
subjects," says Maximus Tyrius, "the whole world is unanimous in the
belief of one only almighty King and Father of all."

There is always a Sovereign Power, a Zeus or Deus, Mahadeva or Adideva,
to whom belongs the maintenance of the order of the Universe. Among the
thousand gods of India, the doctrine of Divine Unity is never lost sight
of; and the ethereal Jove, worshipped by the Persian in an age long
before Xenophanes or Anaxagoras, appears as supremely comprehensive and
independent of planetary or elemental subdivisions, as the "Vast One" or
"Great Soul" of the Vedas.

But the simplicity of belief of the patriarchs did not exclude the
employment of symbolical representations. 'Fl mind never rests satisfied
with a mere feeling. That feeling ever strives to assume precision and
durability as an idea, by some *outward* delineation of its thought.
Even the ideas that are above and beyond the senses, as all ideas of God
are, require the aid of the senses for their expression and
communication. Hence come the representative forms and symbols which
constitute the external investiture of every religion; attempts to
express a religious sentiment that is essentially *one*, and that vainly
struggles for adequate external utterance, striving to tell to one man,
to *paint* to him, an idea existing in the mind of another, and
essentially incapable of utterance or description, in a language all the
words of which have a sensuous meaning. Thus, the idea being perhaps the
same in all, its expressions and utterances are infinitely various, and
branch into an infinite diversity of creeds and sects.

All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what
we see; and the true objects of religion are unseen. The earliest
instruments of education were symbols; and they and all other religious
forms differed and still differ according to

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

external circumstances and imagery, and according to differences of
knowledge and mental cultivation. To present a visible symbol to the eye
of another is not to inform him of the meaning which that symbol has to
*you*. Hence the philosopher soon super-added to these symbols,
explanations addressed to the ear, susceptible of more precision, but
less effective, obvious, and impressive than the painted or sculptured
forms which he despised. Out of these explanations grew by degrees a
variety of narratives, whose true object and meaning were gradually
forgotten. And when these were abandoned, and philosophy resorted to
definitions and formulas, its language was but a more refined symbolism,
grappling with and attempting to picture ideas impossible to be
expressed. For the most abstract expression for Deity which language can
supply, is but a *sign* or *symbol* for an object unknown, and no more
truthful and adequate than the terms Osiris and Vishnu, except as being
less sensuous and explicit. To say that He is a *Spirit*, is but to say
that He is not matter. *What* spirit is, we can only define as the
Ancients did, by resorting, as if in despair, to some sublimized species
of matter, as Light, Fire, or Ether.

No symbol of Deity can be appropriate or durable except in a relative or
moral sense. We cannot exalt words that have only a sensuous meaning,
above sense. To call Him a *Power* or a *Force*, or an *Intelligence*,
is merely to deceive ourselves into the belief that we use words that
have a meaning to us, when they have none, or at least no more than the
ancient visible symbols had. To call Him *Sovereign*, *Father*, *Grand
Architect of the Universe*, *Extension*, *Time*, *Beginning*, *Middle*,
*and End*, *whose face is turned on all sides*, *the Source of life and
death*, is but to present other men with symbols by which we vainly
endeavor to communicate to them 'the same vague ideas which men in all
ages have impotently struggled to express. And it may be doubted whether
we have succeeded either in communicating, or in forming in our own
minds, any more distinct and definite and true and adequate idea of the
Deity, with all our metaphysical conceits and logical subtleties, than
the rude ancients did, who endeavored to symbolize and so to express His
attributes, by the Fire, the Light, the Sun and Stars, the Lotus and the
Scarabæus; all of them types of what, except by types, more or less
sufficient, could not be expressed at all.

The primitive man recognized the Divine Presence under a

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

variety of appearances, without losing his faith in this unity and
Supremacy. The invisible God, manifested and on one of His many sides
visible, did not cease to be God to him. He recognized Him in the
evening breeze of Eden, in the whirlwind of Sinai, in the Stone of
Beth-El: and identified Him with the fire or thunder or the immovable
rock adored in Ancient Arabia. To him the image of the Deity was
reflected in all that was pre-eminent in excellence. He saw Jehovah,
like Osiris and Bel, in the Sun as well as in the Stars, which were His
children, His eyes, "which run through the whole world, and watch over
the Sacred Soil of Palestine, from the year's commencement to its
close." He was the sacred fire of Mount Sinai, of the burning bush, of
the Persians, those Puritans of Paganism.

Naturally it followed that Symbolism soon became more complicated, and
all the, powers of Heaven were reproduced on earth, until a web of
fiction and allegory was woven, which the wit of man, with his limited
means of explanation, will never unravel. Hebrew Theism itself became
involved in symbolism and image-worship, to which all religions ever
tend. We have already seen what was the symbolism of the Tabernacle, the
Temple, and the Ark. The Hebrew establishment tolerated not only the use
of emblematic vessels, vestments, and cherubs, of Sacred Pillars and
Seraphim, but symbolical representations of Jehovah Himself, not even
confined to poetical or illustrative language.

"Among the Adityas," says Chrishna, in the Bagvat Ghita, "I am Vishnu,
the radiant Sun among the Stars; among the waters, I am ocean; among the
mountains, the Himalaya; and among the mountain-tops, Meru." The Psalms
and Isaiah are full of similar attempts to convey to the mind ideas of
God, by ascribing to Him sensual proportions. He rides on the clouds,
and sits on the wings of the wind. Heaven is His pavilion, and out of
His mouth issue lightnings. Men cannot worship a mere abstraction. They
require some outward form in which to clothe their conceptions, and
invest their sympathies. If they do not shape and carve or paint visible
images, they have invisible ones, perhaps quite as inadequate and
unfaithful, within their own minds.

The incongruous and monstrous in the Oriental images came from the
desire to embody the Infinite, and to convey by multi-plied, because
individually inadequate symbols, a notion of the Divine Attributes to
the understanding. Perhaps we should find

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

that we mentally do the same thing, and make within ourselves images
quite as incongruous, if judged of by our own limited conceptions, if we
were to undertake to analyze and gain a clear idea of the mass of
infinite attributes which we assign to the Deity; and even of His
infinite Justice and infinite Mercy and Love.

We may well say, in the language of Maximus Tyrius: "If, in the desire
to obtain some faint conception of the Universal Father, the Nameless
Lawgiver, men had recourse to words or names, to silver or gold, to
animals or plants, to mountain-tops or flowing rivers, every one
inscribing the most valued and most beautiful things with the name of
Deity, and with the fondness of a lover clinging with rapture to each
trivial reminiscence of the Beloved, why should we seek to reduce this
universal practice of symbolism, necessary, indeed, since the mind often
needs the excitement of the imagination to rouse it into activity, to
one monotonous standard of formal propriety? Only let the image duly
perform its task, and bring the divine idea with vividness and truth
before the mental eye; if this be effected, whether by the art of
Phidias, the poetry of Homer, the Egyptian Hieroglyph, or the Persian
element, we need not cavil at external differences, or lament the
seeming fertility of unfamiliar creeds, *so long as the great essential
is attained*, THAT MEN ARE MADE TO REMEMBER, TO UNDERSTAND, AND TO
LOVE."

Certainly, when men regarded Light and Fire as something spiritual, and
above all the corruptions and exempt from all the decay of matter; when
they looked upon the Sun and Stars and Planets as composed of this finer
element, and as themselves great and mysterious Intelligences,
infinitely superior to man, living Existences, gifted with mighty powers
and wielding vast influences, those elements and bodies conveyed to
them, when used as symbols of Deity, a far more adequate idea than they
can now do to us, or than we can comprehend, now that Fire and Light are
familiar to us as air and water, and the Heavenly Luminaries are
lifeless worlds like our own. Perhaps they gave them ideas as adequate
as we obtain from the mere *words* by which we endeavor to symbolize and
shadow forth the ineffable mysteries and infinite attributes of God.

There are, it is true, dangers inseparable from symbolism, which
countervail its advantages, and afford an impressive lesson in regard to
the similar risks attendant on the use of language. The

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

imagination, invited to assist the reason, usurps its place, or leaves
its ally helplessly entangled in its web. Names which stand for things
are confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the end: the
instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to
usurp an independent character as truths and persons. Though perhaps a
necessary path, they were a dangerous one by which to approach the
Deity; in which "many," says Plutarch, "mistaking the sign for the thing
signified, fell into a ridiculous superstition; while others, in
avoiding one extreme, plunged into the no less hideous gulf of
irreligion and impiety."

All great Reformers have warred against this evil, deeply feeling the
intellectual mischief arising out of a degraded idea of the Supreme
Being: and have claimed for their own God an existence or personality
distinct from the objects of ancient superstition; disowning in His name
the symbols and images that had profaned His Temple. But they have not
seen that the utmost which can be effected by human effort, is to
substitute impressions relatively correct, for others whose falsehood
has been detected, and to re-place a gross symbolism by a purer one.
Every man, without being aware of it, worships a conception of his own
mind; for all symbolism, as well as all language, shares the subjective
character of the ideas it represents. The epithets we apply to God only
recall either visible or intellectual symbols to the eye or mind. The
modes or forms of manifestation of the reverential feeling that
constitutes the religious sentiment, are incomplete and progressive;
each term and symbol predicates a partial truth, remaining always
amenable to improvement or modification, and, in its turn, to be
superseded by others more accurate and comprehensive.

Idolatry consists in confounding the symbol with the thing signified,
the substitution of a material for a mental object of worship, after a
higher spiritualism has become possible; an ill-judged preference of the
inferior to the superior symbol, an inadequate and sensual conception of
the Deity: and every religion and every conception of God is idolatrous,
in so far as it is imperfect, and as it substitutes a feeble and
temporary idea in the shrine of that Undiscoverable Being who can be
known only in part, and who can therefore be honored, even by the most
enlightened among His worshippers, only in proportion to their limited
powers of understanding and imagining to themselves His perfections,

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

Like the belief in a Deity, the belief in the soul's immortality is
rather a natural feeling, an adjunct of self-consciousness, than a dogma
belonging to any particular age or country. It gives eternity to man's
nature, and reconciles its seeming anomalies and contradictions; it
makes him strong in weakness and [perfectible](errata.htm#20) in
imperfection; and it alone gives an adequate object for his hopes and
energies, and value and dignity to his pursuits. It is concurrent with
the belief in an infinite, eternal Spirit, since it is chiefly through
consciousness of the dignity of the mind within us, that we learn to
appreciate its evidences in the Universe.

To fortify, and as far as possible to impart this hope, was the great
aim of ancient wisdom, whether expressed in forms of poetry or
philosophy; as it was of the Mysteries, and as it is of Masonry. Life
rising out of death was the great mystery, which symbolism delighted to
represent under a thousand ingenious forms. Nature was ransacked for
attestations to the grand truth which seems to transcend all other gifts
of imagination, or rather to be their essence and consummation. Such
evidences were easily discovered. They were found in the olive and the
lotus, in the evergreen myrtle of the *Mystæ* and of the grave of
Polydorus, in the deadly but self-renewing serpent, the wonderful moth
emerging from the coffin of the worm, the phenomena of germination, the
settings and risings of the sun and stars, the darkening and growth of
the moon, and in sleep, "the minor mystery of death."

The stories of the birth of Apollo from Latona, and of dead heroes, like
Glaucus, resuscitated in caves, were allegories of the natural
alternations of life and death in nature, changes that are but
expedients to preserve her virginity and purity inviolable in the
general sum of her operations, whose aggregate presents only a majestic
calm, rebuking alike man's presumption and his despair. The typical
death of the Nature-God, Osiris, Atys, Adonis, Hiram, was a profound but
consolatory mystery: the heating charms of Orpheus were connected with
his destruction; and his bones, those valued pledges of fertility and
victory, were, by a beautiful contrivance, often buried within the
sacred precincts of his immortal equivalent.

In their doctrines as to the immortality of the soul, the Greek
Philosophers merely stated with more precision ideas long before extant
independently among themselves, in the form of symbolical suggestion.
Egypt and Ethiopia in these matters learned from

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> India, where, as
everywhere else, the origin of the doctrine was as remote and
untraceable as the origin of man himself. Its natural expression is
found in the language of Chrishna, in the Bagvat Ghita: "I myself never
was non-existent, nor thou, nor these princes of the Earth; nor shall we
ever hereafter cease to be. . . The soul is not a thing of which a man
may say, it hath been, or is about to be, or is to be hereafter; for it
is a thing without birth; it is pre-existent, changeless, eternal, and
is not to be destroyed with this mortal frame."

According to the dogma of antiquity, the thronging forms of life are a
series of purifying migrations, through which the divine principle
re-ascends to the unity of its source. Inebriated in the bowl of
Dionusos, and dazzled in the mirror of existence, the souls, those
fragments or sparks of the Universal Intelligence, forgot their native
dignity, and passed into the terrestrial frames they coveted. The most
usual type of the spirit's descent was suggested by the sinking of the
Sun and Stars from the upper to the lower hemisphere. When it arrived
within the portals of the proper empire of Dionusos, the God of this
World, the scene of delusion and change, its individuality became
clothed in a material form; and as individual bodies were compared to a
garment, the world was the investiture of the Universal Spirit. Again,
the body was compared to a vase or urn, the soul's recipient; the world
being the mighty bowl which received the descending Deity. In another
image, ancient as the Grottoes of the Magi and the denunciations of
Ezekiel, the world was as a dimly illuminated cavern, where shadows seem
realities, and where the soul becomes forgetful of its celestial origin
in proportion to its proneness to material fascinations. By another, the
period of the Soul's embodiment is as when exhalations are condensed,
and the aerial element assumes the grosser form of water.

But if vapor falls in water, it was held, water is again the birth of
vapors, which ascend and adorn the Heavens. If our mortal existence be
the death of the spirit, our death may be the renewal of its life; as
physical bodies are exalted from earth to water, from water to air, from
air to fire, so the man may rise into the Hero, the Hero into the God.
In the course of Nature, the soul, to re-cover its lost estate, must
pass through a series of trials and migrations. The scene of those
trials is the Grand Sanctuary of Initiations, the world: their primary
agents are the elements; and Dionusos, as Sovereign of Nature, or the
sensuous world personified,

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

is official Arbiter of the Mysteries, and guide of the soul, which he
introduces into the body and dismisses from it. He is the Sun, that
liberator of the elements, and his spiritual mediation was suggested by
the same imagery which made the Zodiac the supposed path of the spirits
in their descent and their return, and Cancer and Capricorn the gates
through which they passed.

He was not only Creator of the World, but guardian, liberator, and
Saviour of the Soul. Ushered into the world amidst lightning and
thunder, he became the Liberator celebrated in the Mysteries of Thebes,
delivering earth from Winter's chain, conducting the nightly chorus of
the Stars and the celestial revolution of the year. His symbolism was
the inexhaustible imagery employed to fill up the stellar devices of the
Zodiac: he was the Vernal Bull, the Lion, the Ram, the Autumnal Goat,
the Serpent: in short, the varied Deity, the resulting manifestation
personified, the all in the many, the varied year, life passing into
innumerable forms; essentially inferior to none, yet changing with the
seasons, and undergoing their periodical decay.

He mediates and intercedes for man, and reconciles the Universal Unseen
Mind with the individualized spirit of which he is emphatically the
Perfecter; a consummation which he effects, first through the
vicissitudes of the elemental ordeal, the alternate fire of Summer and
the showers of Winter, "the trials or test of an immortal Nature"; and
secondarily and symbolically through the Mysteries. He holds not only
the cup of generation, but also that of wisdom or initiation, whose
influence is contrary to that of the former, causing the soul to abhor
its material bonds, and to long for its return. The first was the Cup of
Forgetfulness; while the second is the Urn of Aquarius, quaffed by the
returning spirit, as by the returning Sun at the Winter Solstice, and
emblematic of the exchange of [worldly](errata.htm#21) impressions for
the recovered recollections of the glorious sights and enjoyments of its
pre-existence. Water nourishes and purifies; and the urn from which it
flows was thought worthy to be a symbol of Deity, as of the
Osiris-Canobus who with living water irrigated the soil of Egypt; and
also an emblem of Hope that should cheer the dwellings of the dead.

The second birth of Dionusos, like the rising of Osiris and Atys from
the dead, and the raising of Khu\_ru\_m, is a type of the spiritual
regeneration of man. Psyche (the Soul), like Ariadne, had

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

two lovers, an earthly and an immortal one. The immortal suitor is
Dionusos, the Eros-Phanes of the Orphici, gradually exalted by the
progress of thought, out of the symbol of Sensuality into the
torch-bearer of the Nuptials of the Gods; the Divine Influence which
physically called the world into being, and which, awakening the soul
from its Stygian trance, restores it from earth to Heaven.

Thus the scientific theories of the ancients, expounded in the
Mysteries, as to the origin of the soul, its descent, its sojourn here
below, and its return, were not a mere barren contemplation of the
nature of the world, and of the intelligent beings existing there. They
were not an idle speculation as to the order of the world, and about the
soul, but a study of the means for arriving at the great object
proposed, the perfecting of the soul; and, as a necessary consequence,
that of morals and society. This Earth, to them, was not the Soul's
home, but its place of exile. Heaven was its home, and there was its
birth-place. To it, it ought incessantly to turn its eyes. Man was not a
terrestrial plant. His roots were in Heaven. The soul had lost its
wings, clogged by the viscosity of matter. It would recover them when it
extricated itself from matter and commenced its upward flight.

Matter being, in their view, as it was in that of St. Paul, the
principle of all the passions that trouble reason, mislead the
intelligence, and stain the purity of the soul, the Mysteries taught man
how to enfeeble the action of matter on the soul, and to restore to the
latter its natural dominion. And lest the stains so contracted should
continue after death, lustrations were used, fastings, expiations,
macerations, continence, and above all, initiations. Many of these
practices were at first merely symbolical,--material signs indicating
the moral purity required of the Initiates; but they afterward came to
be regarded as actual productive causes of that purity.

The effect of initiation was meant to be the same as that of philosophy,
to purify the soul of its passions, to weaken the empire of the body
over the divine portion of man, and to give him here below a happiness
anticipatory of the felicity to be one day enjoyed by him, and of the
future vision by him of the Divine Beings. And therefore Proclus and the
other Platonists taught "that the Mysteries and initiations withdrew
souls from this mortal and material life, to re-unite them to the gods;
and dissipated

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

for the adepts the shades of ignorance by the splendors of the Deity."
Such were the precious fruits of the last Degree of the Mystic
Science,--to see Nature in her springs and sources, and to become
familiar with the causes of things and with real existences.

Cicero says that the soul must exercise itself in the practice of the
virtues, if it would speedily return to its place of origin. It should,
while imprisoned in the body, free itself therefrom by the contemplation
of superior beings, and in some sort be divorced from the body and the
senses. Those who remain enslaved, subjugated by their passions and
violating the sacred laws of religion and society, will re-ascend to
Heaven, only after they shall have been purified through a long
succession of ages.

The Initiate was required to emancipate himself from his passions, and
to free himself from the hindrances of the senses and of matter, in
order that he might rise to the contemplation of the Deity, or of that
incorporeal and unchanging light in which live and subsist the causes of
created natures. "We must," says Porphyry, "flee from everything
sensual, that the soul may with ease re-unite itself with God, and live
happily with Him." "This is the great work of initiation," says
Hierocles;--"to recall the soul to what is truly good and beautiful, and
make it familiar therewith, and they its own; to deliver it from the
pains and ills it endures here below, enchained in matter as in a dark
prison; to facilitate its return to the celestial splendors, and to
establish it in the Fortunate Isles, by restoring it to its first
estate. Thereby, when the hour of death arrives, the soul, freed of its
mortal garmenting, which it leaves behind it as a legacy to earth, will
rise buoyantly to its home among the Stars, there to re-take its ancient
condition, and approach toward the Divine nature as far as man may do."

Plutarch compares Isis to knowledge, and Typhon to ignorance, obscuring
the light of the sacred doctrine whose 'blaze lights the soul of the
Initiate. No gift of the gods, he holds, is so precious as the knowledge
of the Truth, and that of the Nature of the gods, so far as our limited
capacities allow us to rise toward them. The Valentinians termed
initiation LIGHT. The Initiate, says Psellus, becomes an Epopt, when
admitted to see THE DIVINE LIGHTS. Clemens of Alexandria, imitating the
language of an Initiate in the Mysteries of Bacchus, and inviting this
Initiate, whom he terms blind like Tiresias, to come to see Christ, Who
will

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

blaze upon his eyes with greater glory than the Sun, exclaims: "Oh
Mysteries most truly holy! Oh pure Light! When the torch of the Dadoukos
gleams, Heaven and the Deity are displayed to my eyes! I am initiated,
and become holy!" This was the true object of initiation; to be
sanctified, and TO SEE, that is, to have just and faithful conceptions
of the Deity, the knowledge of Whom was THE LIGHT of the Mysteries. It
was promised the Initiate at Samothrace, that he should become pure and
just. Clemens says that by baptism, souls are *illuminated*, and led to
*the pure light* with which mingles no darkness, nor anything material.
The Initiate, become an Epopt, was called A SEER. "HAIL, NEW-BORN
LIGHT!" the Initiates cried in the Mysteries of Bacchus.

Such was held to be the effect of complete initiation. It lighted up the
soul with rays from the Divinity, and became for it, as it were, the eye
with which, according to the Pythagoreans, it con-templates the field of
Truth; in its mystical abstractions, wherein it rises superior to the
body, whose action on it, it annuls for the time, to re-enter into
itself, so as entirely to [occupy](errata.htm#22) itself with the view
of the Divinity, and the means of coming to resemble Him.

Thus enfeebling the dominion of the senses and the passions over the
soul, and as it were freeing the latter from a sordid slavery, and by
the steady practice of all the virtues, active and contemplative, our
ancient brethren strove to fit themselves to return to the bosom of the
Deity. Let not our objects as Masons fall below theirs. We use the
symbols which they used; and teach the same great cardinal doctrines
that they taught, of the existence of an intellectual God, and the
immortality of the soul of man. If the details of their doctrines as to
the soul seem to us to verge on absurdity, let us compare them with the
common notions of our own day, and be silent. If it seems to us that
they regarded the symbol in some cases as the thing symbolized, and
worshipped the *sign* as if it were itself Deity, let us reflect how
insufficient are our own ideas of Deity, and how we worship those ideas
and images formed and fashioned in our own minds, and not the Deity
Himself: and if we are inclined to smile at the importance they attached
to lustrations and fasts, let us pause and inquire whether the same
weakness of human nature does not exist to-day, causing rites and
ceremonies to be regarded as actively efficient for the salvation of
souls.

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

And let us ever remember the words of an old writer, with which we
conclude this lecture: "It is a pleasure to stand on the shore, and to
see ships tossed upon the sea: a pleasure to stand in the window of a
castle, and see a battle and the adventures thereof: but no pleasure is
comparable to the standing on the vantage-ground of TRUTH (a hill not to
be commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene), and to see
the errors and wanderings, and mists and tempests, in the vale below;
*so always that this prospect be with pity, and not with swelling or
pride*. Certainly it is Heaven upon Earth to have a man's mind move in
charity, rest in Providence, AND TURN UPON THE POLES OF TRUTH."

<span id="img_52300"></span> ![](img/52300.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. Prince of Mercy, or Scottish Trinitarian](md27)
