[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](md29)  [Next](md31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNCW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Morals and Dogma*, by Albert Pike, \[1871\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_801">p. 801</span>

<span id="img_80100"></span> ![](img/80100.jpg)

### XXIX.

### GRAND SCOTTISH KNIGHT OF ST. ANDREW.

A MIRACULOUS tradition, something like that connected with the *labarum*
of Constantine, hallows the Ancient Cross of St. Andrew. Hungus, who in
the ninth century reigned over the Picts in Scotland, is said to have
seen in a vision, on the night before a battle, the Apostle Saint
Andrew, who promised him the victory; and for an assured token thereof,
he told him that there should appear over the Pictish host, in the air,
such a fashioned cross as he had suffered upon. Hungus, awakened,
looking up at the sky, saw the promised cross, as did all of both
armies; and Hungus and the Picts, after rendering thanks to the Apostle
for their victory, and making their offerings with humble devotion,
vowed that from thenceforth, as well they as their posterity, in time of
war, would wear a cross of St. Andrew for their badge and cognizance.

John Leslie, Bishop of Ross, says that this cross appeared to Achaius,
King of the Scots, and Hungus, King of the Picts, the night before the
battle was fought betwixt them and Athelstane, King of England, as they
were on their knees at prayer.

Every cross of Knighthood is a symbol of the nine qualities of a Knight
of St. Andrew of Scotland; for every order of chivalry required of its
votaries the same virtues and the same excellencies.

Humility, Patience, and Self-denial are the three essential qualities of
a Knight of St. Andrew of Scotland. The Cross, sanctified by the blood
of the holy ones who have died upon it; the

<span id="page_802">p. 802</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cross, which Jesus
of Nazareth bore, fainting, along the streets of Jerusalem and up to
Calvary, upon which He cried, "Not My will, O Father! but Thine be
done," is an unmistakable and eloquent symbol of these three virtues. He
suffered upon it, because He consorted with and taught the poor and
lowly, and found His disciples among the fishermen of Galilee and the
despised publicans. His life was one of Humility, Patience, and
Self-denial.

The Hospitallers and Templars took upon themselves vows of obedience,
poverty, and chastity. The Lamb, which became the device of the Seal of
the Order of the Poor Fellow Soldiery of the Temple of Solomon, conveyed
the same lessons of humility and self-denial as the original device of
two Knights riding a single horse. The Grand Commander warned every
candidate not to be induced to enter the Order by a vain hope of
enjoying earthly pomp and splendor. He told him that he would have to
endure many things, sorely against his inclinations; and that he would
be compelled to give up his own will, and submit entirely to that of his
superiors.

The religious Houses of the Hospitallers, despoiled by Henry the
Eighth's worthy daughter, Elizabeth, because they would not take the
oath to maintain her supremacy, had been Alms-houses, and Dispensaries,
and Foundling-asyla, relieving the State of many orphan and outcast
children, and ministering to their necessities, God's ravens in the
wilderness, bread and flesh in the morning, bread and flesh in the
evening. They had been Inns to the wayfaring man, who heard from afar
the sound of the Vesper-bell, inviting him to repose and devotion at
once, and who might sing his matins with the Morning Star, and go on his
way rejoicing. And the Knights were no less distinguished by bravery in
battle, than by tenderness and zeal in their ministrations to the sick
and dying.

The Knights of St. Andrew vowed to defend all orphans, maidens, and
widows of good family, and wherever they heard of murderers, robbers, or
masterful thieves who oppressed the people, to bring them to the laws,
to the best of their power.

"If fortune fail you," so ran the vows of Rouge-Croix, "in divers lands
or countries wherever you go or ride that you find any gentleman of name
and arms, which hath lost goods, in worship and Knighthood, in the
King's service, or in any other place of worship, and is fallen into
poverty, you shall aid, and support,

<span id="page_803">p. 803</span>

r and succor him, in that you may; and he ask of you your goods to his
sustenance, you shall give him part of such goods as God hath sent you
to your power, and as you may bear."

Thus CHARITY and GENEROSITY are even *more* essential qualities of a
true and gentle Knight, and have been so in all ages; and so also hath
CLEMENCY. It is a mark of a noble nature to spare the conquered. Valor
is then best tempered, when it can turn out a stern fortitude into the
mild strains of pity, which never shines more brightly than when she is
clad in steel. A martial man, compassionate, shall conquer both in peace
and war; and by a twofold way, get victory with honor. The most famed
men in the world have had in them both courage and compassion. An enemy
reconciled hath a greater value than the long train of captives of a
Roman triumph.

VIRTUE, TRUTH, and HONOR are the three MOST essential qualities of a
Knight of St. Andrew. "Ye shall love God above all things, and be
steadfast in the Faith," it was said to the Knights, in their charge,
"and ye shall be true unto your Sovereign Lord, and true to your word
and promise. Also, ye shall sit in no place where that any judgment
should be given wrongfully against any body, to your knowledge."

The law hath not power to strike the virtuous, nor can fortune subvert
the wise. Virtue and Wisdom, only, perfect and defend man. Virtue's
garment is a sanctuary so sacred, that even Princes dare not strike the
man that is thus robed. It is the livery of the King of Heaven. It
protects us when we are unarmed; and is an armor that we cannot lose,
unless we be false to ourselves. It is the tenure by which we hold of
Heaven, without which we are but outlaws, that cannot claim protection.
Nor is there wisdom without virtue, but only a cunning way of procuring
our own undoing.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">             Peace is nigh  
Where Wisdom's voice has found a listening heart.  
Amid the howl of more than winter storms,  
The halcyon hears the voice of vernal hours,  
Already on the wing.</span>

</div>

Sir Launcelot thought no chivalry equal to that of Virtue. This word
means not continence only, but chiefly manliness, and so includes what
in the old English was called *souffrance*, that patient endurance which
is like the emerald, ever green and flowering;

<span id="page_804">p. 804</span>

and also that other virtue, *droicture*, uprightness, a virtue so strong
and so puissant, that by means of it all earthly things almost attain to
be unchangeable. Even our swords are formed to remind us of the Cross,
and you and any other of us may live to show how much men bear and do
not die; for this world is a place of sorrow and tears, of great evils
and a constant calamity, and if we would win true honor in it, we must
permit no virtue of a Knight to become unfamiliar to us, as men's
friends, coldly entreated and not greatly valued, become mere ordinary
acquaintances.

We must not view with impatience or anger those who injure us; for it is
very inconsistent with philosophy, and particularly with the Divine
Wisdom that should govern every Prince Adept, to betray any great
concern about the evils which the world, which the vulgar, whether in
robes or tatters, can inflict upon the brave. The favor of God and the
love of our Brethren rest upon a basis which the strength of malice
cannot overthrow; and with these and a generous temper and noble
equanimity, we have everything. To be consistent with our professions as
Masons, to retain the dignity of our nature, the consciousness of our
own honor, the spirit of the high chivalry that is our boast, we must
disdain the evils that are only material and bodily, and therefore can
be no bigger than a blow or a cozenage, than a wound or a dream.

Look to the ancient days, Sir E-------, for excellent examples of
VIRTUE, TRUTH, and HONOR, and imitate with a noble emulation the Ancient
Knights, the first Hospitallers and Templars, and Bayard, and Sydney,
and Saint Louis; in the words of Pliny to his friend Maximus, Revere the
ancient glory, and that old age which in man is venerable, in cities
sacred. Honor antiquity and great deeds, and detract nothing from the
dignity and liberty of any one. If those who now pretend to be the great
and mighty, the learned and wise of the world, shall agree in condemning
the memory of the heroic Knights of former ages, and in charging with
folly us who think that they should be held in eternal remembrance, and
that we should defend them from an evil hearing, do you remember that if
these who now claim to rule and teach the world should condemn or scorn
your poor tribute of fidelity, still it is for you to bear therewith
modestly, and yet not to be ashamed, since a day will come when these
who now scorn those who were of infinitely higher and finer natures than

<span id="page_805">p. 805</span>

they are, will be pronounced to have lived poor and pitiful lives, and
the world will make haste to forget them.

But neither must you believe that, even in this very different age, of
commerce and trade, of the vast riches of many, and the poverty of
thousands, of thriving towns and tenement houses swarming with paupers,
of churches with rented pews, and theatres, opera-houses, custom-houses,
and banks, of steam and telegraph, of shops and commercial palaces, of
manufactories and trades-unions, the Gold-room and the Stock Exchange,
of newspapers, elections, Congresses, and Legislatures, of the frightful
struggle for wealth and the constant wrangle for place and power, of the
worship paid to the children of mammon, and covetousness of official
station, there are no men of the antique stamp for you to revere, no
heroic and knightly souls, that preserve their nobleness and equanimity
in the chaos of conflicting passions, of ambition and baseness that
welters around them.

It is quite true that Government tends always to become a conspiracy
against liberty; or, where votes give place, to fall habitually into
such hands that little which is noble or chivalric is found among those
who rule and lead the people. It is true that men, in this present age,
become distinguished for other things, and may have name and fame, and
flatterers and lacqueys, and the oblation of flattery, who would, in a
knightly age, have been despised for the want in them of all true
gentility and courage; and that such men are as likely as any to be
voted for by the multitude, who rarely love or discern or receive truth;
who run after fortune, hating what is oppressed, and ready to worship
the prosperous; who love accusation and hate apologies; and who are
always glad to hear and ready to believe evil of those who care not for
their favor and seek not their applause.

But no country can ever be wholly without men of the old heroic strain
and stamp, whose word no man will dare to doubt, whose virtue shines
resplendent in all calamities and reverses and amid all temptations, and
whose honor scintillates and glitters as purely and perfectly as the
diamond--men who are not wholly the slaves of the material occupations
and pleasures of life, wholly engrossed in trade, in the breeding of
cattle, in the framing and enforcing of revenue regulations, in the
chicanery of the law, the. objects of political envy, in the base trade
of the lower literature, or in the heartless, hollow vanities of an
eternal dissipation. Every

<span id="page_806">p. 806</span>

generation, in every country, will bequeath to those who succeed it
splendid examples and great images of the dead, to be admired and
imitated; there were such among the Romans, under the basest Emperors;
such in England when the Long Parliament ruled; such in France during
its Saturnalia of irreligion and murder, and some such have made the
annals of America illustrious.

When things tend to that state and condition in which, in any country
under the sun, the management of its affairs and the customs of its
people shall require men to entertain a disbelief in the virtue and
honor of those who make and those who are charged to execute the laws;
when there shall be everywhere a spirit of suspicion and scorn of all
who hold or seek office, or have amassed wealth; when falsehood shall no
longer dishonor a man, and oaths give no assurance of true testimony,
and one man hardly expect another to keep faith with him, or to utter
his real sentiments, or to be true to any party or to any cause when
another approaches him with a bribe; when no one shall expect what he
says to be printed without additions, perversions, and
misrepresentations; when public misfortunes shall be turned to private
profit, the press pander to licentiousness, the pulpit ring with
political harangues, long prayers to God, eloquently delivered to
admiring auditors, be written out for publication, like poems and
political speeches; when the uprightness of judges shall be doubted, and
the honesty of legislators be a standing jest; then men may come to
doubt whether the old days were not better than the new, the Monastery
than the Opera Bouffe, the little chapel than the drinking-saloon, the
Convents than the buildings as large as they, without their antiquity,
without their beauty, without their holiness, true Acherusian Temples,
where the passer-by hears from within the never-ceasing din and clang
and clashing of machinery, and where, when the bell rings, it is to call
wretches to their work and not to their prayers; where, says an animated
writer, they keep up a perennial laudation of the Devil, before furnaces
which are never suffered to cool.

It has been well said, that whatever withdraws us from the power of our
senses, whatever makes the Past, the Distant, or the Future, predominate
over the Present, advances us in the dignity of thinking beings. The
modern rivals of the German Spa, with their flaunting pretences and
cheap finery, their follies and frivolities, their chronicles of dances
and inelegant feasts, and their bulletins

<span id="page_807">p. 807</span>

of women's names and dresses, are poor substitutes for the Monastery and
Church which our ancestors would have built in the deep sequestered
valleys, shut up between rugged mountains and forests of sombre pine;
and a man of meditative temper, learned, and of poetic feeling, would be
glad if he could exchange the showy hotel, amid the roar and tumult of
the city, or the pretentious tavern of the country-town, for one old
humble Monastery by the wayside, where he could refresh himself and his
horse without having to fear either pride, impertinence, or knavery, or
to pay for pomp, glitter, and gaudy ornamentation; then where he could
make his orisons in a church which resounded with divine harmony, and
there were no pews for wealth to isolate itself within; where he could
behold the poor happy and edified and strengthened with the thoughts of
Heaven; where he could then converse with learned and holy and gentle
men, and before he took his departure could exalt and calm his spirits
by hearing the evening song.

Even Free-Masonry has so multiplied its members that its obligations are
less regarded than the simple promises which men make to one another
upon the streets and in the markets. It clamors for public notice and
courts notoriety by scores of injudicious journals; it wrangles in
these, or, incorporated by law, carries its controversies into the
Courts. Its elections are, in some Orients, conducted with all the heat
and eagerness, the office-seeking and management of political struggles
for place. And an empty pomp, with semi-military dress and drill, of
peaceful citizens, glittering with painted banners, plumes, and jewels,
gaudy and ostentatious, commends to the public favor and female
admiration an Order that challenges comparison with the noble Knights,
the heroic soldiery encased in steel and mail, stern despisers of danger
and death, who made themselves immortal memories, and won Jerusalem from
the infidels and fought at Acre and Ascalon, and were the bulwark of
Christendom against the Saracenic legions that swarmed after the green
banner of the Prophet Mohammed.

If you, Sir E------, would be respectable as a Knight, and not a mere
tinselled pretender and Knight of straw, you must practise, and be
diligent and ardent in the practice of, the virtues you have professed
in this Degree. How can a Mason vow to be tolerant, and straightway
denounce another for his political opinions? How vow to be zealous and
constant in the service of the Order,

<span id="page_808">p. 808</span>

and be as useless to it as if he were dead and buried? What does the
symbolism of the Compass and Square profit him, if his sensual appetites
and baser passions are not governed by, but domineer over his moral
sense and reason, the animal over the divine, the earthly over the
spiritual, both points of the compass remaining below the Square? What a
hideous mockery to call one "Brother," whom he maligns to the Profane,
lends money unto at usury, defrauds in trade, or plunders at law by
chicanery?

VIRTUE, TRUTH, HONOR!--possessing these and never proving false to your
vows, you will be worthy to call yourself a Knight, to whom Sir John
Chandos might, if living, give his hand, and whom St. Louis and
Falkland, Tancred and Baldassar Castiglione would recognize as worthy of
their friendship.

Chivalry, a noble Spaniard said, is a religious Order, and there are
Knights in the fraternity of Saints in Heaven. Therefore do you here,
and for all time to come, lay aside all uncharitable and repining
feeling; be proof henceforward against the suggestions of undisciplined
passion and inhuman zeal; learn to hate the vices and not the vicious;
be content with the discharge of the duties which your Masonic and
Knightly professions require; be governed by the old principles of honor
and chivalry, and reverence with constancy that Truth which is as sacred
and immutable as God Himself. And above all, remember always, that
jealousy is not our life, nor disputation our end, nor disunion our
health, nor revenge our happiness; but loving-kindness is all these,
greater than Hope, greater than Faith, which can remove mountains,
properly the only thing which God requires of us, and in the possession
of which lies the fulfillment of all our duties.

\[*By Ill∴ Bro∴ Rev∴ W. W. Lord*, 32°\]

We are constrained to confess it to be true, that men, in this Age of
Iron, worship gods of wood and iron and brass, the work of their own
hands. The Steam-Engine is the pre-eminent god of the nineteenth
century, whose idolaters are everywhere, and those, who wield its
tremendous power securely account themselves gods, everywhere in the
civilized world.

Others confess it everywhere, and we must confess here, how reluctantly
soever, that the age which we represent is narrowed and not enlarged by
its discoveries, and has lost a larger world than it

<span id="page_809">p. 809</span>

has gained. If we cannot go as far as the satirist who says that our
self-adored century

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">--its broad clown's back turns broadly on the glory
of the stars,</span>

</div>

we can go with him when he adds,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We are gods by our own reckoning, and may as well
shut up our temples  
And wield on amidst the incense-steam, the thunder of our cars:  
For we throw out acclamations of self-thanking, self-admiring,  
With, at every step, "Run faster, O the wondrous, wondrous age!"  
Little heeding if our souls are wrought as nobly as our iron,  
Or if angels will commend us at the goal of pilgrimage.</span>

</div>

Deceived by their increased but still very imperfect knowledge and
limited mastery of the brute forces of nature, men imagine that they
have discovered the secrets of Divine Wisdom, and do not hesitate, in
their own thoughts, to put human prudence in the place of the Divine.
Destruction was denounced by the Prophets against Tyre and Sidon,
Babylon, and Damascus, and Jerusalem, as a consequence of the sins of
their people; but if fire now consumes or earthquake shatters or the
tornado crushes a great city, those are scoffed at as fanatics and
sneered at for indulging in cant, or rebuked for Pharisaic
uncharitableness, who venture to believe and say that there are divine
retributions and God's judgment in the ruin wrought by His mighty
agencies.

Science, wandering in error, struggles to remove God's Providence to a
distance from us and the material Universe, and to substitute for its
supervision and care and constant overseeing, what it calls
Forces--Forces of Nature--Forces of Matter. It will not see that the
Forces of Nature are the varied actions of God. Hence it becomes
antagonistic to all Religion, and to all the old Faith that has from the
beginning illuminated human souls and constituted their consciousness of
their own dignity, their divine origin, and their immortality; that
Faith which is the *Light* by which the human soul is enabled, as it
were, to see itself.

It is not one religion only, but the basis of all religions, the Truth
that is in all religions, even the religious creed of Masonry, that is
in danger. For all religions have owed all of life that they have had,
and their very being, to the foundation on which they were reared; the
proposition, deemed undeniable and an axiom, that the Providence of God
rules directly in all the affairs and changes of material things. The
Science of the age has its hands

<span id="page_810">p. 810</span>

upon the pillars of the Temple, and rocks it to its foundation. As yet
its destructive efforts have but torn from the ancient structure the
worm-eaten fret-work of superstition, and shaken down some incoherent
additions--owl-inhabited turrets of ignorance, and massive props that
supported nothing. The structure itself will be overthrown, when, in the
vivid language of a living writer, "Human reason leaps into the throne
of God and waves her torch over the ruins of the Universe."

Science deals only with phenomena, and is but charlatanism when it
babbles about the powers or causes that produce these, or what the
things are, in essence, of which it gives us merely the names. It no
more knows what Light or Sound or Perfume is, than the Aryan
cattle-herders did, when they counted the Dawn and Fire, Flame and Light
and Heat as gods. And that Atheistic Science is not even half-science,
which ascribes the Universe and its powers and forces to a system of
natural laws or to an inherent energy of Nature, or to causes unknown,
existing and operating independently of a Divine and Supra-natural
power.

That theory would be greatly fortified, if science were always capable
of protecting life and property, and, with anything like the *certainty*
of which it boasts, securing human interests even against the
destructive agencies that man himself develops in his endeavors to
subserve them. Fire, the fourth element, as the old philosophers deemed
it, is his most useful and abject servant. Why cannot man prevent his
ever breaking that ancient indenture, old as Prometheus, old as Adam?
Why can he not be certain that at any moment his terrible subject may
not break forth and tower up into his master, tyrant, destroyer? It is
because it also is a power of nature; which, in ultimate trial of
forces, is always superior to man. It is also because, in a different
sense from that in which it is the servant of man, it is the servant of
Him Who makes His ministers a flame of fire, and Who is over nature, as
nature is over man.

There are powers of nature which man does not even attempt to check or
control. Naples does nothing against Vesuvius. Valparaiso only trembles
with the trembling earth before the coming earthquake. The sixty
thousand people who went down alive into the grave when Lisbon buried
her population under both earth and sea had no knowledge of the causes,
and no possible control over the power, that effected their destruction.

<span id="page_811">p. 811</span>

But here the servant, and, in a sense, the creature of man, the drudge
of kitchen and factory, the humble slave of the lamp, engaged in his
most servile employment, appearing as a little point of flame, or
perhaps a feeble spark, suddenly snaps his brittle chain, breaks from
his prison, and leaps with destructive fury, as if from the very bosom
of Hell, upon the doomed dwellings of fifty thousand human beings, each
of whom, but a moment before, conceived himself his master. And those
daring fire-brigades, with their water-artillery, his conquerors, it
seemed, upon so many midnight fields, stand paralyzed in the presence of
their conqueror.

In other matters relative to human safety and interests we have observed
how confident science becomes upon the strength of some slight success
in the war of man with nature, and how much inclined to put itself in
the place of Providence, which, by the very force of the term, is the
only absolute science. Near the beginning of this century, for instance,
medical and sanitary science had made, in the course of a few years,
great and wonderful progress. The great plague which wasted Europe in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and reappeared in the
seventeenth, had been identified with a disease which yields to
enlightened treatment, and its ancient virulence was attributed to
ignorance of hygiene, and the filthy habits of a former age. Another
fatal and disfiguring scourge had to a great extent been checked by the
discovery of vaccination. From Sangrado to Sydenham, from Paracelsus to
Jenner, the healing art had indeed taken a long stride. The Faculty
might be excused had it then said, "Man is mortal, disease will be often
fatal; but there shall be no more unresisted and unnecessary slaughter
by infectious disease, no more general carnage, no more carnivals of
terror and high festivals of death."

The conceited boast would hardly have died upon the lip, when, from the
mysterious depths of remotest India a spectre stalked forth, or rather a
monster crept, more fearful than human eye had ever yet beheld. And not
with surer instinct does the tiger of the jungles, where this terrible
pestilence was born, catch the scent of blood upon the air, than did
this invisible Destroyer, this fearful agent of Almighty Power, this
tremendous Consequence of some Sufficient Cause, scent the tainted
atmosphere of Europe and turn Westward his devastating march. The
millions of dead left in his path through Asia proved nothing. They were
unarmed, ignorant, defenceless, unaided by science, undefended by art.
The

<span id="page_812">p. 812</span>

cholera was to them inscrutable and irresistible as Azrael, the Angel of
Death.

But it came to Europe and swept the halls of science as it had swept the
Indian village and the Persian khan. It leaped as noiselessly and
descended as destructively upon the population of many a high-towered,
wide-paved, purified, and disinfected city of the Nest as upon the
Pariahs of Tanjore and the filthy streets of Stamboul. In Vienna, Paris,
London, the scenes of the great plague were re-enacted.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The sick man started in his bed,  
  The watcher leaped upon the floor,  
At the cry, Bring out your dead,  
  The cart is at the door!</span>

</div>

Was *this* the judgment of Almighty God? He would be bold who should say
that it was; he would be bolder who should say it was not. To Paris, at
least, that European Babylon, how often have the further words of the
prophet to the daughter of the Chaldæans, the lady of kingdoms, been
fulfilled? "Thy wisdom and thy knowledge have perverted thee, and thou
hast said in thy heart I am and none else beside me. Therefore shall
evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know whence it riseth; and mischief
shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off; desolation
shall come upon thee suddenly."

And as to London--it looked like judgment, if it be true that the
Asiatic cholera had its origin in English avarice and cruelty, as they
suppose who trace it to the tax which Warren Hastings, when
Governor-General of India, imposed on salt, thus cutting off its use
from millions of the vegetable-eating races of the East: just as that
disease whose spectral shadow lies always upon America's threshold,
originated in the avarice and cruelty of the slave-trade, translating
the African coast fever to the congenial climate of the West Indies and
Southern America--the yellow fever of the former, and the *vomito negro*
of the latter.

But we should be slow to make inferences from our petty human logic to
the ethics of the Almighty. Whatever the cruelty of the slave-trade, or
the severity of slavery on the continents or islands of America, we
should still, in regard to its supposed consequences, be wiser, perhaps,
to say with that great and simple Casuist Who gave the world the
Christian religion: "Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above
all the Galileans because

<span id="page_813">p. 813</span>

they suffered such things? or those eighteen upon whom the tower of
Siloam fell and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all the
men that dwelt in Jerusalem?"

Retribution bars retaliation, even in words. A city shattered, burned,
destroyed, desolate, a land wasted, humiliated, made a desert and a
wilderness, or wearing the thorny crown of humiliation and subjugation,
is invested with the sacred prerogatives and immunities of the dead. The
base human revenge of exultation at its fall and ruin should shrink back
abashed in the presence of the infinite Divine chastisement.
"Forgiveness is wiser than revenge," our Freemasonry teaches us, "and it
is better to love than to hate." Let him who sees in great calamities
the hand of God, be silent, and fear His judgments.

Men are great or small in stature as it pleases God. But their nature is
great or small as it pleases themselves. Men are not born, some with
great souls and some with little souls. One by taking thought cannot add
to his stature, but he can enlarge his soul. By an act of the will he
can make himself a moral giant, or dwarf himself to a pigmy.

There are two natures in man, the higher and the lower, the great and
the mean, the noble and the ignoble; and he can and must, by his own
voluntary act, identify himself with the one or with the other.
Freemasonry is continual effort to exalt the nobler nature over the
ignoble, the spiritual over the material, the divine in man over the
human. In this great effort and purpose the chivalric Degrees concur and
co-operate with those that teach the magnificent lessons of morality and
philosophy. Magnanimity, mercy, clemency, a forgiving temper, are
virtues indispensable to the character of a perfect Knight. When the low
and evil principle in our nature says, "Do not give; reserve your
beneficence for impoverished friends, or at least unobjectionable
strangers, Do not bestow it on successful enemies,--friends only in
virtue, of our misfortunes," the diviner principle whose voice spake by
the despised Galilean says, "Do good to them that hate you, for if ye
love them (only) who love you, what reward have you? Do not publicans
and sinners the same"--that is, the tax-gathers and wicked oppressors,
armed Romans and renegade Jews, whom ye count your enemies?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. Knight Kadosh](md31)
