[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](md31)  [Next](md33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNCW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Morals and Dogma*, by Albert Pike, \[1871\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_825">p. 825</span>

# MORALS AND DOGMA.

# CONSISTORY.

<span id="img_82500"></span> ![](img/82500.jpg)

### XXXI.

### GRAND INSPECTOR INQUISITOR COMMANDER.

### \[Inspector Inquisitor.\]

To hear patiently, to weigh deliberately and dispassionately, and to
decide impartially;--these are the chief duties of a Judge. After the
lessons you have received, I need not further enlarge upon them. You
will be ever eloquently reminded of them by the furniture upon our
Altar, and the decorations of the Tribunal.

The Holy Bible will remind you of your obligation; and that as you judge
here below, so you will be yourself judged hereafter, by One who has not
to submit, like an earthly judge, to the sad necessity of inferring the
motives, intentions, and purposes of men \[of which all crime
essentially consists\] from the uncertain and often unsafe testimony of
their acts and words; as men in thick darkness grope their way, with
hands outstretched before them: but before Whom every thought, feeling,
impulse, and intention of every soul that now is, or ever was, or ever
will be on earth, is, and ever will be through the whole infinite
duration of eternity, present and visible.

<span id="page_826">p. 826</span>

The Square and Compass, the Plumb and Level, are well known to you as a
Mason. Upon you as a Judge, they peculiarly inculcate uprightness,
impartiality, careful consideration of facts and circumstances, accuracy
in judgment, and uniformity in decision As a Judge, too, you are to
bring up square work and square work only. Like a temple erected by the
plumb, you are to lean neither to one side nor the other. Like a
building well squared and levelled, you are to be firm and steadfast in
your convictions of right and justice. Like the circle swept with the
compasses, you are to be true. In the scales of justice you are to weigh
the facts and the law alone, nor place in either scale personal
friendship or personal dislike, neither fear nor favor: and when
reformation is no longer to be hoped for, you are to smite relentlessly
with the sword of justice.

The peculiar and principal symbol of this Degree is the Tetractys of
Pythagoras, suspended in the East, where ordinarily the sacred word or
letter glitters, like it, representing the Deity. Its nine external
points form the triangle, the chief symbol in Masonry, with many of the
meanings of which you are familiar.

To us, its three sides represent the three principal attributes of the
Deity, which created, and now, as ever, support, uphold, and guide the
Universe in its eternal movement; the three supports of the Masonic
Temple, itself an emblem of the Universe:--Wisdom, or the Infinite
Divine Intelligence; Strength, or Power, the Infinite Divine Will; and
Beauty, or the Infinite Divine Harmony, the Eternal Law, by virtue of
which the infinite myriads of suns and worlds flash ever onward in their
ceaseless revolutions, without clash or conflict, in the Infinite of
space, and change and movement are the law of all created existences.

To us, as Masonic Judges, the triangle figures forth the Pyramids,
which, planted firmly as the everlasting hills, and accurately adjusted
to the four cardinal points, defiant of all assaults of men and time,
teach us to stand firm and unshaken as they, when our feet are planted
upon the solid truth.

It includes a multitude of geometrical figures, all having a deep
significance to Masons. The triple triangle is peculiarly sacred, having
ever been among all nations a symbol of the Deity. Prolonging all the
external lines of the Hexagon, which also it includes, we have six
smaller triangles, whose bases cut each other in the central point of
the Tetractys, itself always the symbol of

<span id="page_827">p. 827</span>

the generative power of the Universe, the Sun, Brahma, Osiris, Apollo,
Bel, and the Deity Himself. Thus, too, we form twelve still smaller
triangles, three times three of which compose the Tetractys itself.

I refrain from enumerating all the figures that you may trace within it:
but one may not be passed unnoticed. The Hexagon itself faintly images
to us a cube, not visible at the first glance, and therefore the fit
emblem of that faith in things invisible, most essential to salvation.
The first perfect solid, and reminding you of the cubical stone that
sweated blood, and of that deposited by Enoch, it teaches justice,
accuracy, and consistency.

The infinite divisibility of the triangle teaches the infinity of the
Universe, of time, of space, and of the Deity, as do the lines that,
diverging from the common centre, ever increase their distance from each
other as they are infinitely prolonged. As they may be infinite in
number, so are the attributes of Deity infinite; and as they emanate
from one centre and are projected into space, so the whole Universe has
emanated from God.

Remember also, my Brother, that you have other duties to perform than
those of a judge. You are to inquire into and scrutinize carefully the
work of the subordinate Bodies in Masonry. You are to see that
recipients of the higher Degrees are not unnecessarily multiplied; that
improper persons are carefully excluded from membership, and that in
their life and conversation Masons bear testimony to the excellence of
our doctrines and the incalculable value of the institution itself. You
are to inquire also into your own heart and conduct, and keep careful
watch over yourself, that you go not astray. If you harbor ill-will and
jealousy, if you are hospitable to intolerance and bigotry, and churlish
to gentleness and kind affections, opening wide your heart to one and
closing its portals to the other, it is time for you to set in order
your own temple, or else you wear in vain the name and insignia of a
Mason, while yet uninvested with the Masonic nature.

Everywhere in the world there is a natural law, that is, a constant mode
of action, which seems to belong to the nature of things, to the
constitution of the Universe. This fact is universal. In different
departments we call this mode of action by different names, as the law
of Matter, the law of Mind, the law of Morals, and the like. We mean by
this, a certain mode of action which belongs to the material, mental, or
moral forces, the mode in

<span id="page_828">p. 828</span>

which commonly they are found to act, and in which it is their ideal to
act always. The ideal laws of matter we know only from the fact that
they are always obeyed. To us the actual *obedience* is the only
evidence of the ideal rule; for in respect to the conduct of the
material world, the *ideal* and the *actual* are the same.

The laws of matter we learn only by observation and experience. Before
experience of the fact, no man could foretell that a body, falling
toward the earth, would descend sixteen feet the first second, twice
that the next, four times the third, and sixteen times the fourth. No
mode of action in our consciousness anticipates this rule of action in
the outer world. The same is true of all the laws of matter. The ideal
law is known because it is a fact. The law is imperative. It must be
obeyed without hesitation. Laws of crystallization, laws of proportion
in chemical combination,--neither in these nor in any other law of
Nature is there any mar-gin left for oscillation of disobedience. Only
the primal will of God works in the material world, and no secondary
finite will.

There are no exceptions to the great general law of Attraction, which
binds atom to atom in the body of a rotifier visible only by aid of a
microscope, orb to orb, system to system; gives unity to the world of
things, and rounds these worlds of systems to a Universe. At first there
seem to be exceptions to this law, as in growth and decomposition, in
the repulsions of electricity; but at length all these are found to be
special cases of the one great law of attraction acting in various
modes.

The variety of effect of this law at first surprises the senses; but in
the end the unity of cause astonishes the cultivated mind. Looked at in
reference to this globe, an earthquake is no more than a chink that
opens in a garden-walk of a dry day in Summer. A sponge is porous,
having small spaces between the solid parts: the solar system is only
*more* porous, having larger room between the several orbs: the Universe
yet more so, with spaces between the systems, as small, compared with
*infinite* space, as those between the atoms that compose the bulk of
the smallest invisible animalcule, of which millions swim in a drop of
salt-water. The same attraction holds together the animalcule, the
sponge, the system, and the Universe. Every particle of matter in that
Universe is related to each and all the other particles; and attraction
is their common bond.

In the spiritual world, the world of human consciousness, there

<span id="page_829">p. 829</span>

is also a law, an ideal mode of action for the spiritual forces of man.
The law of Justice is as universal an one as the law of At-traction;
though we are very far from being able to reconcile all the phenomena of
Nature with it. The lark has the same right in our view, to live, to
sing, to dart at pleasure through the ambient atmosphere, as the hawk
has to ply his strong wings in the Summer sunshine: and yet the hawk
pounces on and devours the harmless lark, as *it* devours the worm, and
as the worm devours the animalcule; and, so far as we know, there is
nowhere, in any future state of animal existence, any compensation for
this apparent injustice. Among the bees, one rules, while the others
obey--some work, while others are idle. With the small ants, the
soldiers feed on the proceeds of the workmen's labor. The lion lies in
wait for and devours the antelope that has apparently as good a right to
life as he. Among men, some govern and others serve, capital commands
and labor obeys, and one race, superior in intellect, avails itself of
the strong muscles of another that is inferior; and yet, for all this,
no one impeaches the justice of God.

No doubt all these varied phenomena are consistent with one great law of
justice; and the only difficulty is that we do not, and no doubt we
cannot, understand that law. It is very easy for some dreaming and
visionary theorist to say that it is most evidently unjust for the lion
to devour the deer, and for the eagle to tear and eat the wren; but the
trouble is, that we know of no other way, according to the frame, the
constitution, and the organs which God has given them, in which the lion
and the eagle could manage to live at all. Our little measure of justice
is not God's measure. His justice does not require us to relieve the
hard-working millions of all labor, to emancipate the serf or slave,
unfitted to be free, from all control.

No doubt, underneath all the little bubbles, which are the lives, the
wishes, the wills, and the plans of the two thousand millions or more of
human beings on this earth (for bubbles they are, judging by the space
and time they occupy in this great and age-outlasting sea of
humankind),--no doubt, underneath them all resides one and the same
eternal force, which they shape into this or the other special form; and
over all the same paternal Providence presides, keeping eternal watch
over the little and the great, and producing variety of effect from
Unity of Force.

It is entirely true to say that justice is the constitution or
fundamental

<span id="page_830">p. 830</span>

law of the moral Universe, the law of right, a rule of conduct for man
(as it is for every other living creature), in all his moral relations.
No doubt all human affairs (like all other affairs), must be subject to
that as the law paramount; and what is *right* agrees therewith and
stands, while what is *wrong* conflicts with it and falls. The
difficulty is that we ever erect *our* notions of what is right and just
into the *law* of justice, and insist that God shall adopt that as His
law; instead of striving to learn by observation and reflection what His
law *is*, and then believing that law to be consistent with *His*
infinite justice, whether it corresponds with *our* limited notion of
justice, or does not so correspond. We are too wise in our own conceit,
and ever strive to enact our own little notions into the Universal Laws
of God.

It might be difficult for man to prove, even to his own satisfaction,
how it is right or just for him to subjugate the horse and ox to his
service, giving them in return only their daily food, which God has
spread out for them on all the green meadows and savannas of the world:
or how it is just that we should slay and eat the harmless deer that
only crops the green herbage, the buds, and the young leaves, and drinks
the free-running water that God made common to all; or the gentle dove,
the innocent kid, the many other living things that so confidently trust
to our protection;--quite as difficult, perhaps, as to prove it just for
one man's intellect or even his wealth to make another's strong arms his
servants, for daily wages or for a bare subsistence.

To find out this universal law of justice is one thing--to under-take to
measure off something with our own little tape-line, and call that God's
law of justice, is another. The great general plan and system, and the
great general laws enacted by God, continually produce what to our
limited notions is wrong and injustice, which hitherto men have been
able to explain to their own satisfaction only by the hypothesis of
another existence in which all inequalities and injustices in this life
will be remedied and compensated for. To our ideas of justice, it is
very unjust that the child is made miserable for life by deformity or
organic disease, in consequence of the vices of its father; and yet that
is part of the universal law. The ancients said that the child was
*punished* for the sins of its father. *We* say that this its deformity
or disease is the *consequence* of its father's vices; but so far as
concerns the question of justice or injustice, that is merely the change
of a word.

<span id="page_831">p. 831</span>

It is very easy to lay down a broad, general principle, embodying our
own idea of what is absolute justice, and to insist that everything
shall conform to that: to say, "all human affairs must be subject to
that as the law paramount; what is right agrees therewith and stands,
what is wrong conflicts and falls. Private cohesions of self-love, of
friendship, or of patriotism, must all be subordinate to this universal
gravitation toward the eternal right." The difficulty is that this
Universe of necessities God-created, of sequences of cause and effect,
and of life evolved from death, this interminable succession and
aggregate of cruelties, will not con-form to any such absolute principle
or arbitrary theory, no matter in what sounding words and glittering
phrases it may be embodied.

Impracticable rules in morals are always injurious; for as all men fall
short of compliance with them, they turn real virtues into imaginary
offences against a forged law. Justice as between man and man and as
between man and the animals below him, is that which, under and
according to the God-created relations existing between them, and the
whole aggregate of circumstances surrounding them, is fit and right and
proper to be done, with a view to the general as well as to the
individual interest. It is not a theoretical principle by which the very
relations that God has created and imposed on us are to be tried, and
approved or condemned.

God has made this great system of the Universe, and enacted general laws
for its government. Those laws environ everything that lives with a
mighty network of necessity. He chose to create the tiger with such
organs that he cannot crop the grass, but must eat other flesh or
starve. He has made man carnivorous also; and some of the smallest birds
are as much so as the tiger. In every step we take, in every breath we
draw, is involved the destruction of a multitude of animate existences,
each, no matter how minute, as much a living creature as ourself. He has
made necessary among mankind a division of labor, intellectual and
moral. He has made necessary the varied relations of society and
dependence, of obedience and control.

What is thus made necessary cannot be unjust; for if it be, then God the
great Lawgiver is Himself unjust. The evil to be avoided is, the
legalization of injustice and wrong under the *false* plea of necessity.
Out of all the relations of life grow duties,--as

<span id="page_832">p. 832</span>

naturally grow and as undeniably, as the leaves grow upon the trees. If
we have the right, created by God's law of necessity, to slay the lamb
that we may eat and live, we have no right to torture it in doing so,
because that is in no wise necessary. We have the right to live, if we
fairly can, by the legitimate exercise of our intellect, and hire or buy
the labor of the strong arms of others, to till our grounds, to dig in
our mines, to toil in our manufactories; but we have no right to
overwork or underpay them.

It is not only true that we may learn the moral law of justice, the law
of right, by experience and observation; but that God has given us a
moral faculty, our conscience, which is able to perceive this law
directly and immediately, by intuitive perception of it; and it is true
that man has in his nature a rule of conduct higher than what he has
ever yet come up to,--an ideal of nature that shames his actual of
history: because man has ever been prone to make necessity, his own
necessity, the necessities of society, a plea for injustice. But this
notion must not be pushed too far--for if we substitute this ideality
for actuality, then it is equally true that we have within us an ideal
rule of right and wrong, to which God Himself in His government of the
world has never come, and against which He (we say it reverentially)
every day offends. We detest the tiger and the wolf for the rapacity and
love of blood which are their nature; we revolt against the law by which
the crooked limbs and diseased organism of the child are the fruits of
the father's vices; we even think that a God Omnipotent and Omniscient
ought to have permitted no pain, no poverty, no servitude; our ideal of
justice is more lofty than the actualities of God. It is well, as all
else is well. He has given us that moral sense for wise and beneficent
purposes. We accept it as a significant proof of the inherent loftiness
of human nature, that it can entertain an ideal so exalted; and should
strive to attain it, as far as we can do so consistently with the
relations which He has created, and the circumstances which surround us
and hold us captive.

If we faithfully use this faculty of conscience; if, applying it to the
existing relations and circumstances, we develop it and all its kindred
powers, and so deduce the duties that out of these relations and those
circumstances, and limited and qualified by them, arise and become
obligatory upon us, then we learn justice, the law of right, the divine
rule of conduct for human life. But if we undertake to define and settle
"the mode of action that belongs

<span id="page_833">p. 833</span>

to the infinitely perfect nature of God," and so set up any ideal rule,
beyond all human reach, we soon come to judge and condemn His work and
the relations which it has pleased Him in His infinite wisdom to create.

A sense of justice belongs to human nature, and is a part of it. Men
find a deep, permanent, and instinctive delight in justice, not only in
the outward effects, but in the inward cause, and by their nature love
this law of right, this reasonable rule of conduct, this justice, with a
deep and abiding love. Justice is the object of the conscience, and fits
it as light fits the eye and truth the mind.

Justice keeps just relations between men. It holds the balance between
nation and nation, between a man and his family, tribe, nation, and
race, so that his *absolute* rights and theirs do not interfere, nor
their *ultimate* interests ever clash, nor the eternal interests of the
one prove antagonistic to those of all or of any other one. This we must
believe, if we believe that God is just. We must do justice to all, and
demand it of all; it is a universal human debt, a universal human claim.
But we may err greatly in defining what that justice is. The *temporary*
interests, and what to human view are the rights, of men, do often
interfere and clash. The life-interests of the individual often conflict
with the permanent interests and welfare of society; and what may seem
to be the natural rights of one class or race, with those of another.

It is not true to say that "one man, however little, must not be
sacrificed to another, however great, to a majority, or to all men."
That is not only a fallacy, but a most dangerous one. Often one man and
many men must be sacrificed, in the ordinary sense of the term, to the
interest of the many. It is a comfortable fallacy to the selfish; for if
they cannot, by the law of justice, be sacrificed for the common good,
then their country has no right to demand of them *self*-sacrifice; and
he is a fool who lays down his life, or sacrifices his estate, or even
his luxuries, to insure the safety or prosperity of his country.
According to that doctrine, Curtius was a fool, and Leonidas an idiot;
and to die for one's country is no longer beautiful and glorious, but a
mere absurdity. Then it is no longer to be asked that the common soldier
shall receive in his bosom the sword or bayonet-thrust which otherwise
would let out the life of the great commander on whose fate hang the
liberties of his country, and the welfare of millions yet unborn.

On the contrary, it is certain that necessity rules in all the

<span id="page_834">p. 834</span>

affairs of men, and that the interest and even the life of one man must
often be sacrificed to the interest and welfare of his country. Some
must ever lead the forlorn hope: the missionary must go among savages,
bearing his life in his hand; the physician must expose himself to
pestilence for the sake of others; the sailor, in the frail boat upon
the wide ocean, escaped from the foundering or burning ship, must step
calmly into the hungry waters, if the lives of the passengers can be
saved only by the sacrifice of his own; the pilot must stand firm at the
wheel, and let the flames scorch away his own life to insure the common
safety of those whom the doomed vessel bears.

The mass of men are always looking for what is just. All the vast
machinery which makes up a State, a world of States, is, on the part of
the people, an attempt to organize, not that ideal justice which finds
fault with God's ordinances, but that practical justice which may be
attained in the actual organization of the world. The minute and
wide-extending civil machinery which makes up the law and the courts,
with all their officers and implements, on the part of mankind, is
chiefly an effort to reduce to practice the theory of right.
Constitutions are made to establish justice; the decisions of courts are
reported to help us judge more wisely in time to come. The nation aims
to get together the most nearly just men in the State, that they may
incorporate into statutes their aggregate sense of what is right. The
people wish law to be embodied justice, administered without passion.
Even in the wildest ages there has been a wild popular justice, but
always mixed with passion and administered in hate; for justice takes a
rude form with rude men, and becomes less mixed with hate and passion in
more civilized communities. Every progressive State revises its statutes
and revolutionizes its constitution from time to time, seeking to come
closer to the utmost possible practical justice and right; and
sometimes, following theorists and dreamers in their adoration for the
ideal, by erecting into law positive principles of theoretical right,
works practical injustice, and then has to retrace its steps.

In literature men always look for practical justice, and desire that
virtue should have its own reward, and vice its appropriate punishment.
They are ever on the side of justice and humanity; and the majority of
them have an ideal justice, better than the things about them, juster
than the law: for the law is ever imperfect,

<span id="page_835">p. 835</span>

not attaining even to the utmost *practicable* degree of perfection; and
no man is as just as his own idea of possible and practicable justice.
His passions and his necessities ever cause him to sink below his own
ideal. The ideal justice which men ever look up to and strive to rise
toward, is true; but it will not be realized in this world. Yet we must
approach as near to it as practicable, as we should do toward that ideal
democracy that "now floats before the eyes of earnest and religious
men,--fairer than the Republic of Plato, or More's Utopia, or the Golden
Age of fabled memory," only taking care that we do not, in striving to
reach and ascend to the impossible ideal, neglect to seize upon and hold
fast to the possible actual. To aim at the best, but be content with the
best possible, is the only true wisdom. To insist on the absolute right,
and throw out of the calculation the important and all-controlling
element of necessity, is the folly of a mere dreamer.

In a world inhabited by men with bodies, and necessarily with bodily
wants and animal passions, the time will never come when there will be
no want, no oppression, nor servitude, no fear of man, no fear of God,
but only Love. That can never be while there are inferior intellect,
indulgence in low vice, improvidence, indolence, awful visitations of
pestilence and war and famine, earthquake and volcano, that must of
necessity cause men to want, and serve, and suffer, and fear.

But still the ploughshare of justice is ever drawn through and through
the field of the world, uprooting the savage plants. Ever we see a
continual and progressive triumph of the right. The injustice of England
lost her America, the fairest jewel of her crown. The injustice of
Napoleon bore him to the ground more than the snows of Russia did, and
exiled him to a barren rock, there to pine away and die, his life a
warning to bid mankind be just.

We intuitively understand what justice is, better than we can depict it.
What it is in a given case depends so much on circumstances, that
definitions of it are wholly deceitful. Often it would be unjust to
society to do what would, in the absence of that consideration, be
pronounced just to the individual. General propositions of man's right
to this or that are ever fallacious: and not infrequently it would be
most unjust to the individual himself to do for him what the theorist,
as a general proposition, would say was right and his due.

<span id="page_836">p. 836</span>

We should ever do unto others what, under the same circumstances, we
*ought* to wish, and should have the *right* to wish they should do unto
us. There are many cases, cases constantly occur-ring, where one man
must take care of himself, in preference to another, as where two
struggle for the possession of a plank that will save one, but cannot
uphold both; or where, assailed, he can save his own life only by
slaying his adversary. So one must prefer the safety of his country to
the lives of her enemies; and sometimes, to insure it, to those of her
own innocent citizens. The retreating general may cut away a bridge
behind him, to delay pursuit and save the main body of his army, though
he thereby surrenders a detachment, a battalion, or even a corps of his
own force to certain destruction.

These are not departures from justice; though, like other instances
where the injury or death of the individual is the safety of the many,
where the interest of one individual, class, or race is postponed to
that of the public, or of the superior race, they may infringe some
dreamer's ideal rule of justice. But every departure from real,
practical justice is no doubt attended with loss to the unjust man,
though the loss is not reported to the public. Injustice, public or
private, like every other sin and wrong, is inevitably followed by its
consequences. The selfish, the grasping, the inhuman, the fraudulently
unjust, the ungenerous employer, and the cruel master, are detested by
the great popular heart; while the kind master, the liberal employer,
the generous, the humane, and the just have the good opinion of all men,
and even envy is a tribute to their virtues. Men honor all who stand up
for truth and right, and never shrink. The world builds monuments to its
patriots. Four great statesmen, organizers of the right, embalmed in
stone, look down upon the lawgivers of France as they pass to their hall
of legislation, silent orators to tell how nations love the just. How we
revere the marble lineaments of those just judges, Jay and Marshall,
that look so calmly toward the living Bench of the Supreme Court of the
United States! What a monument Washington has built in the heart of
America and all the world, not because he dreamed of an impracticable
ideal justice, but by his constant effort to be practically just!

But necessity alone, and the greatest good of the greatest number, can
legitimately interfere with the dominion of absolute and ideal justice.
Government should not foster the strong at the expense

<span id="page_837">p. 837</span>

of the weak, nor protect the capitalist and tax the laborer. The
powerful should not seek a monopoly of development and enjoyment; not
prudence only and the expedient for to-day should be appealed to by
statesmen, but conscience and the right: justice should not be forgotten
in looking at interest, nor political morality neglected for political
economy: we should not have national housekeeping instead of national
organization on the basis of right.

We may well differ as to the abstract right of many things; for every
such question has many sides, and few men look at all of them, many only
at one. But we all readily recognize cruelty, unfairness, inhumanity,
partiality, over-reaching, hard-dealing, by their ugly and familiar
lineaments, and in order to know and to hate and despise *them*, we do
not need to sit as a Court of Errors and Appeals to revise and reverse
God's Providences.

There are certainly great evils of civilization at this day, and many
questions of humanity long adjourned and put off. The hideous aspect of
pauperism, the debasement and vice in our cities, tell us by their
eloquent silence or in inarticulate mutterings, that the rich and the
powerful and the intellectual do not do their duty by the poor, the
feeble, and the ignorant; and every wretched woman who lives, Heaven
scarce knows how, by making shirts at sixpence each, attests the
injustice and inhumanity of man. There are cruelties to slaves, and
worse cruelties to animals, each disgraceful to their perpetrators, and
equally unwarranted by the lawful relation of control and dependence
which it has pleased God to create.

A sentence is written against all that is unjust, written by God in the
nature of man and in the nature of the Universe, because it is in the
nature of the Infinite God. Fidelity to your faculties, trust in their
convictions, that is justice to yourself; a life in obedience thereto,
that is justice toward men. No wrong is really successful. The gain of
injustice is a loss, its pleasure suffering. Iniquity often seems to
prosper, but its success is its defeat and shame. After a long while,
the day of reckoning ever comes, to nation as to individual. The knave
deceives himself. The miser, starving his brother's body, starves also
his own soul, and at death shall creep out of his great estate of
injustice, poor and naked and miserable. Whoso escapes a duty avoids a
gain. Outward judgment often fails, inward justice never. Let a man try
to love the

<span id="page_838">p. 838</span>

wrong and to do the wrong, it is eating stones and not bread, the swift
feet of justice are upon him, following with woolen tread, and her iron
hands are round his neck. No man can escape from this, any more than
from himself. Justice is the angel of God that flies from East to West;
and where she stoops her broad wings, it is to bring the counsel of God,
and feed mankind with angel's bread.

We cannot understand the moral Universe. The arc is a long one, and our
eyes reach but a little way; we cannot calculate the curve and complete
the figure by the experience of sight; but we can divine it by
conscience, and we surely know that it bends toward justice. Justice
will not fail, though wickedness appears strong, and has on its side the
armies and thrones of power, the riches and the glory of the world, and
though poor men crouch down in despair. Justice will not fail and perish
out from the world of men, nor will what is really wrong and contrary to
God's real law of justice continually endure. The Power, the Wisdom, and
the Justice of God are on the side of every just thought, and it cannot
fail, any more than God Himself can perish.

In human affairs, the justice of God must work by human means. Men are
the instruments of God's principles; our morality is the instrument of
His justice, which, incomprehensible to us, seems to our short vision
often to work injustice, but will at some time still the oppressor's
brutal laugh. Justice is the rule of conduct written in the nature of
mankind. We may, in our daily life, in house or field or shop, in the
office or in the court, help to prepare the way for the commonwealth of
justice which is slowly, but, we would fain hope, surely approaching.
All the justice we mature will bless us here and hereafter, and at our
death we shall leave it added to the common store of humankind. And
every Mason who, content to do that which is possible and practicable,
does and enforces justice, may help deepen the channel of human morality
in which God's justice runs; and so the wrecks of evil that now check
and obstruct the stream may the sooner be swept out and borne away by
the resistless tide of Omnipotent Right. Let us, my Brother, in this, as
in all else, endeavor always to perform the duties of a good Mason and a
good man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret](md33)
