[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080142)  [Next](0080144.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Simon Magus:  His
Wickedness.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.vi-p2"></span>When Niceta had thus spoken, Aquila
also, asking that he might be permitted to speak, proceeded in manner
following:  “Receive, I entreat thee, most excellent Peter, the
assurance of my love towards thee; for indeed I also am extremely
anxious on thy account.  And do not blame us in this, for indeed to be
concerned for any one cometh of affection; whereas to be indifferent is
no less than hatred.  But I call God to witness that I feel for thee,
not as knowing thee to be weaker in debate,—for indeed I was never
present at any dispute in which thou wert engaged,—but because I well
know the impieties of this man, I think of thy reputation, and at the
same time the souls of the hearers, and above all, the interests of the
truth itself.  For this magician is vehement towards all things that he
wishes, and wicked above measure.  For in all things we know him well,
since from boyhood we have been assistants and ministers of his
wickedness; and had not the love of God rescued us from him, we should
even now be engaged in the same evil deeds with him.  But a certain
inborn love towards God rendered his wickedness hateful to us, and the
worship of God attractive to us.  Whence I think also that it was the
work of Divine Providence, that we, being first made his associates,
should take knowledge in what manner or by what art he effects the
prodigies which he seems to work.  For who is there that would not be
astonished at the wonderful things which he does?  Who would not think
that he was a god come down from heaven for the salvation of men?  For
myself, I confess, if I had not known him intimately, and had taken part
in his doings, I would easily have been carried away with him.  Whence
it was no great thing for us to be separated from his society, knowing
as we did that he depends upon magic arts and wicked devices.  But if
thou also thyself wish to know all about him—who, what, and whence he
is, and how he contrives what he does—then listen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0080144.md)
