[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080236)  [Next](0080238) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.—God Righteous as Well as
Good.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxvii-p2"></span>Then said Simon:  “Inform us,
therefore, what he who desires to know the truth must first learn.” 
Then Peter:  “Before all things it must be inquired what it is possible
for man to find out.  For of necessity the judgment of God turns upon
this, if a man was able to do good and did it not.  And therefore men
must inquire whether they have it in their power by seeking to find what
is good, and to do it when they have found it; for this is that for
which they are to be judged.  But more than this there is no occasion
for any one but a prophet to know:  for what is the need for men to know
how the world was made?  This, indeed, would be necessary to be learned
if we had to enter upon a similar construction.  But now it is
sufficient for us, in order to the worship of God, to know that He made
the world; but how He made it is no subject of inquiry for us, because,
as I have said, it is not incumbent upon us to acquire the knowledge of
that art, as though we were about to make something similar.  But
neither are we to be judged for this, why we have not learned how the
world was made, but only for that, if we be without knowledge of its
Creator.  For we shall know that the Creator of the world is the
righteous and good God, if we seek Him in the paths of righteousness. 
For if we only know regarding Him that He is good, such knowledge is not
sufficient for salvation.  For in the present life not only the worthy,
but also the unworthy, enjoy His goodness and His benefits.  But if we
believe Him to be not only good, but also righteous, and if, according
to what we believe concerning God, we observe righteousness in the whole
course of our life, we shall enjoy His goodness for ever.  In a word, to
the Hebrews, whose opinion concerning God was that He is only good, our
Master said that they should seek also His righteousness; <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) that is, that they should know that He
is good indeed in this present time, that all may live in His goodness,
but that He shall be righteous at the day of judgment, to bestow eternal
rewards upon the worthy, from which the unworthy shall be excluded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_689"></span>[124:690](0080237.htm#fr_689) <span
id="vi.iii.v.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xxvii-p3"></span> [Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span
id="vi.iii.v.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](0080238)
