[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080630)  [Next](0080632.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—Unalterable
Conviction.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxi-p2"></span>When he had thus spoken, I answered: 
“Now do I thank God; for as I wished to be convinced, so He has
vouchsafed to me.  However, so far as concerns me, be you so far without
anxiety that I shall never doubt; so much so, that if you yourself
should ever wish to remove me from the prophetic doctrine, you should
not be able, so well do I know what I have received.  And do not think
that it is a great thing that I promise you that I shall never doubt;
for neither I myself, nor any man who has heard your discourse
concerning the Prophet, can ever doubt of the true doctrine, having
first heard and understood what is the truth of the prophetic
announcement.  Wherefore have confidence in the God-willed dogma; for
every art of wickedness has been conquered.  For against prophecy,
neither arts of discourses, nor tricks of sophisms, nor syllogisms, nor
any other contrivance, can prevail anything; that is, if he who has
heard the true Prophet really is desirous of truth, and does not give
heed to aught else under pretext of truth.  So that, my lord Peter, be
not disconcerted, as though you had presented the greatest good to a
senseless person; for you have presented it to one sensible of the
favour, and who cannot be seduced from the truth that has been committed
to him.  For I know that it is one of those things which one wishes to
receive quickly, and not to attain slowly.  Therefore I know that I
should not despise, on account of the quickness *with which I have got
it*, what has been committed to me, what is incomparable, and what alone
is safe.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](0080632.md)
