[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080005)  [Next](0080007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>II.—The Testament of Simeon Concerning
Envy.</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>The</span> copy of the words of Simeon, what
things he spake to his sons before he died, in the hundred and twentieth
year of his life, in the year in which Joseph died.  For they came to
visit him when he was sick, and he strengthened himself and sat up and
kissed them, and said to them:—

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span>2.  Hear, O my children, hear Simeon your
father, what things I have in my heart.  I was born of Jacob my father,
his second son; and my mother Leah called me Simeon, because the Lord
heard her prayer. <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48)   I became strong
exceedingly; I shrank from no deed, nor was I afraid of anything.  For
my heart was hard, and my mind was unmoveable, and my bowels unfeeling: 
because valour also has been given from the Most High to men in soul and
in body.  And at that time I was jealous of Joseph because our father
loved him; <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) and I set my mind
against him to destroy him, because the prince of deceit sent forth the
spirit of jealousy and blinded my mind, that I regarded him not as a
brother, and spared not Jacob my father.  But his God and the God of his
fathers sent forth His angel, and delivered him out of my hands.  For
when I went into Shechem to bring ointment for the flocks, and Reuben to
Dotham, where were our necessaries and all our stores, Judah our brother
sold him to the Ishmaelites.  And when Reuben came he was grieved, for
he wished to have restored him safe to his father. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)   But I was wroth against Judah in that
he let him go away alive, and for five months I continued wrathful
against him; but God restrained me, and withheld from me all working of
my hands, for my right hand was half withered for seven days.  And I
knew, my children, that because of Joseph this happened to me, and I
repented and wept; and I besought the Lord that He would restore my hand
unto me, and that I might be kept from all pollution and envy, and from
all folly.  For I knew that I had devised an evil deed before the Lord
and Jacob my father, on account of Joseph my brother, in that I envied
him.

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>3.  And now, children, take heed of the
spirit of deceit and of envy.  For envy ruleth over the whole mind of a
man, and suffereth him neither to eat, nor to drink, nor to do any good
thing:  it ever suggesteth to him to destroy him that he envieth; and he
that is envied ever flourisheth, but he that envieth fades away.  Two
years of days I afflicted my soul with fasting in the fear of the Lord,
and I learnt that deliverance from envy cometh by the fear of God.  If a
man flee to the Lord, the evil spirit runneth away from him, and his
mind becometh easy.  And henceforward he sympathizeth with him whom he
envied, and condemneth not those who love him, and so ceaseth from his
envy.

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>4.  And my father asked concerning me,
because he saw that I was sad; and I said, I am pained in my liver.  For
I mourned more than they all, because I was guilty of the selling of
Joseph.  And when we went down into Egypt, and he bound me as a spy, I
knew that I was suffering justly, and I grieved not.  Now Joseph was a
good man, and had the Spirit of God within him:  compassionate and
pitiful, he bore not malice against me; nay, he loved me even as the
rest of his brothers.  Take heed, therefore, my children, of all
jealousy and envy, and walk in singleness of soul and with good heart,
keeping in mind the brother of your father, that God may give to you
also grace and glory, and blessing upon your heads, even as ye saw in
him.  All his days he reproached us not concerning this thing, but loved
us as his own soul, and beyond his own sons; and he glorified us, and
gave riches, and cattle, and fruits freely to us all.  Do ye then also,
my beloved children, love each one his brother with a good heart, and
remove <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_12"></span>from you the spirit of envy, for this maketh
savage the soul and destroyeth the body; it turneth his purposes into
anger and war, and stirreth up unto blood, and leadeth the mind into
frenzy, and suffereth not prudence to act in men:  moreover, it taketh
away sleep, and causeth tumult to the soul and trembling to the body. 
For even in sleep some malicious jealousy, deluding him, gnaweth at his
soul, and with wicked spirits disturbeth it, and causeth the body to be
troubled, and the mind to awake from sleep in confusion; and as though
having a wicked and poisonous spirit, so appeareth it to men.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>5.  Therefore was Joseph fair in appearance,
and goodly to look upon, because there dwelt not in him any wickedness;
for in trouble of the spirit the face declareth it.  And now, my
children, make your hearts good before the Lord, and your ways straight
before men, and ye shall find grace before God and men.  And take heed
not to commit fornication, for fornication is mother of all evils,
separating from God, and bringing near to Beliar.  For I have seen it
inscribed in the writing of Enoch <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)
that your sons shall with you be corrupted in fornication, and shall do
wrong against Levi with the sword.  But they shall not prevail against
Levi, for he shall wage the war of the Lord, and shall conquer all your
hosts; and there shall be a few divided in Levi and Judah, and there
shall be none <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) of you for
sovereignty, even as also my father Jacob prophesied in his blessings.

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>6.  Behold, I have foretold you all things,
that I may be clear from the sin of your souls.  Now, if ye remove from
you your envy, and all your stiffneckedness, as a rose shall my bones
flourish in Israel, and as a lily my flesh in Jacob, and my odour shall
be as the odour of Libanus; and as cedars shall holy ones be multiplied
from me for ever, and their branches shall stretch afar off.  Then shall
perish the seed of Canaan, and a remnant shall not be to Amalek, and all
the Cappadocians <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) shall perish, and
all the Hittites <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) shall be utterly
destroyed.  Then shall fail the land of Ham, and every people shall
perish.  Then shall all the earth rest from trouble, and all the world
under heaven from war.  Then shall Shem be glorified, because the Lord
God, the Mighty One of Israel, shall appear upon earth as man, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) and saved by Him Adam. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)   Then shall all the spirits of deceit be
given to be trampled under foot, and men shall rule over the wicked
spirits.  Then will I arise in joy, and will bless the Most High because
of His marvellous works, because God hath taken a body and eaten with
men and saved men.

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>7.  And now, my children, obey Levi, and in
Judah shall ye be redeemed: <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)   and
be not lifted up against these two tribes, for from them shall arise to
you the salvation of God.  For the Lord shall raise up from Levi as it
were a Priest, <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) and from Judah as it
were a King, God and man. <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)   So
shall He save all the Gentiles and the race of Israel.  Therefore I
command you all things, in order that ye also may command your children,
that they may observe them throughout their generations.

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span>8.  And Simeon made an end of commanding
his sons, and slept with his fathers, being an hundred and twenty years
old.  And they laid him in a coffin of incorruptible wood, to take up
his bones to Hebron.  And they carried them up in a war of the Egyptians
secretly:  for the bones of Joseph the Egyptians guarded in the
treasure-house of the palace; for the sorcerers told them that at the
departure of the bones of Joseph there should be throughout the whole of
Egypt darkness and gloom, and an exceeding great plague to the
Egyptians, so that even with a lamp a man should not recognise his
brother.

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span>9.  And the sons of Simeon bewailed their
father according to the law of mourning, and they were in Egypt until
the day of their departure from Egypt by the hand of Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[11:49](0080006.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span> [Gen. xxix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#033)<span id="iii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[11:50](0080006.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span> That Simeon was prominent in the hostility
to Joseph, is perhaps implied by his detention in Egypt as a surety for
the return of the others; and Jewish tradition generally accords with
this view.  Cf. the Targum of the Pseudo-Jonathan on [Gen. xxxvii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>: 
“Simeon and Levi, who were brothers in counsel, said one to another, Let
us kill him.”  Also this same Targum on [Gen. xlii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p5.2"></span>: 
“And he took from them Simeon, who had counselled to kill him.”  Cf.
also *Breshith Rabba*, § 91.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[11:51](0080006.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iii.iv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span> \[[Gen.
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#022),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#029), [Gen.
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_51"></span>[12:52](0080006.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span> \[See *Speaker’s Com*., N.T., vol. iv. p.
387, ed. Scribners.\]

<span id="fn_52"></span>[12:53](0080006.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span> The Cam. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> seems wrongly to omit the negative
here.  The reference is doubtless to [Gen. xlix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[12:54](0080006.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span> The reference seems to be to the
Philistines.  Cf. [Deut. 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023), [Amos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>,
where the LXX. reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p13.2"></span>Καππαδοκία</span>.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[12:55](0080006.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iii.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span> \[For modern views of these, see *Encyc.
Brit.*, s.v. “Hittites.”\]

<span id="fn_55"></span>[12:56](0080006.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span> \[Two of the many passages that leave no
room for Lardner’s imaginary “Unitarianism” in this author.\]

<span id="fn_56"></span>[12:57](0080006.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span> The construction here is awkward of the
participles after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p16.1"></span>ὅτι</span>:  possibly a clause may have dropped
out after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p16.2"></span>᾽Αδάμ</span>.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[12:58](0080006.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span> \[See p. 10, note 5, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_58"></span>[12:59](0080006.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span> John the Baptist.  His greatness is
declared by Christ Himself.\]

<span id="fn_59"></span>[12:60](0080006.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span> \[Two of the many passages that leave no
room for Lardner’s imaginary “Unitarianism” in this author.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament III](0080007)
