[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080757)  [Next](0080759.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.lxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.lxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.lxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXI.—Various Duties of
Christians.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.lxxi-p2"></span>“But, brethren, there are some things
that you must not wait to hear, but must consider of yourselves what is
reasonable.  Zacchæus alone having given himself up wholly to labour for
you, and needing sustenance, and not being able to attend to his own
affairs, how can he procure necessary support?  Is it not reasonable
that you are to take forethought for his living? not waiting for his
asking you, for this is the part of a beggar.  But he will rather die of
hunger than submit to do this.  And shall not you incur punishment, not
considering that the workman is worthy of his hire?  And let no one
say:  Is, then, the word sold which was freely given?  Far be it.  For
if any one has the means of living, and takes anything, he sells the
word; but if he who has not takes support in order to live—as the Lord
also took at supper and among His friends, having nothing, though He
alone is the owner of all things—he sins not.  Therefore suitably honour
elders, catechists, useful deacons, widows who have lived well, orphans
as children of the Church.  But wherever there is need of any provision
for an emergency, contribute all together.  Be kind one to another, not
shrinking from the endurance of anything whatever for your own
salvation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII](0080759.md)
