[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080548)  [Next](0080550) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xli"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLI.—Explanation of
Mythology.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xli-p2"></span>Then Niceta:  “The affair of the
supper of the gods stands in this wise.  They say that the banquet is
the world, that the order of the gods sitting at table is the position
of the heavenly bodies.  Those whom Hesiod calls the first children of
heaven and earth, of whom six were males and six females, they refer to
the number of the twelve signs, which go round all the world.  They say
that the dishes of the banquet are the reasons and causes of things,
sweet and desirable, which in the shape of inferences from the positions
of the signs and the courses of the stars, explain how the world is
ruled and governed.  Yet they say these things exist after the free
manner of a banquet, inasmuch as the mind of every one has the option
whether he shall taste aught of this sort of knowledge, or whether he
shall refrain; and as in a banquet no one is compelled, but every one is
at liberty to eat, so also the manner of philosophizing depends upon the
choice of the will.  They say that discord is the lust of the flesh,
which rises up against the purpose of the mind, and hinders the desire
of philosophizing; and therefore they say that the time was that in
which the marriage was celebrated.  Thus they make Peleus and the nymph
Thetis to be the dry and the moist element, by the admixture of which
the substance of bodies is composed.  They hold that Mercury is speech,
by which instruction is conveyed to the mind; that Juno is chastity,
Minerva courage, Venus lust, Paris the understanding.  If therefore, say
they, it happens that there is in a man a barbarous and uncultivated
understanding, and ignorant of right judgment, he will despise chastity
and courage, and will give the prize, which is the apple, to lust; and
thereby, ruin and destruction will come not only upon himself, but also
upon his countrymen and the whole race.  These things, therefore, it is
in their power to compose from whatever matter they please; yet they can
be adapted to every man; because if any one has a pastoral and rustic
and uncultivated understanding, and does not wish to be instructed, when
the heat of his body shall make suggestions concerning the pleasure of
lust, straightway he despises the virtues of studies and the blessings
of knowledge, and turns his mind to bodily pleasures.  And hence it is
that implacable wars arise, cities are destroyed, countries fall, even
as Paris, by the abduction of Helen, armed the Greeks and the barbarians
to their mutual destruction.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII](0080550)
