[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080535)  [Next](0080537.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—Buttresses of
Gentilism.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxviii-p2"></span>“But let us return to our
purpose.  What reason is there, yea, rather, what madness possesses the
minds of men, that they worship and adore as a god, a man whom they not
only know to be impious, wicked, profane—I mean Jupiter—incestuous, a
parricide, an adulterer, but even proclaim him publicly as such in their
songs in the theatres?  Or if by means of these deeds he has deserved to
be a god, then also, when they hear of any murderers, adulterers,
parricides, incestuous persons, they ought to worship them also as
gods.  But I cannot understand why they venerate in him what they
execrate in others.”  Then Peter answered:  “Since you say that you
cannot understand it, learn of me why they venerate wickedness in him. 
In the first place, it is that, when they themselves do like deeds, they
may know that they shall be acceptable to him, inasmuch as they have but
imitated him in his wickedness.  In the second place, because the
ancients have left these things skilfully composed in their writings,
and elegantly engrafted in their verses.  And now, by the aid of
youthful education, since the knowledge of these things adheres to their
tender and simple minds, it cannot without difficulty be torn from them
and cast away.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](0080537.md)
