[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080514)  [Next](0080516) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Clement’s Argument.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.vii-p2"></span>To this I answered:  “Since indeed
you wish to learn from me if there is any good or evil in nature or in
act, or whether it is not rather that men, prejudiced by custom, think
some things to be good, and others to be evil, forasmuch as they have
made a division among themselves of common things, which ought, as you
say, to be as common as the air and the sunshine; I think that I ought
not to bring before you any statements from any other quarter than from
those studies in which you are well versed, and which you support, so
that what I say you will receive without hesitation.  You assign certain
boundaries of all the elements and the heavenly bodies, and these, you
say, meet in some without hurt, as in marriages; but in others they are
hurtfully united, as in adulteries.  And you say that some things are
general to all, but other things do not belong to all, and are not
general.  But not to make a long discussion, I shall speak briefly of
the matter.  The earth which is dry is in need of the addition and
admixture of water, that it may be able to produce fruits, without which
man cannot live:  this is therefore a legitimate conjunction.  On the
contrary if the cold of hoar-frost be mixed with the earth, or heat with
the water, a conjunction of this sort produces corruption; and this, in
such things, is adultery.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](0080516)
