[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080296)  [Next](0080298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—Heathen Oracles.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xxi-p2"></span>“Whence it is evident that they since
they are demoniac spirits, know some things both more quickly and more
perfectly *than men;* for they are not retarded in their learning by the
heaviness of a body.  And therefore they, as being spirits, know without
delay and without difficulty what physicians attain after a long time
and by much labour.  It is not wonderful, therefore, if they know
somewhat more than men do; but this is to be observed, that what they
know they do not employ for the salvation of souls, but for the
deception of them, that by means of it they may indoctrinate them in the
worship of false religion.  But God, that the error of so great
deception might not be concealed, and that He Himself might not seem to
be a cause of error in permitting them so great licence to deceive men
by divinations, and cures, and dreams, has of His mercy furnished men
with a remedy, and has made the distinction of falsehood and truth
patent to those who desire to know.  This, therefore, is that
distinction:  what is spoken by the true God, whether by prophets or by
diverse visions, is always true; but what is foretold by demons is not
always true.  It is therefore an evident sign that those things are not
spoken by the true God, in which at any time there is falsehood; for in
truth there is never falsehood.  But in the case of those who speak
falsehoods, there may occasionally be a slight mixture of truth, to give
as it were seasoning to the falsehoods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](0080298)
