[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080077)  [Next](0080079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—Instruction Continued:  the
True Prophet.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvi-p2"></span>“He, therefore, whose aid is needed
for the house filled with the darkness of ignorance and the smoke of
vices, is He, we say, who is called the true Prophet, who alone can
enlighten the souls of men, so that with their eyes they may plainly see
the way of safety.  For otherwise it is impossible to get knowledge of
divine and eternal things, unless one learns of that true Prophet;
because, as you yourself stated a little ago, the belief of things, and
the opinions of causes, are estimated in proportion to the talents of
their advocates:  hence, also, one and the same cause is now thought
just, now unjust; and what now seemed true, anon becomes false on the
assertion of another.  For this reason, the credit of religion and piety
demanded the presence of the true Prophet, that He Himself might tell us
respecting each particular, how the truth stands, and might teach us how
we are to believe concerning each. <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md)   And therefore, before all else, the
credentials of the prophet himself must be examined with all care; and
when you have once ascertained that he is a prophet, it behoves you
thenceforth to believe him in everything, and not further to discuss the
particulars which he teaches, but to hold the things which he speaks as
certain and sacred; which things, although they seem to be received by
faith, yet are believed on the ground of the probation previously
instituted.  For when once at the outset the truth of the prophet is
established on examination, the rest is to be heard and held on the
ground of the faith by which it is already established that he is a
teacher of truth.  And as it is certain that all things which pertain to
divine knowledge ought to be held according to the rule of truth, so it
is beyond doubt that from none but Himself alone can it be known what is
true.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_538"></span>[81:539](0080078.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvi-p3"></span> \[This discourse is given somewhat
more fully here than in the *Homilies*.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](0080079.md)
