[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080550)  [Next](0080552) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xliii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.—A Word of
Exhortation.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xliii-p2"></span>And when he had said this, he
looked to our father, and said:  “You therefore, old man, if indeed you
care for your soul’s safety, that when you desire to be separated from
the body, it may, in consequence of this short conversion, find eternal
rest, ask about whatever you please, and seek counsel, that you may be
able to cast off any doubt that remains in you.  For even to young men
the time of life is uncertain; but to old men it is not even uncertain,
for there is no doubt that there is but little time remaining to them. 
And therefore both young and old ought to be very earnest about their
conversion and repentance, and to be taken up with the adornment of
their souls for the future with the worthiest ornaments, such as the
doctrines of truth, the grace of chastity, the splendour of
righteousness, the fairness of piety, and all other things with which it
becomes a reasonable mind to be adorned.  Then, besides, they should
break off from unseemly and unbelieving companions, and keep company
with the faithful, and frequent those assemblies in which subjects are
handled relating to chastity, righteousness and piety; to pray to God
always heartily, and to ask of Him those things which ought to be asked
of God; to give thanks to Him; to repent truly of their past <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="vi.iii.xii.xliii-Page_204"></span>doings; in some measure also, if
possible, by deeds of mercy towards the poor, to help their penitence: 
for by these means pardon will be more easily bestowed, and mercy will
be sooner shown to the merciful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV](0080552)
