[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080504)  [Next](0080506.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—New Revelations.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxvi-p2"></span>But Peter ordered us to rise from
embracing our father, lest we should kill him; and he himself, laying
hold of his hand, and lifting him up as from a deep sleep, and gradually
reviving him, began to set forth to him the whole transactions as they
had really happened: <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852.md)   how his
brother had fallen in love with Matthidia, and how she, being very
modest, had been unwilling to inform her husband of his brother’s
lawless love, lest she should stir up hostility between the brothers,
and bring disgrace upon the family; and how she had wisely pretended a
dream, by which she was ordered to depart from the city with her twin
sons, leaving the younger one with his father; and how on their voyage
they had suffered shipwreck through the violence of a storm; and how,
when they were cast upon an island called Antaradus, Matthidia was
thrown by a wave upon a rock, but her twin children were seized by
pirates and carried to Cæsarea, and there sold to a pious woman, who
treated them as sons, and brought them up, and caused them to be
educated as gentlemen; and how the pirates had changed their names, and
called the one Niceta and the other Aquila; and how afterwards, through
*common* studies and acquaintanceship, they had adhered to Simon; and
how they had turned away from him when they saw him to be a magician and
a deceiver, and had come to Zacchæus; and how subsequently they had been
associated with himself; and how Clement also, setting out from the city
for the sake of learning the truth, had, through his acquaintance with
Barnabas, come to Cæsarea, and had become known to him, and had adhered
to him, and how he had been taught by him the faith of his religion; and
also how he had found and recognised his mother begging at Antaradus,
and how the whole island rejoiced at his recognition of her; and also
concerning her sojourn with her most chaste hostess, and the cure that
he had wrought upon her, and concerning the liberality of Clement to
those who had been kind to his mother; and how afterwards, when Niceta
and Aquila asked who the strange woman was, and had heard the whole
story from Clement, they cried out that they were her twin sons
Faustinus and Faustus; and how they had unfolded the whole history of
what had befallen them; and how afterwards, by the persuasion of Peter
himself, they were presented to their mother with caution, lest she
should be cut off by the sudden joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_852"></span>[191:853](0080505.htm#fr_852.md) <span
id="vi.iii.xi.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.xxxvi-p3"></span> \[This recapitulation is peculiar
to the *Recognitions*; in Homily XV. 4 the main facts are cited as a
proof of divine providence.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](0080506.md)
