[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080430)  [Next](0080432.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Plants and Animals.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxv-p2"></span>“But what shall I say of plants, and
what of animals?  Is it not providence that has ordained that plants,
when they decay by old age, should be reproduced by the suckers or the
seeds which they have themselves produced, and animals by propagation? 
And by a certain wonderful dispensation of providence, milk is prepared
in the udders of the dams for the animals before they are born; and as
soon as they are born, with no one to guide them, they seek out the
store of nourishment provided for them.  And not only males are
produced, but females also, that by means of both the race may be
perpetuated.  But lest this should seem, as some think, to be done by a
certain order of nature, and not by the appointment of the Creator, He
has, as a proof and indication of His providence, ordained a few animals
to preserve their stock on the earth in an exceptional way:  for
example, the crow conceives through the mouth, and the weasel brings
forth through the ear; and some birds, such as hens, sometimes produce
eggs conceived of wind or dust; other animals convert the male into the
female, and change their sex every year, as hares and hyænas, which they
call monsters; others spring from the earth, and get their bodies from
it, as moles; others from ashes, as vipers; others from putrifying
flesh, as wasps from horseflesh, bees from ox-flesh; others from
cow-dung, as beetles; others from herbs, as the scorpion from the basil;
and again, herbs from animals, as parsley and asparagus from the horn of
the stag or the she goat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](0080432.md)
