[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080300)  [Next](0080302.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vi.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Evil Beings Turned to Good
Account.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xxv-p2"></span>“But, setting aside these things, let
us consider this earnestly, that God the Creator of the universe,
foreseeing the future differences of His creation, foresaw and provided
diverse ranks and different offices to each of His creatures, according
to the peculiar movements which were produced from freedom of will; so
that while all men are of one substance in respect of the method of
creation, there should yet be diversity in ranks and offices, according
to the peculiar movements of minds, to be produced from liberty of
will.  Therefore He foresaw that there would be faults in His creatures;
and the method of His justice demanded that punishment should follow
faults, for the sake of amendment.  It behoved, therefore, that there
should be ministers of punishment, and yet that freedom of will should
draw them into that order.  Moreover, those also must have enemies to
conquer, who had undertaken the contests for the heavenly rewards. 
Thus, therefore, neither are those things destitute of utility which are
thought to be evil, since the conquered unwillingly acquire eternal
rewards for those by whom they are conquered.  But let this suffice on
these points, for in process of time even more secret things shall be
disclosed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](0080302.md)
