[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080554)  [Next](0080556.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVII.—“A Faithful Saying, and
Worthy of All Acceptation.”</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xlvii-p2"></span>“But if any one desires to learn
exactly the truth of our preaching, let him come to hear, and let him
ascertain what the true Prophet is; and then at length all doubtfulness
will cease to him, unless with obstinate mind he resist those things
which he finds to be true.  For there are some whose only object it is
to gain the victory in any way whatever, and who seek praise for this
rather than their salvation.  These ought not to have a single word
addressed to them, lest both the noble word suffer injury, and condemn
to eternal death him who is guilty of the wrong done to it.  For what is
there in respect of which any one ought to oppose our preaching? or in
respect of which the word of our preaching is found to be contrary to
the belief of what is true and honourable?  It says that the God the
Father, the Creator of all, is to be honoured, as also His Son, who
alone knows Him and His will, and who alone is to be believed concerning
all things which He has enjoined.  For He alone is the law and the
Lawgiver, and the righteous Judge, whose law decrees that God, the Lord
of all, is to be honoured by a sober, chaste, just, and merciful life,
and that all hope is to be placed in Him alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII](0080556.md)
