[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080138)  [Next](0080140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—Curtailment of Sleep.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ii-p2"></span>Then I, when I heard this, said:  “You
have very well said, O Peter; for one custom is superseded by another. 
For when I was at sea, I was at first distressed, and all my system was
disordered, so that I felt as if I had been beaten, and could not bear
the tossing and tumult of the sea; but after a few days, when I had got
accustomed to it, I began to bear it tolerably, so that I was glad to
take food immediately in the morning along with the sailors, whereas
before it was not my custom to eat anything before the seventh hour. 
Now, therefore, simply from the custom which I then acquired, hunger
reminds me about that time at which I used to eat with the sailors;
which, however, I hope to get rid of, when once another custom shall
have been formed.  I believe, therefore, that you also have acquired the
habit of wakefulness, as you state; and you have wished at a fitting
time to explain this to us, that we also may not grudge to throw off and
dispense with some portion of our sleep, that we may be able to take in
the precepts of the living doctrine.  For when the food is digested, and
the mind is under the influence of the silence of night, those things
which are seasonably taught abide in it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0080140)
