[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080433)  [Next](0080435) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—The Human Body.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxviii-p2"></span>“From all these things I think it
is sufficiently and abundantly evident that all things are produced; and
the universe consists by a designing sense, and not by the irrational
operation of nature.  But let us come now, if you please, to our own
substance, that is, the substance of man, who is a small world, *a
microcosm,* in the great world; and let us consider with what reason it
is compounded:  and from this especially you will understand the wisdom
of the Creator.  For although man consists of different substances, one
mortal and the other immortal, yet, by the skilful contrivance of the
Creator, their diversity does not prevent their union, and that although
the substances be diverse and alien the one from the other.  For the one
is taken from the earth and formed by the Creator, but the other is
given from immortal substances; and yet the honour of its immortality is
not violated by this union.  Nor does it, as some think, consist of
reason, and concupiscence, and passion, but rather such affections seem
to be in it, by which it may be moved in each of these directions.  For
the body, which consists of bones and flesh, takes its beginning from
the seed of a man, which is extracted from the marrow by warmth, and
conveyed into the womb as into a soil, to which it adheres, and is
gradually moistened from the fountain of the blood, and so is changed
into flesh and bones, and is formed into the likeness of him who
injected the seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](0080435)
