[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080417)  [Next](0080419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Prayer Inconsistent with
Genesis.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xii-p2"></span>“Therefore that first proposition,
which declares that God made all things in the beginning, and having
imposed a course and order upon things, takes no further account of
them, affirms that all things are done according to *genesis*.  To this,
therefore, we shall first reply; and especially to those who worship the
gods and defend *genesis*.  Assuredly, these men, when they sacrifice to
the gods and pray to them, hope that they shall obtain something in
opposition to *genesis*, and so they annul *genesis*.  But when they
laugh at those who incite to virtue and exhort to <span id="page_169">p.
169</span> <span id="vi.iii.x.xii-Page_169"></span>continence, and say
that nobody can do or suffer anything unless what is decreed to him by
fate, they assuredly cut up by the roots all worship of the Divinity. 
For why should you worship those from whom you can obtain nothing which
the method of what is decreed does not allow?  Let this suffice in the
meantime, in opposition to these men.  But I say that the world is made
by God, and that it is at some time to be destroyed by Him, that that
world may appear which is eternal, and which is made for this end, that
it may be always, and that it may receive those who, in the judgment of
God, are worthy of it.  But that there is another and invisible world,
which contains this visible world within itself,—after we have finished
our discussion concerning the visible world, we shall come to it also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](0080419)
