[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080368)  [Next](0080370) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—Disciples Divided into Two
Bands.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.ii-p2"></span>“But I know that you think it sad to
be separated from me for the space of at least two days.  Believe me,
that in whatever degree you love me, my affection towards you is tenfold
greater.  But if, by reason of our mutual affection, we will not do the
things that are right and honourable, such love will appear to be
unreasonable.  And therefore, without bating a little of our love, let
us attend to those things which seem useful and necessary; especially
since not a day can pass in which you may not be present at my
discussions.  For I purpose to pass through the most noted cities of the
provinces one by one, as you also know, and to reside three months in
each for the sake of teaching.  Now, therefore, go before me to
Laodicea, which is the nearest city, and I shall follow you after two or
three days, so far as I purpose.  But you shall wait for me at the inn
nearest to the gate of the city; and thence again, when we have spent a
few days there, you shall go before me to more distant cities.  And this
I wish you to do at every city, for the sake of avoiding envy as much as
in us lies, and also that the brethren who are with us, finding lodgings
prepared in the several cities by your foresight, may not seem to be
vagabonds.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0080370)
