[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080335)  [Next](0080337.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Second Suggestion
Continued.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxii-p2"></span>“But let us come back to you, whose
opinion it is that God should be regarded as Cæsar, and the gods as the
ministers and deputies of Cæsar.  Follow me attentively, and I shall
presently show you the lurking-places of the serpent, which lie in the
crooked windings of this argument.  It ought to be regarded by all as
certain and beyond doubt, that no creature can be on a level with God,
because He was made by none, but Himself made all things; nor indeed can
any one be found so irrational, as to suppose that the thing made can be
compared with the maker.  If therefore the human mind, not only by
reason, but even by a sort of natural instinct, rightly holds this
opinion, that that is called God to which nothing can be compared or
equalled, but which exceeds all and excels all; how can it be supposed
that that name which is believed to be above all, is rightly given to
those whom you think to be employed for the service and comfort of human
life?  But we shall add this also.  This world was undoubtedly made, and
is corruptible, as we shall show more fully by and by; meantime it is
admitted both that it has been made and that it is corruptible.  If
therefore the world cannot be called God, and rightly so, because it is
corruptible, how shall parts of the world take the name of God?  For
inasmuch as the whole world cannot be God, much more its parts cannot. 
Therefore, if we come back to the example of Cæsar, you will see how far
you are in error.  It is not lawful for any one, though a man of the
same nature with him, to be compared with Cæsar:  do you think, then,
that any one ought to be compared with God, who excels all in this
respect, that He was made by none, but Himself made all things?  But,
indeed, you dare not give the name of Cæsar to any other, because he
immediately punishes one who offends against him; you dare give that of
God to others, because He delays the punishment of offenders against
Him, in order to their repentance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](0080337.md)
