[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080590)  [Next](0080592) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—Ordination of Clement.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>But about that time, when he was about
to die, the brethren being assembled together, he suddenly seized my
hand, and rose up, and said in presence of the church:  “Hear me,
brethren and fellow-servants.  Since, as I have been taught by the Lord
and Teacher Jesus Christ, whose apostle I am, the day of my death is
approaching, I lay hands upon this Clement as your bishop; and to him I
entrust my chair of discourse, even to him who has journeyed with me
from the beginning to the end, and thus has heard all my homilies—who,
in a word, having had a share in all my trials, has been found stedfast
in the faith; whom I have found, above all others, pious, philanthropic,
pure, learned, chaste, good, upright, large-hearted, and striving
generously to bear the ingratitude of some of the catechumens. 
Wherefore I communicate to him the power of binding and loosing, so that
with respect to everything which he shall ordain in the earth, it shall
be decreed in the heavens.  For he shall bind what ought to be bound,
and loose what ought to be loosed, as knowing the role of the Church. 
Therefore hear him, as knowing that he who grieves the president of the
truth, sins against Christ, and offends the Father of all.  Wherefore he
shall not live; and therefore it becomes him who presides to hold the
place of a physician, and not to cherish the rage of an irrational
beast.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0080592)
