[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080458)  [Next](0080460) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.liii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.liii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIII.—Everything Has Its
Corresponding Contrary.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.liii-p2"></span>“Therefore this division holds in all
the things of the world; and as there are pious men, so there are also
impious; as there are prophets, so also there are false prophets; and
amongst the Gentiles there are philosophers and false philosophers. 
Also the Arabian nations, and many others, have imitated the
circumcision of the Jews for the service of their impiety.  So also the
worship of demons is contrary to the divine worship, baptism to baptism,
laws to the law, false apostles to apostles, and false teachers to
teachers.  And hence it is that among the philosophers some assert
providence, others deny it; some maintain that there is one God, others
that there are more than one:  in short, the matter has come to this,
that whereas demons are expelled by the word of God, by which it is
declared that there is a providence, the magical art, for the
confirmation of infidelity, has found out ways of imitating this by
contraries.  Thus has been discovered the method of counteracting the
poison of serpents by incantations, and the effecting of cures contrary
to the word and power of God.  The magic art has also found out
ministries contrary to the angels of God, placing the calling up of
souls and the figments of demons in opposition to these.  And, not to
prolong the discourse by a further enumeration, there is nothing
whatever that makes for the belief of providence, which has not
something, on the other hand, prepared for unbelief; and therefore they
who do not know that division of things, think that there is no
providence, by reason of those things in the world which are discordant
from themselves.  But do you, my father, as a wise man, choose from that
division the part which preserves order and makes for the belief of
providence, and do not only follow that part which runs against order
and neutralizes the belief of providence.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV](0080460)
