[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080145)  [Next](0080147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Simon Magus:  His
Profession.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ix-p2"></span>“But not long after he fell in love
with that woman whom they call Luna; and he confided all things to us as
his friends:  how he was a magician, and how he loved Luna, and how,
being desirous of glory, he was unwilling to enjoy her ingloriously, but
that he was waiting patiently till he could enjoy her honourably; yet so
if we also would conspire with him towards the accomplishment of his
desires.  And he promised that, as a reward of this service, he would
cause us to be invested with the highest honours, and we should be
believed by men to be gods; ‘Only, however, on condition,’ says he,
‘that you confer the chief place upon me, Simon, who by magic art am
able to show many signs and prodigies, by means of which either my glory
or our sect may be established.  For I am able to render myself
invisible to those who wish to lay hold of me, and again to be visible
when I am willing to be seen. <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607)  
If I wish to flee, I can dig through the mountains, and pass through
rocks as if they were clay.  If I should throw myself headlong from a
lofty mountain, I should be borne unhurt to the earth, as if I were held
up; when bound, I can loose myself, and bind those who had bound me;
being shut up in prison, I can make the barriers open of their own
accord; I can render statues animated, so that those who see suppose
that they are men.  I can make new trees suddenly spring up, and produce
sprouts at once.  I can throw myself into the fire, and not be burnt; I
can change my countenance, so that I cannot be recognised; but I can
show people that I have two faces.  I shall change myself into a sheep
or a goat; I shall make a beard to grow upon little boys; I shall ascend
by flight into the air; I shall exhibit abundance of gold, and shall
make and unmake kings.  I shall be worshipped as God; I shall have
divine honours publicly assigned to me, so that an image of me shall be
set up, and I shall be worshipped and adored as God.  And what need of
more words?  Whatever I wish, that I shall be able to do.  For already I
have achieved many things by way of experiment.  In short,’ says he,
‘once when my mother Rachel ordered me to go to the field to reap, and I
saw a sickle lying, I ordered it to go and reap; and it reaped ten times
more than the others.  Lately, I produced many new sprouts from the
earth, and made them bear leaves and produce fruit in a moment; and the
nearest mountain I successfully bored through.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_607"></span>[99:608](0080146.htm#fr_607) <span
id="vi.iii.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.ix-p3"></span> \[The statements made in the
*Recognitions* respecting the claims of Simon are more extravagant and
blasphemous than those occurring in the *Homilies*.  Comp. the latter,
ii, 26–32.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](0080147)
