[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080088)  [Next](0080090.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Account of the
Creation.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>“In the beginning, <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) when God had made the heaven and the
earth, <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md) as one house, the shadow
<span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-Page_85"></span>which was cast by the mundane
bodies involved in darkness those things which were enclosed in it.  But
when the will of God had introduced light, that darkness which had been
caused by the shadows of bodies was straightway dispelled:  then at
length light is appointed for the day, darkness for the night.  And now
the water which was within the world, in the middle space of that first
heaven and earth, congealed as if with frost, and solid as crystal, is
distended, and the middle spaces of the heaven and earth are separated
as by a firmament of this sort; and that firmament the Creator called
heaven, so called by the name of that previously made:  and so He
divided into two portions that fabric of the universe, although it was
but one house.  The reason of the division was this, that the upper
portion might afford a dwelling-place to angels, and the lower to men. 
After this, the place of the sea and the chaos which had been made
received that portion of the water which remained below, by order of the
eternal Will; and these flowing down to the sunk and hollow places, the
dry land appeared; and the gatherings of the waters were made seas.  And
after this the earth, which had appeared, produced various species of
herbs and shrubs.  It gave forth fountains also, and rivers, not only in
the plains, but on the mountains.  And so all things were prepared, that
men who were to dwell in it might have it in their power to use all
these things according to their will, that is, either for good or evil.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_545"></span>[84:546](0080089.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p3"></span> \[Hilgenfeld regards chaps. 27–72
as part of the Jewish-Christian document called *Kerygma Petri*, of
which an outline is given in book iii. 75.  This he thinks was of Roman
origin.  Certainly these chapters bear many marks of an earlier origin
than most of the pseudo-Clementine literature.  Much of the matter is
not found elsewhere in this literature:  the tone of the discourse is
much superior; the instruction represented as given to Clement, is quite
well adapted to his needs as a heathen inquirer; the views presented are
not so extravagant as much that occurs in the *Homilies*; the attempt to
adjust the statements to the New-Testament narrative is skilfully made,
and there is not lacking a great *<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>vraisemblance*.  It may not be
improper to add, that the impressions first given in regard to this
passage were made upon the writer of this note quite independently of
Hilgenfeld’s theory; some of them committed to writing without a thought
of maintaining that theory.—R.\]

<span id="fn_546"></span>[84:547](0080089.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](0080090.md)
