[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080461)  [Next](0080463.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.lvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.lvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LVI.—Origin of Evil.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.lvi-p2"></span>Then the old man said:  “You have
stated it excellently, my son.  It now remains only that you tell me
whence is the substance of evil:  for if it was made by God, the evil
fruit shows that the root is in fault; for it appears that it also is of
an evil nature.  But if this substance was co-eternal with God, how can
that which was equally unproduced and co-eternal be subject to the
other?”  “It was not always,” said Aquila; “but neither does it
necessarily follow, if it was made by God, that its Creator should be
thought to be such as is that which has been made by Him.  For indeed
God made the substance of all things; but if a reasonable mind, which
has been made by God, do not acquiesce in the laws of its Creator, and
go beyond the bounds of the temperance prescribed to it, how does this
reflect on the Creator?  Or if there is any reason higher than this, we
do not know it; for we cannot know anything perfectly, and especially
concerning those things for our ignorance of which we are not to be
judged.  But those things for which we are to be judged are most easy to
be understood, and are despatched almost in a word.  For almost the
whole rule of our actions is summed up in this, that what we are
unwilling to suffer we should not do to others.  For as you would not be
killed, you must beware of killing another; and as you would not have
your own marriage violated, you must not defile another’s bed; you would
not be stolen from, neither must you steal; and every matter of men’s
actions is comprehended within this rule.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII](0080463.md)
