[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080353)  [Next](0080355.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—Righteous Anger.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.viii.iii-p2"></span>“And all the more eagerly must we
strive on this account, that while there is time, the collected vices of
evil custom may be cut off.  And this you shall not be able to do
otherwise, than by being angry with yourselves on account of your
profitless and base doings.  For this is righteous and necessary anger,
by which every one is indignant with himself, and accuses himself for
those things in which he has erred and done amiss; and by this
indignation a certain fire is kindled in us, which, applied as it were
to a barren field, consumes and burns up the roots of vile pleasure, and
renders the soil of the heart more fertile for the good seed of the word
of God.  And I think that you have sufficiently worthy causes of anger,
from which that most righteous fire may be kindled, if you consider into
what errors the evil of ignorance has drawn you, and how it has caused
you to fall and rush headlong into sin, from what good things it has
withdrawn you, and into what evils it has driven you, and, what is of
more importance than all the rest, how it has made you liable to eternal
punishments in the world to come.  Is not the fire of most righteous
indignation kindled within you for all these things, now that the light
of truth has shone upon you; and does not the flame of that anger which
is pleasing to God rise within you, that every sprout may be burnt up
and destroyed from the root, if haply any shoot of evil concupiscence
has budded within you?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0080355.md)
