[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080478)  [Next](0080480.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—Tow Smeared with Pitch.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.x-p2"></span>“But what, it is said, of the fact that
some who in their childhood are free from any bodily defect, yet in
process of time fall into those evils, so that some are even violently
hurried on to death?  Concerning these also the account is at hand, and
is almost the same:  for those powers which we have said to be contrary
to the human race, are in some way invited into the heart of every one
by many and diverse lusts, and find a way of entrance; and they have in
them such influence and power as can only encourage and incite, but
cannot compel or accomplish.  If, therefore, any one consents to them,
so as to do those things which he wickedly desires, his consent and deed
shall find the reward of destruction and the worst kind of death.  But
if, thinking of the future judgment, he be checked by fear, and reclaim
himself, so that he do not accomplish in action what he has conceived in
his evil thought, he shall not only escape present destruction, but also
future punishments.  For every cause of sin seems to be like tow smeared
over with pitch, which immediately breaks into flame as soon as it
receives the heat of fire; and the kindling of this fire is understood
to be the work of demons.  If, therefore, any one be found smeared with
sins and lusts as with pitch, the fire easily gets the mastery of him. 
But if the tow be not steeped in the pitch of sin, but in the water of
purification and regeneration, the fire of the demons shall not be able
to be kindled in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](0080480.md)
