[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080086)  [Next](0080088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Repetition
Continued.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxv-p2"></span>While I was going on thus, Peter,
enraptured with joy, and anxious for me as if I had been his son, lest
perhaps I should fail in recollection of the rest, and be put to shame
on account of those who were present, said:  “It is enough, O Clement;
for you have stated these things more clearly than I myself explained
them.”  Then said I, “Liberal learning has conferred upon me the power
of orderly narration, and of stating those things clearly for which
there is occasion.  And if we use learning in asserting the errors of
antiquity, we ruin ourselves by gracefulness and smoothness of speech;
but if we apply learning and grace of speech to the assertion of the
truth, I think that not a little advantage is thereby gained.  Be that
as it may, my lord Peter, you can but imagine with what thankfulness I
am transported for all the rest of your instruction indeed, but
especially for the statement of that doctrine which you gave:  There is
one God, whose work the world is, and who, because He is in all respects
righteous, shall render to every one according to his deeds.  And after
that you added:  For the assertion of this dogma countless thousands of
words will be brought forward; but in those to whom is granted knowledge
of the true Prophet, all this forest of words is cut down.  And on this
account, since you have delivered to me a discourse concerning the true
Prophet, you have strengthened me with all confidence of your
assertions.”  And then, having perceived that the sum of all religion
and piety consists in this, I immediately replied:  “You have proceeded
most excellently, O Peter:  wherefore, in future, expound
unhesitatingly, as to one who already knows what are the foundations of
faith and piety, the traditions of the true Prophet, who alone, as has
been clearly proved, is to be believed.  But that exposition which
requires assertions and arguments, reserve for the unbelievers, to whom
you have not yet judged it proper to commit the indubitable faith of
prophetic grace.”  When I had said this, I added:  “You promised that
you would give at the proper time two things:  first this exposition, at
once simple and entirely free from error; and then an exposition of each
individual point as it may be evolved in the course of the various
questions which shall be raised.  And after this you expounded the
sequence of things in order from the beginning of the world, even to the
present time; and if you please, I can repeat the whole from memory.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](0080088)
