[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080534)  [Next](0080536) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Inconsistency of
Polytheists.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxvii-p2"></span>But Peter, when he heard this,
said:  “According to them, then, before men were changed into stars, and
the other things which you mention, the heaven was without stars, and
the earth without trees and animals; and there were neither fountains,
nor rivers, nor birds.  And without these, how did those men themselves
live, who afterwards were changed into them, since it is evident that,
without these things, men could not live upon the earth?”  Then I
answered:  “But they are not even able to observe the worship of their
own gods consistently; for every one of those whom they worship has
something dedicated to himself, from which his worshippers ought to
abstain:  as they say the olive is dedicated to Minerva, the she-goat to
Jupiter, seeds to Ceres, wine to Bacchus, water to Osiris, the ram to
Hammon, the stag to Diana, the fish and the dove to the demon of the
Syrians, fire to Vulcan; and to each one, as I have said, is there
something specially consecrated, from which the worshippers are bound to
abstain, for the honour <span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxvii-Page_200"></span>of those to whom they are
consecrated.  But were one abstaining from one thing, and another from
another, by doing honor to one of the gods, they incur the anger of all
the rest; and therefore, if they would conciliate them all, they must
abstain from all things for the honour of all, so that, being
self-condemned by a just sentence before the day of judgment, they
should perish by a most wretched death through starvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](0080536)
