[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080591)  [Next](0080593) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—Nolo Episcopari.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>While he thus spoke, I knelt to him,
and entreated him, declining the honour and the authority of the chair. 
But he answered:  “Concerning this matter do not ask me; for it has
seemed to me to be good that thus it be, and all the more if you decline
it.  For this chair has not need of a presumptuous man, ambitious of
occupying it, but of one pious in conduct and deeply skilled in the word
*of God.*  But show me a better *than yourself,* who has travelled more
with me, and has heard more of my discourses, and has learned better the
regulations of the Church, and I shall not force you to do well against
your will.  But it will not be in your power to show me your superior;
for you are the choice first-fruits of the multitudes saved through me. 
However, consider this further, that if you do not undertake the
administration of the Church, through fear of the danger of sin, you may
be sure that you sin more, when you have it in your power to help the
godly, who are, as it were, at sea and in danger, and will not do so,
providing only for your own interest, and not for the common advantage
of all.  But that it behoves you altogether to undertake the danger,
<span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iii.iii-Page_219"></span>while I do not cease to ask it of you
for the help of all, you well understand.  The sooner, therefore, you
consent, so much the sooner will you relieve me from anxiety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0080593)
