[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080149)  [Next](0080151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Simon Magus:  Secret of
His Magic.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>“Now when Niceta and I once asked
him to explain to us how these things could be effected by magic art,
and what was the nature of that thing, Simon began thus to explain it to
us as his associates.  ‘I have,’ said he, ‘made the soul of a boy,
unsullied and violently slain, and invoked by unutterable adjurations,
to assist me; and by it all is done that I command.’  ‘But,’ said I, ‘is
it possible for a soul to do these things?’  He answered:  ‘I would have
you know this, that the soul of man holds the next place after God, when
once it is set free from the darkness of his body.  And immediately it
acquires prescience:  wherefore it is invoked for necromancy.’  Then I
answered:  ‘Why, then, do not the souls of persons who are slain take
vengeance on their slayers?’  ‘Do you not remember,’ said he, ‘that I
told you, that when it goes out of the body it acquires knowledge of the
future?’  ‘I remember,’ said I.  ‘Well, then,’ said he, ‘as soon as it
goes out of the body, it immediately knows that there is a judgment to
come, and that every one shall suffer punishment for those evils that he
hath done; and therefore they are unwilling to take vengeance on their
slayers, because they themselves are enduring torments for their own
evil deeds which they had done here, and they know that severer
punishments await them in the judgment.  Moreover, they are not
permitted by the angels who preside over them to go out, or to do
anything.’  ‘Then,’ I replied, ‘if the angels do not permit them to come
hither, or to do what they please, how can the souls obey the magician
who invokes them?’  ‘It is not,’ said he, ‘that they grant indulgence to
the souls that are willing to come:  but when the presiding angels are
adjured by one greater than themselves, they have the excuse of our
violence who adjure them, to permit the souls which we invoke to go
out:  for they do not sin who suffer violence, but we who impose
necessity upon them.’  Thereupon Niceta, not able longer to refrain,
hastily answered, as indeed I also was about to do, only I wished first
to get information from him on several points; but, as I said, Niceta,
anticipating me, said:  ‘And do you not fear the day of judgment, who do
violence to angels, and invoke souls, and deceive men, and bargain for
divine honour to yourself from men?  And how do you persuade us that
there shall be no judgment, as some of the Jews confess, and that souls
are not immortal, as many suppose, though you see them with your very
eyes, and receive from them assurance of the divine judgment?’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0080151)
