[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080450)  [Next](0080452.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xlv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLV.—Motions of the Sun and
Moon.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xlv-p2"></span>Says Aquila:  “I shall do so without
delay.  Two visible signs are shown in heaven—one of the sun, the other
of the moon; and these are followed by five other stars, each describing
its own separate orbit.  These, therefore, God has placed in the heaven,
by which the temperature of the air may be regulated according to the
seasons, and the order of vicissitudes and alternations may be kept. 
But by means of the very same *signs*, if at any time plague and
corruption is sent upon the earth for the sins of men, the air is
disturbed, pestilence is brought upon animals, blight upon crops, and a
destructive year in every way upon men; and thus it is that by one and
the same means order is both kept and destroyed.  For it is manifest
even to the unbelieving and unskilful, that the course of the sun, which
is useful and necessary to the world, and which is assigned by
providence, is always kept orderly; but the courses of the moon, in
comparison of the course of the sun, seem to the unskilful to be
inordinate and unsettled in her waxings and wanings.  For the sun moves
in fixed and orderly periods: for from him are hours, from him the day
when he rises, from him also the night when he sets; from him months and
years are reckoned, from him the variations of seasons are produced;
while, rising to the higher regions, he tempers the spring; but when he
reaches the top of the heaven, he kindles the summer’s heats:  again,
sinking, he produces the temper of autumn; and when he returns to his
lowest circle, he bequeaths to us the rigour of winter’s cold from the
icy binding of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI](0080452.md)
