[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080320)  [Next](0080322.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Responsibility of
Knowledge.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.vii-p2"></span>“Therefore, before any one hears
what is good for him, it is certain that he is ignorant; and being
ignorant, he wishes and desires to do what is not good for him;
wherefore he is not judged for that.  But when once he has heard the
causes of his error, and has received the method of truth, then, if he
remain in those errors with which he had been long ago preoccupied, he
shall rightly be called into judgment, to suffer punishment, because he
has spent in the sport of errors that portion of life which was given
him to be spent in living well.  But he who, hearing those things,
willingly receives them, and is thankful that the teaching of good
things has been brought to him, inquires more eagerly, and does not
cease to learn, until he ascertains whether there be truly another
world, in which rewards are prepared for the good.  And when he is
assured of this, he gives thanks to God because He has shown him the
light of truth; and for the future directs his actions in all good
works, for which he is assured that there is a reward prepared in the
world to come; while he constantly wonders and is astonished at the
errors of other men, and that no one sees the truth which is placed
before his eyes.  Yet he himself, rejoicing in the riches of wisdom
which he hath found, desires insatiably to enjoy them, and is delighted
with the practice of good works; hastening to attain, with a clean heart
and a pure conscience, the world to come, when he shall be able even to
see God, the king of all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](0080322.md)
