[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080140)  [Next](0080142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Prudence in Dealing with
Opponents.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>“But for other reasons also it is of
importance that I should have some knowledge of this man.  For if I know
that in those things concerning which it cannot be doubted that they are
good, he is faultless and irreproachable,—that is to say, if he is
sober, merciful, upright, gentle, and humane, which no one doubts to be
good qualities,—then it will seem to be fitting, that upon him who
possesses these good virtues, that which is lacking of faith and
knowledge should be conferred; and so his life, which is in other
respects worthy of approbation, should be amended in those points in
which it shall appear to be imperfect.  But if he remains wrapped up and
polluted in those sins which are manifestly such, it does not become me
to speak to him at all of the more secret and sacred things of divine
knowledge, but rather to protest and confront him, that he cease from
sin, and cleanse his actions from vice.  But if he insinuate himself,
and lead us on to speak what he, while he acts improperly, ought not to
hear, it will be our part to parry him cautiously.  For not to answer
him at all does not seem proper, for the sake of the hearers, lest haply
they may think that we decline the contest through want of ability to
answer him, and so their faith may be injured through their
misunderstanding of our purpose.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0080142)
