[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080274)  [Next](0080276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p1"></span> <span id="page_134">p. 134</span>
<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-Page_134"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXV.—Contents of Clement’s
Despatches to James.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p2"></span>The first book, <span
id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) therefore, of those that I formerly
sent to you, contains an account of the true Prophet, and of the
peculiarity of the understanding of the law, according to what the
tradition of Moses teacheth.  The second contains an account of the
beginning, and whether there be one beginning or many, and that the law
of the Hebrews knows what immensity is.  The third, concerning God, and
those things that have been ordained by Him.  The fourth, that though
there are many that are called gods, there is but one true God,
according to the testimonies of the Scriptures.  The fifth, that there
are two heavens, one of which is that visible firmament which shall pass
away, but the other is eternal and invisible.  The sixth, concerning
good and evil; and that all things are subjected to good by the Father;
and why, and how, and whence evil is, and that it co-operates with good,
but not with a good purpose; and what are the signs of good, and what
those of evil; and what is the difference between duality and
conjunction.  The seventh, what are the things which the twelve apostles
treated of in the presence of the people in the temple.  The eighth,
concerning the words of the Lord which seem to be contradictory, but are
not; and what is the explanation of them.  The ninth, that the law which
has been given by God is righteous and perfect, and that it alone can
make pure.  The tenth, concerning the carnal birth of men, and
concerning the generation which is by baptism; and what is the
succession of carnal seed in man; and what is the account of his soul,
and how the freedom of the will is in it, which, seeing it is not
unbegotten, but made, could not be immoveable from good.  Concerning
these several subjects, therefore, whatever Peter discoursed at Cæsarea,
according to his command, as I have said, I have sent you written in ten
volumes. <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716)   But on the next day,
as had been determined, we set out from Cæsarea with some faithful men,
who had resolved to accompany Peter.

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p6"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_715"></span>[134:716](0080275.htm#fr_715) <span
id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p3"></span> Cotelerius remarks that these ten
books previously sent to James (if they ever existed) ought to be
distinguished from the ten books of the *Recognitions*, which were
addressed to the same James, but written after those now mentioned.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[134:717](0080275.htm#fr_716) <span
id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p4"></span> \[This chapter furnishes some
positive evidence that the *Recognitions* are based upon an earlier
work.  The topics here named do not correspond with those of the
*Homilies*, except in the most general way.  Hence this passage does not
favour the theory that the author of the *Recognitions* had the
*Homilies* before him when he wrote.  Even in xvi.–xix. of the later
work, which Uhlhorn regarded as the nucleus of the entire literature,
the resemblances are slight.  As already intimated (see Introductory
Notice, p. 71), Uhlhorn has abandoned this theory.

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxv-p5"></span>On the other hand the chapter bears
marks of being the conclusion to a complete document.  It can therefore
be urged in support of the new view of Lehmann (*Die Clementinischen
Schriften*, Gotha, 1869), that the *Recognitions* are made up of two
parts (books i.–iii., iv.–x.) by two different authors, both parts being
based on earlier documents.  This chapter is regarded by Hilgenfeld as
containing a general outline of the *Kerygma Petri*, a Jewish-Christian
document of Roman origin.  In i. 27–72 he finds a remnant of this
document incorporated in the *Recognitions*.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](0080276)
