[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080060)  [Next](0080062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii-Page_75"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vi.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Recognitions of Clement.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vi.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Rufinus, Presbyter of Aquileia; His Preface
to Clement’s Book of Recognitions.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>To Bishop</span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>Gaudentius</span>.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>To</span> thee, indeed, O Gaudentius, thou
choice glory of our doctors, belongs such vigour of mind, yea, such
grace of the Spirit, that whatever you say even in the course of your
daily preaching, whatever you deliver in the church, ought to be
preserved in books, and handed down to posterity for their instruction. 
But we, whom slenderness of wit renders less ready, and now old age
renders slow and inactive, though after many delays, yet at length
present to you the work which once the virgin Sylvia of venerable memory
enjoined upon us, that we should render Clement into our language, and
you afterwards by hereditary right demanded of us; and thus we
contribute to the use and profit of our people, no small spoil, as I
think, taken from the libraries of the Greeks, so that we may feed with
foreign nourishment those whom we cannot with our own.  For foreign
things usually seem both more pleasant, and sometimes also more
profitable.  In short, almost everything is foreign that brings healing
to our bodies, that opposes diseases, and neutralizes poisons.  For
Judæa sends us *Lacryma balsami*, Crete *Coma dictamni*, Arabia her
flower of spices, India reaps her crop of spikenard; which, although
they reach us in a somewhat more broken condition than when they leave
their native fields, yet retain entire the sweetness of their odour and
their healing virtue.  Receive therefore, my soul, <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) Clement returning to you; receive him
now in a Roman dress.  And wonder not if haply the florid countenance of
eloquence appear less in him than usual.  It matters not, provided the
sense tastes the same.  Therefore we transport foreign merchandise into
our country with much labour.  And I know not with how grateful
countenances my countrymen welcome me, bringing to them the rich spoils
of Greece, and unlocking hidden treasures of wisdom with the key of our
language.  But may God grant your prayers, that no unlucky eye nor any
livid aspect may meet us, lest, by an extreme kind of prodigy, while
those from whom he is taken do not envy, yet those upon whom he is
bestowed should repine.  Truly it is right to point out the plan of our
translation to you, who have read these works also in Greek, lest haply
in some parts you may think the order of translation not kept.  I
suppose you are aware that there are two editions in Greek of this work
of Clement,—the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>᾽Αναγνώσεις</span> , that is, *Recognitions;*
and that there are two collections of books, differing in some points,
but in many *containing* the same narrative.  In short, the last part of
this work, in which is the relation concerning the transformation of
Simon, is contained in one of the collections, but is not at all in the
other. <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529)   There are also in both
collections some dissertations concerning the Unbegotten God and the
Begotten, and on some other subjects, which, to say nothing more, are
beyond our comprehension. <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530)  
These, therefore, as being beyond our powers, I have chosen to reserve
for others, rather than to produce in an imperfect state.  But in the
rest, we have given our endeavour, so far as we could, not to vary
either from the sentiments or even from the language and modes of
expression; and this, although it renders the style of the narrative
less ornate, yet it makes it more faithful.  The epistle in which the
same Clement, writing to James the Lord’s brother, informs him of the
death of Peter, and that he had left him his successor in his chair and
teaching, and in which also the whole subject of church order is
treated, I have not prefixed to this work, both because it is of later
date, and because I have already translated and published it. <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531)   But I do <span id="page_76">p.
76</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii-Page_76"></span>not think it out of place
to explain here what in that letter will perhaps seem to some to be
inconsistent.  For some ask, Since Linus and Cletus were bishops in the
city of Rome before this Clement, how could Clement himself, writing to
James, say that the chair of teaching was handed over to him by
Peter? <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532)   Now of this we have
heard this explanation, that Linus and Cletus were indeed bishops in the
city of Rome before Clement, but during the lifetime of Peter:  that is,
that they undertook the care of the episcopate, and that he fulfilled
the office of apostleship; as is found also to have been the case at
Cæsarea, where, when he himself was present, he yet had Zacchæus,
ordained by himself, as bishop.  And in this way both statements will
appear to be true, both that these bishops are reckoned before Clement,
and yet that Clement received the teacher’s seat on the death of Peter. 
But now let us see how Clement, writing to James the Lord’s brother,
begins his narrative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_528"></span>[75:529](0080061.htm#fr_528) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6"></span> Var. readings:  “magnanimous one,” “my
lord,” “my friend.”

<span id="fn_529"></span>[75:530](0080061.htm#fr_529) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7"></span> \[The reference is probably to the
transformation of the father of Clement into the appearance of Simon
Magus.  This is narrated in both the *Recognitions* (book x. 53, etc.)
and in the *Homilies* (xx. 12, etc.), though the latter book closes
without any statement of the restoration.  It would seem unlikely, then,
that Rufinus refers to the *Homilies* as the “other” collection.  The
recovery of the closing portion of that work has given us its account of
the transformation.—R.\]

<span id="fn_530"></span>[75:531](0080061.htm#fr_530) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p8"></span> \[How far Rufinus has omitted portions
which occurred in Greek cannot be known.  It is quite probable that the
apparent heresy of some passages, rather than their incomprehensibility,
led him to omit them.  This may be urged in favour of the priority of
the *Homilies*, but is not conclusive.—R.\]

<span id="fn_531"></span>[75:532](0080061.htm#fr_531) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p9"></span> \[There is no good reason for doubting
that Rufinus refers to the extant epistle prefixed to the *Homilies*,
and forming, with “the Epistle of Peter to James,” which precedes it, a
preface and fictitious authentication of that collection.—R.\]

<span id="fn_532"></span>[76:533](0080061.htm#fr_532) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p10"></span> \[The language of Rufinus confirms that
of Irenæus, Eusebius, and Jerome, as to the episcopal succession at Rome
(assuming that Cletus and Anacletus, named by Irenæus, is identical with
Cletus).  For other variations, see Church Histories and Encyclopædias
(under *Clemens Romanus*).  The current opinion at Rome in the beginning
of the fifth century is evident from this passage.  Comp. *Ante-Nicene
Fathers*, vol. i. pp. 1, 2.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](0080062)
