[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080529)  [Next](0080531) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Vile Transformation of
Jupiter.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxii-p2"></span>“There are also innumerable
adulteries of his, of which no offspring was the result, which it were
tedious to enumerate.  But amongst those whom we have mentioned, he
violated some being transformed, like a magician.  In short, he seduced
Antiope, the daughter of Nycteus, when turned into a satyr, and of her
were born Amphion and Zethus; Alcmene, when changed into her husband
Amphitryon, and of her was born Hercules; Ægina, the daughter of Asopus,
when changed into an eagle, of whom Æacus was born.  So also he defiled
Ganymede, the son of Dardanus, being changed into an eagle; Manthea, the
daughter of Phocus, when changed into a bear, of whom was born Arctos;
Danæ, the daughter of Acrisius, being changed into gold, of whom
Perseus; Europa, the daughter of Phœnix, changed into a bull, of whom
were born Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon; Eurymedusa, the daughter of
Achelaus, being changed into an ant, of whom Myrmidon; Thalia, the
nymph, being changed into a vulture, of whom were born the Palisci, in
Sicily; Imandra, the daughter of Geneanus, at Rhodes, being changed into
a shower; Cassiopeia, being changed into her husband Phœnix, and of her
was born Anchinos; Leda, the daughter of Thestius, being changed into a
swan, of whom was born Helen; and again the same, being changed into a
star, and of her were born Castor and Pollux; Lamia, being changed into
a lapwing; Mnemosyne, being changed into a shepherd, of whom were born
the nine Muses; Nemesis, being changed into a goose; the Cadmian Semele,
being changed into fire, and of her was born Dionysius.  By his own
daughter Ceres he begot Persephone, whom also herself he defiled, being
changed into a dragon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](0080531)
