[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080557)  [Next](0080559.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.l"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.l-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.l-p1.1"></span>Chapter L.—Philosophers Not Benefactors of
Men.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.l-p2"></span>“For what have the philosophers
contributed to the life of man, by saying that God is not angry with
men?  Only to teach them to have no fear of any punishment or judgment,
and thereby to take away all restraint from sinners.  Or what have they
benefited the human race, who have said that there is no God, but that
all things happen by chance and accident?  What but that men, hearing
this, and thinking that there is no judge, no guardian of things, are
driven headlong, without fear of any one, to every deed which either
rage, or avarice, or lust may dictate.  For they truly have much
benefited the life of man who have said that nothing can be done apart
from <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.l-p2.1"></span>Genesis</span>; that is, that every one,
ascribing the cause of his sin to <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.l-p2.2"></span>Genesis</span>, might in the midst of his
crimes declare himself innocent, while he does not wash out his guilt by
repentance, but doubles it by laying the blame upon fate.  And what
shall I say of those philosophers who have maintained that the gods are
to be worshipped, and such gods as were described to you a little while
ago?  What else was this but to decree that vices, crimes, and base
deeds should be worshipped?  I am ashamed of you, and I pity you, if you
have not yet discovered that these things were unworthy of belief, and
impious, and execrable, or if, having discovered and ascertained them to
be evil, ye have nevertheless worshipped them as if they were good, yea,
even the best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI](0080559.md)
