[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080294)  [Next](0080296.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Demons Incite to
Idolatry.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xix-p2"></span>“There is also another error of the
demons, which they suggest to the senses of men, that <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="vi.iii.vi.xix-Page_139"></span>they should think that those things
which they suffer, they suffer from such as are called gods, in order
that thereby, offering sacrifices and gifts, as if to propitiate them,
they may strengthen the worship of false religion, and avoid us who are
interested in their salvation, that they may be freed from error; but
this they do, as I have said, not knowing that these things are
suggested to them by demons, for fear they should be saved.  It is
therefore in the power of every one, since man has been made possessed
of free-will, whether he shall hear us to life, or the demons to
destruction.  Also to some, the demons, appearing visibly under various
figures, sometimes throw out threats, sometimes promise relief from
sufferings, that they may instil into those whom they deceive the
opinion of their being gods, and that it may not be known that they are
demons.  But they are not concealed from us, who know the mysteries of
the creation, and for what reason it is permitted to the demons to do
those things in the present world; how it is allowed them to transform
themselves into what figures they please, and to suggest evil thoughts,
and to convey themselves, by means of meats and of drink consecrated to
them, into the minds or bodies of those who partake of it, and to
concoct vain dreams to further the worship of some idol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](0080296.md)
