[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080128)  [Next](0080130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.lxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXVII.—Speech of
Gamaliel.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lxvii-p2"></span>“‘If I, Gamaliel, deem it no
reproach either to my learning or to my old age to learn something from
babes and unlearned ones, if haply there be anything which it is for
profit or for safety to acquire (for he who lives reasonably knows that
nothing is more precious than the soul), ought not this to be the object
of love and desire to all, to learn what they do not know, and to teach
what they have learned?  For it is most certain that neither friendship,
nor kindred, nor lofty power, ought to be more precious to men than
truth.  Therefore you, O brethren, if ye know anything more, shrink not
from laying it <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.lxvii-Page_95"></span>before the people of God who are
present, and also before your brethren; while the whole people shall
willingly and in perfect quietness hear what you say.  For why should
not the people do this, when they see even me equally with themselves
willing to learn from you, if haply God has revealed something further
to you?  But if you in anything are deficient, be not ye ashamed in like
manner to be taught by us, that God may fill up whatever is wanting on
either side.  But if any fear now agitates you on account of some of our
people whose minds are prejudiced against you, and if through fear of
their violence you dare not openly speak your sentiments, in order that
I may deliver you from this fear, I openly swear to you by Almighty God,
who liveth for ever, that I will suffer no one to lay hands upon you. 
Since, then, you have all this people witnesses of this my oath, and you
hold the covenant of our sacrament as a fitting pledge, let each one of
you, without any hesitation, declare what he has learned; and let us,
brethren, listen eagerly and in silence.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII](0080130)
