[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080448)  [Next](0080450) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xliii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.—Things Apparently Useless
and Vile Made by God.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xliii-p2"></span>“If, then, it seems to you that this
is so, and what has been said on this subject is enough, let us come to
inquire into other matters; or if you think that something is still
wanting, let us go over it again.”  And the old man said:  “I wish <span
id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="vi.iii.x.xliii-Page_177"></span>you would go over this again, since
there are many other things which I see to be made in like manner:  for
both the fruits of trees are produced in like manner, beautifully formed
and wonderfully rounded; and the appearance of the leaves is formed with
immense gracefulness, and the green membrane is woven with exquisite
art:  then, moreover, fleas, mice, lizards, and such like, shall we say
that these are made by God?  Hence, from these vile objects a conjecture
is derived concerning the superior, that they are by no means formed by
the art of mind.”  “You infer well,” said Aquila, “concerning the
texture of leaves, and concerning small animals, that from these belief
is withdrawn from the superior creatures; but let not these things
deceive you, that you should think that God, working as it were only
with two hands, could not complete all things that are made; but
remember how my brother Niceta answered you yesterday, and truly
disclosed the mystery before the time, as a son speaking with his
father, and explained why and how things are made which seem to be
useless.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV](0080450)
