[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080560)  [Next](0080562) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.liii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.liii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIII.—A Transformation.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.liii-p2"></span>But we, sitting with Peter the
whole night, asking questions, and learning of him on many subjects,
remained awake through very delight in his teaching and the sweetness of
his words; and when it was daybreak, Peter, looking at me and my
brothers, said:  “I wonder what has befallen your father.”  And while he
was speaking my father came in, and found Peter speaking to us about
him.  And when he had saluted he began to apologize, and to explain the
reason why he had remained abroad.  But we, looking at him, were
horrified; for we saw on him the face of Simon, yet we heard the voice
of our father.  And when we shrank from him, and cursed him, my father
was astonished at our treating him so harshly and barbarously.  Yet
Peter was the only one who saw his natural countenance; and he said to
us:  “Why do you curse your father?”  And we, along with our mother,
answered him:  “He appears to us to be Simon, though he has our father’s
voice.”  Then Peter:  “You indeed know only his voice, which has not
been changed by the sorceries; but to me also his face, which to others
appears changed by Simon’s art, is known to be that of your father
Faustinianus.”  And looking at my father, he said:  “The cause of the
dismay of your wife and your sons is this,—the appearance of your
countenance does not seem to be as it was, but the face of the
detestable Simon appears in you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV](0080562)
