[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080011)  [Next](0080013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span> <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="iii.x-Page_27"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>VIII.—The Testament of Naphtali Concerning
Natural Goodness.</span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.x-p2.1"></span>The</span> record of the testament of Naphtali,
what things he ordained at the time of his death in the hundred and
thirty-second year of his life.  When his sons were gathered together in
the seventh month, the fourth day of the month, he, being yet in good
health, made them a feast and good cheer.  And after he was awake in the
morning, he said to them, I am dying; and they believed him not.  And he
blessed the Lord; and affirmed that after yesterday’s feast he should
die.  He began then to say to his sons:  Hear, my children; ye sons of
Naphtali, hear the words of your father.  I was born from Bilhah; and
because Rachel dealt craftily, and gave Bilhah in place of herself to
Jacob, and she bore me upon Rachel’s lap, therefore was I called
Naphtali. <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151)   And Rachel loved me
because I was born upon her lap; and when I was of young and tender
form, she was wont to kiss me, and say, Would that I might see a brother
of thine from my own womb, like unto thee:  whence also Joseph was like
unto me in all things, according to the prayers of Rachel.  Now my
mother was Bilhah, daughter of Rotheus the brother of Deborah, Rebecca’s
nurse, and she was born on one and the self-same day with Rachel.  And
Rotheus was of the family of Abraham, a Chaldean, fearing God, free-born
and noble; and he was taken captive, and was bought by Laban; and he
gave him Aena his handmaid to wife, and she bore a daughter, and called
her Zilpah, after the name of the village in which he had been taken
captive.  And next she bore Bilhah, saying, My daughter is eager after
what is new, for immediately that she was born she was eager for the
breast.

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span>2.  And since I was swift on my feet like a
deer, my father Jacob appointed me for all errands and messages, and as
a deer <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) did he give me his
blessing.  For as the potter knoweth the vessel, what it containeth, and
bringeth clay thereto, so also doth the Lord make the body in accordance
with the spirit, and according to the capacity of the body doth He
implant the spirit, and the one is not deficient from the other by a
third part of a hair; for by weight, and measure, and rule is every
creature of the Most High. <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)   And
as the potter knoweth the use of each vessel, whereto it sufficeth, so
also doth the Lord know the body, how far it is capable for goodness,
and when it beginneth in evil; for there is no created thing and no
thought which the Lord knoweth not, for He created every man after His
own image.  As man’s strength, so also is his work; and as his mind, so
also is his work; and as his purpose, so also is his doing; as his
heart, so also is his mouth; as his eye, so also is his sleep; as his
soul, so also is his word, either in the law of the Lord or in the law
of Beliar.  And as there is a division between light and darkness,
between seeing and hearing, so also is there a division between man and
man, and between woman and woman; neither is it to be said that there is
any superiority in anything, either of the face or of other like
things. <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)   For God made all
things good in their order, the five senses in the head, and He joineth
on the neck to the head, the hair also for comeliness, the heart
moreover for understanding, the belly for the dividing of the stomach,
the calamus <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) for health, the
liver for wrath, the gall for bitterness. the spleen for laughter, the
reins for craftiness, the loins for power, the ribs for containing, the
back for strength, and so forth.  So then, my children, be ye orderly
unto good things in the fear of God, and do nothing disorderly in scorn
or out of its due season.  For if thou bid the eye to hear, it cannot;
so neither in darkness can ye do the works of light.

<span id="iii.x-p9"></span>3.  Be ye not therefore eager to corrupt your
doings through excess, or with empty words to deceive your souls;
because if ye keep silence in purity of heart, ye shall be able to hold
fast the will of God, and to cast away the will of the devil.  Sun and
moon and stars change not their order; so also ye shall not change the
law of God in the disorderliness of your doings.  Nations went astray,
and forsook the Lord, and changed their order, and followed stones and
stocks, following after spirits of error.  But ye shall not be so, my
children, recognising in the firmament, in the earth, and in the sea,
and in all created things, the Lord who made them all, that ye become
not as Sodom, which changed the order of its nature, in like manner also
the Watchers <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) changed the order
of their nature, whom also the Lord cursed at the flood, and for their
sakes made desolate the earth, that it should be uninhabited and
fruitless.

<span id="iii.x-p11"></span>4.  These things I say, my children, for I
have read in the holy writing of Enoch that ye yourselves also will
depart from the Lord, walking according to all wickedness of the
Gentiles, and <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="iii.x-Page_28"></span>ye will do according to all the iniquity of
Sodom.  And the Lord will bring captivity upon you, and there shall ye
serve your enemies, and ye shall be covered with all affliction and
tribulation, until the Lord shall have consumed you all.  And after that
ye shall have been diminished and made few, ye will return and
acknowledge the Lord your God; and He will bring you back into your own
land, according to His abundant mercy.  And it shall be, after that they
shall come into the land of their fathers, they will again forget the
Lord and deal wickedly; and the Lord shall scatter them upon the face of
all the earth, until the compassion of the Lord shall come, a Man
working righteousness and showing mercy unto all them that are afar off,
and them that are near.

<span id="iii.x-p12"></span>5.  For in the fortieth year of my life, I
saw *in a vision* that the sun and the moon were standing still on the
Mount of Olives, at the east of Jerusalem.  And behold Isaac, the father
of my father, saith to us, Run and lay hold of them, each one according
to his strength; and he that seizeth them, his shall be the sun and the
moon.  And we all of us ran together, and Levi laid hold of the sun, and
Judah outstripped the others and seized the moon, and they were both of
them lifted up with them.  And when Levi became as a sun, a certain
young man gave to him twelve branches of palm; and Judah was bright as
the moon, and under his feet were twelve rays.  And Levi and Judah ran,
and laid hold each of the other.  And, lo, a bull upon the earth, having
two great horns, and an eagle’s wings upon his back; and we wished to
seize him, but could not.  For Joseph outstripped us, and took him, and
ascended up with him on high.  And I saw, for I was there, and behold a
holy writing appeared to us saying:  Assyrians, Medes, Persians,
Elamites, Gelachæans, Chaldeans, Syrians, shall possess in captivity the
twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="iii.x-p13"></span>6.  And again, after seven months, I saw our
father Jacob standing by the sea of Jamnia, and we his sons were with
him.  And, behold, there came a ship sailing by, full of dried flesh,
without sailors or pilot:  and there was written upon the ship, Jacob. 
And our father saith to us, Let us embark on our ship.  And when we had
gone on board, there arose a vehement storm, and a tempest of mighty
wind; and our father, who was holding the helm, flew away from us.  And
we, being tost with the tempest, were borne along over the sea; and the
ship was filled with water and beaten about with a mighty wave, so that
it was well-nigh broken in pieces.  And Joseph fled away upon a little
boat, and we all were divided upon twelve boards, and Levi and Judah
were together.  We therefore all were scattered even unto afar off. 
Then Levi, girt about with sackcloth, prayed for us all unto the Lord. 
And when the storm ceased, immediately the ship reached the land, as
though in peace.  And, lo, Jacob our father came, and we rejoiced with
one accord.

<span id="iii.x-p14"></span>7.  These two dreams I told to my father;
and he said to me, These things must be fulfilled in their season, after
that Israel hath endured many things.  Then my father saith unto me, I
believe that Joseph liveth, for I see always that the Lord numbereth him
with you.  And he said, weeping, Thou livest, Joseph, my child, and I
behold thee not, and thou seest not Jacob that begat thee.  And he
caused us also to weep at these words of his, and I burned in my heart
to declare that he had been sold, but I feared my brethren.

<span id="iii.x-p15"></span>8.  Behold, my children, I have shown unto
you the last times, that all shall come to pass in Israel.  Do ye also
therefore charge your children that they be united to Levi and to
Judah.  For through Judah shall salvation arise unto Israel, and in Him
shall Jacob be blessed.  For through his tribe shall God be seen
dwelling among men on the earth, to save the race of Israel, and He
shall gather together the righteous from the Gentiles.  If ye work that
which is good, my children, both men and angels will bless you; and God
will be glorified through you among the Gentiles, and the devil will
flee from you, and the wild beasts will fear you, and the angels will
cleave to you.  For as if a man rear up a child well, he hath a kindly
remembrance thereof; so also for a good work there is a good remembrance
with God.  But him who doeth not that which is good, men and angels
shall curse and God will be dishonoured among the heathen through him,
and the devil maketh him his own as his peculiar instrument, and every
wild beast shall master him, and the Lord will hate him.  For the
commandments of the law are twofold, and through prudence must they be
fulfilled.  For there is a season for a man to embrace his wife, and a
season to abstain therefrom <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) for
his prayer.  So then there are two commandments; and unless they be done
in due order, they bring about sin.  So also is it with the other
commandments.  Be ye therefore wise in God, and prudent, understanding
the order of the commandments, and the laws of every work, that the Lord
may love you.

<span id="iii.x-p17"></span>9.  And when he had charged them with many
such words, he exhorted them that they should remove his bones to
Hebron, and should bury him with his fathers.  And when he had eaten and
drunken with a merry heart, he covered his face and died.  And his sons
did according to all things whatsoever Naphtali their father had charged
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[27:152](0080012.htm#fr_151) <span
id="iii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span> [Gen. xxx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#008)<span id="iii.x-p3.1"></span>. 
Josephus, *Ant*., i. 19. 7

<span id="fn_152"></span>[27:153](0080012.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span> [Gen. xlix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021)<span id="iii.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[27:154](0080012.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span> \[[Wis.
11:20](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#020), [Sir.
42:7](../../../bib/apo/sir042.htm#007)<span id="iii.x-p6.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_154"></span>[27:155](0080012.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span> The Greek text here is obviously corrupt,
and doubtless one or two words are wanting.  The reading of the Cam.
<span class="c9"><span id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> is, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x-p7.2"></span>οὐκ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν ὅτι ἐν τῷ
ἑνὶ τοῖς προσώποις ἢ τῶν ὁμοίων</span>.  In the Ox. <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.x-p7.3"></span>ms.</span> the passage is
wanting.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[27:156](0080012.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iii.x-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span> It seems very doubtful what is meant by
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x-p8.1"></span>κάλαμος</span> here.  I
have thought it best, therefore, to leave the matter open.  The Ox.
<span class="c9"><span id="iii.x-p8.2"></span>ms.</span> punctuates
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x-p8.3"></span>στομάχου κάλ</span>.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[27:157](0080012.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p10"></span> Cf. *Reuben* 5 \[note 3, p. 10 *supra*\].

<span id="fn_157"></span>[28:158](0080012.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iii.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p16"></span> \[[Eccl.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#005), [1 Cor.
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="iii.x-p16.1"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament IX](0080013)
