[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080465)  [Next](0080467.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.lx"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.lx-p1.1"></span>Chapter LX.—His Deliverances Not to Be
Questioned.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.lx-p2"></span>“Therefore, if any one wishes to learn
all things, *he cannot do it by* discussing them one by one; for, being
mortal, he shall not be able to trace the counsel of God, and to scan
immensity itself.  But if, as we have said, he desires to learn all
things, let him seek after the true Prophet; and when he has found Him,
let him not treat with Him by questions and disputations and arguments;
but if He has given any response, or pronounced any judgment, it cannot
be doubted that this is certain.  And therefore, before all things, let
the true Prophet be sought, and His words be laid hold of.  In respect
to these this only should be discussed by every one, that he may satisfy
himself if they are truly His prophetic words; that is, if they contain
undoubted faith of things to come, if they mark out definite times, if
they preserve the order of things, if they do not relate as last those
things which are first, nor as first those things which were done last,
if they contain nothing subtle, nothing composed by magic art to
deceive, or if they have not transferred to themselves things which were
revealed to others, and have mixed them with falsehoods.  And when, all
these things having been discussed by <span id="page_182">p. 182</span>
<span id="vi.iii.x.lx-Page_182"></span>right judgment, it is established
that they are prophetic words, so they ought to be at once believed
concerning all things on which they have spoken and answered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI](0080467.md)
