[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080004)  [Next](0080006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_9"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>I.—The Testament of Reuben Concerning
Thoughts.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>The</span> copy of the Testament of Reuben,
what things he charged his sons before he died in the hundred and
twenty-fifth year of his life.  When he was sick two years after the
death of Joseph, his sons and his sons’ sons were gathered together to
visit him.  And he said to them, My children, I am dying, and go the way
of my fathers.  And when he saw there Judah and Gad and Asher, his
brethren, he said to them, Raise me up, my brethren, that I may tell to
my brethren and to my children what things I have hidden in my heart,
for from henceforth my strength faileth me.  And he arose and kissed
them, and said, weeping:  Hear, my brethren, give ear to Reuben your
father, what things I command you.  And, behold, I call to witness
against you this day the God of heaven, that ye walk not in the
ignorance of youth and fornication wherein I ran greedily, and I defiled
the bed of Jacob my father.  For I tell you that He smote me with a sore
plague in my loins for seven months; and had not Jacob our father prayed
for me to the Lord, surely the Lord would have destroyed me.  For I was
thirty years old when I did this evil in the sight of the Lord, and for
seven months I was sick even unto death; and I repented for seven years
in the set purpose of my soul before the Lord.  Wine and strong drink I
drank not, and flesh entered not into my mouth, and I tasted not
pleasant food, <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) mourning over my
sin, for it was great.  And it shall not so be done in Israel.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>2.  And now hear me, my children, what
things I saw in my repentance concerning the seven spirits of error. 
Seven spirits are given against man from Beliar, and they are chief of
the works of youth; and seven spirits are given to him at his creation,
that in them should be done every work of man. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)   The first (1) spirit is of life, with
which man’s whole being is created.  The second (2) spirit is of sight,
with which ariseth desire.  The third (3) spirit is of hearing, with
which cometh teaching.  The fourth (4) spirit is of smelling, with which
taste is given to draw air and breath.  The fifth (5) spirit is of
speech, with which cometh knowledge.  The sixth (6) spirit is of taste,
with which cometh the eating of meats and drinks; and by them strength
is produced, for in food is the foundation of strength.  The seventh (7)
spirit is of begetting and sexual intercourse, with which through love
of pleasure sin also entereth in:  wherefore it is the last in order of
creation, and the first of youth, because it is filled with ignorance,
which leadeth the young as a blind man to a pit, and as cattle to a
precipice.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>3.  Besides all these, there is an eighth
(8) spirit of sleep, with which is created entrancement of man’s nature,
and the image of death.  With these spirits are mingled the spirits of
error.  The first (1), the spirit of fornication, dwelleth in the nature
and in the senses; the second (2) spirit of insatiateness in the belly;
the third (3) spirit of fighting in the liver and the gall.  The fourth
(4) is the spirit of fawning and trickery, that through
over-officiousness a man may be fair in seeming.  The fifth (5) is the
spirit of arrogance, that a man may be stirred up and become
high-minded.  The sixth (6) is the spirit of lying, in perdition and in
jealousy to feign words, and to conceal <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) words from kindred and friends.  The
seventh (7) is the spirit of injustice, with which are theft and
pilferings, that a man may work the desire of his heart; for injustice
worketh together with the other spirits by means of craft.  Besides all
these, the spirit of sleep, the eighth (8) spirit, is conjoined with
error and fantasy.  And so perisheth every young man, darkening his mind
from the truth, and not understanding the law of God, nor obeying the
<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_10"></span>admonitions of his fathers, as befell me
also in my youth.

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>And now, children, love the truth, and it
shall preserve you.  I counsel you, hear ye Reuben your father.  Pay no
heed to the sight of a woman, nor yet associate privately with a female
under the authority of a husband, nor meddle with affairs of womankind. 
For had I not seen Bilhah bathing in a covered place, I had not fallen
into this great iniquity. <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)   For my
mind, dwelling on the woman’s nakedness, suffered me not to sleep until
I had done the abominable deed.  For while Jacob our father was absent
with Isaac his father, when we were in Gader, near to Ephratha in
Bethlehem, Bilhah was drunk, and lay asleep uncovered in her chamber;
and when I went in and beheld her nakedness, I wrought that impiety, and
leaving her sleeping I departed.  And forthwith an angel of God revealed
to my father Jacob concerning my impiety, and he came and mourned over
me, and touched her no more. <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>4.  Pay no heed, therefore, to the beauty
of women, and muse not upon their doings; but walk in singleness of
heart in the fear of the Lord, and be labouring in works, and roaming in
study and among your flocks, until the Lord give to you a wife whom He
will, that ye suffer not as I did.  Until my father’s death I had not
boldness to look stedfastly into the face of Jacob, or to speak to any
of my brethren, because of my reproach; and even until now my conscience
afflicteth me by reason of my sin.  And my father comforted me; for he
prayed for me unto the Lord, that the anger of the Lord might pass away
from me, even as the Lord showed me.  From henceforth, then, I was
protected, and I sinned not.  Therefore, my children, observe all things
whatsoever I command you, and ye shall not sin.  For fornication is the
destruction of the soul, separating it from God, and bringing it near to
idols, because it deceiveth the mind and understanding, and bringeth
down young men into hell before their time.  For many hath fornication
destroyed; because, though a man be old or noble, it maketh him a
reproach and a laughing-stock with Beliar and the sons of men.  For in
that Joseph kept himself from every woman, and purged his thoughts from
all fornication, he found favour before the Lord and men.  For the
Egyptian woman did many things unto him, and called for magicians, and
offered him love potions, and the purpose of his soul admitted no evil
desire.  Therefore the God of my fathers delivered him from every
visible and hidden death.  For if fornication overcome not the mind,
neither shall Beliar overcome you.

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>5.  Hurtful are women, my children;
because, since they have no power or strength over the man, they act
subtilly through outward guise how they may draw him to themselves; and
whom they cannot overcome by strength, him they overcome by craft.  For
moreover the angel of God told me concerning them, and taught me that
women are overcome by the spirit of fornication more than men, and they
devise in their heart against men; and by means of their adornment they
deceive first their minds, and instil the poison by the glance of their
eye, and then they take them captive by their doings, for a woman cannot
overcome a man by force.

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span>Therefore flee fornication, my children,
and command your wives and your daughters that they adorn not their
heads and their faces; because every woman who acteth deceitfully in
these things hath been reserved to everlasting punishment.  For thus
they allured the Watchers <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) before
the flood; and as these continually beheld them, they fell into desire
each of the other, and they conceived the act in their mind, and changed
themselves into the shape of men, and appeared to them in their congress
with their husbands; and the women, having in their minds desire toward
their apparitions, gave birth to giants, for the Watchers appeared to
them as reaching even unto heaven. <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>6.  Beware, therefore, of fornication; and
if you wish to be pure in your mind, guard your senses against every
woman.  And command them likewise not to company with men, that they
also be pure in their mind.  For constant meetings, even though the
ungodly deed be not wrought, are to them an irremediable disease, and to
us an everlasting reproach of Beliar; for fornication hath neither
understanding nor godliness in itself, and all jealousy dwelleth in the
desire thereof.  Therefore ye will be jealous against the sons of Levi,
and will seek to be exalted over them; but ye shall not be able, for God
will work their avenging, and ye shall die by an evil death.  For to
Levi the Lord gave the sovereignty, and to Judah, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) and to me also with them, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) and to Dan and Joseph, that we should be
for rulers.  Therefore I command you to hearken to Levi, because he
shall know the law of the Lord, and shall give ordinances for judgment
and sacrifice for all Israel until the com<span id="page_11">p.
11</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_11"></span>pletion of the times of
Christ, the High Priest whom the Lord hath declared.  I adjure you by
the God of heaven to work truth each one with his neighbour; and draw ye
near to Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive a blessing from
his mouth.  For he shall bless Israel; and *specially* Judah, because
him hath the Lord chosen to rule over all the peoples.  And worship we
his Seed, because He shall die for us in wars visible and invisible, and
shall be among you an everlasting king.

<span id="iii.iii-p22"></span>7.  And Reuben died after that he had
given command to his sons; and they placed him in a coffin until they
bore him up from Egypt, and buried him in Hebron in the double <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) cave where his fathers were.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[9:39](0080005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span> There seems a reminiscence here of the
words of [Dan. x. 3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>, LXX.  \[For proofs of penitence, see p. 11,
note 3, *infra.*\]

<span id="fn_39"></span>[9:40](0080005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span> For this use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>πνεύματα</span> as applied to the senses, we
may cite Plutarch (*De placitis philosophorum*, iv. 21), who, speaking
with reference to the Stoic philosophy, says, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii-p7.2"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii-p7.3"></span>μὲν ὅρασις ἐστὶ πνεῦμα διατεινον ἀπὸ τοῦ
ἡγεμονικοῦ μέχρις ὀφθαλμῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[9:41](0080005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span> This clause is only found in Cd. Oxon.; it
seems demanded by the following <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>ἀπό</span>

<span id="fn_41"></span>[10:42](0080005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span> Cf. [Gen. xxxv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022)<span id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>. 
The Gader mentioned below is the Edar of [Gen.
35.21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021)<span id="iii.iii-p11.2"></span>,
the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.iii-p11.3"></span>ע</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span> being reproduced, as often, by <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>γ</span>.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[10:43](0080005.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span> \[This section is censured by Lardner as
unsuitable to dying admonitions.  He forgets Oriental simplicity.\]

<span id="fn_43"></span>[10:44](0080005.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span> This name, occurring once again in the
*Testaments* (*Naph*. 3), is one frequently found applied to the angels
as the custodians of the world and of men.  Thus, in the Chaldee of
Daniel ([Dan. 4.10-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii-p17.1"></span>), we find the expression <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.iii-p17.2"></span>ריע</span>, which Aquila
and Symmachus render <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii-p17.3"></span>ἐγρήγορος</span>.  The corresponding Ethiopic
term is of frequent occurrence in the book of Enoch, not only of the
fallen angels (e.g., x. 9, 15, xvi. 1, etc.), but of the good (xii. 2,
3, etc., ed. Dillmann).  See also Gesenius, *Thesaurus, s.v.* <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.iii-p17.4"></span>ריע</span>.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[10:45](0080005.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.iii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span> \[[Gen. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p18.1"></span>;
Revised margin, [1 Cor. 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010), [Jude
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii-p18.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_45"></span>[10:46](0080005.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span> \[See Lardner on this root idea of our
author, vol. ii. p. 353; but he is wrong as to Levi and Mary.  Also
*Joseph*, sec. 19, note 2, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_46"></span>[10:47](0080005.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span> The reading of Cd. Oxon., <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii-p21.1"></span>μετ᾽ αὐτόν</span>, is
doubtless to be preferred.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[11:48](0080005.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p23"></span> i.e., *Machpelah*, which in Hebrew means
double, and is so rendered by the LXX., e.g., [Gen. xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament II](0080006)
