[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080340)  [Next](0080342.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Creatures Take
Vengeance on Sinners.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xxvii-p2"></span>“But this also I would have you
know, that upon such souls God does not take vengeance <span
id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="vi.iii.vii.xxvii-Page_150"></span>directly, but His whole creation
rises up and inflicts punishments upon the impious; and although in the
present world the goodness of God bestows the light of the world and the
services of the earth alike upon the pious and the impious, yet not
without grief does the sun afford his light, and the other elements
perform their service, to the impious.  And, in short, sometimes even in
opposition to the goodness of the Creator, the elements are wearied out
by the crimes of the wicked; and thence it is that either the fruit of
the earth is blighted, or the composition of the air is vitiated, or the
heat of the sun is increased beyond measure, or there is an excessive
amount of rain or of cold.  Thence pestilence, and famine, and death in
various forms stalk forth, for the creature hastens to take vengeance on
the wicked; yet the goodness of God restrains it, and bridles its
indignation against the wicked, and compels it to be obedient to His
mercy, rather than to be inflamed by the sins and the crimes of men. 
For the patience of God waiteth for the conversion of men, as long as
they are in this body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](0080342.md)
