[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080924)  [Next](0080926) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xiii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xiii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—Answer to the
Egyptians.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiii.xviii-p2"></span>“Wherefore answer them thus:  You
lie, for you do not worship these things in honour of the true God, for
then all of you would worship every form; not as ye do.  For those of
you who suppose the onion to be the divinity, and those who worship
rumblings in the stomach, contend with one another; and thus all in like
manner preferring some one thing, revile those that are preferred by
others.  And with diverse judgments, one reverences one and another of
the limbs of the same animal.  Moreover, those of them who still have a
breath of right reason, being ashamed of the manifest baseness, attempt
to drive these things into allegories, wishing by another vagary to
establish their deadly error.  But we should confute the allegories, if
we were there, the foolish passion for which has prevailed to such an
extent as to constitute a great disease of the understanding.  For it is
not necessary to apply a plaster to a whole part of the body, but to a
diseased part.  Since then, you, by your laughing at the Egyptians, show
that you are not affected with their disease, with respect to your own
disease it were reasonable I should afford to you a present cure of your
own malady.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0080926)
