[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080108)  [Next](0080110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVII.—Adam Anointed a
Prophet.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xlvii-p2"></span>To this, I replied:  “I remember,
Peter, that you told me of the first man that he was a prophet; but you
did not say that he was anointed.  If then there be no prophet without
anointing, how could the first man be a prophet, since he was not
anointed?”  Then Peter, smiling, said:  “If the first man prophesied, it
is certain that he was also anointed.  For although he who has recorded
the law in his pages is silent as to his anointing, yet he has evidently
left us to understand these things.  For as, if he had said that he was
anointed, it would not be doubted that he was also a prophet, although
it were not written in the law; so, since it is certain that he was a
prophet, it is in like manner certain that he was also anointed, because
without anointing he could not be a prophet.  But you should rather have
said, If the chrism was compounded by Aaron, by the perfumer’s art, how
could the first man be anointed before Aaron’s time, the arts of
composition not yet having been discovered?”  Then I answered, “Do not
misunderstand me, Peter; for I do not speak of that compounded ointment
and temporal oil, but of that simple and eternal *ointment*, which you
told me was made by God, after whose likeness you say that that other
was compounded by men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII](0080110.md)
