[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080393)  [Next](0080395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ix.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.ix.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Recapitulation
Continued.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.ix.xxvii-p2"></span>“But while I was waiting outside
for them, I began to notice this woman, and to wonder in what part of
her body she was disabled, that she did not seek her living by the
labour of her hands, but submitted to the shame of beggary.  I therefore
asked of her the reason of it.  She confessed that she was sprung of a
noble race, and was married to a no less noble husband, ‘whose brother,’
said she, ‘being inflamed by unlawful love towards me, desired to defile
his brother’s bed.  This I abhorring, and yet not daring to tell my
husband of so great wickedness, lest I should stir up war between the
brothers, and bring disgrace upon the family, judged it better to depart
from my country with my two twin sons, leaving the younger boy to be a
comfort to his father.  And that this might be done with an honourable
appearance, I thought good to feign a dream, and to tell my husband that
there stood by me in a vision a certain deity, who told me to set out
from the city immediately with my two twins, and remain until he should
instruct me to return.’  She told me that her husband, when he heard
this, believed her, and sent her to Athens, with the twin children to be
educated there; but that they were driven by a terrible tempest upon
that island, where, when the ship had gone to pieces, she was lifted by
a wave upon a rock, and delayed killing herself only for this, ‘until,’
said she, ‘I could embrace at least the dead limbs of my unfortunate
sons, and commit them to burial.  But when the day dawned, and crowds
had assembled, they took pity upon me, and threw a garment over me.  But
I, miserable, entreated them with many tears, to search if they could
find anywhere the bodies of my unfortunate sons.  And I, tearing all my
body with my teeth, with wailing and howlings cried out constantly,
Unhappy woman that I am, where is my Faustus? where my Faustinus?’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](0080395)
