[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080079)  [Next](0080081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_82">p. 82</span>
<span id="vi.iii.iii.xviii-Page_82"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—His Profiting by
Peter’s Instruction.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xviii-p2"></span>To this I answered:  “I give
thanks to God Almighty, because I have been instructed as I wished and
desired.  At all events, you may depend upon me so far, that I can never
come to doubt of those things which I have learned of you; so that even
if you yourself should at any time wish to transfer my faith from the
true Prophet, you should not be able, because I have drunk in with all
my heart what you have spoken.  And that you may not think that I am
promising you a great thing when I say that I cannot be moved away from
this faith, it is with me a certainty, that whoever has received this
account of the true Prophet, can never afterwards so much as doubt of
its truth.  And therefore I am confident with respect to this
heaven-taught doctrine, in which all the art of malice is overborne. 
For in opposition to *this* prophecy neither any art can stand, nor the
subtleties of sophisms and syllogism; but every one who hears of the
true Prophet must of necessity long immediately for the truth itself,
nor will he afterwards, under pretext of seeking the truth, endure
diverse errors.  Wherefore, O my lord Peter, be not further anxious
about me, as if I were one who does not know what he has received, and
how great a gift has been conferred on him.  Be assured that you have
conferred a favour on one who knows and understands its value:  nor can
I be easily deceived on that account, because I seem to have gotten
quickly what I long desired; for it may be that one who desires gets
quickly, while another does not even slowly attain the things which he
desires.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0080081)
