[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080915)  [Next](0080917) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—“Eyes Have They, But They See
Not.”</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiii.ix-p2"></span>“Oh the minds of wretched men, who
fear things deader than dead men!  For I cannot call them even dead,
which have never lived, unless they are the tombs of ancient men.  For
sometimes a person, visiting unknown places, does not know whether the
temples which he sees are monuments of dead men, or whether they belong
to the so-called gods; but on inquiring and hearing that they belong to
the gods, he worships, without being ashamed that if he had not learned
on inquiring, he would have passed them by as the monuments of a dead
man, on account of the strictness of the resemblance.  However, it is
not necessary that I should adduce much proof in regard to such
superstition.  For it is easy for any one who pleases to understand that
it, *an idol*, is nothing, unless there be any one who does not see. 
However, now at least hear that it does not hear, and understand that it
does not understand.  For the hands of a man who is dead made it.  If,
then, the maker is dead, how can it be that which was made by him shall
not be dissolved?  Why, then, do you worship the work of a mortal which
is altogether senseless? whereas those who have reason do not worship
animals, nor do they seek to propitiate the elements which have been
made by God,—I mean the heaven, the sun, the moon, lightning, the sea,
and all things in them,—rightly judging not to worship the things that
He has made, but to reverence the Maker and Sustainer of them.  For in
this they themselves also rejoice, that no one ascribes to them the
honour that belongs to their Maker.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](0080917)
