[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080509)  [Next](0080511) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—A Difficulty.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.ii-p2"></span>To this Niceta answered:  “My lord
Peter, I say nothing against your right and good counsels; but I wish to
say one thing, that thereby I may learn something that I do not know. 
What if my father should die within the year <span id="page_193">p.
193</span> <span id="vi.iii.xii.ii-Page_193"></span>during which you
recommend that he should be put off?  He will go down to hell helpless,
and so be tormented for ever.”  Then said Peter:  “I embrace your kindly
purpose towards your father, and I forgive you in respect of things of
which you are ignorant.  For do you suppose that, if any one is thought
to have lived righteously, he shall forthwith be saved?  Do you not
think that he must be examined by Him who knows the secrets of men, as
to how he has lived righteously, whether perchance according to the rule
of the Gentiles, obeying their institutions and laws; or for the sake of
the friendship of men; or merely from custom, or any other cause; or
from necessity, and not on account of righteousness itself, and for the
sake of God?  For those who have lived righteously, for the sake of God
alone and His righteousness, they shall come to eternal rest, and shall
receive the perpetuity of the heavenly kingdom.  For salvation is not
attained by force, but by liberty; and not through the favour of men,
but by the faith of God.  Then, besides, you ought to consider that God
is prescient, and knows whether this man is one of His.  But if He knows
that he is not, what shall we do with respect to those things which have
been determined by Him from the beginning?  But wherein I can, I give
counsel:  when he is awake, and we sit down together, then do you, as if
you wished to learn something, ask a question about those matters which
it is fitting for him to learn; and while we speak to one another, he
will gain instruction.  But yet wait first to see if he himself ask
anything; for if he do so, the occasion of discourse will be the
fitter.  But if he do not ask anything, let us by turns put questions to
one another, wishing to learn something, as I have said.  Such is my
judgment, state what is yours.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0080511)
