[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080007)  [Next](0080009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>IV.—The Testament of Judah Concerning Fortitude,
and Love of Money, and Fornication.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.vi-p2.1"></span>The</span> copy of the words of Judah, what
things he spake to his sons before he died.  They gathered themselves
together, and came to him, and he said to them:  I was the fourth son
born to my father, and my mother called me Judah, saying, I give thanks
to the Lord, because He hath given to me even a fourth son. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)   I was swift and active in my youth, and
obedient to my father in everything.  And I honoured my mother and my
mother’s sister.  And it came to pass, when I became a man, that my
father Jacob prayed over me, saying, Thou shalt be a king, and
prosperous in all things.

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span>2.  And the Lord showed me favour in all my
works both in the field and at home.  When I saw that I could run with
the hind, then I caught it, and prepared meat for my father.  I seized
upon the roes in the chase, and all that was in the plains I outran.  A
wild mare I outran, and I caught it and tamed it; and I slew a lion, and
plucked a kid out of its mouth.  I took a bear by its paw, and rolled it
over a cliff; and if any beast turned upon me, I rent it like a dog.  I
encountered the wild boar, and overtaking it in the chase, I tore it.  A
leopard in Hebron leaped upon the dog, and I caught it by the tail, and
flung it from me, and it was dashed to pieces in the coasts of Gaza.  A
wild ox feeding in the field I seized by the horns; and whirling it
round and stunning it, I cast it from me, and slew it.

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>3.  And when the two kings of the Canaanites
came in warlike array against our flocks, and much people with them, I
by myself rushed upon King Sur and seized him; and I beat him upon the
legs, and dragged him down, and so I slew him.  And the other king,
Taphue, <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) I slew as he sat upon his
horse, and so I scattered all the people.  Achor the king, a man of
giant stature, hurling darts before and behind as he sat on horseback, I
slew; for I hurled a stone of sixty pounds weight, and cast it upon his
horse, and killed him.  And I fought with Achor for two hours, and I
killed him; and I clave his shield into two parts, and I chopped off his
feet.  And as I stripped off his breastplate, behold, eight men his
companions began to fight with me.  I wound round therefore my garment
in my hand; and I slang stones at them, and killed four of them, and the
rest fled.  And Jacob my father slew Beelisa, king of all the kings, a
giant in strength, twelve cubits high; and fear fell upon them, and they
ceased from making war with us.  Therefore my father had no care in the
wars when I was among my brethren.  For he saw in a vision concerning
me, that an angel of might followed me everywhere, that I should not be
overcome.

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>4.  And in the south there befell us a
greater war than that in Shechem; and I joined in battle array with my
brethren, and pursued a thousand men, and slew of them two hundred men
and four kings.  And I went up against them upon the wall, and two other
kings I slew; and so we freed Hebron, and took all the captives of the
kings.

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>5.  On the next day we departed to
Areta, <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) a city strong and walled and
inaccessible, threatening us with death.  Therefore I and Gad approached
on the east side of the city, and Reuben and Levi on the west and
south.  And they that were upon the wall, thinking that we were alone,
charged down upon us; and so our brethren secretly climbed up the wall
on both sides by ladders, and entered into the city, while the men knew
it not.  And we took it with the edge of the sword; and those who had
taken <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_18"></span>refuge in the tower,—we set fire to the
tower, and took both it and them.  And as we were departing the men of
Thaffu set upon our captives, and we took it with our sons, and fought
with them even to Thaffu; and we slew them, and burnt their city, and
spoiled all the things that were therein.

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>6.  And when I was at the waters of
Chuzeba, <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) the men of Jobel came
against us to battle, and we fought with them; and their allies from
Selom <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) we slew, and we allowed them
no means of escaping, and of coming against us.  And the men of
Machir <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) came upon us on the fifth
day, to carry away our captives; and we attacked them, and overcame them
in fierce battle:  for they were a host and mighty in themselves, and we
slew them before they had gone up the ascent of the hill.  And when we
came to their city, their women rolled upon us stones from the brow of
the hill on which the city stood.  And I and Simeon hid ourselves behind
the town, and seized upon the heights, and utterly destroyed the whole
city.

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>7.  And the next day it was told us that
the cities <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) of the two kings with a
great host were coming against us.  I therefore and Dan feigned
ourselves to be Amorites, and went as allies into their city.  And in
the depth of night our brethren came, and we opened to them the gates;
and we destroyed all the men and their substance, and we took for a prey
all that was theirs, and their three walls we cast down.  And we drew
near to Thamna, <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) where was all
the refuge of the hostile kings.  Then having received hurt I was wroth,
and charged upon them to the brow of the hill; and they slang at me with
stones and darts; and had not Dan my brother aided me, they would have
been able to slay me.  We came upon them therefore with wrath, and they
all fled; and passing by another way, they besought my father, and he
made peace with them, and we did to them no hurt, but made a truce with
them, and restored to them all the captives.  And I built Thamna, and my
father built Rhambael. <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)   I was
twenty years old when this war befell, and the Canaanites feared me and
my brethren.

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span>8.  Moreover, I had much cattle, and I had
for the chief of my herdsmen Iran <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) the Adullamite.  And when I went to
him I saw Barsan, king of Adullam, and he made us a feast; and he
entreated me, and gave me his daughter Bathshua to wife.  She bare me
Er, and Onan, and Shelah; and the two of them the Lord smote that they
died childless:  for Shelah lived, and his children are ye.

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span>9.  Eighteen years we abode at peace, our
father and we, with his brother Esau, and his sons with us, after that
we came from Mesopotamia, from Laban.  And when eighteen years were
fulfilled, in the fortieth year of my life, Esau, the brother of my
father, came upon us with much people and strong; and he fell by the bow
of Jacob, and was taken up dead in Mount Seir:  even as he went above
Iramna <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) was he slain.  And we
pursued after the sons of Esau.  Now they had a city with walls of iron
and gates of brass; and we could not enter into it, and we encamped
around, and besieged them.  And when they opened not to us after twenty
days, I set up a ladder in the sight of all, and with my shield upon my
head I climbed up, assailed with stones of three talents’ weight; and I
climbed up, and slew four who were mighty among them.  And the next day
Reuben and Gad entered in and slew sixty others.  Then they asked from
us terms of peace; and being aware of our father’s purpose, we received
them as tributaries.  And they gave us two hundred cors of wheat, five
hundred baths of oil, fifteen hundred measures of wine, until we went
down into Egypt.

<span id="iii.vi-p22"></span>10.  After these things, my son Er took to
wife Tamar, from Mesopotamia, a daughter of Aram. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)   Now Er was wicked, and he doubted
concerning Tamar, because she was not of the land of Canaan.  And on the
third day an angel of the Lord smote him in the night, and he had not
known her, according to the evil craftiness of his mother, for he did
not wish to have children from her.  In the days of the wedding-feast I
espoused Onan to her; and he also in wickedness knew her not, though he
lived with her a year.  And when I threatened him, he lay with
her, <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) …according to the command
of his mother, and he also died in his wickedness.  And I wished to give
Shelah also to her, but my wife Bathshua suffered it not; for she bore a
spite against Tamar, because she was not of the daughters of Canaan, as
she herself was.

<span id="iii.vi-p25"></span>11.  And I knew that the race of Canaan was
wicked, but the thoughts of youth blinded my heart.  And when I saw her
pouring out wine, <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_19"></span>in the drunkenness of wine was I deceived,
and I fell before her.  And while I was away, she went and took for
Shelah a wife from the land of Caanan.  And when I knew what she had
done, I cursed her in the anguish of my soul, and she also died in the
wickedness of her sons.

<span id="iii.vi-p26"></span>12.  And after these things, while Tamar
was a widow, she heard after two years that I was going up to shear my
sheep; then she decked herself in bridal array, and sat over against the
city by the gate.  For it is a law of the Amorites, that she who is
about to marry sit in fornication seven days by the gate. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)   I therefore, being drunk at the
waters of Chozeb, recognised her not by reason of wine; and her beauty
deceived me, through the fashion of her adorning.  And I turned aside to
her, and said, I would enter in to thee.  And she said to me, What wilt
thou give me?  And I gave her my staff, and my girdle, and my royal
crown; and I lay with her, and she conceived.  I then, not knowing what
she had done, wished to slay her; but she privily sent my pledges, and
put me to shame.  And when I called her, I heard also the secret words
which I spoke when lying with her in my drunkenness; and I could not
slay her, because it was from the Lord.  For I said, Lest haply she did
it in subtlety, and received the pledge from another woman:  but I came
near her no more till my death, because I had done this abomination in
all Israel.  Moreover, they who were in the city said that there was no
bride in the city, because she came from another place, and sat for
awhile in the gate, and she thought that no one knew that I had gone in
to her. <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)   And after this we came
into Egypt to Joseph, because of the famine.  Forty and six years old
was I, and seventy and three years lived I there.

<span id="iii.vi-p29"></span>13.  And now, my children, in what things
so ever I command you hearken to your father, and keep all my sayings to
perform the ordinances of the Lord, and to obey the command of the Lord
God.  And walk not after your lusts, nor in the thoughts of your
imaginations in the haughtiness of your heart; and glory not in the
works of the strength of youth, for this also is evil in the eyes of the
Lord.  For since I also gloried that in wars the face of no woman of
goodly form ever deceived me, and upbraided Reuben my brother concerning
Bilhah, the wife of my father, the spirits of jealousy and of
fornication arrayed themselves within me, until I fell before Bathshua
the Canaanite, and Tamar who was espoused to my sons.  And I said to my
father-in-law, I will counsel with my father, and so will I take thy
daughter.  And he showed me a boundless store of gold in his daughter’s
behalf, for he was a king.  And he decked her with gold and pearls, and
caused her to pour out wine for us at the feast in womanly beauty.  And
the wine led my eyes astray, and pleasure blinded my heart; and I loved
her, and I fell, and transgressed the commandment of the Lord and the
commandment of my fathers, and I took her to wife.  And the Lord
rewarded me according to the thought of my heart, insomuch that I had no
joy in her children.

<span id="iii.vi-p30"></span>14.  And now, my children, be not drunk
with wine; for wine turneth the mind away from the truth, and kindleth
in it the passion of lust, and leadeth the eyes into error.  For the
spirit of fornication hath wine as a minister to give pleasures to the
mind; for these two take away the power from a man.  For if a man drink
wine to drunkenness, he disturbeth his mind with filthy thoughts to
fornication, and exciteth his body to carnal union; and if the cause of
the desire be present, he worketh the sin, and is not ashamed.  Such is
wine, my children; for he who is drunken reverenceth no man.  For, lo,
it made me also to err, so that I was not ashamed of the multitude in
the city, because before the eyes of all I turned aside unto Tamar, and
I worked a great sin, and I uncovered the covering of the shame of my
sons.  After that I drank wine I reverenced not the commandment of God,
and I took a woman of Canaan to wife.  Wherefore, my children, he who
drinketh wine needeth discretion; and herein is discretion in drinking
wine, that a man should drink as long as he keepeth decency; but if he
go beyond this bound, the spirit of deceit attacketh his mind and
worketh his will; and it maketh the drunkard to talk filthily, and to
transgress and not to be ashamed, but even to exult in his dishonour,
accounting himself to do well.

<span id="iii.vi-p31"></span>15.  He that committeth fornication,
and <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) uncovereth his nakedness,
hath become the servant of fornication, and escapeth not <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) from the power thereof, even as I also
was uncovered.  For I gave my staff, that is, the stay of my tribe; and
my girdle, that is, my power; and my diadem, that is, the glory of my
kingdom.  Then I repented for these things, and took no wine or flesh
until my old age, nor did I behold any joy.  And the angel of God showed
me that for ever do women bear rule over king and beggar alike; and from
the king they take away his glory, and from the valiant man his
strength, and from the beggar even that little which is the stay of his
poverty.

<span id="iii.vi-p34"></span><span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_20"></span>16.  Observe therefore, my children,
moderation in wine; for there are in it four evil spirits—of (1) lust,
of (2) wrath, of (3) riot, of (4) filthy lucre.  If ye drink wine in
gladness, with shamefacedness, with the fear of God, ye shall live.  For
if ye drink not with shamefacedness, and the fear of God departeth from
you, then cometh drunkenness, and shamelessness stealeth in.  But <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) *even* if ye drink not at all, take
heed lest ye sin in words of outrage, and fighting, and slander, and
transgression of the commandments of God; so shall ye perish before your
time.  Moreover, wine revealeth the mysteries of God and men to aliens,
even as I also revealed the commandments of God and the mysteries of
Jacob my father to the Canaanitish Bathshua, to whom God forbade to
declare them.  And wine also is a cause of war and confusion.

<span id="iii.vi-p36"></span>17.  I charge you, therefore, my children,
not to love money, nor to gaze upon the beauty of women; because for the
sake of money and beauty I was led astray to Bathshua the Canaanite. 
For I know that because of these two things shall ye who are my race
fall into wickedness; for even wise men among my sons shall they mar,
and shall cause the kingdom of Judah to be diminished, which the Lord
gave me because of my obedience to my father. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111)   For I never disobeyed a word of
Jacob my father, for all things whatsoever he commanded I did.  And
Abraham, the father of my father, blessed me that I should be king in
Israel, and Isaac further blessed me in like manner.  And I know that
from me shall the kingdom be established.

<span id="iii.vi-p38"></span>18.  For I have read also in the books of
Enoch the righteous what evils ye shall do in the last days.  Take heed,
therefore, my children, of fornication and the love of money; hearken to
Judah your father, for these things do withdraw you from the law of God,
and blind the understanding of the soul, and teach arrogance, and suffer
not a man to have compassion upon his neighbour:  they rob his soul of
all goodness, and bind him in toils and troubles, and take away his
sleep and devour his flesh, and hinder the sacrifices of God; and he
remembereth not blessing, and he hearkeneth not to a prophet when he
speaketh, and is vexed at the word of godliness.  For one who serveth
two passions contrary to the commandments of God cannot obey God,
because they have blinded his soul, and he walketh in the day-time as in
the night.

<span id="iii.vi-p39"></span>19.  My children, the love of money leadeth
to idols; because, when led astray through money, men make mention of
those who are no gods, and it causeth him who hath it to fall into
madness.  For the sake of money I lost my children, and but for the
repentance of my flesh, and the humbling of my soul, and the prayers of
Jacob my father, I should have died childless.  But the God of my
fathers, who is pitiful and merciful, pardoned me, because I did it in
ignorance. <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)   For the prince of
deceit blinded me, and I was ignorant as a man and as flesh, being
corrupted in sins; and I learnt my own weakness while thinking myself
unconquerable. <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113)

<span id="iii.vi-p42"></span>20.   <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) Learn therefore, my children, that two
spirits wait upon man—the spirit of truth and the spirit of error; and
in the midst is the spirit of the understanding of the mind, to which it
belongeth to turn whithersoever it will.  And the works of truth and the
works of error are written upon the breast of men, and each one of them
the Lord knoweth.  And there is no time at which the works of men can be
hid from Him; for on the bones of his breast hath he been written down
before the Lord.  And the spirit of truth testifieth all things, and
accuseth all; and he who sinneth is burnt up by his own heart, and
cannot raise his face unto the Judge.

<span id="iii.vi-p44"></span>21.  And now, my children, love Levi, that
ye may abide, and exalt not yourselves against him, lest ye be utterly
destroyed.  For to me the Lord gave the kingdom, and to him the
priesthood, and He set the kingdom beneath the priesthood.  To me He
gave the things upon the earth; to him the things in the heavens.  As
the heaven is higher than the earth, so is the priesthood of God higher
than the kingdom upon the earth.  For the Lord chose him above thee, to
draw near to Him, and to eat of His table and first-fruits, even the
choice things of the sons of Israel, and thou shalt be to them as a
sea.  For as, on the sea, just and unjust are tossed about, some taken
into captivity while others are enriched, so also shall every race of
men be in thee, some are in jeopardy and taken captive, and others shall
grow rich by means of plunder.  For they who rule will be as great
sea-monsters, swallowing up men like fishes:  free sons and daughters do
they enslave; houses, lands, flocks, money, will they plunder; and with
the flesh of many will they wrongfully feed the ravens and the cranes;
and they will go on further in evil, advancing on still in
covetousness.  And there shall be false prophets like tempests, and they
shall persecute all righteous men.

<span id="iii.vi-p45"></span>22.  And the Lord shall bring upon them
divisions one against another, and there shall be continual wars in
Israel; and among men of other race shall my kingdom be brought to an
end, until the salvation of Israel shall come, until the appearing of
the God of righteousness, that <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_21"></span>Jacob and all the Gentiles may rest in
peace. <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115)   And he shall guard the
might of my kingdom for ever:  for the Lord sware to me with an oath
that the kingdom should never fail from me, and from my seed for all
days, even for ever.

<span id="iii.vi-p47"></span>23.  Now I have much grief, my children,
because of your lewdness, and witchcrafts, and idolatries, which ye will
work against the kingdom, following them that have familiar spirits;
ye <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) will make your daughters
singing girls <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) and harlots for
divinations and demons of error, and ye will be mingled in the
pollutions of the Gentiles:  for which things’ sake the Lord shall bring
upon you famine and pestilence, death and the sword, avenging siege, and
dogs for the rending in pieces of enemies, and revilings of friends,
destruction and blighting of eyes, children slaughtered, wives carried
off, possessions plundered, temple of God in flames, your land
desolated, your own selves enslaved among the Gentiles, and they shall
make some of you eunuchs for their wives; and whenever ye will return to
the Lord with humility of heart, repenting and walking in all the
commandments of God, then will the Lord visit you in mercy and in love,
bringing you from out of the bondage of your enemies.

<span id="iii.vi-p50"></span>24.  And after these things shall a Star
arise to you from Jacob in peace, and a Man shall rise from my seed,
like the Sun of righteousness, walking with the sons of men <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) in meekness and righteousness, and no
sin shall be found in Him.  And the heavens shall be opened above Him,
to shed forth the blessing of the Spirit from the Holy Father; and He
shall shed forth a spirit of grace upon you, and ye shall be unto Him
sons in truth, and ye shall walk in His commandments, the first and the
last.  This is the Branch of God Most High, and this the Well-spring
unto life for all flesh.   <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) Then
shall the sceptre of my kingdom shine forth, and from your root shall
arise a stem; and in it shall arise a rod of righteousness to the
Gentiles, to judge and to save all that call upon the Lord.

<span id="iii.vi-p53"></span>25.  And after these things shall Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob arise unto life, and I and my brethren will be
chiefs, even your sceptre in Israel:  Levi first, I the second, Joseph
third, Benjamin fourth, Simeon fifth, Issachar sixth, and so all in
order.  And the Lord blessed Levi; the Angel of the Presence, me; the
powers of glory, <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) Simeon; the
heaven, Reuben; the earth, Issachar; the sea, Zebulun; the mountains,
Joseph; the tabernacle, Benjamin; the lights of heaven, Dan; the fatness
of earth, Naphtali; the sun, Gad; the olive, Asher:  and there shall be
one people of the Lord, and one tongue; and there shall no more be a
spirit of deceit of Beliar, for he shall be cast into the fire for
ever.  And they who have died in grief shall arise in joy, and they who
have lived in poverty for the Lord’s sake shall be made rich, and they
who have been in want shall be filled, and they who have been weak shall
be made strong, and they who have been put to death for the Lord’s sake
shall awake in life. <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121)   And the
harts of Jacob shall run in joyfulness, and the eagles of Israel shall
fly in gladness; but the ungodly shall lament, and sinners all weep, and
all the people shall glorify the Lord for ever.

<span id="iii.vi-p56"></span>26.  Observe, therefore, my children, all
the law of the Lord, for there is hope for all them who follow His way
aright.  And he said to them:  I die before your eyes this day, a
hundred and nineteen years old.  Let no one bury me in costly apparel,
nor tear open my bowels, <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) for
this shall they who are kings do:  and carry me up to Hebron with you. 
And Judah, when he had said these things, fell asleep; and his sons did
according to all whatsoever he commanded them, and they buried him in
Hebron with his fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[17:94](0080008.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> [Gen. xxix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#035)<span id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>. 
\[The name = "Praise".  So [Gen. xlix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)<span id="iii.vi-p3.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_94"></span>[17:95](0080008.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> In c. 5 we find this name, with a slight
variety of spelling, as that of a place over which this king may have
ruled.  It is doubtless equivalent to the Hebrew *Tappuah*, a name of
several cities mentioned in the Old Testament.  See [Josh.
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#034), [Josh.
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#008), [Josh.
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#008), [1 Chr.
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#043)<span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>. 
Cf. Thapha, *Jubilees*, 34.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[17:96](0080008.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span> Cd. Oxon. reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>ἑτέραν</span>; but cf. Aresa, *Jubilees*, 34.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[18:97](0080008.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span> Cf. c. 12; also Chezib ([Gen. xxxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#005)<span id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>),
Chozeba ([1 Chron. iv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vi-p11.2"></span>), and Achzib ([Josh.
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044), [Mic.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014)<span id="iii.vi-p11.3"></span>),
all of which are probably different names for the same place, and all
connected with Judah.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[18:98](0080008.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.vi-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span> Cf. Selo, *Jubilees, l.c*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[18:99](0080008.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span> Cf. [1 Chron. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#036)<span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>. 
\[Here the translator supplies a note of doubt—an interrogation-point.\]

<span id="fn_99"></span>[18:100](0080008.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span> Cd. Oxon. reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p15.1"></span>Γαᾶς πόλις βασιλέων</span>.  Cf. [Josh.
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030), [Judg.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#009), [2 Sam.
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#030)<span id="iii.vi-p15.2"></span>. 
Cf. also “Gaiz,” *Jubilees, l.c*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[18:101](0080008.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iii.vi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span> The Timnah of the Old Testament, which
name is, however, borne by several places.  Most probably it is the
Timnah near Bethshemesh, on the north frontier of Judah, in the
neighbourhood, that is, of many of the other localities mentioned in the
*Testaments*.  This may be the same as the Timnathah on the Danite
frontier ([Josh. xix. 43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043)<span
id="iii.vi-p16.1"></span>), and with the Timnathah where Samson’s wife
dwelt ([Judg. xiv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vi-p16.2"></span> sqq ).  The geographical position of
Timnath-serah is against the allusion being to it here.  Cf., however,
*Jubilees*, c. 34, where *Thamnathares* is one of the hostile towns.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[18:102](0080008.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.vi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span> Cf. Robel, *Jubilees, l.c.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[18:103](0080008.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span> Cf. [Gen. xxxviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[18:104](0080008.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span> Cd. Oxon. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p21.1"></span>ἐν ᾽Ανονιράμ</span>, probably *per incuriam
scribæ*, for <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi-p21.2"></span>ἐπάνω
᾽Ιράμ</span>

<span id="fn_104"></span>[18:105](0080008.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p23"></span> This seems to arise from the wish to
disconnect Israel as far as possible from non-Shemite associations.  Cf.
the Targum of Onkelos on [Gen. xxxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#006)<span id="iii.vi-p23.1"></span>. 
“Judah took a wife for Er, his first-born, *a daughter of the great
Shem*, whose name was Tamar.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[18:106](0080008.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p24.1"></span>διέφθειρε δὲ τὸ σπέρμα ἐπὶ τὴν γὴν</span>

<span id="fn_106"></span>[19:107](0080008.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p27"></span> \[*Herod*. i., cap. 199; Baruch vi.
43<span id="iii.vi-p27.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_107"></span>[19:108](0080008.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iii.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p28"></span> \[To this section Lardner objects.  But
compare [Gen. xxxviii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi-p28.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_108"></span>[19:109](0080008.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p32"></span> Cd. Oxon. here reads the additional clause
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi-p32.1"></span>ζημιούμενος οὐκ
αἰσθάνεται καὶ ἄδοξον οὐκ αἰσχύνεται.  Κἂν γάρ τις βασιλεύσῃ,
πορνεύων</span>—perhaps omitted from Cd. Cant. through the
homœoteleuton.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[19:110](0080008.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iii.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p33"></span> Cd. Oxon. omits the negative.  The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi-p33.1"></span>βασίλεια</span> will then
be that from which the man falls by his sin.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[20:111](0080008.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p35"></span> Cd. Oxon. reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p35.1"></span>τί δὲ λέγω</span>; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p35.2"></span>μηδ᾽ ὅλως πίνετε</span>, which seems much more
suitable to the context.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[20:112](0080008.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iii.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p37"></span> \[[1 Kings
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#011)<span id="iii.vi-p37.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_112"></span>[20:113](0080008.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iii.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p40"></span> \[[Num.
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#025), [Acts
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017)<span id="iii.vi-p40.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_113"></span>[20:114](0080008.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iii.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p41"></span> \[See cap. 13, p. 19, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_114"></span>[20:115](0080008.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iii.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p43"></span> Cd. Oxon. omits the whole of this chapter.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[21:116](0080008.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p46"></span> \[[Rom. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)<span id="iii.vi-p46.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_116"></span>[21:117](0080008.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p48"></span> The reading of Cd. Oxon. is doubtless to
be preferred, which joins <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p48.1"></span>κλῄδοσι και δαίμοσι πλάνης</span> to what
precedes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[21:118](0080008.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iii.vi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p49"></span> \[[Eccl.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#008), [Sir.
9:4](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#004)<span id="iii.vi-p49.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_118"></span>[21:119](0080008.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iii.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p51"></span> \[[Prov. viii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031)<span id="iii.vi-p51.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_119"></span>[21:120](0080008.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iii.vi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p52"></span> Cd. Oxon. omits from here to end of c. 25.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[21:121](0080008.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iii.vi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p54"></span> \[[Eph. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="iii.vi-p54.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_121"></span>[21:122](0080008.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iii.vi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p55"></span> \[[2 Macc.
7:9](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#009), [Heb.
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#035)<span
id="iii.vi-p55.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_122"></span>[21:123](0080008.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iii.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p57"></span> i.e., for the purpose of embalmment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament V](0080009)
