[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080424)  [Next](0080426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—More Difficulties of the
Atomic Theory.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xix-p2"></span>“But if any one say that atoms of a
fiery quality, being joined together, formed a body, and because the
quality of fire does not tend downwards, but upwards, that the nature of
fire, always pushing upwards, supports the mass of the world placed upon
it; to this we answer:  How could atoms of a fiery quality, which always
make for the highest place, descend to the lower, and be found in the
lowest place of all, so as to form a foundation for all; whereas rather
the heavier qualities, that is, the earthy or watery, always come before
the lighter, as we have said; hence, also, they assert that the heaven,
as the higher structure, is composed of fiery atoms, which are lighter,
and always fly upwards?  Therefore the world cannot have foundations of
fire, or any other:  nor can there be any association or compacting of
the heavier atoms with the lighter, that is, of those which are always
borne downwards, with those that always fly upwards.  Thus it is
sufficiently shown that the bodies of the world are consolidated by the
union of atoms; and that insensible bodies, even if they could by any
means concur and be united, could not give forms and measures to bodies,
form limbs, or effect qualities, or express quantities; all which,
therefore, by their exactness, attest the hand of a Maker, and show the
operation of reason, which reason I call the Word, and God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](0080426)
