[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080187)  [Next](0080189.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.li"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.li-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.li-p1.1"></span>Chapter LI.—The Sixth Sense.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.li-p2"></span>“But believe me, that you could never
know what light is unless you had received both vision and understanding
from light itself; so also in other things.  Hence, having received
understanding, you are framing in imagination something greater and more
sublime, as if dreaming, but deriving all your hints from those five
senses, to whose Giver you are unthankful.  But be sure of this, that
until you find some new sense which is beyond those five which we all
enjoy, you cannot assert the existence of a new God.”  Then Simon
answered:  “Since all things that exist are in accordance with those
five senses, that power which is more excellent than all cannot add
anything new.”  Then Peter said:  “It is false; for there is also a
sixth sense, namely that of foreknowledge:  for those five senses are
capable of knowledge, but the sixth is that of foreknowledge:  and this
the prophets possessed.  How, then, can you know a God who is unknown to
all, who do not know the prophetic sense, which is that of prescience?” 
Then Simon began to say:  “This power of which I speak, incomprehensible
and more excellent than all, ay, even than that God who made the world,
neither any of the angels has known, nor of the demons, nor of the Jews,
nay, nor any creature which subsists by means of God the creator.  How,
then, could that creator’s law teach me that which the creator himself
did not know, since neither did the law itself know it, that it might
teach it?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LII](0080189.md)
