[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080528)  [Next](0080530.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—A Black Catalogue.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxi-p2"></span>“Thus much of his incests; I shall
now speak of his adulteries.  He defiled Europa, the wife of Oceanus, of
whom was born Dodonæus; Helen, the wife of Pandion, of whom Musæus;
Eurynome, the wife of Asopus, of whom Ogygias; Hermione, the wife of
Oceanus, of whom the Graces, Thalia, Euphrosyne, Aglaia; Themis, his own
sister, of whom the Hours, Eurynomia, Dice, Irene; Themisto, the
daughter of Inachus, of whom Arcas; Idæa, the daughter of Minos, of whom
Asterion; Phœnissa, the daughter of Alphion, of whom Endymion; Io, the
daughter of Inachus, of whom Epaphus; Hippodamia and Isione, daughters
of Danaus, of whom Hippodamia was the wife of Olenus, and Isione of
Orchomenus or Chryses; Carme, the daughter of Phœnix, of whom was born
Britomartis, who was an attendant of Diana; Callisto, the daughter of
Lycaon, of whom Orcas; Lybee, the daughter of Munantius, of whom Belus;
Latona, of whom Apollo and Diana; Leandia, the daughter of Eurymedon, of
whom Coron; Lysithea, the daughter of Evenus, of whom Helenus;
Hippodamia, the daughter of Bellerophon, of whom Sarpedon; Megaclite,
the daughter of Macarius, of whom Thebe and Locrus; Niobe, the daughter
of Phoroneus, of whom Argus and Pelasgus; Olympias, the daughter of
Neoptolemus, of whom Alexander; Pyrrha, the daughter of Prometheus, of
whom Helmetheus; Protogenia and Pandora, daughters of Deucalion, of whom
he begot Æthelius, and Dorus, and Melera, and Pandorus; Thaicrucia, the
daughter of Proteus, of whom was born Nympheus; Salamis, the daughter of
Asopus, of whom Saracon; Taygete, Electra, Maia, Plutide, daughters of
Atlas, of whom respectively he begot Lacedæmon, Dardanus, Mercury, and
Tantalus; Phthia, the daughter of Phoroneus, of whom he begot Achæus;
Chonia, the daughter of Aramnus, of whom he begot Lacon; Chalcea, a
nymph, of whom was born Olympus; Charidia, a nymph, of whom Alcanus;
Chloris, who was the wife of Ampycus, of whom Mopsus was born; Cotonia,
the daughter of Lesbus, of whom Polymedes; Hippodamia, the daughter of
Anicetus; Chrysogenia, the daughter of Peneus, of whom was born
Thissæus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](0080530.md)
