[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080573)  [Next](0080575) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.lxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXVI.—Truth Told by Lying
Lips.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lxvi-p2"></span>“It is long that the divine
patience bears with me, Simon the most unhappy of men; for whatever you
have wondered at in me was done, not by means of truth, but by the lies
and tricks of demons, that I might subvert your faith and condemn my own
soul.  I confess that all things that I said about Peter were lies; for
he never was either a magician or a murderer, but has been sent by God
for the salvation of you all; and if from this hour you think that he is
to be despised, be assured that your very city may suddenly be
destroyed.  But, *you will ask,* what is the reason that I make this
confession to you of my own accord?  I was vehemently rebuked by an
angel of God this night, and most severely scourged, because I was his
enemy.  I therefore entreat you, that if from this hour even I myself
shall ever open my mouth against him, you will drive me from your sight;
for that foul demon, who is an enemy to the salvation of men, speaks
against him through my mouth, that you may not attain to life by his
means.  For what miracle could the magic art show you through me?  I
made brazen dogs bark, and statues move, men change their appearances,
and suddenly vanish from men’s sight; and for these things you ought to
have cursed the magic art, which bound your souls with devilish fetters,
that I might show you a vain miracle, that you might not believe Peter,
who cures the sick in the name of Him by whom he is sent, and expels
demons, and gives sight to the blind, and restores health to the
palsied, and raises the dead.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVII](0080575)
