[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080445)  [Next](0080447) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xl"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter XL.—Genesis.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xl-p2"></span>“If, therefore, it can be shown that
mind and reason created all things, it follows that those things which
come after are also managed by reason and providence.  But if
unintelligent and blind nature produces all things, the reason of
judgment is undoubtedly overthrown; and there is no ground to expect
either punishment of sin or reward of well-doing where there is no
judge.  Since, then, the whole matter depends upon this, and hangs by
this head, do not take it amiss, if I wish this to be discussed and
handled somewhat more fully.  For in this the first gate, as it were, is
shut towards all things which are propounded, and therefore I wish first
of all to have it opened to me.  Now therefore hear what my doctrine is;
and if any one of you pleases, let him reply to me:  for I shall not be
ashamed to learn, if I hear that which is true, and to assent to him who
speaks rightly.  The discourse, then, which you delivered yesterday,
which asserted that all things consist by art, and measure, and reason,
does not fully persuade me that it is mind and reason that has made the
world; for I have many things which I can show to consist by competent
measure, and form, and species, and which yet were not made by mind and
reason.  Then, besides, I see that many things are done in the world
without arrangement, consequence, or justice, and that nothing can be
done without the course of <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xl-p2.1"></span>Genesis</span>.  This I shall in the sequel
prove most clearly from my own case.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI](0080447)
