[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080621)  [Next](0080623.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Clement’s Rebuke of the
People.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xii-p2"></span>“And this wrongful treatment of my
heralds would have been against all from the beginning, if from the
beginning the unworthy had been called to salvation.  For that which is
now done wrongfully by these men serves to the vindication of my
righteous foreknowledge, that it was well that I did not choose from the
beginning to expose uselessly to public contempt the word which is
worthy of honour; but determined to suppress it, as being honourable,
not indeed from those who were worthy from the beginning—for to them
also I imparted it—but from those, and such as those, unworthy, as you
see them to be,—those who hate me, and who will not love themselves. 
And now, give over laughing at this man, and hear me with respect to his
announcement, or let any one of the hearers who pleases answer.  And do
not bark like vicious dogs, deafening with disorderly clamour the ears
of those who would be saved, ye unrighteous and God-haters, and
perverting the saving method to unbelief.  How shall you be able to
obtain pardon, who scorn him who is sent to speak to you of the Godhead
of God?  And this you do towards a man whom you ought to have received
on account of his good-will towards you, even if he did not speak
truth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](0080623.md)
