[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080155)  [Next](0080157.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Disputation Begun.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p2"></span>And Niceta answered:  “When he
perceived that we had found him out, having spoken to one another
concerning his crimes, we left him, and came to Zacchæus, telling him
those same things which we have now told to you.  But he, receiving us
most kindly, and instructing us concerning the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, enrolled us in the number of the faithful.”  When Niceta had
done speaking, Zacchæus, who had gone out a little before, entered,
saying, “It is time, O Peter, that you proceed to the disputation; for a
great crowd, collected in the court of the house, is awaiting you, in
the midst of whom stands Simon, supported by many attendants.”  Then
Peter, when he heard this, ordering me to withdraw for the sake of
prayer (for I had not yet been washed from the sins which I had
committed in ignorance), said to the rest, “Brethren, let us pray that
God, for His unspeakable mercy through His Christ, would help me going
out on behalf of the salvation of men who have been created by Him.” 
Having said this, and having prayed, he went forth to the court of the
house, in which a great multitude of people were assembled; and when he
saw them all looking intently on him in profound silence, and Simon the
magician standing in the midst of them like a standard-bearer, he began
in manner following. <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_612"></span>[102:613](0080156.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p3"></span> \[Three discussions with Simon Magus
are detailed in the pseudo-Clementine literature,—*one* in the
*Recognitions*, ii. 20–iii. 48; *two* in the *Homilies*, iii. 30–58 and
xvi.–xix.  The differences between these are quite remarkable.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p4"></span>I.  *External Differences*.—That in
the *Recognitions* is assigned to Cæsarea and is represented as lasting
three days, details of each day’s discussion being given.  The earlier
one in the *Homilies* is given the same place and time, but it is very
brief.  The details of the first day alone are mentioned; and it
resembles that in the *Recognitions* less than does the later one.  This
is represented as taking place at Laodicea, and as occupying four days. 
The account is the longest of the three.  In its historical setting this
discussion has no parallel in the *Recognitions*.  Faustus, the father
of Clement, is made the umpire; and this discussion before him takes the
place of the discussions with him which occupy so large a part of
*Recognitions*, viii.–x.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p5"></span>II.  *Internal Differences*.—Of
course there are many thoughts common to the discussions; but the
treatment is so varied as to form one of the most perplexing points in
the literary problem.  All are somewhat irregular in arrangement, hence
an analysis is difficult.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p6"></span>The discussion in the *Recognitions*
seems to be more ethical and philosophical than those in the *Homilies*;
the latter contain more theosophical views.  Both of them emphasize the
falsehoods of Scripture and abound more in sophistries and verbal
sword-play.  In the *Recognitions* against Simon’s polytheism and theory
of an unknown God, Peter opposes the righteousness of God, emphasizing
the freedom of the will, discussing the existence and origin of evil,
reverting to the righteousness of God as proving the immortality of the
soul.  The defeat of Simon is narrated in a peculiar way.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p7"></span>The Cæsarean discussion in the
*Homilies* is very briefly narrated.  After the preliminary parley,
Simon attacks the God of the Scriptures attributing defects to Him. 
Peter’s reply, while explaining many passages correctly, is largely
taken up with a statement of the view of the Scripture peculiar to the
*Homilies*.  This is really the weapon with which Simon is defeated. 
The discussion, therefore, presents few points of resemblance to that in
the *Recognitions*.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p8"></span>The Laodicean discussion in the
*Homilies*, covering four days, is of a higher character than the
preceding.  It is not strictly parallel to that in the *Recognitions*. 
The opening argument is concerning polytheism.  To Peter’s monotheism
Simon opposes the contradictions of Scripture:  these Peter explains,
including some christological statements which lead to a declaration of
the nature, name and character of God.  On the second day, after some
personal discussion, Simon asserts that Christ’s teaching differs from
that of Peter; the argument reverts to the shape and figure of God.  The
evidence of the senses is urged against fancied revelations, which are
attributed to demons.  On the third day the question of God the Framer
of the world is introduced, and His moral character.  Peter explains the
nature of revelation, with some sharp personal thrusts at Simon, but
soon reverts to the usual explanation of Scripture.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p9"></span>On the fourth day the existence of
the evil one becomes the prominent topic:  the existence of sin is
pressed; and the discussion closes with a justification of the
inequalities of human life, and an expression of judgment against Simon
by Faustus.

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xix-p10"></span>Throughout these portions footnotes
have been added, to indicate the correspondences of thought in the
several accounts—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](0080157.md)
