[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080437)  [Next](0080439.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.—Generation.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxii-p2"></span>“Moreover, the female form, and the
cavity of the womb, most suitable for receiving, and cherishing, and
vivifying the germ, who does not believe that it has been made as it is
by reason and foresight?—because in that part alone of her body the
female differs from the male, in which the fœtus being placed, is kept
and cher<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="vi.iii.x.xxxii-Page_174"></span>ished.  And again the male differs
from the female only in that part of his body in which is the power of
injecting seed and propagating mankind.  And in this there is a great
proof of providence, from the necessary difference of members; but more
in this, where, under a likeness of form there is found to be diversity
of use and variety of office.  For males and females equally have teats,
but only those of the female are filled with milk; that, as soon as they
have brought forth, the infant may find nourishment suited to him.  But
if we see the members in man arranged with such method, that in all the
rest there is seen to be similarity of form, and a difference only in
those in which their use requires a difference, and we neither see
anything superfluous nor anything wanting in man, nor in woman anything
deficient or in excess, who will not, from all these things, acknowledge
the operation of reason, and the wisdom of the Creator?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](0080439.md)
