[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080293)  [Next](0080295.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—This Power in Proportion
to Faith.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi.xviii-p2"></span>“There is therefore a measure of
faith, which, if it be perfect, drives the demon perfectly from the
soul; but if it has any defect, something on the part of the demon still
remains in the portion of infidelity; and it is the greatest difficulty
for the soul to understand when or how, whether fully or less fully, the
demon has been expelled from it.  For if he remains in any quarter, when
he gets an opportunity, he suggests thoughts to men’s hearts; and they,
not knowing whence they come, believe the suggestions of the demons, as
if they were the perceptions of their own souls.  Thus they suggest to
some to follow pleasure by occasion of bodily necessity; they excuse the
passionateness of others by excess of gall; they colour over the madness
of others by the vehemence of melancholy; and even extenuate the folly
of some as the result of abundance of phlegm.  But even if this were so,
still none of these could be hurtful to the body, except from the excess
of meats and drinks; because, when these are taken in excessive
quantities, their abundance, which the natural warmth is not sufficient
to digest, curdles into a sort of poison, and it, flowing through the
bowels and all the veins like a common sewer, renders the motions of the
body unhealthy and base.  Wherefore moderation is to be attained in all
things, that neither may place be given to demons, nor the soul, being
possessed by them, be delivered along with them to be tormented in
eternal fires.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0080295.md)
