[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080530)  [Next](0080532.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—Why a God?</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxiii-p2"></span>“He also committed adultery with
Europa, the wife of his own uncle Oceanus, and with her <span
id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxiii-Page_199"></span>sister Eurynome, and punished
their father; and he committed adultery with Plute, the daughter of his
own son Atlas, and condemned Tantalus, whom she bore to him.  Of
Larisse, the daughter of Orchomenus, he begot Tityon, whom also he
consigned to punishment.  He carried off Dia, the wife of his own son
Ixion, and subjected him to perpetual punishment; and almost all the
sons who sprang from his adulteries he put to violent deaths; and indeed
the sepulchres of almost all of them are well known.  Yea, the sepulchre
of this parricide himself, who destroyed his uncles and defiled their
wives, who committed whoredom with his sisters, this magician of many
transformations, is shown among the Cretans, who, although they know and
acknowledge his horrid and incestuous deeds, and tell them to all, yet
are not ashamed to confess him to be a god.  Whence it seems to me to be
wonderful, yea, exceeding wonderful, how he who exceeds all men in
wickedness and crimes, has received that holy and good name which is
above every name, being called the father of gods and men; unless
perhaps he who rejoices in the evils of men has persuaded unhappy souls
to confer honour above all others upon him whom he saw to excel all
others in crimes, in order that he might allure all to the imitation of
his evil deeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](0080532.md)
