[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080120)  [Next](0080122.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lix"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.lix-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIX.—Pharisees Refuted.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lix-p2"></span>“Then a certain Pharisee, hearing
this, chid Philip because he put Jesus on a level with Mo<span
id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span id="vi.iii.iii.lix-Page_93"></span>ses. 
To whom Bartholomew, answering, boldly declared that we do not only say
that Jesus was equal to Moses, but that He was greater than he, because
Moses was indeed a prophet, as Jesus was also, but that Moses was not
the Christ, as Jesus was, and therefore He is doubtless greater who is
both a prophet and the Christ, than he who is only a prophet.  After
following out this train of argument, he stopped.  After him James the
son of Alphæus gave an address to the people, with the view of showing
that we are not to believe on Jesus on the ground that the prophets
foretold concerning Him, but rather that we are to believe the prophets,
that they were really prophets, because the Christ bears testimony to
them; for it is the presence and coming of Christ that show that they
are truly prophets:  for testimony must be borne by the superior to his
inferiors, not by the inferiors to their superior.  After these and many
similar statements, James also was silent.  After him Lebbæus began
vehemently to charge it upon the people that they did not believe in
Jesus, who had done them so much good by teaching them the things that
are of God, by comforting the afflicted, healing the sick, relieving the
poor; yet for all these benefits their return had been hatred and
death.  When he had declared these and many more such things to the
people, he ceased.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX](0080122.md)
