[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080565)  [Next](0080567) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.lviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LVIII.—How It All
Happened.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.lviii-p2"></span>Then, turning to my father, he
said:  “I gave you leave to salute Appion and Anubion, who, you said,
were your friends from boyhood, but not that you should speak with
Simon.”  Then my father said:  “I confess I have sinned.”  Then said
Anubion:  “I also with him beg and entreat of you to pardon the old
man—good and noble man as he is.  He was unhappily seduced and imposed
upon by the magician in question; for I will tell you how the thing was
done.  When he came to salute us, it happened that at that very time we
were standing around him, hearing him tell that he intended to flee away
that night, for that he had heard that some persons had come even to
this city of Laodicea to apprehend him by command of the emperor, but
that he wished to turn all their rage against this Faustinianus, who has
lately come hither.  And he said to us:  ‘Only you make him sup with us,
and I shall compound a certain ointment, with which, when he has supped,
he shall anoint his face, and from that time he shall seem to all to
have my countenance.  But you first anoint your faces with the juice of
a certain herb, that you may not be deceived as to the change of his
countenance, so that to all except you he shall seem to be Simon.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIX](0080567)
