[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080363)  [Next](0080365.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.viii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Superiority of Christian
Morality.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.viii.xiii-p2"></span>“But perhaps some one of you will
say, Must we then observe all things which we did while we worshipped
idols?  Not all.  But whatever things were done well, these you ought to
observe even now; because, if anything is rightly done by those who are
in error, it is certain that that is derived from the truth; whereas, if
anything is not rightly done in the true religion, that is, without
doubt, borrowed from error.  For good is good, though it be done by
those who are in error; and evil is evil, though it be done by those who
follow the truth.  Or shall we be so foolish, that if we see a
worshipper of idols to be sober, we shall refuse to be sober, lest we
should seem to do the same things which he does who worships idols?  It
is not so.  But let this be our study, that if those who err do not
commit murder, we should not even be angry; if they do not commit
adultery, we should not even covet another’s wife; if they love their
neighbours, we should love even our enemies; if they lend to those who
have the means of paying, we should give to those from whom we do not
hope to receive anything.  And in all things, we who hope for the
inheritance of the eternal world ought to excel those who know only the
present world; knowing that if their works, when compared with our
works, be found like and equal in the day of judgment, there will be
confusion to us, because we are found equal in our works to those who
are condemned on account of ignorance, and had no hope of the world to
come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0080365.md)
