[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080224)  [Next](0080226.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—“Who Hath Resisted His
Will?”</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.xv-p2"></span>You say, therefore, if God wishes
anything to be, it is; and if He do not wish it, it is not.  <span
id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span id="vi.iii.v.xv-Page_121"></span>But
if I were to answer that what He wishes is, and what He wishes not is
not, you would say that then He wishes the evil things to be which are
done in the world, since everything that He wishes is, and everything
that He wishes not is not.  But if I had answered that it is not so that
what God wishes is, and what He wishes not is not, then you would retort
upon me that God must then be powerless, if He cannot do what He wills;
and you would be all the more petulant, as thinking that you had got a
victory, though had said nothing to the point.  Therefore you are
ignorant, O Simon, yea very ignorant, how the will of God acts in each
individual case.  For some things, as we have said, He has so willed to
be, that they cannot be otherwise than as they are ordained by Him; and
to these He has assigned neither rewards nor punishments; but those
which He has willed to be so that they have it in their power to do what
they will, He has assigned to them according to their actions and their
wills, to earn either rewards or punishments.  Since, therefore, as I
have informed you, all things that are moved are divided into two parts,
according to the distinction that I formerly stated, everything that God
wills is, and everything that He wills not is not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](0080226.md)
