[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080331)  [Next](0080333) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—His First
Suggestion.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.vii.xviii-p2"></span>“And first of all he suggests to
men’s thoughts not to hear the words of truth, by which they might put
to flight the ignorance of those things which are evils.  And this he
does, as by the presentation of another knowledge, making a show of that
opinion which very many hold, to think that they shall not be held
guilty if they have been in ignorance, and that they shall not be called
to account for what they have not heard; and thereby he persuades them
to turn aside from hearing the word.  But I tell you, in opposition to
this, that ignorance is in itself a most deadly poison, which is
sufficient to ruin the soul without any aid from without.  And therefore
there is no one who is ignorant who shall escape through his ignorance,
but it is certain that he shall perish.  For the power of sin naturally
destroys the sinner.  But since the judgment shall be according to
reason, the cause and origin of ignorance shall be inquired into, as
well as of every sin.  For he who is unwilling to know how he may attain
to life, and prefers to be in ignorance lest he thereby be made guilty,
from this very fact is judged as if he knew and had knowledge.  For he
knew what it was that he was unwilling to hear; and the cunning obtained
by the artifice of the serpent will avail him nothing for an excuse, for
he will have to do with Him to whom the heart is open.  But that you may
know that ignorance of itself brings destruction, *I assure you that*
when the soul departs from the body, if it leave it in ignorance of Him
by whom it was created, and from whom in this world it obtained all
things that were necessary for its uses, it is driven forth from the
light of His kingdom as ungrateful and unfaithful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0080333)
