[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080094)  [Next](0080096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—Abraham:  His
Posterity.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxxiii-p2"></span>“Therefore Abraham, when he was
desirous to learn the causes of things, and was intently pondering upon
what had been told him, the true Prophet appeared to him, who alone
knows the hearts and purpose of men, and disclosed to him all things
which he desired.  He taught him the knowledge of the Divinity;
intimated the origin of the world, and likewise its end; showed him the
immortality of the soul, and the manner of life which was pleasing to
God; declared also the resurrection of the dead, the future judgment,
the reward of the good, the punishment of the evil,—all to be regulated
by righteous judgment:  and having given him all this information
plainly and sufficiently, He departed again to the invisible abodes. 
But while Abraham was still in ignorance, as we said to you before, two
sons were born to him, of whom the one was called Ismael, and the other
Heliesdros.  From the one are descended the barbarous nations, from the
other the people of the Persians, some of whom have adopted the manner
of living and the institutions of their neighbours, the Brachmans. 
Others settled in Arabia, of whose posterity some also have spread into
Egypt.  From them some of the Indians and of the Egyptians have learned
to be circumcised, and to be of purer observance than others, although
in process of time most of them have turned to impiety what was the
proof and sign of purity.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](0080096)
