[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080190)  [Next](0080192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.liv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.liv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.liv-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIV.—How Simon Learned from the
Law What the Law Does Not Teach.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.liv-p2"></span>“Thus then, since he who made man and
the world is, according to what the law relates, imperfect, we are given
to understand, without doubt, that there is another who is perfect.  For
it is of necessity that there be one most excellent of all, on whose
account also every creature keeps its rank.  Whence also I, knowing that
it is every way necessary that there be some one more benignant and more
powerful than that imperfect God who gave the law, understanding what is
perfect from comparison of the imperfect, understood even from the
Scripture that God who is not mentioned there.  And in this way I was
able, O Peter, to learn from the law what the law did not know.  But
even if the law had not given indications from which it might be
gathered that the God who made the world is imperfect, it was still
possible for me to infer from those evils which are done in this world,
and are not corrected, either that its creator is powerless, if he
cannot correct what is done amiss; or else, if he does not wish to
remove the evils, that he is himself evil; but if he neither can nor
will, that he is neither powerful nor good.  And from this it cannot but
be concluded that there is another God more excellent and more powerful
than all.  If you have aught to say to this, say on.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV](0080192)
