[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080078)  [Next](0080080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—Peter Requests Him to Be
His Attendant.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvii-p2"></span>Having thus spoken, he set forth to
me so openly and so clearly who that Prophet was, and how He might be
found, that I seemed to have before my eyes, and to handle with my hand,
the proofs which he produced concerning the prophetic truth; and I was
struck with intense astonishment, how no one sees, though placed before
his eyes, those things which all are seeking for.  Whence, by his
command, reducing into order what he had spoken to me, I compiled a book
concerning the true Prophet, and sent it to you from Cæsarea by his
command.  For he said that he had received a command from you to send
you every year an account of his sayings and doings. <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md)   Meantime, at the beginning of his
discourse which he delivered to me the first day, when he had instructed
me very fully concerning the true Prophet, and very many things besides,
he added also this:  “See,” said he, “for the future, and be present at
the discussions which whenever any necessity arises, I shall hold with
those who contradict; against whom, when I dispute, even if I shall seem
to be worsted, I shall not be afraid of your being led to doubt of those
things which I have stated to you; because, even if I shall seem to be
beaten, yet those things shall not therefore seem to be uncertain which
the true Prophet has delivered to us.  Yet I hope that we shall not be
overcome in disputations either, if only our hearers are reasonable, and
friends of truth, who can discern the force and bearing of words, and
recognise what discourse comes from the sophistical art, not containing
truth, but an image of truth; and what that is, which, uttered simply
and without craft, depends for all its power not on show and ornament,
but on truth and reason.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_539"></span>[81:540](0080079.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xvii-p3"></span> \[Comp. Homily I. 20, where there
is a curious inconsistency.  Both accounts seem to insert this to tally
with the fictitious relation to James, and both may be used to support
the theory of a common documentary basis.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](0080080.md)
