[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080474)  [Next](0080476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_184">p. 184</span>
<span id="vi.iii.xi.vi-Page_184"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Arrangements of the World for
the Exercise of Virtue.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xi.vi-p2"></span>“Therefore the Creator, knowing that
no one would come to the contest of his own accord, while labour is
shunned,—that is, to the practice of those professions which we have
mentioned, by means of which either the justice or the mercy of every
one can be manifested,—made for men a body susceptible of hunger, and
thirst, and cold, in order that men, being compelled for the sake of
supporting their bodies, might come down to all the professions which we
have mentioned, by the necessity of livelihood.  For we are taught to
cultivate every one of these arts, for the sake of food, and drink, and
clothing.  And in this the purpose of each one’s mind is shown, whether
he will supply the demands of hunger and cold by means of thefts, and
murders, and perjuries, and other crimes of that sort; or whether,
keeping justice and mercy and continence, he will fulfil the service of
imminent necessity by the practice of a profession and the labour of his
hands.  For if he supply his bodily wants with justice, and piety, and
mercy, he comes forth as a victor in the contest set before him, and is
chosen as a friend of the Son of God.  But if he serve carnal lusts, by
frauds, iniquities, and crimes, he becomes a friend of the prince of
this world, and of all demons; by whom he is also taught this, to
ascribe to the courses of the stars the errors of his own evil doings,
although he chose them of purpose, and willingly.  For arts are learned
and practised, as we have said, under the compulsion of the desire of
food and drink; which desire, when the knowledge of the truth comes to
any one, becomes weaker, and frugality takes its place.  For what
expense have those who use water and bread, and only expect it from God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0080476)
