[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080010)  [Next](0080012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>VII.—The Testament of Dan Concerning Anger and
Lying.</span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ix-p2.1"></span>The</span> record of the words of Dan, which he
spake to his sons in his last days.  In the hundred and twenty-fifth
year of his life he called together his family, and said:  Hearken to my
words, ye sons of Dan; give heed to the words of the mouth of your
father.  I have proved in my heart, and in my whole life, that truth
with just dealing is good and well-pleasing to God, and that lying and
anger are evil, because they teach man all wickedness.  I confess this
day to you, my children, that in my heart I rejoiced concerning the
death of Joseph, a true and good man; and I rejoiced at the selling of
Joseph, because his father loved him more than us.  For the spirit of
jealousy and of vainglory said to me, Thou also art his son.  And one of
the spirits of Beliar wrought with me, saying, Take this sword, and with
it slay Joseph; so shall thy father love thee when he is slain.  This is
the spirit of anger that counselled me, that even as a leopard devoureth
a kid, so should I devour Joseph.  But the God of Jacob our father gave
him not over into my hands that I should find him alone, nor suffered me
to work this iniquity, that two tribes should be destroyed in
Israel. <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md)

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span>2.  And now, my children, I am dying, and I
tell you of a truth, that unless ye keep yourselves from the spirit of
lying and of anger, and love truth and long-suffering, ye shall perish. 
There is blindness in anger, my children, and no wrathful man regardeth
any person with truth:  for though it be a father or a mother, he
behaveth towards them as enemies; though it be a brother, he knoweth him
not; though it be a prophet of the Lord, he disobeyeth him; though a
righteous man, he regardeth him not; a friend he doth not acknowledge. 
For the spirit of anger encompasseth him with the nets of deceit, and
blindeth his natural eyes, and through lying darkeneth his mind, and
giveth him a sight of his own making.  And wherewith encompasseth he his
eyes?  In hatred of heart; and he giveth him a heart of his own against
his brother unto envy.

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span>3.  My children, mischievous is anger, for
it becometh as a soul to the soul itself; and the body of the angry man
it maketh its own, and over his soul it getteth the mastery, and it
bestoweth upon the body its own power, that it may work all iniquity;
and whenever the soul doeth aught, it justifieth what has been done,
since it seeth not.  Therefore he who is wrathful, if he be a mighty
man, hath a treble might in his anger; one by the might and aid of his
servants, and a second by his wrath, whereby he persuadeth and
overcometh in injustice:  and having a third of the nature of his own
body, and of his own self working the evil.  And though the wrathful man
be weak, yet hath he a might twofold of that which is by nature; for
wrath ever aideth such in mischief.  This spirit goeth always with lying
at the right hand of Satan, that his works may be wrought with cruelty
and lying.

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span>4.  Understand ye therefore the might of
wrath, that it is vain.  For it first of all stingeth him in word:  then
by deeds it strengtheneth <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="iii.ix-Page_26"></span>him who is angry, and with bitter punishments
disturbeth his mind, and so stirreth up with great wrath his soul. 
Therefore, when any one speaketh against you, be not <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) ye moved unto anger.  And if any man
praiseth you as good, be not lifted up nor elated, either to the feeling
or showing of pleasure. <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md)   For
first it pleaseth the hearing, and so stirreth up the understanding to
understand the grounds for anger; and then, being wrathful, he thinketh
that he is justly angry.  If ye fall into any loss or ruin, my children,
be not troubled; for this very spirit maketh men desire that which hath
perished, in order that they may be inflamed by the desire.  If ye
suffer loss willingly, be not vexed, for from vexation he raiseth up
wrath with lying.  And wrath with lying is a twofold mischief; <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) and they speak one with another that
they may disturb the mind; and when the soul is continually disturbed,
the Lord departeth from it, and Beliar ruleth over it.

<span id="iii.ix-p10"></span>5.  Observe, therefore, my children, the
commandments of the Lord, and keep His law; and depart from wrath, and
hate lying, that the Lord may dwell among you, and Beliar may flee from
you.  Speak truth each one with his neighbour, so shall ye not fall into
lust and confusion; but ye shall be in peace, having the God of peace,
so <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) shall no war prevail over
you.  Love the Lord through all your life, and one another with a true
heart.  For I know that in the last days ye will depart from the Lord,
and will provoke Levi unto anger, and will fight against Judah; but ye
shall not prevail against them.  For an angel of the Lord shall guide
them both; for by them shall Israel stand.  And whensoever ye depart
from the Lord, ye will walk in all evil, working the abominations of the
Gentiles, going <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) astray with
women of them that are ungodly; and the spirits of error shall work in
you with all malice.  For I have read in the book of Enoch the
righteous, that your prince is Satan, and that all the spirits of
fornication and pride shall be subject unto Levi, to lay a snare for the
sons of Levi, to cause them to sin before the Lord.  And my sons will
draw near unto Levi, and sin with them in all things; and the sons of
Judah will be covetous, plundering other men’s goods like lions. 
Therefore shall ye be led away with them in captivity, and there shall
ye receive all the plagues of Egypt, and all the malice of the
Gentiles:  and so, when ye return to the Lord, ye shall obtain mercy,
and He shall bring you into His sanctuary, calling peace upon you; and
there shall arise unto you from the tribe of Judah and of Levi the
salvation of the Lord; <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) and He
shall make war against Beliar, and He shall give the vengeance of
victory to our coasts.  And the captivity shall He take from Beliar,
even the souls of the saints, and shall turn disobedient hearts unto the
Lord, and shall give to them who call upon Him everlasting peace; and
the saints shall rest in Eden, and the righteous shall rejoice in the
new Jerusalem, which shall be unto the glory of God for ever and ever. 
And no longer shall Jerusalem endure desolation, nor Israel be led
captive; for the Lord shall be in the midst of her, dwelling among
men, <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) even the Holy One of Israel
reigning over them <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) in humility
and in poverty; <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) and he who
believeth on Him shall reign in truth in the heavens.

<span id="iii.ix-p17"></span>6.  And now, my children, fear the Lord,
and take heed unto yourselves of Satan and his spirits; and draw near
unto God, and to the Angel <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) that
intercedeth for you, for He is a Mediator between God and man for the
peace of Israel.  He shall stand up against the kingdom of the enemy;
therefore is the enemy eager to destroy all that call upon the Lord. 
For he knoweth that in the day on which Israel shall believe, <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) the kingdom of the enemy shall be
brought to an end; and the very angel of peace shall strengthen Israel,
that it fall not into the extremity of evil.  And it shall be in the
time of the iniquity of Israel, that the Lord will depart from them, and
will go after him that doeth His will, for unto none of His angels shall
it be as unto him.  And His name shall be in every place of Israel, and
among the Gentiles—Saviour.  Keep therefore yourselves, my children,
from every evil work, and cast away wrath and all lying, and love truth
and long-suffering; and the things which ye have heard from your father,
do ye also impart to your children, that the Father of the Gentiles may
receive you:  for He is true and long-suffering, meek and lowly, and
teacheth by His works the law of God.  Depart, therefore, from all
unrighteousness, and cleave unto the righteousness of the law of the
Lord:  and bury me near my fathers.

<span id="iii.ix-p20"></span>7.  And when he had said these things he
kissed them, and slept the long sleep. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md)   And his sons buried him, and after
that they carried up his bones to the side of Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob.  Nevertheless, as Dan had prophesied unto them that they should
forget the law of their God, and should be alienated from the land of
their inheritance, and from the race of Israel, and from their kindred,
so also it came to pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_138"></span>[25:139](0080011.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span> \[The tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh.\]

<span id="fn_139"></span>[26:140](0080011.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span> The reading of the Ox. <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>ms.</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix-p7.2"></span>μῂ κινεῖσθε</span> is to be
taken.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[26:141](0080011.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p8"></span> Cam. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ix-p8.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix-p8.2"></span>εις εἰδέαν</span>; Ox. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ix-p8.3"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix-p8.4"></span>εἰς ἀηδίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[26:142](0080011.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p8.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p9"></span> Read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix-p9.1"></span>κακόν</span>

<span id="fn_142"></span>[26:143](0080011.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p11"></span> The Ox. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ix-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> omits from here to <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix-p11.2"></span>τοῖς ἔθνεσι Σωτήρ</span> in
c. 6.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[26:144](0080011.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix-p12.1"></span>᾽Εκπορεύοντες</span> may be an error for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix-p12.2"></span>ἐκπορνεύοντες</span> ,
which Grabe wrongly gives as the reading of the Cam. <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ix-p12.3"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_144"></span>[26:145](0080011.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p13"></span> \[The root idea, p. 18, notes 5, 6,
*supra*.\]

<span id="fn_145"></span>[26:146](0080011.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p14"></span> \[[Rev. xxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.ix-p14.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_146"></span>[26:147](0080011.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p15"></span> \[Here is the Chiliasm of Barnabas, vol.
i. p. 146.\]

<span id="fn_147"></span>[26:148](0080011.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p16"></span> \[That is, not with the glory of His
throne above.\]

<span id="fn_148"></span>[26:149](0080011.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p18"></span> Cf. Dorner, *Doctrine of the Person of
Christ*, Introd., p, 15, Eng. transl.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[26:150](0080011.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p19"></span> \[[Rom. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.ix-p19.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_150"></span>[26:151](0080011.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p21"></span> See *Zebulun* 10, p. 25, *supra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament VIII](0080012.md)
