[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080084)  [Next](0080086.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—Repetition
Continued.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>Then Peter, having heard my answer
with pleasure, said:  “I congratulate you because you have answered
thus, not because you speak of these things easily, but because you
profess that you remember them; for the most sublime truths are best
honoured by means of silence.  Yet, for the credit of those things which
you remember concerning things not to be spoken, <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) tell me what you retain of those
things which we spoke of in the second place, which can easily be spoken
out, that, perceiving your tenacity of memory, I may the more readily
point out to you, and freely open, the things of which I wish to
speak.”  Then I, when I perceived that he rejoiced in the good memory of
his hearers, said:  “Not only am I mindful of your definition, but also
of that preface which was prefixed to the definition; and of almost all
things that you have expounded, I retain the sense complete, though not
all the words; because the things that you have spoken have been made,
as it were, native to my soul, and inborn.  For you have held out a most
sweet cup to me in my excessive thirst.  And that you may not suppose
that I am occupying you with words, being unmindful of things, I shall
now call to mind the things which were spoken, in which the order of
your discussion greatly helps me; for the way in which the things that
you said followed by consequence upon one another, and were arranged in
a balanced manner, makes them easily recalled to memory by the lines of
their order.  For the order of sayings is useful for remembering them: 
for when you begin to follow them point by point in succession, when
anything is wanting, immediately the sense seeks for it; and when it has
found it, retains it, or at all events, if it cannot discover it, there
will be no reluctance to ask it of the master.  But not to delay in
granting what you demand of me, I shall shortly rehearse what you
delivered to me concerning the definition of truth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_544"></span>[83:545](0080085.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> That is, that I may be sure that
you remember these things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](0080086.md)
