[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080835)  [Next](0080837) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ix.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—The Same.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.ix.xviii-p2"></span>“Wherefore do not suppose that they
were wise men, but rather evil spirits, who could cover honourable
actions with wicked stories, in order that they who wish to imitate
their betters may emulate these deeds of so-called gods, which yesterday
in my discourse I spoke so freely of,—namely, their parricides, their
murders of their children, their incests of all kinds, their shameless
adulteries and countless impurities.  The most impious of them are those
who wish these stories to be believed, in order that they may not be
ashamed when they do the like.  If they had been disposed to act
reverently, they ought, as I said a little ago, even if the gods really
did the things which are sung of them, to have veiled their indecencies
under more seemly stories, and not, on the contrary, as you say they
did, when the deeds of the gods were honourable, clothed them in wicked
and indecent forms, which, even when interpreted, can only be understood
by much labour; and when they were understood by some, they indeed got
for their much toil the privilege of not being deceived, which they
might have had without the toil, while they who were deceived were
utterly ruined.  (Those, however, who trace the allegories to a more
honourable source I do not object to; as, for instance, those who
explain one allegory by saying that it was wisdom which sprang from the
head of Zeus.)  On the whole, it seems to me more probable that wicked
men, robbing the gods of their honour, ventured to promulgate these
insulting stories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0080837)
