[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080006)  [Next](0080008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>III.—The Testament of Levi Concerning the
Priesthood and Arrogance.</span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>The</span> copy of the words of Levi, what things
he appointed to his sons, according to all that they should do, and what
things should befall them until the day of judgment.  He was in sound
health when he called them to him, for it had been shown to him that he
should die.  And when they were gathered together he said to them:—

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span>2.  I Levi was conceived in Haran and born
there, and after that I came with my father to <span id="page_13">p.
13</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_13"></span>Shechem.  And I was young,
about twenty years of age, when with Simeon I wrought the vengeance on
Hamor for our sister Dinah.  And when we were feeding our flocks in
Abel-Maul, a spirit of understanding of the Lord came upon me, <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) and I saw all men corrupting their way,
and that unrighteousness had built to itself walls, and iniquity sat
upon towers; and I grieved for the race of men, and I prayed to the Lord
that I might be saved.  Then there fell upon me a sleep, and I beheld a
high mountain:  this is the mountain of Aspis <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) in Abel-Maul.  And behold, the heavens
were opened, and an angel of God said to me, Levi, enter.  And I entered
from the first heaven into the second, and I saw there water hanging
between the one and the other.  And I saw a third heaven far brighter
than those two, for there was in it a height without bounds.  And I said
to the angel, Wherefore is this?  And the angel said to me, Marvel not
at these, for thou shalt see four other heavens brighter than these, and
without comparison, when thou shalt have ascended thither:  because thou
shalt stand near the Lord, and shalt be His minister, and shall declare
His mysteries to men, and shalt proclaim concerning Him who shall redeem
Israel; <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) and by thee and Judah shall
the Lord appear among men, saving in them every race of men; and of the
portion of the Lord shall be thy life, and He shall be thy field and
vineyard, fruits, gold, silver.

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span>3.  Hear, then, concerning the seven <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) heavens.  The lowest is for this cause
more gloomy, in that it is near all the iniquities of men.  The second
hath fire, snow, ice, ready for the day of the ordinance of the Lord, in
the righteous judgment of God:  in it are all the spirits of the
retributions for vengeance on the wicked.  In the third are the hosts of
the armies which are ordained for the day of judgment, to work vengeance
on the spirits of deceit and of Beliar.  And the heavens up to the
fourth above these are holy, for in the highest of all dwelleth the
Great Glory, in the holy of holies, far above all holiness.  In the
heaven next to it are the angels of the presence of the Lord, who
minister and make propitiation to the Lord for all the ignorances of the
righteous; and they offer to the Lord a reasonable sweet-smelling
savour, and a bloodless offering.  And in the heaven below this are the
angels who bear the answers to the angels of the presence of the Lord. 
And in the heaven next to this are thrones, dominions, in which hymns
are ever offered to God.  Therefore, whenever the Lord looketh upon us,
all of us are shaken; yea, the heavens, and the earth, and the abysses,
are shaken at the presence of His majesty; but the sons of men,
regarding not these things, sin, and provoke the Most High.

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>4.  Now, therefore, know that the Lord will
execute judgment upon the sons of men; because when the rocks are
rent, <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) and the sun quenched, and the
waters dried up, and the fire trembling, and all creation troubled, and
the invisible spirits melting away, and the grave <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) spoiled in the suffering of the Most
High, <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) men unbelieving will abide in
their iniquity, therefore with punishment shall they be judged. 
Therefore the Most High hath heard thy prayer, to separate thee from
iniquity, and that thou shouldest become to Him a son, and a servant,
and a minister of His presence.  A shining light of knowledge shalt thou
shine in Jacob, and as the sun shalt thou be to all the seed of Israel. 
And a blessing shall be given to thee, and to all thy seed, until the
Lord shall visit all the heathen in the tender mercies of His Son, even
for ever.  Nevertheless thy sons shall lay hands upon Him to crucify
Him; and therefore have counsel and understanding been given thee, that
thou mightest instruct thy sons concerning Him, because he that blesseth
Him shall be blessed, but they that curse Him shall perish.

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span>5.  And the angel opened to me the gates of
heaven, and I saw the holy temple, and the Most High upon a throne of
glory.  And He said to me, Levi, I have given thee the blessings of the
priesthood until that I shall come and sojourn in the midst of Israel. 
Then the angel brought me to the earth, and gave me a shield and a
sword, and said, Work vengeance on Shechem because of Dinah, and I will
be with thee, because the Lord hath sent me.  And I destroyed at that
time the sons of Hamor, as it is written in the heavenly tablets. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)   And I said to Him, I pray Thee, O Lord,
tell me Thy name, that I may call upon Thee in a day of tribulation. 
And He said, I am the angel who intercedeth for the race of Israel, that
He smite them not utterly, because every evil spirit attacketh it.  And
after these things I was as it were awaked, and blessed the Most High,
and the angel that intercedeth for the race of Israel, and for all the
righteous. <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md)

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span><span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_14"></span>6.  And when I came to my father I found a
brazen shield; <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) wherefore also the
name of the mountain is Aspis, which is near Gebal, on the right side of
Abila; and I kept these words in my heart.  I took counsel with my
father, and with Reuben my brother, that he should bid the sons of Hamor
that they should be circumcised; for I was jealous because of the
abomination which they had wrought in Israel.  And I slew Shechem at the
first, and Simeon slew Hamor.  And after this our brethren came and
smote the city with the edge of the sword; and our father heard it and
was wroth, and he was grieved in that they had received the
circumcision, and after that had been put to death, and in his blessings
he dealt otherwise *with us*.  For we sinned because we had done this
thing against his will, and he was sick upon that day.  But I knew that
the sentence of God was for evil upon Shechem; for they sought to do to
Sarah as they did to Dinah our sister, and the Lord hindered them.  And
so they persecuted Abraham our father when he was a stranger, and they
harried his flocks when they were multiplied upon him; and Jeblae his
servant, born in his house, they shamefully handled.  And thus they did
to all strangers, taking away their wives by force, and the men
themselves driving into exile.  But the wrath of the Lord came suddenly
upon them to the uttermost. <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md)

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span>7.  And I said to my father, Be not angry,
sir, because by thee will the Lord bring to nought the Canaanites, and
will give their land to thee, and to thy seed after thee.  For from this
day forward shall Shechem be called a city of them that are without
understanding; for as a man mocketh at a fool, so did we mock them,
because they wrought folly in Israel to defile our sister.  And we took
our sister from thence, and departed, and came to Bethel.

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span>8.  And there I saw a thing again even as
the former, after we had passed seventy days.  And I saw seven men in
white raiment saying to me, Arise, put on the robe of the priesthood,
and the crown of righteousness, and the breastplate of understanding,
and the garment of truth, and the diadem of faith, and the tiara of
miracle, and the ephod of prophecy. <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md)
  And each one of them bearing each of these things put them on me, and
said, From henceforth become a priest of the Lord, thou and thy seed for
ever.  And the first anointed me with holy oil, and gave to me the rod
of judgment.  The second washed me with pure water, and fed me with
bread and wine, the most holy things, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) and clad me with a holy and glorious
robe.  The third clothed me with a linen vestment like to an ephod.  The
fourth put round me a girdle like unto purple.  The fifth gave to me a
branch of rich olive.  The sixth placed a crown on my head.  The seventh
placed on my head a diadem of priesthood, and filled my hands with
incense, so that I served as a priest to the Lord.  And they said to me,
Levi, thy seed shall be divided into three branches, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) for a sign of the glory of the Lord who
is to come; and first shall he be that hath been faithful; no portion
shall be greater than his.  The second shall be in the priesthood.  The
third—a new name shall be called over Him, because He shall arise as
King from Judah, and shall establish a new priesthood, after the fashion
of the Gentiles, to all the Gentiles. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md)   And His appearing shall be unutterable,
as of an exalted <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) prophet of the
seed of Abraham our father.  Every desirable thing in Israel shall be
for thee and for thy seed, and everything fair to look upon shall ye
eat, and the table of the Lord shall thy seed apportion, and some of
them shall be high priests, and judges, and scribes; for by their mouth
shall the holy place be guarded.  And when I awoke, I understood that
this thing was like unto the former.  And I hid this also in my heart,
and told it not to any man upon the earth.

<span id="iii.v-p26"></span>9.  And after two days I and Judah went up
to Isaac after <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) our father; and the
father of my father blessed me according to all the words of the visions
which I had seen:  and he would not come with us to Bethel.  And when we
came to Bethel, my father Jacob saw in a vision concerning me, that I
should be to them for a priest unto the Lord; and he rose up early in
the morning, and paid tithes of all to the Lord through me.  And we came
to Hebron to dwell there, and Isaac called me continually to put me in
remembrance of the law of the Lord, even as the angel of God showed to
me.  And he taught me the law of the priesthood, of sacrifices, whole
burnt-offerings, first-fruits, free-will offerings, thank-offerings. 
And each day he was instructing me, and was busied for me before the
Lord.  And he said to me, Take heed, my child, of the spirit of
fornication; for this shall <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_15"></span>continue, and shall by thy seed pollute the
holy things.  Take therefore to thyself, while yet thou art young, a
wife, not having blemish, nor yet polluted, nor of the race of the
Philistines or Gentiles.  And before entering into the holy place,
bathe; <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) and when thou offerest the
sacrifice, wash; and again when thou finishest the sacrifice, wash.  Of
twelve trees ever having leaves, offer up *the fruits* to the Lord, as
also Abraham taught me; and of every clean beast and clean bird offer a
sacrifice to the Lord, and of every firstling and of wine offer
first-fruits; and every sacrifice thou shalt salt with salt. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md)

<span id="iii.v-p30"></span>10.  Now, therefore, observe whatsoever I
command you, children; for whatsoever things I have heard from my
fathers I have made known to you.  I am clear from all your ungodliness
and transgression which ye will do in the end of the ages against the
Saviour of the world, acting ungodly, deceiving Israel, and raising up
against it great evils from the Lord. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md)   And ye will deal lawlessly with Israel,
so that Jerusalem shall not endure your wickedness; but the veil of the
temple shall be rent, so as not to cover your shame.  And ye shall be
scattered as captives among the heathen, and shall be for a reproach and
for a curse, and for a trampling under foot.  For the house which the
Lord shall choose shall be called Jerusalem, as is contained in the book
of Enoch the righteous. <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md)

<span id="iii.v-p33"></span>11.  Therefore, when I took a wife I was
twenty-eight years old, and her name was Melcha.  And she conceived and
bare a son, and she called his name Gersham, for we were sojourners in
our land:  for Gersham is interpreted sojourning.  And I saw concerning
him that he would not be in the first rank.  And Kohath was born in my
thirty-fifth year, towards the east.  And I saw in a vision that he was
standing on high in the midst of all the congregation.  Therefore I
called his name Kohath, which meaneth, beginning of majesty and
instruction.  And thirdly, she bare to me Merari, in the fortieth year
of my life; and since his mother bare him with difficulty, she called
him Merari, which meaneth my bitterness, because he also died.  And
Jochebed was born in my sixty-fourth year, in Egypt, for I was renowned
then in the midst of my brethren.

<span id="iii.v-p34"></span>12.  And Gersham took a wife, and she bare
to him Lomni and Semei.  And the sons of Kohath, Ambram, Isaar, Chebro,
and Ozel.  And the sons of Merari, Mooli and Homusi.  And in my
ninety-fourth year Ambram took Jochebed my daughter to him to wife, for
they were born in one day, he and my daughter.  Eight years old was I
when I went into the land of Canaan, and eighteen years when I slew
Shechem, and at nineteen years I became priest, and at twenty-eight
years I took a wife, and at forty years I went into Egypt.  And behold,
ye are my children, my children even *of* a third generation.  In my
hundred and eighteenth year Joseph died.

<span id="iii.v-p35"></span>13.  And now, my children, I command you
that ye fear our Lord with your whole heart, and walk in simplicity
according to all His <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) law.  And do
ye also teach your children learning, that they may have understanding
in all their life, reading unceasingly the law of God; for every one who
shall know the law of God shall be honoured, and shall not be a stranger
wheresoever he goeth.  Yea, many friends shall he gain more than his
forefathers; and many men shall desire to serve him, and to hear the law
from his mouth.  Work righteousness, my children, upon the earth, that
ye may find *treasure* in the heavens, and sow good things in your
souls, that ye may find them in your life.  For if ye sow evil things,
ye shall reap all trouble and affliction.  Get wisdom in the fear of God
with diligence; for though there shall be a leading into captivity, and
cities be destroyed, and lands and gold and silver and every possession
shall perish, the wisdom of the wise none can take away, save the
blindness of ungodliness and the palsy of sin:  for even among his
enemies shall it be to him glorious, and in a strange country a home,
and in the midst of foes shall it be found a friend.  If a man teach
these things and do them, he shall be enthroned with kings, as was also
Joseph our brother.

<span id="iii.v-p37"></span>14.  And now, my children, I have learnt
from the writing of Enoch that at the last ye will deal ungodly, laying
your hands upon the Lord in all malice; and your brethren shall be
ashamed because of you, and to all the Gentiles shall it become a
mocking.  For our father Israel shall be pure from the ungodliness of
the chief priests who shall lay their hands upon the Saviour of the
world.  Pure is the heaven above the earth, and ye are the lights of the
heaven as the sun and the moon.  What shall all the Gentiles do if ye be
darkened in ungodliness?  So shall ye bring a curse upon our race for
whom came the light of the world, which was given among you for the
lighting up of every man. <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md)   Him
will ye desire to slay, teaching commandments contrary to the ordinances
of God.  The offerings of the Lord will ye rob, and from His portion
will ye steal; and before ye sacrifice to the Lord, ye will take the
choicest parts, in despitefulness eating them <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_16"></span>with harlots.  Amid
excesses <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md) will ye teach the
commandments of the Lord, the women that have husbands will ye pollute,
and the virgins of Jerusalem will ye defile; and with harlots and
adulteresses will ye be joined.  The daughters of the Gentiles will ye
take for wives, purifying them with an unlawful purification; and your
union shall be like unto Sodom and Gomorrah in ungodliness.  And ye will
be puffed up because of the priesthood lifting yourselves up against
men.  And not only so, but being puffed up also against the commands of
God, ye will scoff at the holy things, mocking in despitefulness.

<span id="iii.v-p40"></span>15.  Therefore the temple which the Lord
shall choose shall be desolate in uncleanness, and ye shall be captives
throughout all nations, and ye shall be an abomination among them, and
ye shall receive reproach and everlasting shame from the righteous
judgment of God; and all who see you shall flee from you.  And were it
not for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob our fathers, not one from my seed
should be left upon the earth.

<span id="iii.v-p41"></span>16.  And now I have learnt in the book of
Enoch that for seventy weeks will ye go astray, and will profane the
priesthood, and pollute the sacrifices, and corrupt the law, and set at
nought the words of the prophets.  In perverseness ye will persecute
righteous men, and hate the godly; the words of the faithful will ye
abhor, and the man who reneweth the law in the power of the Most High
will ye call a deceiver; <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) and at
last, as ye suppose, ye will slay Him, not understanding His
resurrection, wickedly taking upon your own heads the innocent
blood. <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md)   Because of Him shall your
holy places be desolate, polluted even to the ground, and ye shall have
no place that is clean; but ye shall be among the Gentiles a curse and a
dispersion, until He shall again look upon you, and in pity shall take
you to Himself through faith and water. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md)

<span id="iii.v-p45"></span>17.  And because ye have heard concerning
the seventy weeks, hear also concerning the priesthood; for in each
jubilee there shall be a priesthood.  In the first jubilee, the first
who is anointed into the priesthood shall be great, and shall speak to
God as to a Father; and his priesthood shall be filled with the fear of
the Lord, and in the day of his gladness shall he arise for the
salvation of the world.  In the second jubilee, he that is anointed
shall be conceived in the sorrow of beloved ones; and his priesthood
shall be honoured, and shall be glorified among all.  And the third
priest shall be held fast in sorrow; and the fourth shall be in grief,
because unrighteousness shall be laid upon him exceedingly, and all
Israel shall hate each one his neighbour.  The fifth shall be held fast
in darkness, likewise also the sixth and the seventh.  And in the
seventh there shall be such pollution as I am not able to express,
before the Lord and men, for they shall know it who do these things. 
Therefore shall they be in captivity and for a prey, and their land and
their substance shall be destroyed.  And in the fifth week they shall
return into their desolate country, and shall renew the house of the
Lord.  And in the seventh week shall come the priests, worshippers of
idols, contentious, lovers of money, proud, lawless, lascivious, abusers
of children and beasts.

<span id="iii.v-p46"></span>18.  And after their punishment shall have
come from the Lord, then will the Lord raise up to the priesthood a new
Priest, to whom all the words of the Lord shall be revealed; and He
shall execute a judgment of truth upon the earth, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) in the fulness of days.  And His star
shall arise in heaven, <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) as a king
shedding forth the light of knowledge in the sunshine of day, and He
shall be magnified in the world until His ascension.  He shall shine
forth as the sun in the earth, and shall drive away all darkness from
the world under heaven, and there shall be peace in all the earth.  The
heavens shall rejoice in His days, and the earth shall be glad, and the
clouds shall be joyful, and the knowledge of the Lord shall be poured
forth upon the earth, as the water of seas; and the angels of the glory
of the presence of the Lord shall be glad in Him.  The heavens shall be
opened, and from the temple of glory shall the sanctification come upon
Him with the Father’s voice, as from Abraham the father of Isaac.  And
the glory of the Most High shall be uttered over Him, and the spirit of
understanding and of sanctification shall rest upon Him in the water. 
He shall give the majesty of the Lord to His sons in truth for evermore;
and there shall none succeed Him for all generations, even for
ever. <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md)   And in His priesthood shall
all sin come to an end, and the lawless shall rest from evil, and the
just shall rest in Him.  And He shall open the gates of paradise, and
shall remove <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) the threatening sword
against Adam; and He shall give to His saints to eat from the tree of
life, <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) and the spirit of holiness
shall be on them.  And Beliar shall be bound by Him, and He shall give
power to His children to tread <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_17"></span>upon the evil spirits. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md)   And the Lord shall rejoice in His
children, and the Lord shall be well pleased in His beloved for ever. 
Then shall Abraham and Isaac and Jacob be joyful, and I will be glad,
and all the saints shall put on gladness.

<span id="iii.v-p53"></span>19.  And now, my children, ye have heard
all; choose therefore for yourselves either the darkness or the light,
either the law of the Lord or the works of Beliar.  And we answered our
father, saying, Before the Lord will we walk according to His law.  And
our father said, The Lord is witness, and His angels are witnesses, and
I am witness, and ye are witnesses, concerning the word of your mouth. 
And we said, We are witnesses.  And thus Levi ceased giving charge to
his sons; and he stretched out his feet, and was gathered to his
fathers, after he had lived a hundred and thirty-seven years.  And they
laid him in a coffin, and afterwards they buried him in Hebron, by the
side of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[13:61](0080007.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span> \[[Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_61"></span>[13:62](0080007.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> See below, c. 6.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[13:63](0080007.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span> Cf. [Luke xxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[13:64](0080007.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span> For the Jewish idea of seven heavens, cf.
Clement of Alexandra, *Strom*., iv. 7; and Wetstein’s note on [2 Cor.
xii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>;
\[also vol. vii. note 11, this series; and vol. ii. note 7, p. 438, this
series\].

<span id="fn_64"></span>[13:65](0080007.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span> \[[Matt. xxvii.
51-53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051.md)<span id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_65"></span>[13:66](0080007.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="iii.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span> \[Hades, rather.\]

<span id="fn_66"></span>[13:67](0080007.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p12.1"></span>ἐπὶ τῳ πάθει τοῦ ῾Υψισοῦ</span>.  Compare
Tatian, vol. ii. p. 71, this series.\]

<span id="fn_67"></span>[13:68](0080007.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span> This document, the idea of which is that of
a book containing what is fore-ordained in heaven as to the course of
the future, is one often appealed to in Apocalyptic literature, when
some oracular declaration of weighty import is needed.  Thus, in the
Book of Enoch, the angel Uriel tells Enoch that the tablets contain all
wisdom, the dying Enoch tells his children that the tablets are the
source of all understanding, etc. (see, e.g., cc. 81. 1; 93. 2; 106. 19,
ed. Dillmann).  In the Book of Jubilees, again, it is said that
inscribed on the tablets are, e.g., the punishment of the angels who
sinned with mortal women, the plan of the division of weeks, the name of
Abraham as the friend of God, etc. (cc. 5, 6, 19).  See also *Test.
Asher*, 2, 7, *infra*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[13:69](0080007.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span> \[[Gen. xlviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>.  The
Jehovah-Angel.\]

<span id="fn_69"></span>[14:70](0080007.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>ἀσπίς</span>.  The Latin version gives the other
meaning to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p17.2"></span>ἀσπίς</span> here, of asp or viper.  The epithet
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p17.3"></span>χαλκῆν</span>,
however, renders “shield” much more probable, as there seems nothing in
the context pointing to the “brazen serpent.”

<span id="fn_70"></span>[14:71](0080007.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="iii.v-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span> A quotation from [1 Thess. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.v-p18.1"></span>,
where the context also is similar to the present.  \[See Lardner’s
refutation of the learned Grabe on this quotation, vol. ii. p. 359.\]

<span id="fn_71"></span>[14:72](0080007.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span> With the whole of this passage we may
compare the description of the vestments of Aaron.  See especially
[Exod. 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.v-p21.1"></span>
(LXX.).  The <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p21.2"></span>πέταλον</span> is the translation of <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.v-p21.3"></span>ץיצ</span>, the plate of
gold on the forehead of the high priest over the mitre.  The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p21.4"></span>λογίον</span>, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p21.5"></span>λογεῖον</span>, is the
breastplate, with the Urim and Thummim.  For the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p21.6"></span>ποδήρης</span>, see [Ex.
xxviii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.v-p21.7"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[14:73](0080007.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="iii.v-p21.8"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span> On the possible reference here to the
elements of the Eucharist, see Grabe’s note, *Spicilegium, in loc*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[14:74](0080007.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span> Nitzsch (p. 19, n. 37) explains this
division into three <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p23.1"></span>ἀρχαί</span>, as referring to the three orders
of the Christian priesthood.  This, however, seems improbable.  Cf.
Kayser, p. 119; Vorstman, p. 41.  It is far more probable that the
reference is to Moses, Aaron, and Christ.  Thus with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p23.2"></span>πιστεύσας</span> we may
compare [Num. xii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.v-p23.3"></span>.  For this use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p23.4"></span>ἀρχή</span>, cf. [Gen. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.v-p23.5"></span>. 
\[[Isa. lxvi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.v-p23.6"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_74"></span>[14:75](0080007.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="iii.v-p23.7"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span> \[[Rom.
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#015.md), [Heb.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_75"></span>[14:76](0080007.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="iii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p25"></span> Or, if we follow the reading of Cd. Oxon.,
“Prophet of the Most High.”

<span id="fn_76"></span>[14:77](0080007.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="iii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p27"></span> Or rather, with Cd. Oxon., “with our
father.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[15:78](0080007.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="iii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p28"></span> We constantly find Peter, in the
*Clementine Homilies* and *Recognitions*, combining with the Agapæ the
practice of bathing.  Cf., e.g., *Recog*., iv. 3, v. 36.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[15:79](0080007.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="iii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p29"></span> Cf. Hom., xiv. 1.  \[[Lev.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013.md), [Mark
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049.md)<span id="iii.v-p29.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_79"></span>[15:80](0080007.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="iii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p31"></span> \[Annas and Caiaphas.  [John xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.v-p31.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_80"></span>[15:81](0080007.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="iii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p32"></span> This document is frequently quoted in the
*Testaments*:  cf. *Sim*. 5; *Levi* 14, 16; *Judah* 18; *Dan* 5; *Naph*.
4; *Benj*. 9.  Most of these citations, however, are not to be found in
the work as it has come down to us.  We must therefore either assume the
reference to some other books of Enoch not now extant, or rather perhaps
that they are general appeals to the spirit of the book, regarded as a
great fount of prophecy.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[15:82](0080007.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="iii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p36"></span> Read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p36.1"></span>αὐτοῦ</span> with Cd. Oxon.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[15:83](0080007.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="iii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p38"></span> \[[John
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md), [John
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md), [John
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.v-p38.1"></span>,
etc.\]

<span id="fn_83"></span>[16:84](0080007.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="iii.v-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p39"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p39.1"></span>πλεονξία</span>, like the English “excess,” has
not unfrequently special reference to sins of sensuality.  Cf. [1 Cor.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011.md), [Eph.
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019.md), [Eph.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005.md), [Col.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005.md), [1 Thess.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.v-p39.2"></span>, the
context in all of which passages points strongly to this conclusion. 
See Suicer’s *Thesaurus, s.v.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[16:85](0080007.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="iii.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p42"></span> Cf. [Matt. xxvii.
63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063.md)<span id="iii.v-p42.1"></span>,
where <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p42.2"></span>ἐκεῖνος ὁ
πλάνος</span> is said of our Lord.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[16:86](0080007.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="iii.v-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p43"></span> \[[Matt. xxvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.v-p43.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_86"></span>[16:87](0080007.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="iii.v-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p44"></span> \[[John
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005.md), [Isa.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003.md), [1 Pet.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.v-p44.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_87"></span>[16:88](0080007.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="iii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p47"></span> \[[Jer. xxxiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.v-p47.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_88"></span>[16:89](0080007.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="iii.v-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p48"></span> \[[Matt. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.v-p48.1"></span>. 
Constant references to the Gospels proofs of text.\]

<span id="fn_89"></span>[16:90](0080007.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="iii.v-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p49"></span> An additional clause occurs here in Cd.
Oxon., which generally has a tendency to omit; the copyist of Cd. Cam.
having possibly looked on to the same initial words in the next clause: 
“And in His priesthood shall the Gentiles be multiplied in knowledge on
the earth and shall be enlightened through the grace of the Lord; but
Israel shall be minished in ignorance, and be darkened in sorrow.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[16:91](0080007.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="iii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p50"></span> The reading of Cd. Oxon. here, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p50.1"></span>ἀποστήσει</span>, is to be
preferred to Cd. Cam., <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p50.2"></span>στήσει</span>.  Grosseteste’s Latin version, in
all probability made from the latter, has *stare faciet*.  \[See p. 7,
note 1, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_91"></span>[16:92](0080007.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="iii.v-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p51"></span> \[[Rev. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.v-p51.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_92"></span>[17:93](0080007.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="iii.v-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p52"></span> \[[Luke
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.v-p52.1"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament IV](0080008.md)
