[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080439)  [Next](0080441.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Time of Making the
World.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv-p2"></span>“But you will say, When was the
world made?  And why so late?  This you might have objected, though it
had been made sooner.  For you might say, Why not also before this?  And
so, going back through unmeasured ages, you might still ask, And why not
sooner?  But we are not now discussing this, why it was not made sooner;
but whether it was made at all.  For if it is manifest that it was made,
it is necessarily the work of a powerful and supreme Artificer; and if
this is evident, it must be left to the choice and judgment of the wise
Artificer when He should please to make it; unless indeed you think that
all this wisdom, which has constructed the immense fabric of the world,
and has given to the several objects their forms and kinds, assigning to
them a habit not only in accordance with beauty, but also most
convenient and necessary for their future uses,—unless, I say, you think
that this alone has escaped it, that it should choose a convenient
season for so magnificent a work of creation.  He has doubtless a
certain reason and evident causes why, and when, and how He made the
world; but it were not proper that these should be disclosed to those
who are reluctant to inquire into and understand the things which are
placed before their eyes, and which testify of His providence.  For
those things which are kept in secret, and are hidden within the senses
of Wisdom, as in a royal treasury, are laid open to none but those who
have learned of Him, with whom these things are sealed and laid up.  It
is God, therefore, who made all things, and Himself was made by none. 
But those who speak of nature instead of God, and declare that all
things were made by nature, do not perceive the mistake of the name
which they use.  For if they think that nature is irrational, it is most
foolish to suppose that a rational creature can proceed from an
irrational creator.  But if it is Reason—that is, Logos <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816.md) —by which it appears that all things
were made, they change the name without purpose, when they make
statements concerning the reason of the Creator.  If you have anything
to say to these things, my father, say on.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_816"></span>[174:817](0080440.htm#fr_816.md) <span
id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv-p3"></span> \[Comp. [John i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iii.x.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.  The expression seems to be used here
with a polemic purpose.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](0080441.md)
