[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080013)  [Next](0080015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>X.—The Testament of Asher Concerning Two Faces
of Vice and Virtue.</span>

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xii-p2.1"></span>The</span> record of the testament of Asher,
what things he spake to his sons in the hundred and twentieth year of
his life.  While he was still in health, he said to them:  Hearken, ye
children of Asher, to your father, and I will declare to you all that is
right in the sight of God.  Two ways <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) hath God given to the sons of men, and
two minds, and two doings, and two places, and two ends.  Therefore all
things are by twos, one corresponding to the other.  There are two ways
of good and evil, with which are the two minds in our breasts
distinguishing them.  Therefore if the soul take pleasure in good, all
its actions are in righteousness; and though it sin, it straightway
repenteth.  For, having his mind set upon righteousness, and casting
away maliciousness, he straightway overthroweth the evil, and uprooteth
the sin.  But if his mind turn aside in evil, all his doings are in
maliciousness, and he driveth away the good, and taketh unto him the
evil, and is ruled by Beliar; and even though he work what is good, he
perverteth it in evil.  For whenever he beginneth as though to do good,
he bringeth the end of his doing to work evil, seeing that the treasure
of the devil is filled with the poison of an evil spirit.

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span>2.  There is then, he saith, a soul which
speaketh the good for the sake of the evil, and the end of the doing
leadeth to mischief. <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md)   There is
a man who showeth no compassion upon him <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>
<span id="iii.xii-Page_31"></span>who serveth his turn in evil; and this
thing hath two aspects, but the whole is evil.  And there is a man that
loveth him that worketh evil; he likewise dwelleth in evil, because he
chooseth even to die in an evil cause for his sake:  and concerning this
it is clear that it hath two aspects, but the whole is an evil work. 
And though there is love, it is but wickedness concealing the evil, even
as it beareth a name that seemeth good, but the end of the doing tendeth
unto evil.  Another stealeth, worketh unjustly, plundereth, defraudeth,
and withal pitieth the poor:  this, too, hath a twofold aspect, but the
whole is evil.  Defrauding his neighbour he provoketh God, and sweareth
falsely against the Most High, and yet pitieth the poor:  the Lord who
commandeth the law he setteth at nought and provoketh, and refresheth
the poor; he defileth the soul, and maketh gay the body; he killeth
many, and he pitieth a few:  and this, too, hath a twofold aspect. 
Another committeth adultery and fornication, and abstaineth from meats;
yet in his fasting he worketh evil, and by his power and his wealth
perverteth many, and out of his excessive wickedness worketh the
commandments:  this, too, hath a twofold aspect, but the whole is evil. 
Such men are as swine or hares; <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md)
for they are half clean, but in very deed are unclean.  For God in the
Heavenly <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) Tablets hath thus
declared.

<span id="iii.xii-p8"></span>3.  Do not ye therefore, my children, wear
two faces like unto them, of goodness and of wickedness; but cleave unto
goodness only, for in goodness doth God rest, and men desire it.  From
wickedness flee away, destroying the devil by your good works; for they
that are double-faced serve not God, but their own lusts, so that they
may please Beliar and men like unto themselves.

<span id="iii.xii-p9"></span>4.  For good men, even they that are single
of face, though they be thought by them that are double-faced to err,
are just before God.  For many in killing the wicked do two works, an
evil by a good; but the whole is good, because he hath uprooted and
destroyed that which is evil.  One man hateth him that showeth mercy,
and doeth wrong to the adulterer and the thief:  this, too, is
double-faced, but the whole work is good, because he followeth the
Lord’s example, in that he receiveth not that which seemeth good with
that which is really bad. <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md)  
Another desireth not to see good days with them that riot, lest he
defile his mouth and pollute his soul:  this, too, is double-faced, but
the whole is good, for such men are like to stags and to hinds, because
in a wild condition they seem to be unclean, but they are altogether
clean; because they walk in a zeal for God, and abstain from what God
also hateth and forbiddeth by His commandments, and they ward off the
evil from the good.

<span id="iii.xii-p11"></span>5.  Ye see therefore, my children, how
that there are two in all things, one against the other, and the one is
hidden by the other. <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md)   Death
succeedeth to life, dishonour to glory, night to day, and darkness to
light; and all things are under the day, and just things under life: 
wherefore also everlasting life awaiteth death.  Nor may it be said that
truth is a lie, nor right wrong; for all truth is under the light, even
as all things are under God.  All these things I proved in my life, and
I wandered not from the truth of the Lord, and I searched out the
commandments of the Most High, walking with singleness of face according
to all my strength unto that which is good.

<span id="iii.xii-p13"></span>6.  Take heed therefore ye also, my
children, to the commandments of the Lord, following the truth with
singleness of face, for they that are double-faced receive twofold
punishment.  Hate the spirits of error, which strive against men.  Keep
the law of the Lord, and give not heed unto evil as unto good; but look
unto the thing that is good indeed, and keep it in all commandments of
the Lord, having your conversation unto Him, and resting in Him:  for
the ends at which men aim do show their righteousness, and know the
angels of the Lord from the angels of Satan.  For if the soul depart
troubled, it is tormented by the evil spirit which also it served in
lusts and evil works; but if quietly and with joy it hath known the
angel of peace, it shall comfort him in life.

<span id="iii.xii-p14"></span>7.  Become not, my children, as Sodom,
which knew not the angels of the Lord, and perished for ever.  For I
know that ye will sin, and ye shall be delivered into the hands of your
enemies, and your land shall be made desolate, and ye shall be scattered
unto the four corners of the earth.  And ye shall be set at nought in
the Dispersion as useless water, until the Most High shall visit the
earth; and He shall come as man, with men eating and drinking, and in
peace breaking the head of the dragon through water.  He shall save
Israel and all nations, God speaking in the person of man.  Therefore
tell ye these things to your children, that they disobey Him not.  For I
have read in the Heavenly Tablets that in very deed ye will disobey Him,
and act ungodly against Him, not giving heed to the law of God, but to
the commandments of men.  Therefore shall ye be scattered as Gad and as
Dan my brethren, who shall know not their own lands, tribe, and tongue. 
But the Lord will gather you together in faith through <span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="iii.xii-Page_32"></span>the hope of
His tender mercy, for the sake of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md)

<span id="iii.xii-p16"></span>8.  And when he had said these things unto
them, he charged them, saying:  Bury me in Hebron.  And he fell into a
peaceful sleep, and died; and after this his sons did as he had charged
them, and they carried him up and buried him with his fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[30:167](0080014.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span> \[See the *Duæ Viæ*, vol. vii., p. 377,
this series.\]

<span id="fn_167"></span>[30:168](0080014.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span> \[This section is commended by Dr.
Lardner.\]

<span id="fn_168"></span>[31:169](0080014.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span> Cf. [Lev.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xii-p6.1"></span>. 
\[Vol. ii. p. 555 note 6.\]

<span id="fn_169"></span>[31:170](0080014.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p7"></span> Cf. *Levi* 5.  \[P. 13, note 8 *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_170"></span>[31:171](0080014.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p10"></span> \[[Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)<span id="iii.xii-p10.1"></span>. 
This seems contradictory.\]

<span id="fn_171"></span>[31:172](0080014.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p12"></span> The Ox. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xii-p12.1"></span>ms</span>. adds, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii-p12.2"></span>ἐν τῇ εὐφροσύνῃ ἡ μέθη, ἐν τῷ γέλωτι τὸ
πένθος, ἐν τῷ γάμῳ ἡ ἀκρασία</span>.  \[[Ecclesiasticus
42.24](../../../bib/apo/sir042.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.xii-p12.3"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_172"></span>[32:173](0080014.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p15"></span> \[The Hebrew triad, father, son, and
proceeding.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament XI](0080015.md)
