[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080003)  [Next](0080005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>to</span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs.</span>

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>This</span> very curious fragment of antiquity
deserves a few words in anticipation of the translator’s valuable
preface.  Grabe’s *Spicilegium* is there referred to; but it may be well
also to consult his citations, in elucidation, of Bull’s *Defensio Fidei
Nicænæ*, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) where he treats the work with
respect.  My most valued authority, however, on this subject, is
Lardner, <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) who gives a very full account
of the work with his usual candor and learning.  He seems to treat the
matter with a needless profusion of space and consideration; yet in a
much later volume of his great treatise he recurs to the subject <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) with expressions of satisfaction that he had
dealt with it so largely before.

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>Cave placed the composition of the
*Testaments* about <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 192, but concedes a much earlier
origin to the first portion of the work.  Origen quotes from it, and
Tertullian is supposed to have borrowed from it one of his expositions,
as will be noted in its place.  Lardner clears it from charges of
Ebionitism, <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) but thinks the author was
so far in accord with that heresy as to use expressions savouring of
“Unitarianism.”  Of this charge he is not justly susceptible, it appears
to me:  quite otherwise.  If we can imagine Trypho coming to the light
after his kindly parting with Justin, <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md)
I can conceive of such a man as the author of this work.  He is a
Christian awakening to the real purport of the Old-Testament Scriptures,
and anxious to lead rather than drive his brethren after the flesh to
the discovery of Him “concerning whom Moses in the law and the prophets
did write:”  not a “Judaizing Christian,” as Cave imagined, but the
reverse,—a Christianizing Jew.  Now, I must think that such a writer
would weave into his plan many accepted traditions of the Jews and many
Rabbinical expositions of the sacred writers.  He was doubtless
acquainted with that remarkable passage in the Revelation in which the
patriarchs are so honourably named, <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md)
and with that corresponding passage which seems to unite the twelve
patriarchs with the twelve apostles. <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md)
  St. Paul’s claim for the twelve tribes before Agrippa <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) would naturally impress itself on such a
mind.  Whether the product of such a character with such a disposition
would naturally be such an affectionate and filial attempt as this to
identify the religion of the Crucified with the faith of the Jewish
fathers, <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) may be judged of by my
reader.

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span><span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_4"></span>It appears to me an ill-advised romance; not
more a “pious fraud” than several fictions which have attracted
attention in our own times, based on the traditions of the Hebrews.  The
legends of the “Wandering Jew” have grown out of corresponding instincts
among Christians.  To me they appear like the profane “Passion-plays”
lately revived among Christians,—a most unwarrantable form of teaching
even truth.  But as to the work itself, seeing it exists, I must
acknowledge that it seems to me a valuable relic of antiquity, and an
interesting specimen of the feelings and convictions of those believers
over whom St. James presided in Jerusalem: <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)   “Israelites indeed,” but “zealous of
the law.”  They were now convinced that Abraham and Isaac and Jacob,
with Moses and all the prophets, looked for the Messiah who had appeared
in Jesus of Nazareth.  The author of this book was anxious to show that
the twelve patriarchs were twelve believers in the Paschal Lamb, and
that they died in Christian penitence and faith.

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>He, then, who will read or study the
following waif of the olden time, as I have done, will not find it
unprofitable reading.  It really supplies a key to some difficulties in
the Scripture narrative.  It suggests what are at least plausible
counterparts of what is written.  “To the pure all things are pure;” and
I see nothing that need defile in any of the details which expose the
sins, and magnify the penitence, of the patriarchs.  In fact, Lardner’s
objection to one of the sections in the beautiful narrative of Joseph
strikes me as extraordinary.  It is the story of a heroic conflict with
temptation, the like of which was doubtless not uncommon in the days of
early Christians living among heathens; <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) and I think it was possibly written to
inspire a Joseph-like chastity in Christian youth.  “I do not suppose,”
says Lardner, “that the virtue of any of these ancient Hebrews was
complete according to the Christian rule.”  I am amazed at this; I have
always supposed the example of Joseph the more glorious because he
flourished as the flower of chastity in a gross and carnal age.  Who so
pure as he save John the Baptist, that morning star that shone so near
the Sun of Righteousness in the transient beauty of his “heliacal
rising”?  Surely Joseph was a type of Christ in this as in other
particulars, and our author merely enables us to understand the “fiery
darts” which he was wont to hurl back at the tempter.  I own
(reluctantly, because I dislike this form of teaching) that for me the
superlative ode of the dying Jacob receives a reflected lustre from this
curious book, especially in the splendid eulogy with which the old
patriarch blesses his beloved Joseph.  “The author,” says Lardner, “in
an indirect manner…bears a large testimony to the Christian religion, to
the facts, principles, and books of the New Testament.  He speaks of the
nativity of Christ, the meekness and unblameableness of His life, His
crucifixion at the instigation of the Jewish priests, the wonderful
concomitants of His death, His resurrection, and ascension.  He
represents the character of the Messiah as God and man:  the Most High
God with men, eating and drinking with them; the Son of God; the Saviour
of the world, of the Gentiles and Israel; as Eternal High Priest and
King.  He likewise speaks of the effusion of the Holy Spirit upon the
Messiah, attended with a voice from heaven; His unrighteous treatment by
the Jews; their desolations and the destruction of the Temple upon that
account; the call of the Gentiles; the illuminating them generally with
new light; the effusion of the Spirit upon believers, but especially,
and in a more abundant measure, upon the Gentiles.…There are allusions
to the Gospels of St. Matthew, St. Luke and St. John, the Acts of the
Apostles, and of the Epistles to Ephesians, First Thessalonians, First
Timothy, Hebrews, and First St. John, also to the Revelation.  So far as
consistent with the assumed character of his work, the author declares
the canonical authority of the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles of
St. Paul.”  Of which of the minor writers among the Ante-Nicene Fathers
can so much be said?

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span>Regarded as a sort of Jewish surrender to
Justin’s argument with Trypho, this book is interesting, and represents,
no doubt, the convictions of thousands of Jewish converts of the first
age.  It is, in short, worthy of more attention than it has yet
received.

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span><span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_5"></span>Here follows Mr. Sinker’s valuable <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p21.1"></span>Introductory Notice:</span>—

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p22.1"></span>The</span> apocryphal work known as the
*Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs* professes to be, as its name
implies, the utterances of the dying patriarchs, the sons of Jacob.  In
these they give some account of their lives, embodying particulars not
found in the scriptural account, and build thereupon various moral
precepts for the guidance of their descendants.  The book partakes also
of the nature of an Apocalypse:  the patriarchs see in the future their
children doing wickedly, stained with the sins of every nation; and thus
they foretell the troubles impending on their race.  Still at last God
will put an end to their woe, and comfort is found in the promise of a
Messiah

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span>There can be little or no doubt that the
author was a Jew, who, having been converted to Christianity, sought to
win over his countrymen to the same faith, and thus employed the names
of the patriarchs as a vehicle for conveying instruction to their
descendants, as winning by this means for his teaching at any rate a
*prima facie* welcome in the eyes of the Jewish people.

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span>It does not seem hard to settle
approximately the limits of time within which the book was probably
written.  It cannot be placed very late in the second century, seeing
that it is almost certainly quoted by Tertullian, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) and that Origen <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) cites the *Testaments* by name,
apparently indeed holding it in considerable respect.  We can, however,
approximate much more nearly than this; for the allusions to the
destruction of Jerusalem assign to the *Testaments* a date subsequent to
that event.  This will harmonize perfectly with what is the natural
inference from several passages,—namely, that the Gentiles now were a
majority in the Church,—as well as with the presence of the many formulæ
to express the incarnation, and with the apparent collection of the
books of the New Testament into a volume. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p28"></span>On the other hand, important evidence as to
the posterior limit of the date of writing may be derived from the
language used with reference to the priesthood.  Christ is both High
Priest and King, and His former office is higher than the latter, and to
Him the old priesthood must resign its rights.  Now such language as
this would be almost meaningless after Hadrian’s destruction of
Jerusalem consequent on the revolt of Bar-Cochba (<span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>a.d.</span> 135), after which all power of
Judaism for acting directly upon Christianity ceased; and, indeed, on
the hypothesis of a later date, we should doubtless find allusions to
the revolt and its suppression.  On the above grounds, we infer that the
writing of the *Testaments* is to be placed in a period ranging from
late in the first century to the revolt of Bar-Cochba; closer than this
it is perhaps not safe to draw our limits. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p30"></span>The language in which the *Testaments* were
written was no doubt the Hellenistic Greek in which we now possess them;
presenting as they do none of the peculiar marks which characterize a
version.  Whether there were a Hebrew work on which the present was
modelled—a supposition by no means improbable in itself—we cannot tell,
nor is it a matter of much importance.  The phenomena of the book itself
may be cited in support of this conclusion:  for instance, the use of
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p30.1"></span>διαθήκη</span> in its ordinary classical
meaning of “testament,” not “covenant” as in Hellenistic Greek, for
which former meaning there would be no strictly equivalent word in
Hebrew; the numerous instances of paronomasia, such as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p30.2"></span>ἀθετεῖν,
νουθετεῖν</span>, <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p31.2"></span>φαίρεσις,
ἀναίρεσις</span>, <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p32.1"></span>λιμός, λοιμός</span>, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p33.1"></span>ἐν τάξει, ἄτακτον</span>, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p34.1"></span>τάξις, ἀταξία</span>; <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) the frequent use of the genitive
absolute, and of the verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p35.1"></span>μέλλειν</span>; the use of various expressions
pertaining to the Greek philosophy, as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p35.2"></span>διάθεσις, αἴσθησις, φύσις, τέλος</span>.

<span id="iii.ii-p36"></span>It seems doubtful how far we can attempt
with safety to determine accurately the religious standpoint of the
writer beyond the obvious fact of his Jewish origin, though some have
attempted <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_6"></span>to show that he was a Nazarene, and others a
Jewish Christian of Pauline tendencies.  We shall therefore content
ourselves with referring those who seek for more specific information on
this point to the works mentioned below.

<span id="iii.ii-p37"></span>To refer now briefly to the external
history of our document, we meet with nothing definite, after its
citation by Origen, for many centuries:  there are possible allusions in
Jerome <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) and in Procopius
Gazæus; <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) there is also a mention of
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p39.1"></span>πατριάρχαι</span> in
the *Synopsis Sacræ Scripturæ* found among the writings of Athanasius,
as well as in the *Stichometria* of Nicephorus of Constantinople, on
which it is probably based.  Again, in the Canons of the Council of Rome
(494 <span class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p39.2"></span>a.d.</span>) under
Gelasius, and of the Council of Bracara (563 <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p39.3"></span>a.d.</span>), are possible references, though
it is far from improbable that in some of the foregoing passages the
reference may be to a writing <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p39.4"></span>τῶν τριῶν Πατριαρχῶν</span> alluded to in the
*Apostolic Constitutions*, <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) or is
even of somewhat loose application.

<span id="iii.ii-p41"></span>After this a blank ensues until the middle
of the thirteenth century, when it was brought to the knowledge of
Western Europe by Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, the earliest of
the great English reformers. <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)   We
cite here the account of the matter given by Matthew Paris, although of
course we need not accept all the opinions of the old chronicler
respecting the document in question:  “At this same time, Robert, Bishop
of Lincoln, a man most deeply versed in Latin and Greek, accurately
translated the *Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs* from Greek into
Latin.  These had been for a long time unknown and hidden through the
jealousy of the Jews, on account of the prophecies of the Saviour
contained in them.  The Greeks, however, the most unwearied
investigators of all writings, were the first to come to a knowledge of
this document, and translated it from Hebrew into Greek, and have kept
it to themselves till our times.  And neither in the time of the blessed
Jerome nor of any other holy interpreter could the Christians gain an
acquaintance with it, through the malice of the ancient Jews.  This
glorious treatise, then, the aforesaid bishop (with the help of Master
Nicolaus, a Greek, and a clerk of the Abbey of St. Alban’s) translated
fully and clearly, and word for word, from Greek into Latin, to the
strengthening of the Christian faith, and to the greater confusion of
the Jews.” <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p44"></span>Again, after speaking of the death of
“Master John de Basingstokes, Archdeacon of Leicester,” a man of very
great learning in Latin and Greek, he proceeds: <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md)   “This Master John had mentioned to
Robert, Bishop of Lincoln, that when he was studying at Athens he had
seen and heard from learned Greek doctors certain things unknown to the
Latins.  Among these he found the *Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs*,
that is to say, of the sons of Jacob.  Now it is plain that these really
form part of the sacred volume, but have been long hidden through the
jealousy of the Jews, on account of the evident prophecies about Christ
which are clearly seen in them.  Consequently this same bishop sent into
Greece; and when he obtained them, he translated them from Greek into
Latin, as well as certain other things.”

<span id="iii.ii-p46"></span>After this it would seem as though the same
fate still pursued our document, for the entire Greek text was not
printed until the eve of the eighteenth century, when it was published
for the first time by Grabe, whose edition has been several times
reprinted. <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p48"></span>Four Greek <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p48.1"></span>mss.</span> of the *Testaments* are known to
exist:—

<span id="iii.ii-p49"></span>1.  The <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p49.1"></span>ms. F</span>f. i. 24 in the University Library
of Cambridge, to which it was given by Archbishop Parker, whose
autograph it bears on its first page.  It is a quarto on parchment, of
261 leaves (in which the *Testaments* occupy ff. 203*a*–261*b*), double
columns, 20 lines in a column, handwriting of the tenth century.  It is
furnished with accents and breathings, and a fairly full punctuation. 
There are very strong grounds for believing that it was this <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p49.2"></span>ms.</span> that Grosseteste’s
<span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span id="iii.ii-Page_7"></span>version
was made, exhibiting as it does a very large amount of curious verbal
coincidence with it. <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md)   The text of
this <span class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p50.5"></span>ms.</span> has been
that given in the various editions mentioned below.

<span id="iii.ii-p51"></span>2.  The <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p51.1"></span>ms.</span> Barocci 133 in the Bodleian Library
at Oxford, where it came with the rest of the Barocci collection from
Venice, and was presented to the University by its Chancellor, the Earl
of Pembroke.  It is a quarto volume; and except a leaf or two of
parchment, containing writing of an older period, consists of a number
of treatises on paper, apparently by several different hands, in the
writing of the latter part of the fourteenth century.  The *Testaments*
occupy ff. 179*a*–203*b*.  The amount of difference between this <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p51.2"></span>ms.</span> and the preceding
is considerable, and is sufficient to show that it has had no direct
communication with the latter.  A large number of omissions occur in it,
in some instances amounting to entire chapters.  The variations of this
<span class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p51.3"></span>ms.</span> are given
more or less fully in the various editions.

<span id="iii.ii-p52"></span>3.  A <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p52.1"></span>ms.</span> in the Vatican Library at Rome, not
yet edited.  It is said to be a small quarto on paper, written in a very
distinct hand, though unfortunately some leaves are damaged.  It bears a
subscription with the date 1235.  I owe my knowledge of this <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p52.2"></span>ms.</span> to an article by
Dr. Vorstman in the *Godgeleerde Bijdragen* for 1866, p. 953 sqq.

<span id="iii.ii-p53"></span>4.  A <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p53.1"></span>ms.</span> discovered by Tischendorf in the
island of Patmos, of which no details have yet been published. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p55"></span>The entire Greek text of the *Testaments*
was first printed by Grabe in his *Spicilegium Patrum et Hæreticorum*,
Oxford, 1698, professedly from the Cambridge <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p55.1"></span>ms.</span>, but in reality from some very
inaccurate transcript of it, very possibly from one made by Abednego
Seller, also in the Cambridge University Library, Oo. vi. 92.  Grabe
also gave a few of the variations of the Oxford <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p55.2"></span>ms.</span>  Fabricius, in his *Codex
Pseudepigraphus Veteris Testamenti*, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) gives little more than a reprint from
Grabe.  In the second edition of the latter (1714) the true text has
been restored in several passages; but in many places Grosseteste’s
Latin version, which witnessed to the true reading, was altered to suit
Grabe’s incorrect text.  Fabricius’ second edition (1722) is perhaps, on
the whole, less accurate than his first.  Since then the text and notes,
as given in Grabe’s second edition, have been reprinted, with but few
additions, by Gallandi, in his *Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum*, vol. i. p.
193 sqq., Venice, 1765, and in Migne’s *Patrologia Græca*, vol. ii.,
Paris, 1857.  The text of the Cambridge <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p56.1"></span>ms.</span> with a full statement of the
variations of the Oxford <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p56.2"></span>ms.</span>, has recently been edited directly
from the <span class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p56.3"></span>mss.</span> by
myself, Cambridge, 1869; from this edition the present translation has
been made.

<span id="iii.ii-p57"></span>The <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p57.1"></span>mss.</span> of Grosseteste’s Latin version are
numerous, there being no less than twelve in Cambridge alone and it has
been frequently printed, both with the editions of the Greek text and
independently. <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p59"></span>Besides the Latin version, the *Testaments*
have also been translated into several European languages, in all cases
apparently from the Latin.  The English translation made by Arthur
Golding was first printed by John Daye in Aldersgate in 1581, and has
since been frequently reproduced; the British Museum, which does not
possess all the editions, having no less than eleven. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p61"></span>The author of the French translation <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) appears to believe, as the English
translator had done, that we have here really the last words of the sons
of Jacob.  A German translation has also several times been
published, <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) and a German translation
in <span class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p63.1"></span>ms.</span> is to be
found in the British Museum. <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md)   We
may further mention a Dutch translation (Antwerp, 1570), a Danish
translation <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_8"></span>(1601), and a <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p64.2"></span>ms.</span> Icelandic translation of the
eighteenth century in the British Museum, add. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p64.3"></span>mss</span> 11,068.

<span id="iii.ii-p65"></span>For further information on the subject of
the *Testaments*, reference may be made, in addition to works already
mentioned, to the following:—Nitzsch, *Commentatio Critica de
Testamentis XII. Patriarcharum, libro V. T. Pseudepigrapho* (Wittenberg,
1810); Ritschl, *<span id="iii.ii-p65.1"></span>Die Entstehung der
altkatholischen Kirche* (Bonn, 1850; ed. 2, 1857), p. 171 sqq.;
Vorstman, *Disquisitio de Testamentorum XII. Patriarcharum origine et
pretio* (Rotterdam, 1857); Kayser in Reuss and Cunitz’s *<span
id="iii.ii-p65.2"></span>Beiträge zu den theol. Wissenschaften* for
1851, pp. 107–140; <span id="iii.ii-p65.3"></span>Lücke,*Einleitung in
die Offenbarung des Joh*., vol. i. p. 334 sqq., ed. 2.

<span id="iii.ii-p66"></span>R. S.

<span id="iii.ii-p67"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p67.1"></span>Trinity</span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p67.2"></span>College</span>, <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p67.3"></span>Cambridge</span>.

<span id="iii.ii-p68"></span>*February* 21, 1871.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:4](0080004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span> Vol. v. p. 176, ed. 1827.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3:5](0080004.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span> *Credib.*, vol. ii. pp. 345–364.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[3:6](0080004.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span> Vol. vi. p. 384.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[3:7](0080004.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span> The honour done to St. Paul is enough to
settle any suspicion of this sort.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[3:8](0080004.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span> See vol. i. p. 270, note 2, this series.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[3:9](0080004.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span> [Rev. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>.  Dan
is excepted.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[3:10](0080004.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span> [Rev. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>.  See
vol. vii. p. 348, this series.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:11](0080004.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span> [Acts xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.ii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[3:12](0080004.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span> See *The Christ of Jewish History* in
Stanley Leathes’ *Bampton Lectures*, p. 51, ed. New York, 1874; also
Westcott, *Introduction to Study of the Gospels*, 3d ed., London,
Macmillans, 1867.  Note, on the *Book of Henoch*, pp. 69, 93–101; on the
*Book of Jubilees* p. 109.  He puts this book into the first century,
later than Henoch, earlier than the *Twelve Patriarchs*.  Consult this
work on the Alexandrian Fathers, on inspiration of Scripture, etc.; and
note the Jewish doctrine of the Messiah, pp. 86, 143, 151, also the
apocryphal traditions of words of our Lord, p. 428.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[4:13](0080004.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span> [Acts xxi.
18-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>. 
To my mind a most touching history, in which it is hard to say whether
St. Paul or St. James is exhibited in the more charming light.  It
suggests the absolute harmony of their Epistles.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[4:14](0080004.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span> Vol. i. Elucid. II. p. 57, this series.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[5:15](0080004.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p25"></span> *Adv. Marcionem*, v. 1; *Scorpiace*, 13;
cf. *Benj.* 11.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[5:16](0080004.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p26"></span> *Hom. in Josuam*, xv. 6; cf. *Reub.* 2, 3.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[5:17](0080004.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p27"></span> *Benj*. 11.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[5:18](0080004.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p29"></span> \[Compare Westcott, *Introduction to Study
of the Gospels*, p. 132, ed. Boston, 1862.\]

<span id="fn_18"></span>[5:19](0080004.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p31"></span> *Benj*. 4.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[5:20](0080004.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p32"></span> *Judah* 23.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[5:21](0080004.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p33"></span> *Judah* 23.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[5:22](0080004.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p34"></span> *Naph*. 2.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[5:23](0080004.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p35"></span> *Naph*. 3.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[6:24](0080004.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p38"></span> *Adv. Vigilantium*, c. 6.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[6:25](0080004.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p39"></span> *Comm. in Genesin*, c. 38.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[6:26](0080004.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p39.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p40"></span> vi. 16.  \[See vol. vii. p. 457, this
series.\]

<span id="fn_26"></span>[6:27](0080004.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p42"></span> \[Of whom see Lightfoot, *Apostolic
Fathers*, Part II. vol. i. p. 77, ed. London, 1885.\]

<span id="fn_27"></span>[6:28](0080004.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p43"></span> *Historia Anglorum*, <span
class="c9"><span id="iii.ii-p43.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1242, p. 801, ed.
London, 1571.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[6:29](0080004.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p45"></span> *Op. cit.* <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p45.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1252, p. 1112.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[6:30](0080004.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p47"></span> *Vide infra*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[7:31](0080004.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p50"></span> \[See, e.g., the curious reading in *Levi*
18, <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p50.1"></span>καὶ
στησει</span>, where the Latin <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p50.2"></span>mss.</span> are unanimous in giving *stare
faciet*; also the mistake of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p50.3"></span>᾽Ιακώβ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p50.4"></span>᾽Ρουβήμ</span> in *Issachar* 1.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[7:32](0080004.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p54"></span> See Tischendorf, *<span
id="iii.ii-p54.1"></span>Aus dem heiligen Lande*, p. 341.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[7:33](0080004.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p56"></span> Hamburgh, 1713.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[7:34](0080004.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p58"></span> e.g., 1483; Hagenau, 1532; Paris, 1549;
and often.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[7:35](0080004.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p60"></span> This English translation having been made
from the Latin, the printed editions of which swarm with inaccuracies
(Grosseteste’s Latin version itself being a most exact translation), I
have been able to make much less use of it than I could have desired. 
It has, however, been compared throughout.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[7:36](0080004.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p62"></span> Monsieur Macé, Chefecier, curé de Saint
Opportune, Paris, 1713.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[7:37](0080004.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p63"></span> e.g., Vienna, 1544; Strasburgh, 1596;
Hamburgh, 1637.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[7:38](0080004.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p64"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.ii-p64.1"></span>mss.</span> Harl., 1252.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament I](0080005.md)
