[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080123)  [Next](0080125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lxii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.lxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXII.—Foolishness of
Preaching.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.lxii-p2"></span>“Therefore Caiaphas, again looking
at me, and sometimes in the way of warning and sometimes in that of
accusation, said that I ought for the future to refrain from preaching
Christ Jesus, lest I should do it to my own destruction, and lest, being
deceived myself, I should also deceive others.  Then, moreover, he
charged me with presumption, because, though I was unlearned, a
fisherman, and a rustic, I dared to assume the office of a teacher.  As
he spoke these things, and many more of like kind, I said in reply, that
I incurred less danger, if, as he said, this Jesus were not the Christ,
because I received Him as a teacher of the law; but that he was in
terrible danger if this be the very Christ, as assuredly He is:  for I
believe in Him who has appeared; but for whom else, who has never
appeared, does he reserve his faith?  But if I, an unlearned and
uneducated man, as you say, a fisherman and a rustic, have more
understanding than wise elders, this, said I, ought the more to strike
terror into you.  For if I disputed with any learning, and won over you
wise and learned men, it would appear that I had acquired this power by
long learning, and not by the grace of divine power; but now, when, as I
have said, we unskilled men convince and overcome you wise men, who that
has any sense does not perceive that this is not a work of human
subtlety, but of divine will and gift?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII](0080125)
