[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080270)  [Next](0080272.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.v.lxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXI.—Peter Prepares the Cæsareans
for His Departure.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.v.lxi-p2"></span>However, rubbing his forehead with his
hand, he said:  “Be of good courage, my brethren, and comfort your
sorrowful hearts by means of counsel, referring all things to God, whose
will alone is to be fulfilled and to be preferred in all things.  For
let us suppose for a moment, that by reason of the affection that we
have towards you, we should act against His will, and remain with you,
is He not able, by sending death upon me, to appoint to me a longer
separation from you?  And therefore it is better for us to carry out
this shorter separation with His will, as those to whom it is prescribed
to obey God in all things.  Hence you also ought to obey Him with like
submission, inasmuch as you love me from no other reason than on account
of your love of Him.  As friends of God, therefore, acquiesce in His
will; but also judge yourselves what is right.  Would it not have seemed
wicked, if, when Simon was deceiving you, I had been detained by the
brethren in Jerusalem, and had not come to you, and that although you
had Zacchæus among you, a good and eloquent man?  So now also consider
that it would be wicked, if, when Simon has gone forth to assail the
Gentiles, who are wholly without a defender, I should be detained by
you, and should not follow him.  Wherefore let us see to it, that we do
not, by an unreasonable affection, accomplish the will of the wicked
one.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII](0080272.md)
