[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080170)  [Next](0080172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Order of Proof.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>Then said Simon:  “I have no need
to learn this from you, but how these things agree with one another. 
For if he shall be shown to be inconsistent, he shall be proved at the
same time not to be a prophet.”  Then says Peter:  “But if I first show
Him to be a prophet, it will follow that what seems to be inconsistency
is not such.  For no one can be proved to be a prophet merely by
consistency, because it is possible for many to attain this; but if
consistency does not make a prophet, much more inconsistency does not. 
Because, therefore, there are many things which to some seem
inconsistent, which yet have consistency in them on a more profound
investigation; as also other things which seem to have consistency, but
which, being more carefully discussed, are found to be inconsistent; for
this reason I do not think there is any better way to judge of these
things than to ascertain in the first instance whether He be a prophet
who has spoken those things which appear to be inconsistent.  For it is
evident that, if He be found a <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iv.xxxiv-Page_107"></span>prophet, those things which seem to
be contradictory must have consistency, but are misunderstood. 
Concerning these things, therefore, proofs will be properly demanded. 
For we apostles are sent to expound the sayings and affirm the judgments
of Him who has sent us; but we are not commissioned to say anything of
our own, but to unfold the truth, as I have said, of His words.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](0080172)
