[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080511)  [Next](0080513.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Free Inquiry.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.iv-p2"></span>To this Peter answered: “Let us not
concern ourselves about this; and if indeed it is fitting that he enter
the gate of life, God will afford a fitting opportunity; and there shall
be a beginning from God, and not from man.  And therefore, as I have
said, let him journey with us, and hear our discussions; but because I
saw you in haste, therefore I said that opportunity must be sought; and
when God shall give it, do you comply with my advice in what I shall
say.”  While we were thus talking, a boy came to tell us that our father
was now awake; and when we were intending to go in to him, he himself
came to us, and saluting us with a kiss, after we had sat down again, he
said:  “Is it permitted to one to ask a question, if he wishes it; or is
silence enforced, after the manner of the Pythagoreans?”  Then said
Peter:  “We do not compel those who come to us either to keep silence
continually, or to ask questions; but we leave them free to do as they
will knowing that he who is anxious about his salvation, if he feels
pain in any part of his soul, does not suffer it to be silent.  But he
who neglects his salvation, no advantage is conferred upon him if he is
compelled to ask, excepting this only, that he may seem to be earnest
and diligent.  Wherefore, if you wish to get any information, ask on.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0080513.md)
