[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080543)  [Next](0080545) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iii.xii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—The Allegories an
Afterthought.</span>

<span id="vi.iii.xii.xxxvi-p2"></span>“Whence it is the more evident
that prudent men, when they saw that the common superstition was so
disgraceful, so base, and yet they had not learned any way of correcting
it, or any knowledge, endeavoured with what arguments and
interpretations they could to veil unseemly things under seemly speech,
and not, as they say, to conceal seemly reasons under unseemly fables. 
For if this were the case, surely their statues and their pictures would
never be made with *representations of* their vices and crimes.  The
swan, which committed adultery with Leda, would not be represented, nor
the bull which committed adultery with Europa; nor would they turn into
a thousand monstrous shapes, him whom they think better than all.  And
assuredly, if the great and wise men who are amongst them knew that all
this is fiction and not truth, would not they charge with impiety and
sacrilege those who should exhibit a picture or carve an image of this
sort, to the injury of the gods?  In short, let them present a king of
their own time in the form of an ox, or a goose, or an ant, or a
vulture, and let them write the name of their king upon it, and set up
such a statue or figure in a public place, and they will soon be made to
feel the wrong of their deed, and the greatness of its punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](0080545)
