[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0080012)  [Next](0080014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_29"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>IX.—The Testament of Gad Concerning
Hatred.</span>

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xi-p2.1"></span>The</span> record of the testament of Gad, what
things he spake unto his sons, in the hundred and twenty-seventh year of
his life, saying:  I was the seventh son born to Jacob, and I was
valiant in keeping the flocks.  I guarded at night the flock; and
whenever the lion came, or wolf, or leopard, or bear, or any wild beast
against the fold, I pursued it, and with my hand seizing its foot, and
whirling it round, I stunned it, and hurled it over two furlongs, and so
killed it.  Now Joseph was feeding the flock with us for about thirty
days, and being tender, he fell sick by reason of the heat.  And he
returned to Hebron to his father, who made him lie down near him,
because he loved him.  And Joseph told our father that the sons of
Zilpah and Bilhah were slaying the best of the beasts, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) and devouring them without the
knowledge of Judah and Reuben.  For he saw that I delivered a lamb out
of the mouth of the bear, and I put the bear to death; and the lamb I
slew, being grieved concerning it that it could not live, and we ate it,
and he told our father.  And I was wroth with Joseph for that thing
until the day that he was sold into Egypt.  And the spirit of hatred was
in me, and I wished not either to see Joseph or to hear him.  And he
rebuked us to our faces for having eaten of the flock without Judah. 
And whatsoever things he told our father, he believed him.

<span id="iii.xi-p4"></span>2.  I confess now my sin, my children, that
oftentimes I wished to kill him, because I hated him to the death, and
there were in no wise in me bowels of mercy towards him.  Moreover, I
hated him yet more because of his dreams; and I would have devoured him
out of the land of the living, even as a calf devoureth the grass from
the earth.  Therefore I and Judah sold him to the Ishmaelites for
thirty <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) pieces of gold, and ten
of them we hid, and showed the twenty to our brethren:  and so through
my covetousness I was fully bent on his destruction.  And the God of my
fathers delivered him from my hands, that I should not work iniquity in
Israel.

<span id="iii.xi-p6"></span>3.  And now, my children, hearken to the
words of truth to work righteousness, and all the law of the Most High,
and not go astray through the spirit of hatred, for it is evil in all
the doings of men.  Whatsoever a man doeth, that doth the hater abhor: 
though he worketh the law of the Lord, he praiseth him not; though he
feareth the Lord, and taketh pleasure in that which is righteous, he
loveth him not:  he dispraiseth the truth, he envieth him that ordereth
his way aright, he delighteth in evil-speaking, he loveth arrogance, for
hatred hath blinded his soul; even as I also looked on Joseph.

<span id="iii.xi-p7"></span>4.  Take heed therefore, my children, of
hatred; for it worketh iniquity against the Lord Himself:  for it will
not hear the words of His commandments concerning the loving of one’s
neighbour, and it sinneth against God.  For if a brother stumble,
immediately it wisheth to proclaim it to all men, and is urgent that he
should be judged for it, and be punished and slain.  And if it be a
servant, it accuseth him to his master, and with all affliction it
deviseth against him, if it be possible to slay him.  For hatred worketh
in envy, and it ever sickeneth with envy against them that prosper in
well-doing, when it seeth or heareth thereof.  For as love would even
restore to life the dead, and would call back them that are condemned to
die, so hatred would slay the living, and those that have offended in a
small matter it would not suffer to live.  For the spirit of hatred
worketh together with Satan through hastiness <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) of spirit in all things unto men’s
death; but the spirit of love worketh together with the law of God in
long-suffering unto the salvation of men. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md)

<span id="iii.xi-p10"></span>5.  Hatred is evil, because it continually
abideth with lying, speaking against the truth; and it maketh small
things to be great, and giveth heed to darkness as to light, and calleth
the sweet bitter, and teacheth slander, and war, and violence, and every
excess of evil; and it filleth the heart with devilish poison.  And
these things I say to you from experience, my children, that ye may flee
hatred, and cleave to the love of the Lord.  Righteousness casteth out
hatred, humility destroyeth hatred.  For he that is just and humble is
ashamed to do wrong, being reproved not of another, but of his own
heart, because the Lord vieweth his intent:  he speaketh not against any
man, because the fear of the Most High overcometh hatred.  For, fearing
lest he should offend the Lord, he will not do any wrong to any man, no,
not even in thought.  These things I learnt at last, after that I had
repented concerning Joseph.  For true repentance after a godly sort
destroyeth unbelief, and driveth away the darkness, and enlighteneth the
eyes, and giveth knowledge to the soul, and guideth the mind to
salvation; and those things which it hath not learnt from man, it
knoweth through repentance.  For God <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
<span id="iii.xi-Page_30"></span>brought upon me a disease of the heart;
and had not the prayers of Jacob my father intervened, it had hardly
failed that my spirit had departed.  For by what things a man
transgresseth, by the same also is he punished. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md)   For in that my heart was set
mercilessly against Joseph, in my heart too I suffered mercilessly, and
was judged for eleven months, for so long a time as I had been envious
against Joseph until he was sold.

<span id="iii.xi-p12"></span>6.  And now, my children, love ye each one
his brother, and put away hatred from your hearts, loving one another in
deed, and in word, and in thought of the soul.  For in the presence of
our father I spake peaceably with Joseph; and when I had gone out, the
spirit of hatred darkened my mind, and moved my soul to slay him. 
 <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) Love ye therefore one another
from your hearts; and if a man sin against thee, tell him of it gently,
and drive out the poison of hatred, and foster not guile in thy soul. 
And if he confess and repent, forgive him; and if he deny it, strive not
with him, lest he swear, and thou sin doubly.  Let not a stranger hear
your secrets amid your striving, lest he hate and become thy enemy, and
work great sin against thee; for ofttimes he will talk guilefully <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) with thee, or evilly overreach thee,
taking his poison from himself.  Therefore, if he deny it, and is
convicted and put to shame, and is silenced, do not tempt him on.  For
he who denieth repenteth, so that he no more doeth wrong against thee;
yea also, he will honour thee, and fear thee, and be at peace with
thee.  But if he be shameless, and abideth in his wrongdoing, even then
forgive him from the heart, and give the vengeance to God.

<span id="iii.xi-p15"></span>7.  If a man prospereth more than you, be
not grieved, but pray also for him, that he may have perfect prosperity.
 For perchance it is expedient for you thus; and if he be further
exalted, be not envious, remembering that all flesh shall die:  and
offer praise to God, who giveth things good and profitable to all men. 
Seek out the judgments of the Lord, and so shall thy mind rest and be at
peace.  And though a man become rich by evil means, even as Esau the
brother of my father, be not jealous; but wait for the end of the Lord. 
For either He taketh His benefits away from the wicked, or leaveth them
still to the repentant, or to the unrepentant reserveth punishment for
ever.  For the poor man who is free from envy, giving thanks to the Lord
in all things, is rich among all men, because he hath not evil jealousy
of men.  Put away, therefore, hatred from your souls, and love one
another with uprightness of heart.

<span id="iii.xi-p16"></span>8.  And do ye also tell these things to
your children, that they honour Judah and Levi, for from them shall the
Lord raise up a Saviour to Israel. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md)   For I know that at the last your
children shall depart from them, and shall walk in all wickedness, and
mischief, and corruption before the Lord.  And when he had rested for a
little while, he said again to them, My children, obey your father, and
bury me near to my fathers.  And he drew up his feet, and fell asleep in
peace.  And after five years they carried him up, and laid him in Hebron
with his fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[29:159](0080013.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span> Cf. Targum Ps. Jon. of [Gen. xxxvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[29:160](0080013.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p5"></span> The narrative of Genesis ([Gen.
37.28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)<span id="iii.xi-p5.1"></span>.md)
gives twenty pieces of silver; the LXX. twenty pieces of gold, with
which latter agrees Josephus’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p5.2"></span>μνῶν εἴκοσιν</span> (*Antiq*., ii. 3. 3).  \[It
is worthy of note that Judas took a meaner price for the “Son of
Joseph.”\]

<span id="fn_160"></span>[29:161](0080013.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p8"></span> For this unusual use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p8.1"></span>ὀλιγοψυχία</span>, cf.
[Prov. xiv. 29](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.xi-p8.2"></span>, LXX., where there is the same contrast with
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p8.3"></span>μακροθυμία</span>.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[29:162](0080013.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p9"></span> \[This passage is cited by Lardner as
conspicuously fine.\]

<span id="fn_162"></span>[30:163](0080013.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p11"></span> \[[Wis. xi.
16](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xi-p11.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_163"></span>[30:164](0080013.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p13"></span> The Ox. <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xi-p13.1"></span>ms</span>. omits from here to the last clause
of c. 7.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[30:165](0080013.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p14"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p14.1"></span>δολωφωνῆσαι</span> , the reading of the Cam.
<span class="c9"><span id="iii.xi-p14.2"></span>ms</span>. here, Grabe
conjectured <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p14.3"></span>δολοφονήσει</span>.  Probably <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p14.4"></span>δολοφωνήσει</span> is to be
preferred.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[30:166](0080013.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p17"></span> \[The Virgin was the daughter of Judah,
but had kinship with Levi.  [Luke i.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#036.md)<span id="iii.xi-p17.1"></span>. 
Compare [Jer. xxxiii. 20-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.xi-p17.2"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testament X](0080014.md)
