[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081522)  [Next](0081524) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ix"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>Maximus, Bishop of Jerusalem.</span>

<span id="x.ix-p2"></span>\[<span class="c9"><span
id="x.ix-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 185–196.\]  He was a noted character
among Christians, according to Eusebius; living, according to Jerome,
under Commodus and Severus.  He wrote on the inveterate question
concerning the *Origin of Evil;* and the fragment here translated, as
given by Eusebius, is also textually cited by Origen against the
Marcionites, <span id="fr_3729"></span>[3730](#fn_3729) if that Dialogue
be his.  The reader will not fail <span id="page_767">p. 767</span>
<span id="x.ix-Page_767"></span>to recollect that liberal citations out
of this work are also to be found in Methodius, *On Free-Will*. <span
id="fr_3730"></span>[3731](#fn_3730)   But all who desire fuller
information on the subject will be gratified by the learned
*prolegomena* and notes of Routh, to which I refer them. <span
id="fr_3731"></span>[3732](#fn_3731)   Whether Maximus was the bishop of
Jerusalem (<span class="c9"><span id="x.ix-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 185)
mentioned by Eusebius as presiding in that See in the sixth year of
Commodus, seems to be uncertain.

<span id="x.ix-p6"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="x.ix-p6.1"></span>From the Book Concerning Matter, or in Defence of
the Proposition that Matter is Created, and is Not the Cause of
Evil. <span id="fr_3732"></span>[3733](#fn_3732) </span>

<span id="x.ix-p8"></span>“<span class="c9"><span
id="x.ix-p8.1"></span>That</span> there cannot exist two uncreated
*substances* at one and the same time, I presume that you hold equally
*with myself*.  You appear, however, very decidedly to have assumed, and
to have introduced into the argument, this *principle*, that we must of
unavoidable necessity maintain one of two things:  either that God is
separate from matter; or else, on the contrary, that He is indissolubly
connected with it.

<span id="x.ix-p9"></span>“If, then, any one should choose to assert
that He exists in union *with matter*, that would be saying that there
is *only* one uncreated *substance*.  For either of the two must
constitute a part of the other; and, since they form parts of each
other, they cannot be two uncreated *substances*.  Just as, in speaking
of man, we do not describe him as subdivided into a number of distinct
parts, each forming a separate created *substance*, but, as reason
requires us to do, assert that he was made by God a single created
*substance* consisting of many parts,—so, in like manner, if God is not
separate from matter, we are driven to the conclusion that there is
*only* one uncreated *substance*.

<span id="x.ix-p10"></span>“If, on the other hand, it be affirmed that
He is separate *from matter*, it necessarily follows that there is some
*other substance* intermediate between the two, by which their
separation is made apparent.  For it is impossible that one thing should
be shown to be severed by an interval from another, unless there be
something else by which the interval between the two is produced.  This
*principle*, too, holds good not only with regard to this or any other
single case, but in any number of cases you please.  For the same
argument which we have employed in dealing with the two uncreated
*substances* must in like manner be valid if the substances *in
question* be given as three.  For in regard to these also I should *have
to* inquire whether they are separate from one another, or whether, on
the contrary, each of them is united to its fellow.  For, if you should
say that they are united, you would hear from me the same argument as
before; but if, on the contrary, you should say that they are separate,
you could not escape the unavoidable assumption of a separating
*medium*.

<span id="x.ix-p11"></span>“If, again, perchance any one should think
that there is a third view which may be consistently maintained with
regard to uncreated *substances*,—namely, that God is not separate from
matter, nor yet, on the other hand, united to it as a part, but that God
exists in matter as in a place, or possibly matter exists in God,—let
such a person observe the consequence:—

<span id="x.ix-p12"></span>“That, if we make matter God’s place, we must
of necessity admit that He can be contained, <span
id="fr_3733"></span>[3734](#fn_3733) and that He is circumscribed by
matter.  Nay, further, he must grant that He is, in the same way as
matter, driven about hither and thither, unable to maintain His place
and to stay where He is, since that in which He exists is perpetually
being driven about in one direction or another.  Beside this, he must
also admit that God has had His place among the worst *kind of
elements*.  For if matter was once in disorder, and if he reduced it to
order for the purpose of rendering it better, there was a time when God
existed among *the* disordered *elements of matter*.

<span id="x.ix-p14"></span>“I might also fairly put this question: 
whether God filled the whole of matter, or was in some part of it.  If
any one should choose to say that God was in some part of matter, he
would be making Him indefinitely smaller than matter, inasmuch as a part
of it contained the whole of Him; <span
id="fr_3734"></span>[3735](#fn_3734) but, if he maintained that He
pervaded the whole of matter, I need to be informed how He became the
Fashioner of this *matter*.  For we must necessarily assume, either that
there was on the part of God a contraction, <span
id="fr_3735"></span>[3736](#fn_3735) so to speak, of Himself, *and a
withdrawal from matter*, whereupon He proceeded to fashion that from
which He had retired; or else that He fashioned Himself in conjunction
with matter, in consequence of having no place to retire to.

<span id="x.ix-p17"></span>“But suppose it to be maintained, on the
other hand, that matter is in God, it will behove us similarly to
inquire, whether we are to understand by this that He is sundered from
Himself, and that, just like the air, which contains *various* kinds of
animals, so is He sundered and divided into parts for the reception of
those *creatures* <span id="page_768">p. 768</span> <span
id="x.ix-Page_768"></span>which from time to time exist in <span
id="fr_3736"></span>[3737](#fn_3736) Him; or whether *matter is in God*
as in a place,—for instance, as water is contained in earth.  For should
we say ‘as in air,’ we should perforce be speaking of God as divisible
into parts; but if ‘as water in earth,’ and if matter was, *as is
admitted*, in confusion and disorder, and moreover also contained what
was evil, we should have to admit that God is the place of disorder and
evil.  But this it does not seem to me consistent with reverence to say,
but hazardous rather.  For you contend that matter is uncreated, <span
id="fr_3737"></span>[3738](#fn_3737) that you may not have to admit that
God is the author of evil; and yet, while aiming to escape this
*difficulty*, you make Him the receptacle of evil.

<span id="x.ix-p20"></span>“If you had stated that your suspicion that
matter was uncreated arose from the nature of created things as we find
them, <span id="fr_3738"></span>[3739](#fn_3738) I should have employed
abundant argument in proof that it cannot be so.  But, since you have
spoken of the existence of evil as the cause of such suspicion, I am
disposed to enter upon a *separate* examination of this point.  For,
when once it has been made clear how it is that evil exists, and when it
is seen to be impossible to deny that God is the author of evil, in
consequence of His having had recourse to matter for His
materials, <span id="fr_3739"></span>[3740](#fn_3739) it seems to me
that a suspicion of this kind disappears.

<span id="x.ix-p23"></span>“You assert, then, that matter, destitute of
all qualities *good or bad*, co-existed at the outset with God, and that
out of it He fashioned the world as we now find it.”

<span id="x.ix-p24"></span>“Such is my opinion.”

<span id="x.ix-p25"></span>“Well, then, if matter was without any
qualities, and the world has come into existence from God, and if the
world possesses qualities, the author of those qualities must be God.”

<span id="x.ix-p26"></span>“Exactly so.”

<span id="x.ix-p27"></span>“Since, too, I heard you say yourself just
now that out of nothing <span id="fr_3740"></span>[3741](#fn_3740)
nothing can possibly come, give me an answer to the question I am about
to ask you.  You seem to me to think that the qualities of the world
have not sprung from pre-existing <span
id="fr_3741"></span>[3742](#fn_3741) qualities, and moreover that they
are something different from the substances *themselves*.”

<span id="x.ix-p30"></span>“I do.”

<span id="x.ix-p31"></span>“If, therefore, God did not produce the
qualities *in question* from qualities already existing, nor yet from
substances, by reason that they are not substances, the conclusion is
inevitable, that they were made by God out of nothing.  So that you
seemed to me to affirm more than you were warranted to do, *when you
said* that it had been proved impossible to hold the opinion <span
id="fr_3742"></span>[3743](#fn_3742) that anything was made by God out
of nothing.

<span id="x.ix-p33"></span>“But let us put the matter thus.  We see
persons among ourselves making certain things out of nothing, however
true it may be that they make them by means of something. <span
id="fr_3743"></span>[3744](#fn_3743)   Let us take our illustration,
say, from builders.  These men do not make cities out of cities; nor,
similarly, temples out of temples.  Nay, if you suppose that, because
the substances *necessary* for these *constructions* are already
provided, therefore they make them out of that which already exists,
your reasoning is fallacious.  For it is not the substance that makes
the city or the temples, but the art which is employed about the
substance.  Neither, *again*, does the art proceed from any art inhering
in the substances, but it arises independently of any such art in them.

<span id="x.ix-p35"></span>“But I fancy you will meet the argument by
saying that the artist produces the art which is *manifest* in the
substance *he has fashioned* out of the art which he *himself already*
has.  In reply to this, however, I think it may be fairly said, that
neither in man does art spring from any already existing art.  For we
cannot possibly allow that art exists by itself, since it belongs to the
class of things which are accidentals, and which receive their existence
only when they appear in *connection with* substance.  For man will
exist though there should be no architecture, but the latter will have
no existence unless there be first of all man.  Thus we cannot avoid the
conclusion, that it is the nature of art to spring up in man out of
nothing.  If, then, we have shown that this is the case with man, we
surely must allow that God can make not only the qualities *of
substances* out of nothing, but also the substances *themselves*.  For,
if it appears possible that anything *whatever* can be made out of
nothing, it is proved that this may be the case with substances also.

<span id="x.ix-p36"></span>“But, since you are specially desirous of
inquiring about the origin of evil, I will proceed to the discussion of
this topic.  And I should like to ask you a few questions.  Is it your
opinion that things evil are substances, or that they are qualities of
substances?”

<span id="x.ix-p37"></span>“Qualities of substances, I am disposed to
say.”

<span id="x.ix-p38"></span>“But matter was destitute of qualities and of
form:  this I assumed at the outset of the discussion.  Therefore, if
things evil are qualities of substances, and matter was destitute of
qualities, and you have called God the author of qualities, God will
also be the former of that which is evil.  Since, then, it is not
possible, on <span id="page_769">p. 769</span> <span
id="x.ix-Page_769"></span>this supposition any more than on the other,
to speak of God as not the cause of evil, it seems to me superfluous to
add matter to Him, *as if that were the cause of evil*.  If you have any
reply to make to this, begin your argument.”

<span id="x.ix-p39"></span>“If, indeed, our discussion had arisen from a
love of contention, I should not be willing to have the inquiry raised a
second time about *the origin of* evil; but, since we are prompted
rather by friendship and the good of our neighbour to engage in
controversy, I readily consent to have the question raised afresh on
this subject.  You have no doubt long been aware of the character of my
mind, and of the object at which I aim in dispute:  that I have no wish
to vanquish falsehood by plausible reasoning, but rather that truth
should be established in connection with thorough investigation.  You
yourself, too, are of the same mind, I am well assured.  Whatever
method, therefore, you deem successful for the discovery of truth, do
not shrink from using it.  For, by following a better course of
argument, you will not only confer a benefit on yourself, but most
assuredly on me also, *instructing me* concerning matters of which I am
ignorant.”

<span id="x.ix-p40"></span>“You seem clearly to agree with <span
id="fr_3744"></span>[3745](#fn_3744) me, that things evil are in some
sort substances: <span id="fr_3745"></span>[3746](#fn_3745) for, apart
from substances, I do not see them to have any existence.  Since, then,
my good friend, you say that things evil are substances, it is necessary
to inquire into the nature of substance.  Is it your opinion that
substance is a kind of bodily structure?” <span
id="fr_3746"></span>[3747](#fn_3746)

<span id="x.ix-p44"></span>“It is.”

<span id="x.ix-p45"></span>“And does that bodily structure exist by
itself, without the need of any one to come and give it existence?”

<span id="x.ix-p46"></span>“Yes.”

<span id="x.ix-p47"></span>“And does it seem to you that things evil are
connected with certain *courses of* action?”

<span id="x.ix-p48"></span>“That is my belief.”

<span id="x.ix-p49"></span>“And do actions come into existence only when
an actor is there?”

<span id="x.ix-p50"></span>“Yes.”

<span id="x.ix-p51"></span>“And, when there is no actor, neither will
his action ever take place?”

<span id="x.ix-p52"></span>“It will not.”

<span id="x.ix-p53"></span>“If, therefore, substance is a kind of bodily
structure, and this does not stand in need of some one in and through
whom it may receive its existence, and if things evil are actions of
some one, and actions require some one in and through whom they receive
their existence,—things evil will ‘not’ be substances.  And if things
evil are not substances, and murder is an evil, *and* is the action of
some one, it follows that murder is not a substance.  But, if you insist
that agents are substance, then I myself agree with you.  A man, for
instance, who is a murderer, is, in so far as he is a man, a substance;
but the murder which he commits is not a substance, but a work of the
substance.  Moreover, we speak of a man sometimes as bad because he
commits murder; and sometimes, again, because he performs acts of
beneficence, as good:  and these names adhere to the substance, in
consequence of the things which are accidents of it, which, *however*,
are not *the substance* itself.  For neither is the substance murder,
nor, again, is it adultery, nor is it any *other* similar evil.  But,
just as the grammarian derives his name from grammar, and the orator
from oratory, and the physician from physic, though the substance is not
physic, nor yet oratory, nor grammar, but receives its appellation from
the things which are accidents of it, from which it popularly receives
its name, though it is not any one of them,—so in like manner it appears
to me that the substance receives name from things regarded as evil,
though it is not *itself* any one of them.

<span id="x.ix-p54"></span>“I must beg you also to consider that, if you
represent some other being as the cause of evil to men, he also, in so
far as he acts in them, and incites them to do evil, is himself evil, by
reason of the things he does.  For he too is said to be evil, for the
simple reason that he is the doer of evil things; but the things which a
being does are not the being himself, but his actions, from which he
receives his appellation, and is called evil.  For if we should say that
the things he does are himself, and these consist in murder, and
adultery, and theft, and such-like, these things will be himself.  And
if these things are himself, and if when they take place they get to
have a substantial existence, <span id="fr_3747"></span>[3748](#fn_3747)
but by not taking place they also cease to exist, and if these things
are done by men,—men will be the doers of these things, and the causes
of existing and of no longer existing.  But, if you affirm that these
things are his actions, he gets to be evil from the things he does, not
from those things of which the substance *of him* consists.

<span id="x.ix-p56"></span>“Moreover, we have said that he is called
evil from those things which are accidents of the substance, which are
not *themselves* the substance:  as a physician from the art of physic. 
But, if he receives the beginning of his existence from the actions he
performs, he too began to be evil, and these evil things likewise began
to exist.  And, if so, an evil being will not be without a beginning,
nor will evil things be unoriginated, since we have said that they are
originated by him.”

<span id="x.ix-p57"></span><span id="page_770">p. 770</span> <span
id="x.ix-Page_770"></span>“The argument relating to the opinion I before
expressed, you seem to me, my friend, to have handled satisfactorily: 
for, from the premises you assumed in the discussion, I think you have
drawn a fair conclusion.  For, beyond doubt, if matter was *at first*
destitute of qualities, and if God is the fashioner of the qualities *it
now has*, and if evil things are qualities, God is the author of those
evil things.  The argument, then, relating to that *opinion* we may
consider as well discussed, and to me it *now* seems false to speak of
matter as destitute of qualities.  For it is not possible to say of any
substance <span id="fr_3748"></span>[3749](#fn_3748) whatsoever that it
is without qualities.  For, in the very act of saying that it is
destitute of qualities, you do *in fact* indicate its quality,
representing of what kind matter is, which of course is *ascribing to
it* a species of quality.  Wherefore, if it is agreeable to you,
rehearse the argument to me from the beginning:  for, to me, matter
seems to have had qualifies from all eternity. <span
id="fr_3749"></span>[3750](#fn_3749)   For in this way I *can* affirm
that evil things also come from it in the way of emanation, so that the
cause of evil things may not be ascribed to God, but that matter may be
*regarded as* the cause of all such things.”

<span id="x.ix-p60"></span>“I approve your desire, my friend, and praise
the zeal you manifest in the discussion of opinions.  For it assuredly
becomes every one who is desirous of knowledge, not simply and out of
hand to agree with what is said, but to make a careful examination of
the arguments *adduced*.  For, though a disputant, by laying down false
premises, may make his opponent draw the conclusion he wishes, yet he
will not convince a hearer of this; but only when he says that
which <span id="fr_3750"></span>[3751](#fn_3750) it seems possible to
say with fairness.  So that one of two things will happen:  either he
will, as he listens, be decisively helped to reach that *conclusion*
towards which he *already* feels himself impelled, or he will convict
his adversary of not speaking the truth.

<span id="x.ix-p62"></span>“Now, it seems to me that you have not
sufficiently discussed the statement that matter has qualities from the
first.  For, if this is the case, what will God be the maker of?  For,
if we speak of substances, we affirm these to exist beforehand; or if
again of qualities, we declare these also to exist already.  Since,
therefore both substance and qualities exist, it seems to me
unreasonable to call God a creator.

<span id="x.ix-p63"></span>“But, lest I should seem to be constructing
an argument *to suit my purpose*, be so good as to answer the question: 
In what way do you assert God to be a creator?  Is He such because He
changed the substances, so that they should no longer be the same as
they had once been but become different from what they were; or because,
while He kept the substances the same as they were before that period,
He changed their qualities?”

<span id="x.ix-p64"></span>“I do not at all think that any alteration
took place in substances:  for it appears to me absurd to say this.  But
I affirm that a certain change was made in their qualities; and it is in
respect of these that I speak of God as a creator.  Just as we might
happen to speak of a house as made out of stones, in which case we could
not say that the stones no longer continue to be stones as regards their
substance, now that they are made into a house (for I affirm that the
house owes its existence to the quality of its construction, forasmuch
as the previous quality of the stones has been changed),—so does it seem
to me that God, while the substance remains *the same*, has made a
certain change in its qualities; and it is in respect of such change
that I speak of the origin of this world as having come from God.”

<span id="x.ix-p65"></span>“Since, then, you maintain that a certain
change—namely, of qualities—has been produced by God, answer me briefly
what I am desirous to ask you.”

<span id="x.ix-p66"></span>“Proceed, pray, with your question.”

<span id="x.ix-p67"></span>“Do you agree in the opinion that evil things
are qualities of substances?”

<span id="x.ix-p68"></span>“I do.”

<span id="x.ix-p69"></span>“Were these qualities in matter from the
first, or did they begin to be?”

<span id="x.ix-p70"></span>“I hold that these qualifies existed in
combination with matter, without being originated.”

<span id="x.ix-p71"></span>“But do you not affirm that God has made a
certain change in the qualities?”

<span id="x.ix-p72"></span>“That is what I affirm.”

<span id="x.ix-p73"></span>“For the better, or for the worse?”

<span id="x.ix-p74"></span>“For the better, I should say.”

<span id="x.ix-p75"></span>“Well, then, if evil things are qualities of
matter, and if the Lord *of all* changed its qualities for the better,
whence, it behoves us to ask, come evil things?  For either the
qualities remained the same in their nature as they previously were, or,
if they were not evil before, but you assert that, in consequence of a
change wrought on them by God, the first qualities of this kind came
into existence in connection with matter,—God will be the author of
evil, inasmuch as He changed the qualities which were not evil, so as to
make them evil.

<span id="x.ix-p76"></span>“Possibly, however, it is not your view that
God changed evil qualities for the better; but you mean that all those
other qualities which happened to be neither good nor bad, <span
id="fr_3751"></span>[3752](#fn_3751) were changed by God with a view to
the adornment *of the creation*.”

<span id="x.ix-p78"></span>“That has been my opinion from the outset.”

<span id="x.ix-p79"></span><span id="page_771">p. 771</span> <span
id="x.ix-Page_771"></span>“How, then, can you say that He has left the
qualities of bad things just as they were?  Is it that, although He was
able to destroy those qualities as well as the others, He was not
willing; or *did He refrain* because He had not the power?  For, if you
say He had the power, but not the will, you must admit Him to be the
cause of these *qualities*:  since, when He could have put a stop to the
existence of evil, He chose to let it remain as it was, and that, too,
at the very time when He began to fashion matter.  For, if He had not
concerned Himself at all with matter, He would not have been the cause
of those things which He allowed to remain.  But, seeing that He
fashioned a certain part of it, and left a certain part as we have
described it, although He could have changed that also for the better,
it seems to me that He deserves to have the blame cast on Him, for
having permitted a part of matter to be evil, to the ruin of that
*other* part which He fashioned.

<span id="x.ix-p80"></span>“Nay, more, it seems to me that the most
serious wrong has been committed as regards this part, in that He
constituted this part of matter so as to be now affected by evil.  For,
if we were to examine carefully into things, we should find that the
condition of matter is worse now than in its former state, before it was
reduced to order.  For, before it was separated into parts, it had no
sense of evil; but now every one of its parts is afflicted with a sense
of evil.

<span id="x.ix-p81"></span>“Take an illustration from man.  Before he
was fashioned, and became a living being through the art of the Creator,
he was by nature exempt from any contact whatever with evil; but, as
soon as ever he was made by God a man, he became liable to the sense of
even approaching evil:  and thus that very thing which you say was
brought about by God for the benefit of matter, <span
id="fr_3752"></span>[3753](#fn_3752) is found to have turned out rather
to its detriment.

<span id="x.ix-p83"></span>“But, if you say that evil has not been put a
stop to, because God was unable to do away with it, you will be making
God powerless.  But, if He is powerless, it will be either because He is
weak by nature, or because He is overcome by fear, and reduced to
subjection by a stronger.  If, then, you go so far as to say that God is
weak by nature, it seems to me that you imperil your salvation itself;
but, if *you say that He is weak* through being overcome by fear of a
greater, things evil will be greater than God, since they frustrate the
carrying out of His purpose.  But this, as it seems to me, it would be
absurd to say of God.  For why should not ‘they’ rather be *considered*
gods, since according to your account they are able to overcome God: 
if, that is to say, we mean by God that which has a controlling power
over all things?

<span id="x.ix-p84"></span>“But I wish to ask you a few questions
concerning matter itself.  Pray tell me, therefore, whether matter was
something simple or compound.  I am induced to adopt this method of
investigating the subject before us by *considering* the diversity that
obtains in existing things.  For, if perchance matter was something
simple and uniform, how comes it that the world is compound, <span
id="fr_3753"></span>[3754](#fn_3753) and consists of divers substances
and combinations?  For by ‘compound’ we denote a mixture of certain
simple *elements*.  But if, on the contrary, you prefer to call matter
compound, you will, of course, be asserting that it is compounded of
certain simple elements.  And, if it was compounded of simple elements,
these simple elements must have existed at some time or other separately
by themselves, and when they were compounded together matter came into
being:  from which it of course follows that matter is created.  For, if
matter is compound, and compound things are constituted from simple,
there was once a time when matter had no existence,—namely, before the
simple elements came together.  And, if there was once a time when
matter was not, and there was never a time when the uncreated was not,
matter cannot be uncreated.  And hence there will be many uncreated
*substances*.  For, if God was uncreated, and the simple elements out of
which matter was compounded *were also uncreated*, there will not be two
uncreated things only,—not to discuss the question what it is which
constitutes objects simple, whether matter or form.

<span id="x.ix-p86"></span>“Is it, further, your opinion that nothing in
existence is opposed to itself?”

<span id="x.ix-p87"></span>“It is.”

<span id="x.ix-p88"></span>“Is water, then, opposed to fire?”

<span id="x.ix-p89"></span>“So it appears to me.”

<span id="x.ix-p90"></span>“Similarly, is darkness opposed to light, and
warm to cold, and moreover moist to dry?”

<span id="x.ix-p91"></span>“It seems to me to be so.”

<span id="x.ix-p92"></span>“Well, then, if nothing in existence is
opposed to itself, and these things are opposed to each other, they
cannot be one and the same matter; no, nor yet be made out of one and
the same matter.

<span id="x.ix-p93"></span>“I wish further to ask your opinion on a
matter kindred to that of which we have been speaking.  Do you believe
that the parts *of a thing* are not mutually destructive?”

<span id="x.ix-p94"></span>“I do.”

<span id="x.ix-p95"></span>“And you believe that fire and water, and so
on, are parts of matter?”

<span id="x.ix-p96"></span>“Quite so.”

<span id="x.ix-p97"></span>“Do you not also believe that water is
subversive of fire, and light of darkness, and so of all similar
things?”

<span id="x.ix-p98"></span>“Yes.”

<span id="x.ix-p99"></span><span id="page_772">p. 772</span> <span
id="x.ix-Page_772"></span>“Well, then, if the parts *of a whole* are not
mutually destructive, and yet the parts of matter are mutually
destructive, they cannot be parts of one matter.  And, if they are not
parts of one another, they cannot be composed of one and the same
matter; nay, they cannot be matter at all, since nothing in existence is
destructive of itself, as we learn from the doctrine of opposites:  for
nothing is opposed to itself—an opposite being by nature opposed to
something else.  White, for example, is not opposed to itself, but is
said to be the opposite of black; and, similarly, light is shown not to
be opposed to itself, but is considered an opposite in relation to
darkness; and so of a very great number of things besides.  If, then,
matter were some one thing, it could not be opposed to itself.  This,
then, being the nature of opposites, it is proved that matter has no
existence.”’

<span id="x.ix-p100"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3729"></span>[766:3730](0081523.htm#fr_3729) <span
id="x.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p3"></span> A fact which gave rise to a controversy, on
which consult Routh, *Rel. Sac*., vol. ii. p. 78.

<span id="fn_3730"></span>[767:3731](0081523.htm#fr_3730) <span
id="x.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p4"></span> See vol. vi. p. 358, etc., this series, where
I have spoken of Maximus as the original of the Dialogue ascribed to
Methodius.

<span id="fn_3731"></span>[767:3732](0081523.htm#fr_3731) <span
id="x.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p5"></span> Routh, *Rel. Sac*., vol. ii. p. 85.  See pp.
77–121, devoted to this author.

<span id="fn_3732"></span>[767:3733](0081523.htm#fr_3732) <span
id="x.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p7"></span> In Eusebius, *Præp. Evang*., vii. 22.

<span id="fn_3733"></span>[767:3734](0081523.htm#fr_3733) <span
id="x.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p13.1"></span>Χωρητὸν</span>, the reading of one<span
class="c9"><span id="x.ix-p13.2"></span>ms.,</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p13.3"></span>χωρητικόν</span>.

<span id="fn_3734"></span>[767:3735](0081523.htm#fr_3734) <span
id="x.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p15"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p15.1"></span>εἰ δὲ μέρος αὐτῆς, ὅλον ἐχώρησεν αὐτόν</span>,
Migne reads, <span class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p15.2"></span>εἴ
γε</span> (or <span class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p15.3"></span>εἰ
δὴ</span>) <span class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p15.4"></span>μέρος αὐτῆς
ὅλον, κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_3735"></span>[767:3736](0081523.htm#fr_3735) <span
id="x.ix-p15.5"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p16.1"></span>Συστολήν τινα</span>.

<span id="fn_3736"></span>[768:3737](0081523.htm#fr_3736) <span
id="x.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p18.1"></span>Τῶν γινομένων</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p18.2"></span>ἐν</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p18.3"></span>αὐτῷ</span>, Migne.

<span id="fn_3737"></span>[768:3738](0081523.htm#fr_3737) <span
id="x.ix-p18.4"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p19"></span> This word, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p19.1"></span>ἀγέννητον</span>, is added from Migne’s
conjecture.

<span id="fn_3738"></span>[768:3739](0081523.htm#fr_3738) <span
id="x.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p21.1"></span>᾽Εκ τῶν ὑποστάντων γενητῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_3739"></span>[768:3740](0081523.htm#fr_3739) <span
id="x.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p22.1"></span>᾽Εκ τοῦ ὕλην αὐτὸν ὑποτιθέναι</span>.

<span id="fn_3740"></span>[768:3741](0081523.htm#fr_3740) <span
id="x.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p28.1"></span>᾽Εξ οὐκ ὄντων</span>.  \[Note this phrase.  Comp.
vol. vi. p. 292, n. 3.\]

<span id="fn_3741"></span>[768:3742](0081523.htm#fr_3741) <span
id="x.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p29.1"></span>῾Υποκειμένων</span>.

<span id="fn_3742"></span>[768:3743](0081523.htm#fr_3742) <span
id="x.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p32"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p32.1"></span>συλλελόγισται ὡς οὐκ ἀδύνατον εἶναι
δοξάζειν</span>, Migne reads, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p32.2"></span>ὡς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p32.3"></span>συλλελόγισται ἀδύνατον εἶναι δοξάζειν</span>.

<span id="fn_3743"></span>[768:3744](0081523.htm#fr_3743) <span
id="x.ix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p34"></span> Lit. “in something.”  Whether the materials
or the art is meant is not very clear.  Possibly there is a play of
words in the use of the two prepositions, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p34.1"></span>ἐκ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p34.2"></span>ἐν</span>.

<span id="fn_3744"></span>[769:3745](0081523.htm#fr_3744) <span
id="x.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p41"></span> Migne, instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p41.1"></span>παραστῆναι</span>, conjectures <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p41.2"></span>παραστῆσαι</span>, which,
however, would not suit what appears to be the meaning.

<span id="fn_3745"></span>[769:3746](0081523.htm#fr_3745) <span
id="x.ix-p41.3"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p42.1"></span>Οὐσίας τινάς</span>.

<span id="fn_3746"></span>[769:3747](0081523.htm#fr_3746) <span
id="x.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p43.1"></span>Σωματικήν τινα σύστασιν</span>.

<span id="fn_3747"></span>[769:3748](0081523.htm#fr_3747) <span
id="x.ix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p55.1"></span>Τὴν σύστασιν ἔχει</span>.

<span id="fn_3748"></span>[770:3749](0081523.htm#fr_3748) <span
id="x.ix-p57.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p58"></span> Migne reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p58.1"></span>οὐσίας</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p58.2"></span>αἰτίας</span>.

<span id="fn_3749"></span>[770:3750](0081523.htm#fr_3749) <span
id="x.ix-p58.3"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p59.1"></span>᾽Ανάρχως</span>.

<span id="fn_3750"></span>[770:3751](0081523.htm#fr_3750) <span
id="x.ix-p60.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p61"></span> Reading, with Migne, <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p61.1"></span>εἰ ὅ τι</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p61.2"></span>εἴ τι</span>.

<span id="fn_3751"></span>[770:3752](0081523.htm#fr_3751) <span
id="x.ix-p76.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p77"></span> Or “indifferent:”  <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p77.1"></span>ἀδιάφοροι</span>.

<span id="fn_3752"></span>[771:3753](0081523.htm#fr_3752) <span
id="x.ix-p81.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p82"></span> Migne reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p82.1"></span>ἐπ᾽ εὐεργεσίᾳ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p82.2"></span>ἐστὶν εὐεργεσία</span>.

<span id="fn_3753"></span>[771:3754](0081523.htm#fr_3753) <span
id="x.ix-p84.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p85"></span> The text has, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix-p85.1"></span>σύνθετος δὲ ὁ κόσμος</span>; which Migne changes
to, <span class="Greek"><span id="x.ix-p85.2"></span>πῶς δὴ σύνθετός
ἐστιν ὁ κόσμος</span>;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Claudius Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis, and
Apologist.](0081524)
