[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081377)  [Next](0081379.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_558">p. 558</span> <span
id="vii.xxxvi-Page_558"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Acts of the Holy Apostle Thaddæus,</span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>One of the Twelve. <span
id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427.md) </span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>Lebbæus</span>, who also is Thaddæus, was of
the city of Edessa—and it is the metropolis of Osroene, in the interior
of the Armenosyrians—an Hebrew by race, accomplished and most learned in
the divine writings.  He came to Jerusalem to worship in the days of
John the Baptist; and having heard his preaching and seen his angelic
life, he was baptized, and his name was called Thaddæus.  And having
seen the appearing of Christ, and His teaching, and His wonderful works,
he followed Him, and became His disciple; and He chose him as one of the
twelve, the tenth apostle according to the Evangelists Matthew and Mark.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p6"></span>In those times there was a governor of
the city of Edessa, Abgarus by name.  And there having gone abroad the
fame of Christ, of the wonders which He did, and of His teaching,
Abgarus having heard of it, was astonished, and desired to see Christ,
and could not leave his city and government.  And about the days of the
Passion and the plots of the Jews, Abgarus, being seized by an incurable
disease, sent a letter to Christ by Ananias the courier, <span
id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428.md) to the following effect:—To
Jesus <span id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429.md) called Christ, Abgarus
the governor of the country of the Edessenes, an unworthy slave.  The
multitude of the wonders done by thee has been heard of by me, that thou
healest the blind, the lame, and the paralytic, and curest all the
demoniacs; and on this account I entreat thy goodness to come even to
us, and escape from the plottings of the wicked Jews, which through envy
they set in motion against thee.  My city is small, but large enough for
both.  Abgarus enjoined Ananias to take accurate account of Christ, of
what appearance He was, and His stature, and His hair, and in a word
everything.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p9"></span>And Ananias, having gone and given the
letter, was carefully looking at Christ, but was unable to fix Him in
his mind.  And He knew as knowing the heart, and asked to wash Himself;
and a towel <span id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430.md) was given Him;
and when He had washed Himself, He wiped His face with it.  And His
image having been imprinted upon the linen, He gave it to Ananias,
saying:  Give this, and take back this message, to him that sent thee: 
Peace to thee and thy city!  For because of this I am come, to suffer
for the world, and to rise again, and to raise up the forefathers.  And
after I have been taken up into the heavens I shall send thee my
disciple Thaddæus, who shall enlighten thee, and guide thee into all the
truth, both thee and thy city.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p11"></span>And having received Ananias, and fallen
down and adored the likeness, Abgarus was cured of his disease before
Thaddæus came.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p12"></span>And after the passion, and the
resurrection, and the ascension, Thaddæus went to Abgarus; and having
found him in health, he gave him an account of the incarnation of
Christ, and baptized him, with all his house.  And having instructed
great multitudes, both of Hebrews and Greeks, Syrians and Armenians, he
baptized them in the name of the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit,
having anointed them with the holy perfume; and he communicated to them
of the undefiled mysteries of the sacred body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and delivered to them to keep and observe the law of
Moses, and to give close heed to the things that had been said by the
apostles in Jerusalem.  For year by year they came together to the
passover, and again he imparted to them the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p13"></span>And Thaddæus along with Abgarus
destroyed idol-temples and built churches; ordained as bishop one of his
disciples, and presbyters, and deacons, and gave them the rule of the
psalmody and the holy liturgy.  And having left them, he went to the
city of Amis, great metropolis of the Mesechaldeans and Syrians, that
is, of Mesopotamia-Syria, beside the river Tigris.  And he having gone
into the synagogue of the Jews along with his disciples on the
Sabbath-day, after the <span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="vii.xxxvi-Page_559"></span>reading of the law the high priest said
to Thaddæus and his disciples:  Men, whence are you? and why are you
here?

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p14"></span>And Thaddæus said:  No doubt you have
heard of what has taken place in Jerusalem about Jesus Christ, and we
are His disciples, and witnesses of the wonderful things which He did
and taught, and how through hatred the chief priests delivered Him to
Pilate the procurator of Judæa.  And Pilate, having examined Him and
found no case, <span id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431.md) wished to let
Him go; but they cried out, If thou let him go, thou art not Cæsar’s
friend, because he proclaims himself king.  And he being afraid, washed
his hands in the sight of the multitude, and said, I am innocent of the
blood of this man; see ye to it.  And the chief priests answered and
said, His blood be upon us and our children.  And Pilate gave him up to
them.  And they took Him, and spit upon Him, with the soldiers, and made
a great mock of Him, and crucified Him, and laid Him in the tomb, and
secured it well, having also set guards upon Him.  And on the third day
before dawn He rose, leaving His burial-clothes in the tomb.  And He was
seen first by His mother and other women, and by Peter and John first of
my fellow disciples, and thereafter to us the twelve, who ate and drank
with Him after His resurrection for many days.  And He sent us in His
name to proclaim repentance and remission of sins to all the nations,
that those who were baptized, having had the kingdom of the heavens
preached to them, would rise up incorruptible at the end of this age;
and He gave us power to expel demons, and heal every disease and every
malady, and raise the dead.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p16"></span>And the multitudes having heard this,
brought together their sick and demoniacs.  And Thaddæus, having gone
forth along with his disciples, laid his hand upon each one of them, and
healed them all by calling upon the name of Christ.  And the demoniacs
were healed before Thaddæus came near them, the spirits going out of
them.  And for many days the people ran together from different places,
and beheld what was done by Thaddæus.  And hearing his teaching, many
believed, and were baptized, confessing their sins.

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p17"></span>Having therefore remained with them for
five years, he built a church; and having appointed as bishop one of his
disciples, and presbyters, and deacons, and prayed for them, he went
away, going round the cities of Syria, and teaching, and healing all the
sick; whence he brought many cities and countries to Christ through His
teaching.  Teaching, therefore, and evangelizing along with the
disciples, and healing the sick, he went to Berytus, a city of Phœnicia
by the sea; <span id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432.md) and there, having
taught and enlightened many, he fell asleep on the twenty-first <span
id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433.md) of the month of August.  And the
disciples having come together, buried him with great honour; and many
sick were healed, and they gave glory to the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[558:2428](0081378.htm#fr_2427.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p3"></span> \[Curiously enough, the Vienna <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> has in the
title:  “one of the seventy,” instead of “one of the twelve.”  The same
confusion exists in the writings of Eusebius and Jerome.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[558:2429](0081378.htm#fr_2428.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p7"></span> Lit., the swift runner.

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[558:2430](0081378.htm#fr_2429.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p8"></span> \[Compare with this letter that found in
Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl*., i. 13), where the reply is also given. 
Eusebius claims that he had seen the original documents.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[558:2431](0081378.htm#fr_2430.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p10"></span> Lit., doubled in four.

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[559:2432](0081378.htm#fr_2431.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p15"></span> Or, fault.

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[559:2433](0081378.htm#fr_2432.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p18"></span> The other \[Vienna\] <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxvi-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> here adds:  And
having gone into it, he preached Christ, saying to them all with tears,
Ye men who have ears to hear, hear from me the word of life; hear
attentively, and understand.  Cast off your many opinions, and believe
and come to the one living and true God, the God of the Hebrews.  For He
only is the true God and Maker of the whole creation, searching the
hearts of mankind, and knowing all about each one before their birth, as
being the Maker of them all.  To Him alone, fixing your eyes upon
heaven, fall down evening and morning, and at noon, and to Him alone
offer the sacrifice of praise, and give thanks always, refraining from
what you yourselves hate; because God is compassionate and benevolent,
and recompenses to each one according to his works.

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[559:2434](0081378.htm#fr_2433.md) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p19"></span> The Paris<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p19.1"></span>ms.</span> has 20th.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the
Theologian.](0081379.md)
