[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081303)  [Next](0081305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.iv-p2"></span>Pilate, filled with fury, went forth
outside of the prætorium, and says to them:  I take the sun to witness
that I find in this man not even one fault.  The Jews answered and said
to the governor:  If he were not an evil-doer, we should never have
delivered him to thee.  Pilate says to them:  Take him, and judge him
according to your law.  The Jews answered:  It is not permitted to us to
put any one to death.  Pilate says to them:  Has God said to you not to
put any one to death? has He therefore said to me that I am to kill?

<span id="vii.xv.iv-p3"></span>Pilate, having again gone into the
prætorium, called Jesus to him privately, and said to Him:  Art thou the
king of the Jews?  Jesus answered Pilate:  Speakest thou this of
thyself, or have others said *it* to thee of me?  Pilate answered:  Am I
a Jew?  Thy nation and the chief priests have delivered thee to me. 
What hast thou done?  Jesus answering, said:  My kingdom is not of this
world.  If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would assuredly
strive that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now my kingdom is
not from hence.  Pilate said to Him:  Art thou then a king?  Jesus said
to him:  Thou sayest that I am a king.  For I for this was born, and for
this have I come, that I should bear witness to the truth; and every one
who is of the truth hears my voice.  Pilate says to him:  What is
truth?  Jesus says:  Truth is from heaven.  Pilate says:  Is not there
truth upon earth?  Jesus says to Pilate:  Notice how the truth-speaking
are judged by those who have power upon earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](0081305)
