[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081443)  [Next](0081445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.x.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.x.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="viii.x.ii-p1.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="viii.x.ii-p2"></span>(Donation of Constantine, p. 607.)

<span id="viii.x.ii-p3"></span>On this stupendous fraud I quote from
Dupin, as follows:—

<span id="viii.x.ii-p4"></span>“Among the number of Constantine’s edicts
I do not place the Donation which goes under his name.  Some have
attributed this false monument to the author of the collection
(Decretals) ascribed to Isidore, he being a notorious forger of such
kind of writings; and this conjecture is more probable than some others.

<span id="viii.x.ii-p5"></span>“By this Donation, Constantine is
supposed to give to the Bishops of Rome the sovereignty of the city, and
of the provinces of the Western Empire.  I note some of the reasons
which clearly prove this instrument to be a forgery:—

<span id="viii.x.ii-p6"></span>“(1)  Not one of the ancients mentions
this pretended liberality of the emperor.  How could Eusebius, and all
the other historians who wrote about Constantine, have passed over in
silence, had it been a reality, the gift of a Western Empire to the
Bishop of Rome?

<span id="viii.x.ii-p7"></span>“(2)  Not one of the Bishops of Rome ever
refers to such a donation, though it would have been much to their
advantage so to do.

<span id="viii.x.ii-p8"></span>“(3)  It is dated falsely, and under
consuls who flourished when Constantine was unbaptized; yet his baptism
is referred to in this instrument.  Again, the city of Constantinople is
mentioned in it, although it was called Byzantium for ten years
subsequent to its date.

<span id="viii.x.ii-p9"></span>“(4)  Not only is the style very
different from the genuine edicts of the emperor, but it is full of
terms and phrases that came into use much after the time of Constantine.

<span id="viii.x.ii-p10"></span>“(5)  How comes it that he should have
given one-half of his empire to the Bishop of Rome, including the city
of Rome itself, without any one ever hearing of it for hundreds of years
after?

<span id="viii.x.ii-p11"></span>“(6)  The falsities and absurdities of
this edict demonstrate that it was composed by an ignorant impostor. 
Thus by it, for example, the Pope is permitted to wear a crown of gold,
and a fabulous history is given of the emperor’s baptism by Sylvester: 
also, it contains a history of the emperor’s miraculous cure of leprosy
by Sylvester, all which do plainly prove the forgery.  It is certain
that the city of Rome was governed by the emperor, and that the Bishops
of Rome were subject to him, and obeyed him, as all his other subjects.

<span id="viii.x.ii-p12"></span>“All that we have said plainly shows
that the edict of Donation that bears the name of Constantine is wholly
supposititious; but it is not so easy to find out who was the author. 
However it be, this document has neither any use nor authority.” <span
id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[644:2887](0081444.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="viii.x.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x.ii-p13"></span> Dupin, *ut supra*, p. 17.  See also
Bryce’s *Holy Roman Empire*, pp. 43 and 100.  He pronounces “the
Donation of Constantine” to be “the *most stupendous* of all the
mediæval forgeries.  The Decretals certainly surpass it in their nature
and their effects; but Mr. Bryce’s reference to these is very feeble and
unsatisfactory, after Dupin.  See p. 156 of his work, ed. Macmillan,
1880.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Memoirs of Edessa And Other Ancient Syriac Documents.](0081445)
