[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081183)  [Next](0081185.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.</span>

<span id="vii.v.vii-p2"></span>And Mary was held in admiration by all
the people of Israel; and when she was three years old, she walked with
a step so mature, she spoke so perfectly, and spent her time so
assiduously in the praises of God, that all were astonished at her, and
wondered; and she was not reckoned a young infant, but as it were a
grown-up person of thirty years old.  She was so constant in prayer, and
her appearance was so beautiful and glorious, that scarcely any one
could look into her face.  And she occupied herself constantly with her
wool-work, so that she in her tender years could do all that old women
were not able to do.  And this was the order that she had set for
herself: <span id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628.md)   From the morning
to the third hour she remained in prayer; from the third to the ninth
she was occupied with her weaving; and from the ninth she again applied
herself to prayer.  She did not retire from praying until there appeared
to her the angel of the Lord, from whose hand she used to receive food;
and thus she became more and more perfect in the work of God.  Then,
when the older virgins rested from the praises of God, she did not rest
at all; so that in the praises and vigils of God none were found before
her, no one more learned in the wisdom of the law of God, more lowly in
humility, more elegant in singing, more perfect in all virtue.  She was
indeed stedfast, immoveable, unchangeable, and daily advancing to
perfection.  No one saw her angry, nor heard her speaking evil.  All her
speech was so full of grace, that her God was acknowledged to be in her
tongue.  She was always engaged in prayer and in searching the law, and
she was anxious lest by any word of hers she should sin with regard to
her companions.  Then she was afraid lest in her laughter, or the sound
of her beautiful voice, she should commit any fault, or lest, being
elated, she should display any wrong-doing or haughtiness to one of her
equals. <span id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629.md)   She blessed God
without intermission; and lest perchance, even in her salutation, she
might cease from praising God; if any one saluted her, she used to
answer by way of salutation:  Thanks be to God.  And from her the custom
first began of men saying, Thanks be to God, when they saluted each
other.  She refreshed herself only with the food which she daily
received from the hand of the angel; but the food which she obtained
from the priests she divided among the poor.  The angels of God were
often seen speaking with her, and they most diligently obeyed her.  If
any one who was unwell touched her, the same hour he went home cured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[371:1629](0081184.htm#fr_1628.md) <span
id="vii.v.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.vii-p3"></span> For the hours of prayer, see *Apost.
Const*., ch. xl.; Jerome’s letters to Læta, Demetrias, etc.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[371:1630](0081184.htm#fr_1629.md) <span
id="vii.v.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.vii-p4"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.v.vii-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> has:  She was anxious about her
companions, lest any of them should sin even in one word, lest any of
them should raise her voice in laughing, lest any of them should be in
the wrong, or proud to her father or her mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](0081185.md)
