[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081149)  [Next](0081151.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Sophonias Maintains that God
Cannot Produce What is Unlike Himself.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p2"></span>And Sophonias said again:  “Your
great patience, my lord Peter, gives us boldness to ask you many
questions for the sake of accuracy.  Wherefore we make our inquiries
with confidence in every direction.  I remember, then, that Simon said
yesterday, in his discussion with you, that the evil one, if he was born
of God, possesses in consequence the same substance as He does who sent
him forth, and he ought to have been good, and not wicked.  But you
answered that this was not always the case, since many wicked sons are
born of good parents, as from Adam two unlike <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492.md) sons were begotten, one of whom was
bad and the other good.  And when Simon found fault with you for having
used human examples, you answered that in this way we ought not to admit
that God begets at all; for this also is a human example.  And I,
Sophonias, admit that God begets; but I do not allow that He begets what
is bad, even though the good among men beget bad children.  And do not
imagine <span id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493.md) that I am without
reason attributing to God some of the qualities that distinguish men,
and refusing to attribute others, when I grant that He begets, but do
not allow that He begets what is unlike Himself.  For men, as you might
expect, beget sons who are unlike them in their dispositions for the
following reason.  Being composed of four parts, they change their
bodies variously, according to the various changes of the year; and
thus, the appropriate change either of increase or decrease taking place
in the human body, each season destroys the harmonious combination. 
Now, when the combinations do not always remain exactly in the same
position, the seeds, having sometimes one combination, sometimes
another, are sent off; and these are followed, according to the
combination belonging to the season, by dispositions either good or
bad.  But in the case of God we cannot suppose any such thing; for,
being unchangeable and always existing, whenever He wishes to send
forth, there is an absolute necessity that what is sent forth should be
in all respects in the same position as that which has begotten, I mean
in regard to substance and disposition.  But if any one should wish to
maintain that He is changeable, I do not know how it is possible for him
to maintain that He is immortal.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[340:1493](0081150.htm#fr_1492.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p3"></span> An emendation of Wieseler’s.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[340:1494](0081150.htm#fr_1493.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.v-p4"></span> An emendation of Wieseler’s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](0081151.md)
