[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081332)  [Next](0081334) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p1"></span> *<span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xvii.i-p1.1"></span>Latin.  Second Version.</span>*

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvii.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter 1 (17).</span>

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p3"></span>Then Rabbi Addas, and Rabbi Finees, and
Rabbi Egias, the three men who had come from Galilee, testifying that
they had seen Jesus taken up into heaven, rose up in the midst of the
multitude of the chiefs of the Jews, and said before the priests and the
Levites, who had been called together to the council of the Lord:  When
we were coming from Galilee, we met at the Jordan a very great multitude
of men, fathers <span id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004) who had been
some time dead.  And present among them we saw Karinus and Leucius.  And
they came up to us, and we kissed each other, because they were dear
friends of ours; and we asked them, Tell us, friends and brothers, what
is this breath of life and flesh? and who are those with whom you are
going? and how do you, who have been some time dead, remain in the body?

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p5"></span>And they said in answer:  We have risen
again along with Christ from the lower world, and He has raised us up
again from the dead.  And from this you may know that the gates of death
and darkness have been destroyed, and the souls of the saints have been
brought out thence, and have ascended into heaven along with Christ the
Lord.  And indeed to us it has been commanded by the Lord Himself, that
for an appointed time we should walk over the banks of Jordan and the
mountains; not, however, appearing to every one, nor speaking to every
one, except to those to whom He has permitted us.  And just now we could
neither have spoken nor appeared to you, unless it had been allowed to
us by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p6"></span>And when they heard this, all the
multitude who were present in the council were struck with fear and
trembling, and wondered whether these things had really happened which
these Galilæans testified.  Then Caiaphas and Annas said to the
council:  What these have testified, first and last, must shortly be
altogether made clear:  If it shall be found to be true that Karinus and
Leucius remain alive in the body, and if we shall be able to behold them
with our own eyes, then <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="vii.xvii.i-Page_455"></span>what they testify is altogether true;
and if we find them, they will inform us of everything; but if not, you
may know that it is all lies.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p7"></span>Then the council having suddenly risen,
it pleased them to choose men fit for the duty, fearing God, and who
knew when they died, and where they were buried, to inquire diligently,
and to see whether it was as they had heard.  The men therefore
proceeded to the same place, fifteen in number, who through all were
present at their falling asleep, and had stood at their feet when they
were buried, and had beheld their tombs.  And they came and found their
tombs open, and very many others besides, and found a sign neither of
their bones nor of their dust.  And they returned in all haste, and
reported what they had seen.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p8"></span>Then all their synagogue was in great
grief and perplexity, and they said to each other:  What shall we do? 
Annas and Caiaphas said:  Let us turn to where we have heard that they
are, and let us send to them men of rank, asking and entreating them: 
perhaps they will deign to come to us.  Then they sent to them Nicodemus
and Joseph, and the three men, the Galilæan rabbis who had seen them,
asking that they should deign to come to them.  And they went, and
walked round all the region of Jordan and of the mountains, and they
were coming back without finding them.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p9"></span>And, behold, suddenly there appeared
coming down from Mount Amalech a very great number, as it were, twelve
thousand men, who had risen with the Lord.  And though they recognised
very many there, they were not able to say anything to them for fear and
the angelic vision; and they stood at a distance gazing and hearing
them, how they walked along singing praises, and saying:  The Lord has
risen again from the dead, as He had said; let us all exult and be glad,
since He reigns for ever.  Then those who had been sent were astonished,
and fell to the ground for fear, and received the answer from them, that
they should see Karinus and Leucius in their own houses.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p10"></span>And they rose up and went to their
houses, and found them spending their time in prayer.  And going in to
them, they fell on their faces to the ground, saluting them; and being
raised up, they said:  O friends of God, all the multitude of the Jews
have directed us to you, hearing that you have risen from the dead,
asking and beseeching you to come to them, that we all may know the
great things of God which have happened around us in our times.  And
they immediately, at a sign from God, rose up, and came with them, and
entered their synagogue.  Then the multitude of the Jews, with the
priests, put the books of the law in their hands, and adjured them by
the God Heloi, and the God Adonai, and by the law and the prophets,
saying:  Tell us how you have risen from the dead, and what are those
wonderful things which have happened in our times, such as we have never
heard to have happened at any other time; because already for fear all
our bones have been benumbed, and have dried up, and the earth moves
itself under our feet:  for we have joined all our hearts to shed
righteous and holy blood.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p11"></span>Then Karinus and Leucius signed to them
with their hands to give them a sheet of paper and ink.  And this they
did, because the Holy Spirit did not allow them to speak to them.  And
they gave each of them paper, and put them apart, the one from the other
in separate cells.  And they, making with their fingers the sign of the
cross of Christ, began to write on the separate sheets; and after they
had finished, as if out of one mouth from the separate cells, they cried
out, Amen.  And rising up, Karinus gave his paper to Annas, and Leucius
to Caiaphas; and saluting each other, they went out, and returned to
their sepulchres.

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p12"></span>Then Annas and Caiaphas, opening the
sheet of paper, began each to read it in secret.  But all the people
took it ill, and so all cried out:  Read these writings to us openly;
and after they have been read through we shall keep them, lest perchance
this truth of God be turned through wilful blindness, by unclean and
deceitful men, into falsehood.  At this Annas and Caiaphas fell
a-trembling, and delivered the sheet of paper to Rabbi Addas, and Rabbi
Finees, and Rabbi Egias, who had come from Galilee, and announced that
Jesus had been taken up into heaven.  All the multitude of the Jews
trusted to them to read this writing.  And they read the paper
containing these words:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[454:2005](0081333.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="vii.xvii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii.i-p4"></span> *Abbatorum*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](0081334)
