[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081489)  [Next](0081491) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.xix.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_742">p. 742</span> <span
id="ix.xix.i-Page_742"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xix.i-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="ix.xix.i-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xix.i-p2.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="ix.xix.i-p3"></span>(Mara, son of Serapion, p. 735.)

<span id="ix.xix.i-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xix.i-p4.1"></span>I cannot</span> withhold from the student the
valuable hints concerning “the dialect of Edessa” by which Professor
Nöldke <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523) corrects the loose
ideas of Mommsen, more especially because the fresh work of Mommsen will
soon be in our hands, and general credit will be attached to specious
representations which are sure to have a bearing on his ulterior
treatment of Christianity and the Roman Empire.

<span id="ix.xix.i-p6"></span>Of the Syriac language Professor Nöldke
says:—

<span id="ix.xix.i-p7"></span>“It was the living language of Syria which
here appears as the *language of writing*.  In Syria it had long ago
been compelled to yield to the Greek as the *official language*, but
private writings were certainly yet to a great extent written in
Aramaic.  We cannot lay much stress upon the fact that the respectable
citizen in the Orient would have the schoolmaster of the village compose
a Greek inscription for his tomb, of which he undoubtedly understood but
little himself.  And what a Greek this often was!  That no books written
by Aramaic Gentiles have been preserved for us, does not decide against
the existence of the Aramaic as the language of literature in that day;
for how could such Gentile works have been preserved for us?  To this
must be added, that *that particular dialect which afterward became the
common literary language of Aramaic Christendom*—*namely, that of
Edessa*—certainly had in the Gentile period already been used for
literary purposes.  The official report of the great flood in the year
201, which is prefixed to the Edessa Chronicles, is written by a
Gentile.  To the same time must be ascribed the letter, written in good
Edessan language by the finely educated Marâ bar Serapion, from the
neighbouring Samosata, who, notwithstanding his good-will toward
youthful Christianity, was no Christian, but represented rather the
ethical stand-point of the Stoicism so popular at that time.  The fixed
settling of Syriac orthography must have taken place at a much earlier
period than the hymns of Bardesanes and his school, which are for us
very old specimens of that language, since these hymns represent a
versification much younger than the stage of development which is
presupposed in this orthography.  In general, it must be granted that
*the dialect of Edessa had been thoroughly developed already in
pre-Christian times;* otherwise, it could not have been so fixed and
firm in writing and forms of expression.  And the Syriac *Dialogue on
Fate*, which presupposes throughout the third century, treats of
scientific questions, according to Greek models, with such precision
that we again see that this was not the beginning, but rather the close,
of a scientific Syriac literature, which flourished already when there
were but few or possibly no Christians there.  Of course I recognise,
with Mommsen, that Edessa offered a better protection to the national
language and literature than did the cities of Syria proper; but
circumstances were not altogether of a different nature in this regard
in Haleb, Hems, and Damascus than they were in Edessa and Jerusalem. 
If, as is known, the common mass spoke Aramaic in the metropolitan city
of Antiochia, it cannot safely be accepted that in the inland districts
the Greek was not the language of the ‘educated,’ but only of those who
had specially learned it.  The Macedonian and Greek colonists have
certainly only in a very small part retained this language in those
districts down to the Roman period.  In most cases they have been in a
minority from the beginning over against the natives.  Further, as the
descendants of old soldiers, they can scarcely be regarded as the called
watchmen of Greek custom and language.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[742:3524](0081490.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="ix.xix.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xix.i-p5"></span> For previous quotations refer to p. 721,
*supra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](0081491)
