[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081204)  [Next](0081206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xxviii-p2"></span>And it came to pass, after these
things, that in the sight of all Jesus took clay from the pools which He
had made, and of it made twelve sparrows.  And it was the Sabbath when
Jesus did this, and there were very many children with Him.  When,
therefore, one of the Jews had seen Him doing this, he said to Joseph: 
Joseph, dost thou not see the child Jesus working on the Sabbath at what
it is not lawful for him to do? for he has made twelve sparrows of
clay.  And when Joseph heard this, he reproved him, saying:  Wherefore
doest thou on the Sabbath such things as are not lawful for us to do? 
And when Jesus heard Joseph, He struck His hands together, and said to
His sparrows:  Fly!  And at the voice of His command they began to fly. 
And in the sight and hearing of all that stood by, He said to the
birds:  Go and fly through the earth, and through all the world, and
live.  And when those that were there saw such miracles, they were
filled with great astonishment.  And some praised and admired Him, but
others reviled Him.  And certain of them went away to the chief priests
and the heads of the Pharisees, and reported to them that Jesus the son
of Joseph had done great signs and miracles in the sight of all the
people of Israel.  And this was reported in the twelve tribes of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](0081206.md)
