[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081318)  [Next](0081320.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvi.i"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span
id="vii.xvi.i-Page_448"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xvi.i-p1.1"></span>The Gospel of Nicodemus.</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xvi.i-p3.1"></span>Part II.—Christ’s Descent into Hell.</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p5"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xvi.i-p5.1"></span>Latin.  First Version.</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p6"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvi.i-p6.1"></span>Chapter 1 (17).</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p7"></span>And Joseph rose up and said to Annas and
Caiaphas:  Truly and well do you wonder, since you have heard that Jesus
has been seen alive from the dead, ascending up into heaven.  But it is
more to be wondered at that he is not the only one who has risen from
the dead:  but he has raised up alive out of their tombs many others of
the dead, and they have been seen by many in Jerusalem.  And hear me
now, that we all know the blessed Simeon, the great priest, who took up
with his hands Jesus, when an infant, in the temple.  And Simeon himself
had two sons, full brothers; and we all were at their falling asleep,
and at their burial.  Go, therefore, and see their tombs:  for they are
open, because they have risen; and, behold, they are in the city of
Arimathæa, living together in prayers.  And, indeed, they are heard
crying out, but speaking with nobody, and they are silent as the dead. 
But come, let us go to them; let us conduct them to us with all honour
and respect.  And if we adjure them, perhaps they will speak to us of
the mystery of their resurrection.

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p8"></span>At hearing this they all rejoiced.  And
Annas and Caiaphas, Nicodemus, and Joseph, and Gamaliel, went, and did
not find them in their sepulchres; but, walking into the city of
Arimathea, they found them there, on their bended knees, and spending
their time in prayer.  And kissing them, they conducted them to
Jerusalem, into the synagogue, with all veneration and fear of God.  And
shutting the doors, and lifting up the law of the Lord, they put it in
their hands, adjuring them by the God Adonai, and the God of Israel, who
by the law and the prophets spoke to our fathers, saying:  Do you
believe that it was Jesus who raised you from the dead?  Tell us how you
have risen from the dead.

<span id="vii.xvi.i-p9"></span>Karinus and Leucius, hearing this
adjuration, trembled in their body, and groaned, being disturbed in
heart.  And together they looked towards heaven, and with their fingers
made the sign of the cross on their tongues, and immediately they spoke
together, saying:  Give each of us sheets of paper, and let us write
what we have seen and heard.  And they gave it to them.  And they sat
down, and each of them wrote, saying:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](0081320.md)
