[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081461)  [Next](0081463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_667">p. 667</span> <span
id="ix.vii-Page_667"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.vii-p3.1"></span>The Teaching of the Apostles. <span
id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053) </span>

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p5.1"></span>At</span> that time Christ was taken up to His
Father; and how the apostles received the gift of the Spirit; and the
Ordinances and Laws of the Church; and whither each one of the apostles
went; and from whence the countries in the territory of the Romans
received the ordination to the priesthood.

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span>In the year three hundred and <span
id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054) thirty-nine of the kingdom of the
Greeks, in the month Heziran, <span id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055)
on the fourth <span id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056) day of the
same, which is the first day of the week, and the end of Pentecost <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) —on the selfsame day came the
disciples from Nazareth of Galilee, where the conception of our Lord was
announced, to the mount which is called that of the Place of
Olives, <span id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058) our Lord being with
them, but not being visible to them.  And at the time of early dawn our
Lord lifted up His hands, and laid them upon the heads of the eleven
disciples, and gave to them the gift of the priesthood.  And suddenly a
bright cloud received Him.  And they saw Him as He was going up to
heaven.  And He sat down on the right hand of His Father.  And they
praised God because they saw His ascension according as He had told
them; and they rejoiced because they had received the Right Hand
conferring on them the priesthood of the house of Moses and Aaron.

<span id="ix.vii-p12"></span>And from thence they went up *to the city*,
and <span id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059) proceeded to an upper
room—that in which our Lord had observed the passover with them, and the
place where the inquiries had been made:  Who it was that should betray
our Lord to the crucifiers?  There also were *made* the inquiries: <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060)   How they should preach His Gospel
in the world?  And, as within the upper room the mystery of the body and
of the blood of our Lord began to prevail in the world, so also from
thence did the teaching of His preaching begin to have authority in the
world.

<span id="ix.vii-p15"></span>And, when the disciples were cast into this
perplexity, how they should preach His Gospel to *men of* strange
tongues <span id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061) which were unknown to
them, and were speaking thus to one another:  Although we are confident
that Christ will perform by our hands mighty works and miracles in the
presence of strange peoples whose tongues we know not, and who
themselves also are unversed in our tongue, *yet* who shall teach them
and make them understand that it is by the name of Christ who was
crucified that these mighty works and miracles are done?—while, I say,
the disciples were occupied with these thoughts, Simon Cephas rose up,
and said to them:  My brethren, this matter, how we shall preach His
Gospel, pertaineth not to us, but to our Lord; for *He* knoweth how it
is possible for us to preach His Gospel in the world; and we rely on His
care for us, which He promised us, saying:  “When I am ascended to my
Father I will send you the Spirit, the Paraclete, that *He* may teach
you everything which it is meet for you to know, and to make known.”

<span id="ix.vii-p17"></span>And, whilst Simon Cephas was saying these
things to his fellow-apostles, and putting them in remembrance, a
mysterious voice was heard by them, and a sweet odour, which was strange
to the world, breathed upon them; <span
id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) and tongues of fire, between the
voice and the odour, came down from heaven <span
id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063) towards them, and alighted and sat
on every one of them; and, according to the tongue which every one of
them had severally received, so did he prepare himself to go <span
id="page_668">p. 668</span> <span id="ix.vii-Page_668"></span>to the
country in which that tongue was spoken and heard.

<span id="ix.vii-p20"></span>And, by the same gift of the Spirit which
was given to them on that day, they appointed Ordinances and Laws—such
as were in accordance with the Gospel of their preaching, and with the
true and faithful doctrine of their teaching:—

<span id="ix.vii-p21"></span>1.  The apostles therefore appointed:  Pray
ye towards the east: <span id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064)  
because, “as the lightning which lighteneth from the east and is seen
even to the west, so shall the coming of the Son of man be:” <span
id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065)   that by this we might know and
understand that He will appear from the east suddenly. <span
id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066)

<span id="ix.vii-p26"></span>2.  The apostles further appointed:  On the
first *day* of the week let there be service, and the reading of the
Holy Scriptures, and the oblation: <span
id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067)   because on the first day of the
week our Lord rose from the place of the dead and on the first day of
the week He arose upon the world, and on the first day of the week He
ascended up to heaven, and on the first day of the week He will appear
at last with the angels of heaven. <span
id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068)

<span id="ix.vii-p29"></span>3.  The apostles further appointed:  On the
fourth <span id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069) day of the week let
there be service:  because on that *day* our Lord made the disclosure to
them about His trial, <span id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070) and His
suffering, and His crucifixion, and His death, and His resurrection; and
the disciples were on account of this in sorrow. <span
id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071)

<span id="ix.vii-p33"></span>4.  The apostles further appointed:  On the
eve *of the Sabbath*, <span id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072) at the
ninth hour, let there be service:  because that which had been spoken on
the fourth day of the week about the suffering of the Saviour was
brought to pass on the *same* eve; the worlds and creatures trembling,
and the luminaries in the heavens being darkened.

<span id="ix.vii-p35"></span>5.  The apostles further appointed:  Let
there be elders and deacons, like the Levites; <span
id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073) and subdeacons, <span
id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074) like those who carried the vessels
of the court of the sanctuary of the Lord; and an overseer, <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075) who shall likewise be the Guide of
all the people, <span id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076) like Aaron,
the head and chief of all the priests and Levites of the whole
city. <span id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077)

<span id="ix.vii-p41"></span>6.  The apostles further appointed: 
Celebrate the day of the Epiphany <span
id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078) of our Saviour, which is the chief
of the festivals of the Church, on the sixth day of the latter
Canun, <span id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079) in the long number of
the Greeks. <span id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080)

<span id="ix.vii-p46"></span>7.  The apostles further appointed: 
Forty <span id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081) days before the day of
the passion of our Saviour fast ye, and then celebrate the day of the
passion, and the day of the resurrection:  because our Lord Himself
also, the Lord of the festival, fasted forty days; and Moses and Elijah,
who were endued with this mystery, likewise each fasted forty days, and
then were glorified.

<span id="ix.vii-p48"></span>8.  The apostles further appointed:  At the
conclusion of all the Scriptures *other* let the Gospel be read, as
being the seal <span id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082) of all the
Scriptures; and let the people listen to it standing upon their feet: 
because it is the Gospel of the redemption of all men.

<span id="ix.vii-p50"></span>9.  The apostles further appointed:  At the
completion of fifty <span id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083) days
after His resurrection make ye a commemoration of His ascension to His
glorious Father.

<span id="ix.vii-p52"></span>10.  The apostles appointed:  That, beside
the Old Testament, and the Prophets, and the Gospel, and the Acts (of
their exploits), nothing should be read on the pulpit in the
church. <span id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084)

<span id="ix.vii-p54"></span>11.  The apostles further appointed: 
Whosoever is unacquainted with the faith of the Church and the
ordinances and laws which are appointed in it, let him not be a guide
and ruler; and whosoever is acquainted with them and departs from them,
let him not minister again:  because, not being true in his ministry, he
has lied.

<span id="ix.vii-p55"></span>12.  The apostles further appointed: 
Whosoever sweareth, or <span id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) lieth,
or beareth false witness, or hath recourse to magicians and soothsayers
and Chaldeans, and putteth confidence in fates and nativities, which
they hold fast who know not God,—let him also, as a man that knoweth not
God, be dismissed from the ministry, and not minister *again*.

<span id="ix.vii-p57"></span><span id="page_669">p. 669</span> <span
id="ix.vii-Page_669"></span>13.  The apostles further appointed:  If
there be any man that is divided *in mind* touching the ministry, and
who follows it not with a steadfast will <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086) , let not this man minister again: 
because the Lord of the ministry is not served by him with a stedfast
will; and he deceiveth man *only*, and not God, “before whom crafty
devices avail not.” <span id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087)

<span id="ix.vii-p61"></span>14.  The apostles further appointed: 
Whosoever lendeth and receiveth usury, <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) and is occupied in merchandise and
covetousness, let not this man minister again, nor continue in the
ministry.

<span id="ix.vii-p63"></span>15.  The apostles further appointed:  That
whosoever loveth the Jews, <span id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089)
like Iscariot, who was their friend, or the pagans, who worship
creatures instead of the Creator,—should not enter in amongst them and
minister; and moreover, that if he be *already* amongst them, they
should not suffer him *to remain*, but that he should be separated from
amongst them, and not minister with them again.

<span id="ix.vii-p65"></span>16.  The apostles further appointed:  That,
if any one from the Jews or from the pagans come and join himself with
them, and if after he has joined himself with them he turn and go back
again to the side on which he stood *before*, and if he again return and
come to them a second time,—he should not be received again; but that,
according to the side on which he was before, so those who know him
should look upon him.

<span id="ix.vii-p66"></span>17.  The apostles further appointed:  That
it should not be permitted to the Guide to transact the matters which
pertain to the Church apart from those who minister with him; but that
he should issue commands with the counsel of them all, and that that
*only* should be done which all of them should concur in and not
disapprove. <span id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090)

<span id="ix.vii-p68"></span>18.  The apostles further appointed: 
Whenever any shall depart out of this world with a good testimony to the
faith of Christ, and with affliction *borne* for His name’s sake, make
ye a commemoration of them on the day on which they were put to
death. <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091)

<span id="ix.vii-p70"></span>19.  The apostles further appointed:  In
the service of the Church repeat ye the praises of David day by day: 
because of this *saying*:  “I will bless the Lord at all times, and at
all times His praises *shall be* in my mouth;” <span
id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092) and *this:*  “By day and by night
will I meditate and speak, and cause my voice to be heard before Thee.”

<span id="ix.vii-p72"></span>20.  The apostles further appointed:  If
any divest themselves of mammon and run not after the gain of money, let
these men be chosen and admitted to the ministry of the altar.

<span id="ix.vii-p73"></span>21.  The apostles further appointed:  Let
any priest who accidentally puts *another* in bonds <span
id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) contrary to justice receive the
punishment that is right; and let him that has been bound receive the
bonds as if he had been equitably bound.

<span id="ix.vii-p75"></span>22.  The apostles further appointed:  If it
be seen that those who are accustomed to hear causes show partiality,
and pronounce the innocent guilty and the guilty innocent, let them
never again hear another cause:  *thus* receiving the rebuke of their
partiality, as it is fit. <span id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094)

<span id="ix.vii-p77"></span>23.  The apostles further ordained:  Let
not those that are high-minded and lifted up with the arrogance of
boasting be admitted to the ministry:  because of this *text:*  “That
which is exalted among men is abominable before God;” and because
concerning them it is said:  “I will return a recompense upon those that
vaunt themselves.”

<span id="ix.vii-p78"></span>24.  The apostles further appointed:  Let
there be a Ruler over the elders who are in the villages, and let him be
recognised as head of them all, at whose hand all of them shall be
required:  for Samuel also thus made visits from place to place and
ruled. <span id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095)

<span id="ix.vii-p80"></span>25.  The apostles further appointed:  That
those kings who shall hereafter believe in Christ should be permitted to
go up and stand before the altar along with the Guides of the Church: 
because David also, and those who were like him, went up and stood
before the altar. <span id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096)

<span id="ix.vii-p82"></span>26.  The apostles further appointed:  Let
no man dare to do anything by the authority of the priesthood which is
not in accordance with justice and equity, but in accordance with
justice, and free from the blame of partiality, *let all things be
done*.

<span id="ix.vii-p83"></span>27.  The apostles further appointed:  Let
the bread of the Oblation be placed upon the altar on the day on which
it is baked, and not some days after—a thing which is not permitted.

<span id="ix.vii-p84"></span>All these things did the apostles appoint,
not <span id="page_670">p. 670</span> <span
id="ix.vii-Page_670"></span>for themselves, but for those who should
come after them—for they were apprehensive that in time to come wolves
would put on sheep’s clothing:  since for themselves the Spirit, the
Paraclete, which was in them, was sufficient:  that, even as He had
appointed these laws by their hands, *so* He would guide them lawfully. 
For they, who had received from our Lord power and authority, had no
need that laws should be appointed for them by others.  For Paul also,
and Timothy, <span id="fr_3097"></span>[3098](#fn_3097) while they were
going from place to place in the country of Syria and Cilicia, committed
these same Commands and Laws of the apostles and elders to those who
were under the hand of the apostles, for the churches of the countries
in which they were preaching and publishing the Gospel.

<span id="ix.vii-p86"></span>The disciples, moreover, after they had
appointed these Ordinances and Laws, ceased not from the preaching of
the Gospel, or from the wonderful mighty-works which our Lord did by
their hands.  For much people was gathered about them every day, who
believed in Christ; and they came to them from other cities, and heard
their words and received them.  Nicodemus also, and Gamaliel, chiefs of
the synagogue of the Jews, used to come to the apostles in secret,
agreeing with their teaching.  Judas, moreover, and Levi, and Peri, and
Joseph, and Justus, sons of Hananias, and Caiaphas <span
id="fr_3098"></span>[3099](#fn_3098) and Alexander the priests—they too
used to come to the apostles by night, confessing Christ that He is the
Son of God; but they were afraid of the people of their own nation, so
that they did not disclose their mind toward the disciples.

<span id="ix.vii-p88"></span>And the apostles received them
affectionately, saying to them:  Do not, by reason of the shame and fear
of men, forfeit your salvation before God, nor have the blood of Christ
required of you; even as your fathers, who took it upon them:  for it is
not acceptable before God, that, while ye are, *in secret*, with His
worshippers, ye should go and associate with the murderers of His
adorable Son.  How do ye expect that your faith should be accepted with
those that are true, whilst ye are with those that are false?  But it
becomes you, as men who believe in Christ, to confess openly this faith
which we preach. <span id="fr_3099"></span>[3100](#fn_3099)

<span id="ix.vii-p90"></span>And, when they heard these things from the
Disciples, those sons of the priests, all of them alike, cried out
before the whole company of the apostles:  We confess and believe in
Christ who was crucified, and we confess that He is from everlasting the
Son of God; and those who dared to crucify Him do we renounce.  For even
the priests of the people in secret confess Christ; but, for the sake of
the headship among the people which they love, they are not willing to
confess openly; and they have forgotten that which is written: <span
id="fr_3100"></span>[3101](#fn_3100)   “Of knowledge is He the Lord, and
before Him avail not crafty devices.”

<span id="ix.vii-p92"></span>And, when their fathers heard these things
from their sons, they became exceedingly hostile to them:  not indeed
because they had believed in Christ, but because they had declared and
spoken openly of the mind of their fathers before the sons of their
people.

<span id="ix.vii-p93"></span>But those who believed clove to the
disciples, and departed not from them, because they saw that, whatsoever
they taught the multitude, they themselves carried into practice before
all men; and, when affliction and persecution arose against the
disciples, they rejoiced to be afflicted with them, and received with
gladness stripes and imprisonment for the confession of their faith in
Christ; and all the days of their life they preached Christ before the
Jews and the Samaritans.

<span id="ix.vii-p94"></span>And after the death of the apostles there
were Guides and Rulers <span id="fr_3101"></span>[3102](#fn_3101) in the
churches; and, whatsoever the apostles had committed to them and they
had received from them, they continued to teach to the multitude through
the whole space of their lives.  They too, again, at their deaths
committed and delivered to their disciples after them whatsoever they
had received from the apostles; also what James had written from
Jerusalem, and Simon from the city of Rome, and John from Ephesus, and
Mark from Alexandria the Great, and Andrew from Phrygia, and Luke from
Macedonia, and Judas Thomas from India: <span
id="fr_3102"></span>[3103](#fn_3102)   that the epistles of an
apostle <span id="fr_3103"></span>[3104](#fn_3103) might be received and
read in the churches that were in every place, just as the achievements
of their Acts, which Luke wrote, are read; that hereby the apostles
might be known, and the prophets, and the Old Testament and the
New; <span id="fr_3104"></span>[3105](#fn_3104) that *so might be seen*
one truth was proclaimed in them all:  that one Spirit spoke in them
all, from one God whom they had all worshipped and had all preached. 
And the *divers* countries received their teaching.  Everything,
therefore, which had been spoken by our Lord by means of the apos<span
id="page_671">p. 671</span> <span id="ix.vii-Page_671"></span>tles, and
which the apostles had delivered to their disciples, was believed and
received in every country, by the operation <span
id="fr_3105"></span>[3106](#fn_3105) of our Lord, who said to them:  “I
am with you, even until the world shall end;” the Guides disputing with
the Jews from the books of the prophets, and contending also against the
deluded pagans with the terrible mighty-works which they did in the name
of Christ.  For all the peoples, even those that dwell in other
countries, quietly and silently received <span
id="fr_3106"></span>[3107](#fn_3106) the Gospel of Christ; and those who
became confessors cried out under their persecution:  This our
persecution to-day shall plead <span
id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107) on our behalf, *lest we be
punished*, for having been formerly persecutors *ourselves*.  For there
were some of them against whom death by the sword was ordered; and there
were some of them from whom they took away whatsoever they possessed,
and let them go. <span id="fr_3108"></span>[3109](#fn_3108)   And the
more affliction arose against them, the richer and larger did their
congregations become; and with gladness in their hearts did they receive
death of every kind.  And by ordination to the priesthood, which the
apostles themselves had received from our Lord, did their Gospel wing
its way rapidly into the four quarters of the world.  And by mutual
visitation they ministered to one another.

<span id="ix.vii-p103"></span>1.  Jerusalem received the ordination to
the priesthood, as did all the country of Palestine, and the parts
occupied by the Samaritans, and the parts occupied by the Philistines,
and the country of the Arabians, and of Phœnicia, and the people of
Cæsarea, from James, who was ruler and guide in the church of the
apostles which was built in Zion.

<span id="ix.vii-p104"></span>2.  Alexandria the Great, and Thebais, and
the whole of Inner Egypt, and all the country of Pelusium, <span
id="fr_3109"></span>[3110](#fn_3109) and *extending* as far as the
borders of the Indians, received the apostles’ ordination to the
priesthood from Mark the evangelist, who was ruler and guide there in
the church which he had built, *in which,* he also ministered.

<span id="ix.vii-p106"></span>3.  India, <span
id="fr_3110"></span>[3111](#fn_3110) and all the countries belonging to
it and round about it, even to the farthest sea, received the apostles’
ordination to the priesthood from Judas Thomas, who was guide and ruler
in the church which he had built there, *in which* he also ministered
there.

<span id="ix.vii-p108"></span>4.  Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia, and
Galatia, even to Pontus, received the apostles’ ordination to the
priesthood from Simon Cephas, who himself laid the foundation of the
church there, <span id="fr_3111"></span>[3112](#fn_3111) and was priest
and ministered there up to the time when he went up from thence to Rome
on account of Simon the sorcerer, who was deluding the people of Rome
with his sorceries. <span id="fr_3112"></span>[3113](#fn_3112)

<span id="ix.vii-p111"></span>5.  The city of Rome, and all Italy, and
Spain, and Britain, and Gaul, together with all the rest of the
countries round about them, received the apostles’ ordination to the
priesthood from Simon Cephas, who went up from Antioch; and he was ruler
and guide there, in the church which he had built there, and in the
places round about it. <span id="fr_3113"></span>[3114](#fn_3113)

<span id="ix.vii-p113"></span>6.  Ephesus, and Thessalonica, and all
Asia, and all the country of the Corinthians, and of all Achaia and the
parts round about it, received the apostles’ ordination to the
priesthood from John the evangelist, who had leaned upon the bosom of
our Lord; who himself built a church there, and ministered in his office
of Guide which *he held* there.

<span id="ix.vii-p114"></span>7.  Nicæa, and Nicomedia, and all the
country of Bithynia, and of Inner Galatia, <span
id="fr_3114"></span>[3115](#fn_3114) and of the regions round about it,
received the apostles’ ordination to the priesthood from Andrew, the
brother of Simon Cephas, who was himself Guide and Ruler in the church
which he had built there, and was priest and ministered there.

<span id="ix.vii-p116"></span>8.  Byzantium, and all the country of
Thrace, and of the parts about it as far as the great river, <span
id="fr_3115"></span>[3116](#fn_3115) the boundary which separates from
the barbarians, received the apostles’ ordination to the priesthood from
Luke the apostle, who himself built a church there, and ministered there
in his office of Ruler and Guide which *he held* there.

<span id="ix.vii-p118"></span>9.  Edessa, and all the countries round
about it which were on all sides of it, and Zoba, <span
id="fr_3116"></span>[3117](#fn_3116) and Arabia, and all the north, and
the regions round about it, and the south, and all the regions on the
borders of Mesopotamia, received the apostles’ ordination to the
priesthood from Addæus the apostle, one of the seventy-two
apostles, <span id="fr_3117"></span>[3118](#fn_3117) who himself made
disciples there, and built a church there, and was priest and ministered
there in his office of Guide which *he held* there.

<span id="ix.vii-p121"></span>10.  The whole of Persia, of the
Assyrians, and of the Armenians, and of the Medians, and of the
countries round about Babylon, the Huzites and the Gelæ, as far as the
borders of the Indians, and as far as the land <span
id="fr_3118"></span>[3119](#fn_3118) of Gog and Magog, <span
id="page_672">p. 672</span> <span id="ix.vii-Page_672"></span>and
moreover all the countries on all sides, received the apostles’
ordination to the priesthood from Aggæus, a maker of silks, <span
id="fr_3119"></span>[3120](#fn_3119) the disciple of Addæus the apostle.

<span id="ix.vii-p124"></span>The other remaining companions of the
apostles, moreover went to the distant countries of the barbarians; and
they made disciples from place to place and passed on; and there they
ministered by their preaching; and there occurred their departure out of
this world, their disciples after them going on *with the work* down to
the present day, nor was any change or addition made by them in their
preaching.

<span id="ix.vii-p125"></span>Luke, moreover, the evangelist had such
diligence that he wrote the exploits of the Acts of the Apostles, and
the ordinances and laws of the ministry of their priesthood, and whither
each one of them went.  By his diligence, I say, did Luke write these
things, and more than these; and he placed them in the hand of
Priscus <span id="fr_3120"></span>[3121](#fn_3120) and Aquilus, his
disciples; and they accompanied him up to the day of his death, just as
Timothy and Erastus of Lystra, and Menaus, <span
id="fr_3121"></span>[3122](#fn_3121) the first disciples of the
apostles, accompanied Paul until he was taken up to the city of Rome
because he had withstood Tertullus the orator. <span
id="fr_3122"></span>[3123](#fn_3122)

<span id="ix.vii-p129"></span>And Nero Cæsar despatched with the sword
Simon Cephas in the city of Rome. <span
id="fr_3123"></span>[3124](#fn_3123)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[667:3054](0081462.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="ix.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span> This work is taken, and printed verbatim,
from the same <span class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p4.1"></span>ms.</span>
as the preceding, Cod. Add. 14,644, fol. 10.  That <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p4.2"></span>ms.</span>, however, has been
carefully compared with another in the Brit. Mus. in which it is found,
Cod. Add. 14,531, fol. 109; and with a third, in which the piece is
quoted as *Canons of the Apostles*, Cod. Add. 14,173, fol. 37.  In using
the second, a comparison has also been made of De Lagarde’s edition of
it (Vienna, 1856).  This treatise had also been published before in
*Ebediesu Metropolitæ Sobæ et Armeniæ collectio canonum Synodicorum* by
Cardinal Mai.  It is also cited by Bar Hebræus in his *Nomocanon*,
printed by Mai in the same volume.  These three texts are referred to in
the notes, as A. B. C. respectively.  \[It seems to me that this and the
Bryennios fragment are alike relics of some original older than both. 
To that of vol. vii. (p. 377) and the *Apostolic Constitutions*, so
called, this is a natural preface.\]

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[667:3055](0081462.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="ix.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span> A. omits “three hundred and.”  They are
supplied from B.  The reading of C. is 342.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[667:3056](0081462.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span> This month answers to Sivan, which began
with the new moon of June.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p8.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[667:3057](0081462.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="ix.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span> C. reads “fourteenth.”

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[667:3058](0081462.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="ix.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span> The day of Pentecost seems to be put for
that of the Ascension.

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[667:3059](0081462.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="ix.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p11"></span> Syr. “Baith Zaithe.”  Comp. [Luke xxiv.
50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050)<span id="ix.vii-p11.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[667:3060](0081462.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="ix.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p13"></span> Comp. [Acts i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012)<span id="ix.vii-p13.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[667:3061](0081462.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="ix.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p14"></span> \[It is evident that the apostles had no
such ideas until after the vision of St. Peter, [Acts x.
9-35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)<span id="ix.vii-p14.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[667:3062](0081462.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="ix.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p16"></span> \[It is evident that the apostles had no
such ideas until after the vision of St. Peter, [Acts x.
9-35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)<span id="ix.vii-p16.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[667:3063](0081462.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="ix.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p18"></span> The reading of B. and C.:  A. reads
“answered them.”

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[667:3064](0081462.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="ix.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p19"></span> B. reads “suddenly.”  \[The translator
interpolates *upon him*.\]

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[668:3065](0081462.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="ix.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p22"></span> On praying toward the east, comp. *Apost.
Constitutions*, ii. 57, vii. 44; and Tertullian, *Apol*., 16.

<span id="ix.vii-p23"></span>*A. C*., ii. 57, contains an interesting
account of the conduct of public worship.  It may be consulted in
connection with Ordinances 2, 8, and 10, also.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p23.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[668:3066](0081462.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="ix.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p24"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)<span id="ix.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[668:3067](0081462.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="ix.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p25"></span> B. and C. read “at the last.”  Ebediesu
has “from heaven.”

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[668:3068](0081462.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="ix.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p27"></span> i.e., the Eucharist.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p27.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[668:3069](0081462.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="ix.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p28"></span> C. reads “His holy angels.”

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[668:3070](0081462.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="ix.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p30"></span> For Ords. 3 and 4, see *Ap. Const*., v.
13–15.

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[668:3071](0081462.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="ix.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p31"></span> B. reads “His manifestation.”

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[668:3072](0081462.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="ix.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p32"></span> The reading of C.

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[668:3073](0081462.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="ix.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p34"></span> Lit. “ the evening,” but used in
particular of the evening of the sixth day of the week, the eve of the
seventh:  the evening being regarded, as in [Gen. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005)<span id="ix.vii-p34.1"></span>, as
the first part of the day.  Similarly, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii-p34.2"></span>παρασκευή</span> , which the Peshito translates
by our word, is used in the Gospels for the sixth day, with a
prospective reference to the seventh.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p34.3"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[668:3074](0081462.htm#fr_3073) <span
id="ix.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p36"></span> See *Ap. Const*., ii. 25.

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[668:3075](0081462.htm#fr_3074) <span
id="ix.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p37"></span> Comp. *Eccl. Canons*, No. 43.  The Gr.
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii-p37.1"></span>ὑποδιάκονοι</span> is
here used, though for “deacon” the usual Syriac word is employed,
meaning “minister” or “servant.”  From Riddle, *Christian Antiqq*., p.
301, with whom Neander agrees, it would seem that subdeacons were first
appointed at the end of the third century or the beginning of the
fourth.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p37.2"></span>Tr.</span> 
\[See vol. v. p. 417.\]

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[668:3076](0081462.htm#fr_3075) <span
id="ix.vii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p38"></span> \*\*\*, equivalent, not to <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii-p38.1"></span>ἐπίσκοπος</span>, but to
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii-p38.2"></span>σκοπός</span> =
*watchman*, as in [Ezek. xxxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007)<span id="ix.vii-p38.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[668:3077](0081462.htm#fr_3076) <span
id="ix.vii-p38.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p39"></span> For this B. reads “world.”

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[668:3078](0081462.htm#fr_3077) <span
id="ix.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p40"></span> B. has “camp.”

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[668:3079](0081462.htm#fr_3078) <span
id="ix.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p42"></span> See *Ap. Const*., v. 13.

<span id="ix.vii-p43"></span>Christmas, of which no mention is made in
these Ordinances, is called “the first of all,” the Epiphany being
ranked next to it in the *Constitutions*.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p43.1"></span>Tr.</span>  \[See vol. vii. p. 492.\]

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[668:3080](0081462.htm#fr_3079) <span
id="ix.vii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p44"></span> January:  the Jewish Tebeth.  “The former
Canun” is December, i.e., Chisleu.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p44.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[668:3081](0081462.htm#fr_3080) <span
id="ix.vii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p45"></span> The era of the Seleucidæ, 311 <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p45.1"></span>a.c.</span>, appears to be
referred to.  In this new names were given to certain months, and Canun
was one of them.  See p. 666, *supra*.

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[668:3082](0081462.htm#fr_3081) <span
id="ix.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p47"></span> *Eccl. Can*., No. 69.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p47.1"></span>Tr.</span>  See *Ap. Const*.,
v. 13–15.

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[668:3083](0081462.htm#fr_3082) <span
id="ix.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p49"></span> Properly “the sealer:”  for, although the
word is not found in the lexicons, its formation shows that it denotes
an agent.  The meaning seems to be, that the Gospel gives completeness
and validity to the Scriptures.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p49.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[668:3084](0081462.htm#fr_3083) <span
id="ix.vii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p51"></span> C. reads “forty.”

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[668:3085](0081462.htm#fr_3084) <span
id="ix.vii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p53"></span> See *Ap. Const*., ii. 57; *Teaching of
Simon Cephas*, *ad fin.*; *Eccl. Can*., Nos. 60, 85.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p53.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[668:3086](0081462.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="ix.vii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p56"></span> B. and C., as well as Ebediesu, read
“and.”

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[669:3087](0081462.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="ix.vii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p58"></span> Lit. “it is not certain (or firm) to
him.”—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p58.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[669:3088](0081462.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="ix.vii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p59"></span> The exact words of the Peshito of [1 Sam.
ii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003)<span id="ix.vii-p59.1"></span>. 
The E.V. following the K’ri <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vii-p59.2"></span>ולו</span>, instead of the <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.vii-p59.3"></span>אלו</span> of the text,
renders “and by Him actions are weighed.”

<span id="ix.vii-p60"></span>The Peshito translator may have confounded
the Heb. verb <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vii-p60.1"></span>ןכתּ</span>, which appears not to exist in
Aramæan, with its own verb <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vii-p60.2"></span>ןקתּ</span> (\*\*\*), through the similarity in
sound of the gutturals <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vii-p60.3"></span>כּ</span> and <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vii-p60.4"></span>ק</span><span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vii-p60.5"></span>׃</span>

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[669:3089](0081462.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="ix.vii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p62"></span> See *Eccl. Canons*, No. 44.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p62.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[669:3090](0081462.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="ix.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p64"></span> Comp. *Eccl. Canons*, Nos. 65, 70,
71.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p64.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[669:3091](0081462.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="ix.vii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p67"></span> See *Eccl. Canons*, No. 35.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p67.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[669:3092](0081462.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="ix.vii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p69"></span> See the letter of the Church of Smyrna on
the martyrdom of Polycarp, and Euseb., *Hist. Eccl*., iv. 15; \[also p.
664, note 4, *supra*\].

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[669:3093](0081462.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="ix.vii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p71"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="ix.vii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[669:3094](0081462.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="ix.vii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p74"></span> The particip. \*\*\*, though usually
pass., may, like some other participles Peil, be taken actively, as
appears from a passage quoted by Dr. R. Payne Smith, *Thes. Syr*.,
*s.v.*  This would seem to be the only possible way of taking it
here.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p74.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[669:3095](0081462.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="ix.vii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p76"></span> Comp. *Ap. Const*., ii. 45 sqq.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[669:3096](0081462.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="ix.vii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p79"></span> \[Note the Institutions of Samuel, vol.
vii. p. 531, and observe the prominence here assigned to that prophet. 
Comp. [Acts iii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vii-p79.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[669:3097](0081462.htm#fr_3096) <span
id="ix.vii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p81"></span> \[But note the case of Ambrose and
Theodosius; Sozomen, *Eccl. Hist*., book vii. cap. 25.\]

<span id="fn_3097"></span>[670:3098](0081462.htm#fr_3097) <span
id="ix.vii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p85"></span> [Acts
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004), [Acts
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span id="ix.vii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3098"></span>[670:3099](0081462.htm#fr_3098) <span
id="ix.vii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p87"></span> The belief was common among the Jacobites
that Caiaphas, whose full name was Joseph Caïaphas, was the same person
as the historian Josephus, and that he was converted to Christianity. 
See Assem., *Bibl. Orient*., vol. ii. p. 165.

<span id="fn_3099"></span>[670:3100](0081462.htm#fr_3099) <span
id="ix.vii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p89"></span> \[The visible Church and sacraments are
necessary, on this principle, to the conversion of the world.\]

<span id="fn_3100"></span>[670:3101](0081462.htm#fr_3100) <span
id="ix.vii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p91"></span> \[Perhaps a metaphrase of [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)<span id="ix.vii-p91.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3101"></span>[670:3102](0081462.htm#fr_3101) <span
id="ix.vii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p95"></span> This would seem to have been written
anterior to the time when the title of Bishop, as specially appropriated
to those who succeeded to the apostolic office, had generally obtained
in the East.  \[Previously named as in the Greek of [2 Cor. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023)<span id="ix.vii-p95.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3102"></span>[670:3103](0081462.htm#fr_3102) <span
id="ix.vii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p96"></span> For writings ascribed to Andrew and
Thomas, see *Apocryphal Scriptures*, this volume, *infra*.  Comp. *Eccl.
Canons*, No. 85.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p96.1"></span>Tr.</span>  There is no mention here of the
Epistles of Paul.  They may not at this early period have been collected
and become generally known in the East.  The Epistle of Jude is also
omitted here, but it was never received into the Syriac canon:  see De
Wette, *Einl*., 6th ed. p. 342.

<span id="fn_3103"></span>[670:3104](0081462.htm#fr_3103) <span
id="ix.vii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p97"></span> So the printed text.  But “the apostles”
seems to be meant.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p97.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3104"></span>[670:3105](0081462.htm#fr_3104) <span
id="ix.vii-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p98"></span> See note 10 on p. 668.—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p98.1"></span>Tr.</span>  It is plain from
this that the Epistles were not at that time considered part of what was
called the New Testament, nor the prophets of the Old.

<span id="fn_3105"></span>[671:3106](0081462.htm#fr_3105) <span
id="ix.vii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p99"></span> Lit. “nod,” or “bidding,” or
“impulse.”—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p99.1"></span>Tr.</span> 
\[See Tertull., vol. iii. p. 252.\]

<span id="fn_3106"></span>[671:3107](0081462.htm#fr_3106) <span
id="ix.vii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p100"></span> Lit. “were quiet and silent at.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p100.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[671:3108](0081462.htm#fr_3107) <span
id="ix.vii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p101"></span> Lit. “be an advocate.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p101.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3108"></span>[671:3109](0081462.htm#fr_3108) <span
id="ix.vii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p102"></span> \[[Heb.
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span id="ix.vii-p102.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3109"></span>[671:3110](0081462.htm#fr_3109) <span
id="ix.vii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p105"></span> C. reads “Pentapolis.”

<span id="fn_3110"></span>[671:3111](0081462.htm#fr_3110) <span
id="ix.vii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p107"></span> A. has “the Indians;” C. “the
Ethiopians.”

<span id="fn_3111"></span>[671:3112](0081462.htm#fr_3111) <span
id="ix.vii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p109"></span> C. adds, “and built a church at Antioch.”

<span id="fn_3112"></span>[671:3113](0081462.htm#fr_3112) <span
id="ix.vii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p110"></span> See note 3, p. 673, *infra*.

<span id="fn_3113"></span>[671:3114](0081462.htm#fr_3113) <span
id="ix.vii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p112"></span> \[The omission of reference to St. Paul
is a token of a corrupt and mediæval text here.\]

<span id="fn_3114"></span>[671:3115](0081462.htm#fr_3114) <span
id="ix.vii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p115"></span> The reading of C.  The <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.vii-p115.1"></span>ms.</span> A. gives what
Cureton transcribes as Gothia, which is almost the same as the word
rendered “Inner.”  Possibly this explains the origin of the reading of
A.  “Galatia” was perhaps accidentally omitted.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p115.2"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3115"></span>[671:3116](0081462.htm#fr_3115) <span
id="ix.vii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p117"></span> C. has “the Danube.”

<span id="fn_3116"></span>[671:3117](0081462.htm#fr_3116) <span
id="ix.vii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p119"></span> Or “Soba,” the same as Nisïbis.

<span id="fn_3117"></span>[671:3118](0081462.htm#fr_3117) <span
id="ix.vii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p120"></span> The number seventy-two may have arisen
from the supposition, mentioned in the *Recognitions* and in the
*Apostolical Constitutions*, that our Lord chose them in imitation of
the seventy-two elders appointed by Moses.

<span id="fn_3118"></span>[671:3119](0081462.htm#fr_3118) <span
id="ix.vii-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p122"></span> Or “place.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.vii-p122.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3119"></span>[672:3120](0081462.htm#fr_3119) <span
id="ix.vii-p122.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p123"></span> See note 6 on p. 661.

<span id="fn_3120"></span>[672:3121](0081462.htm#fr_3120) <span
id="ix.vii-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p126"></span> B. reads “Priscilla,” C. “Pricillas.” 
Prisca and Priscilla are the forms in which the name occurs in the New
Testament.

<span id="fn_3121"></span>[672:3122](0081462.htm#fr_3121) <span
id="ix.vii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p127"></span> Probably the same as Manaen, mentioned in
[Acts xiii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vii-p127.1"></span>, as associated with Paul at Antioch.

<span id="fn_3122"></span>[672:3123](0081462.htm#fr_3122) <span
id="ix.vii-p127.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p128"></span> \[The failure to praise the work of him
who “laboured more abundantly than all” others, is noteworthy, and can
only be accounted for by Middle-Age corruptions of the text.\]

<span id="fn_3123"></span>[672:3124](0081462.htm#fr_3123) <span
id="ix.vii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p130"></span> C. adds, “crucifying him on a cross.”  C.
also adds, “Here endeth the treatise of Addæus the apostle.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Teaching of Simon Cephas in the City of Rome.](0081463)
