[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081265)  [Next](0081267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.</span>

<span id="vii.xii.xiv-p2"></span>And while they were still sitting in
the synagogue, and wondering about Joseph, there come some of the guard
whom the Jews had begged of Pilate to guard the tomb of Jesus, that His
disciples might not come and steal Him.  And they reported to the rulers
of the synagogue, and the priests and the Levites, what had happened: 
how there had been a great earthquake; and we saw an angel coming down
from heaven, and he rolled away the stone from the mouth of the tomb,
and sat upon it; and he shone like snow, and like lightning.  And we
were very much afraid, and lay like dead men; and we heard the voice of
the angel saying to the women who remained beside the tomb, Be not
afraid, for I know that you seek Jesus who was crucified.  He is not
here:  He is risen, as He said.  Come, see the place where the Lord
lay:  and go quickly, and tell His disciples that He is risen from the
dead, and is in Galilee. <span id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841)

<span id="vii.xii.xiv-p4"></span><span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="vii.xii.xiv-Page_422"></span>The Jews say:  To what women did he
speak?  The men of the guard say:  We do not know who they were.  The
Jews say:  At what time was this?  The men of the guard say:  At
midnight.  The Jews say:  And wherefore did you not lay hold of them? 
The men of the guard say:  We were like dead men from fear, not
expecting to see the light of day, and how could we lay hold of them? 
The Jews say:  As the Lord liveth, we do not believe you.  The men of
the guard say to the Jews:  You have seen so great miracles in the case
of this man, and have not believed; and how can you believe us?  And
assuredly you have done well to swear that the Lord liveth, for indeed
He does live.  Again the men of the guard say:  We have heard that you
have locked up the man that begged the body of Jesus, and put a seal on
the door; and that you have opened it, and not found him.  Do you then
give us the man whom you were guarding, and we shall give you Jesus. 
The Jews say:  Joseph has gone away to his own city.  The men of the
guard say to the Jews:  And Jesus has risen, as we heard from the angel,
and is in Galilee.

<span id="vii.xii.xiv-p5"></span>And when the Jews heard these words,
they were very much afraid, and said:  We must take care lest this story
be heard, and all incline to Jesus.  And the Jews called a council, and
paid down a considerable sum of money, and gave it to the soldiers,
saying:  Say, while we slept, his disciples came by night and stole him;
and if this come to the ears of the procurator, we shall persuade him,
and keep you out of trouble.  And they took it, and said as they had
been instructed. <span id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[421:1842](0081266.htm#fr_1841) <span
id="vii.xii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xiv-p3"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#005)<span
id="vii.xii.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[422:1843](0081266.htm#fr_1842) <span
id="vii.xii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xiv-p6"></span> Three of the Latin versions say:  And
they took the money, but could not hide the truth.  For they wanted to
say, His disciples stole him while we slept, and could not utter it; but
said, Truly the Lord Jesus Christ has risen from the dead; and we saw an
angel of God coming down from heaven, and he rolled back the stone, and
sat on it.  And this saying has been spread abroad among the Jews even
to this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](0081267)
