[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081356)  [Next](0081358.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxv.i"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_477"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p1.1"></span>Acts of the Holy Apostles Peter and
Paul.</span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p3.1"></span>It</span> came to pass, after Paul went out
of the island Gaudomeleta, <span id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058.md)
that he came to Italy; and it was heard of by the Jews who were in Rome,
the elder of the cities, that Paul demanded to come to Cæsar.  Having
fallen, therefore, into great grief and much despondency, they said
among themselves:  It does not please him that he alone has afflicted
all our brethren and parents in Judæa and Samaria, and in all Palestine;
and he has not been pleased with these, but, behold, he comes here also,
having through imposition asked Cæsar to destroy us.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p5"></span>Having therefore made an assembly against
Paul, and having considered many proposals, <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059.md) it seemed good to them to go to
Nero the emperor, *to ask him* not to allow Paul to come to Rome. 
Having therefore got in readiness not a few presents, and having carried
them with them, with supplication they came before him, saying:  We
beseech thee, O good emperor, send orders into all the governments of
your worship, to the effect that Paul is not to come near these parts;
because this Paul, having afflicted all the nation of our fathers, has
been seeking to come hither to destroy us also.  And the affliction, O
most worshipful emperor, which we have from Peter is enough for us.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p7"></span>And the Emperor Nero, having heard these
things, answered them:  It is <span id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060.md)
according to your wish.  And we write to all our governments that he
shall not on any account come to anchor in the parts of Italy.  And they
also informed Simon the magian, having sent for him, that, as has been
said, he should not come into the parts of Italy.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p9"></span>And while they were thus doing, some of
those that had repented out of the nations, and that had been baptized
at the preaching of Peter, sent elders to Paul with a letter to the
following effect:  Paul, dear servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
brother of Peter, the first of the apostles, we have heard from the
rabbis of the Jews that are in this Rome, the greatest of the cities,
that they have asked Cæsar to send into all his governments, in order
that, wherever thou mayst be found, thou mayst be put to death.  But we
have believed, and do believe, that as God does not separate the two
great lights which He has made, so He is not to part you from each
other, that is, neither Peter from Paul, nor Paul from Peter; but we
positively believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, into whom we have been
baptized, that we have become worthy also of your teaching.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p10"></span>And Paul, having received the two men
sent with the letter on the twentieth of the month of May, became eager
*to go*, and gave thanks to the Lord and Master Jesus Christ.  And
having sailed from Gaudomeleta, he did not now come through Africa to
the parts of Italy, but ran to Sicily, until he came to the city of
Syracuse with the two men who had been sent from Rome to him.  And
having sailed thence, he came to Rhegium of Calabria, and from Rhegium
he crossed to Mesina, and there ordained a bishop, Bacchylus by name. 
And when he came out of Mesina he sailed to Didymus, and remained there
one night.  And having sailed thence, he came to Pontiole <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061.md) on the second day.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p12"></span>And Dioscorus the shipmaster, who
brought him to Syracuse, sympathizing with Paul because he had delivered
his son from death, having left his own ship in Syracuse, accompanied
him to Pontiole.  And some of Peter’s disciples having been found there,
and having received Paul, exhorted him to stay with them.  And he stayed
a week, in hiding, because of the command of Cæsar.  And all the
toparchs were watching to seize and kill him.  But Dioscorus the
shipmaster, being himself also bald, wearing his shipmaster’s dress, and
speaking boldly, on the first day went out into the city of Pontiole. 
Thinking therefore that he was Paul, they seized him, and beheaded him,
and sent his head to Cæsar.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p13"></span>Cæsar therefore, having summoned the
first men of the Jews, announced to them, saying:  Rejoice with great
joy, for Paul your enemy is dead.  And he showed them the head. 
Hav<span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_478"></span>ing therefore made great rejoicing on
that day, which was the fourteenth of the month of June, each of the
Jews fully believed it.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p14"></span>And Paul, being in Pontiole, and having
heard that Dioscorus had been beheaded, being grieved with great grief,
gazing into the height of the heaven, said:  O Lord Almighty in heaven,
who hast appeared to me in every place whither I have gone on account of
Thine only-begotten Word, our Lord Jesus Christ, punish this city, and
bring out all who have believed in God and followed His word.  He said
to them therefore:  Follow me:  And going forth from Pontiole with those
who had believed in the word of God, they came to a place called
Baias; <span id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062.md) and looking up with
their eyes, they all see that city called Pontiole sunk into the
sea-shore about one fathom; and there it is until this day, for a
remembrance, under the sea.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p16"></span>And having gone forth from Baias, they
went to Gaitas, and there he taught the word of God.  And he stayed
there three days in the house of Erasmus, whom Peter sent from Rome to
teach the Gospel of God.  And having come forth from Gaitas, he came to
the castle called Taracinas, and stayed there seven days in the house of
Cæsarius the deacon, whom Peter had ordained by the laying on of hands. 
And sailing thence, he came by the river to a place called Tribus
Tabernes.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p17"></span>And those who had been saved out of the
city of Pontiole that had been swallowed up, reported to Cæsar in Rome
that Pontiole had been swallowed up, with all its multitude.  And the
emperor, being in great grief on account of the city, having summoned
the chief of the Jews, said to them:  Behold, on account of what I heard
from you, I have caused Paul to be beheaded, and on account of this the
city has been swallowed up.  And the chief of the Jews said to Cæsar: 
Most worshipful emperor, did we not say to thee that he troubled all the
country of the East, and perverted our fathers?  It is better therefore,
most worshipful emperor, that one city be destroyed, and not the seat of
thine empire; for this had Rome to suffer.  And the emperor, having
heard their words, was appeased.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p18"></span>And Paul stayed in Tribus Tabernes four
days.  And departing thence, he came to Appii Forum, which is called
Vicusarape; and having slept there that night, he saw one sitting on a
golden chair, and a multitude of blacks standing beside him, saying:  I
have to-day made a son murder his father.  Another said:  And I have
made a house fall, and kill parents with children.  And they reported to
him many evil deeds—some of one kind, some of another.  And another
coming, reported to him:  I have managed that the bishop Juvenalius,
whom Peter ordained, should sleep with the abbess Juliana.  And having
heard all these things when sleeping in that Appii Forum, near
Vicusarape, straightway and immediately he sent to Rome one of those who
had followed him from Pontiole to the bishop Juvenalius, telling him
this same thing which had just been done.  And on the following day,
Juvenalius, running, threw himself at the feet of Peter, weeping and
lamenting, and saying what had just befallen; and he recounted to him
the matter, and said:  I believe that this is the light which thou wast
awaiting.  And Peter said to him:  How is it possible that it is he when
he is dead?  And Juvenalius the bishop took to Peter him that had been
sent by Paul, and he reported to him that he was alive, and on his way,
and that he was at Appii Forum.  And Peter thanked and glorified the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p19"></span>Then having summoned his disciples that
believed, he sent them to Paul as far as Tribus Tabernes.  And the
distance from Rome to Tribus Tabernes is thirty-eight miles. <span
id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063.md)   And Paul seeing them, having
given thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, took courage; and departing
thence, they slept in the city called Aricia.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p21"></span>And a report went about in the city of
Rome that Paul the brother of Peter was coming.  And those that believed
in God rejoiced with great joy.  And there was great consternation among
the Jews; and having gone to Simon the magian, they entreated him,
saying:  Report to the emperor that Paul is not dead, but that he is
alive, and has come.  And Simon said to the Jews:  What head is it,
then, which came to Cæsar from Pontiole?  Was it not bald also?

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p22"></span>And Paul having come to Rome, great fear
fell upon the Jews.  They came together therefore to him, and exhorted
him, saying:  Vindicate the faith in which thou wast born; for it is not
right that thou, being a Hebrew, and of the Hebrews, shouldst call
thyself teacher of Gentiles, and vindicator of the uncircumcised; and,
being thyself circumcised, that thou shouldst bring to nought the faith
of the circumcision. <span id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064.md)   And
when thou seest Peter, contend against his teaching, because he has
destroyed all the bulwarks of our law; for he has prevented the keeping
of Sabbaths and new moons, and the holidays appointed by the law.  And
Paul, answering, said to them:  That I am a true Jew, by this you can
prove; because also you have been able to keep the Sabbath, and to
observe the true circumcision; for assuredly on the day of the Sabbath
God rested from all His works.  We have fathers, and patriarchs, and the
law.  What, then, <span id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_479"></span>does Peter preach in the kingdom of the
Gentiles?  But if he shall wish to bring in any new teaching, without
any tumult, and envy, and trouble, send him word, that we may see, and
in your presence I shall convict him.  But if his teaching be true,
supported by the book and testimony of the Hebrews, it becomes all of us
to submit to him.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p24"></span>Paul saying these and such like things,
the Jews went and said to Peter:  Paul of the Hebrews has come, and
entreats thee to come to him, since those who have brought him say that
he cannot meet whomsoever he may wish until he appear before Cæsar.  And
Peter having heard, rejoiced with great joy; and rising up, immediately
went to him.  And seeing each other, they wept for joy; and long
embracing each other, they bedewed each other with tears.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p25"></span>And when Paul had related to Peter the
substance <span id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065.md) of all his doings,
and how, through the disasters of the ship, he had come, Peter also told
him what he had suffered from Simon the magian, and all his plots.  And
having told these things, he went away towards evening.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p27"></span>And in the morning of the following day,
at dawn, behold, Peter coming, finds a multitude of the Jews before
Paul’s door.  And there was a great uproar between the Christian Jews
and the Gentiles.  For, on the one hand, the Jews said:  We are a chosen
race, a royal priesthood, the friends of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the prophets, with whom God spake, to whom He showed His own
mysteries and His great wonders.  But you of the Gentiles are no great
thing in your lineage; if otherwise, you have become polluted and
abominable by idols and graven images.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p28"></span>While the Jews were saying such things,
and such-like, those of the Gentiles answered, saying:  We, when we
heard the truth, straightway followed it, having abandoned our errors. 
But you, both knowing the mighty deeds of your fathers, and seeing the
signs of the prophets, and having received the law, and gone through the
sea with dry feet, and seen your enemies sunk in its depths, and the
pillar of fire by night and of cloud by day shining upon you, and manna
having been given to you out of heaven, and water flowing to you out of
a rock,—after all these things you fashioned to yourselves the idol of a
calf, and worshipped the graven image.  But we, having seen none of the
signs, believe to be a Saviour the God whom you have forsaken in
unbelief.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p29"></span>While they were contending in these and
such-like words, the Apostle Paul said that they ought not to make such
attacks upon each other, but that they should rather give heed to this,
that God had fulfilled His promises which He swore to Abraham our
father, that in his seed he should inherit all the nations. <span
id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066.md)   For there is no respect of
persons with God. <span id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067.md)   As many
as have sinned in law shall be judged according to law, and as many as
have sinned without law shall perish without law. <span
id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068.md)   But we, brethren, ought to thank
God that, according to His mercy, He has chosen us to be a holy people
to Himself:  so that in this we ought to boast, whether Jews or Greeks;
for you are all one in the belief of His name.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p33"></span>And Paul having thus spoken, both the
Jews and they of the Gentiles were appeased.  But the rulers of the Jews
assailed Peter.  And Peter, when they accused him of having renounced
their synagogues, said:  Hear, brethren, the holy Spirit about the
patriarch David, promising, Of the fruit of thy womb shall He set upon
thy throne. <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069.md)   Him therefore
to whom the Father said, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten Thee,
the chief priests through envy crucified; but that He might accomplish
the salvation of the world, it was allowed that He should suffer all
these things. <span id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070.md)   Just as,
therefore, from the side of Adam Eve was created, so also from the side
of Christ was created the Church, which has no spot nor blemish.  In
Him, <span id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071.md) therefore, God has
opened an entrance to all the sons of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in
order that they may be in the faith of profession towards Him, <span
id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072.md) and have life and salvation in His
name.  Turn, therefore, and enter into the joy of your father Abraham,
because God hath fulfilled what He promised to him.  Whence also the
prophet says, The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent:  Thou art a
priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedec. <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073.md)   For a priest He became upon the
cross, when He offered the whole burnt-offering of His own body and
blood as a sacrifice for all the world.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p39"></span>And Peter saying this and such-like, the
most part of the people believed.  And it happened also that Nero’s wife
Libia, and the yoke-fellow of Agrippa the prefect, Agrippina by name,
thus believed, so that also they went away from beside their own
husbands.  And on account of the teaching of Paul, many, despising
military life, clung to God; so that even from the emperor’s bed-chamber
some came to him, and having become Christians, were no longer willing
to return to the army or the palace.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p40"></span>When, consequently, the people were
making <span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_480"></span>a seditious murmuring, Simon, moved with
zeal, rouses himself, and began to say many evil things about Peter,
saying that he was a wizard and a cheat.  And they believed him,
wondering at his miracles; for he made a brazen serpent move itself, and
stone statues to laugh and move themselves, and himself to run and
suddenly to be raised into the air.  But as a set-off to these, Peter
healed the sick by a word, by praying made the blind to see, put demons
to flight by a command; sometimes he even raised the dead.  And he said
to the people that they should not only flee from Simon’s deceit, but
also that they should expose him, that they might not seem to be slaves
to the devil.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p41"></span>And thus it happened that all pious men
abhorred Simon the magian, and proclaimed him impious.  But those who
adhered to Simon strongly affirmed Peter to be a magian, bearing false
witness as many of them as were with Simon the magian; so that the
matter came even to the ears of Nero the Cæsar, and he gave order to
bring Simon the magian before him.  And he, coming in, stood before him,
and began suddenly to assume different forms, so that on a sudden he
became a child, and after a little an old man, and at other times a
young man; for he changed himself both in face and stature into
different forms, and was in a frenzy, having the devil as his servant. 
And Nero beholding this, supposed him to be truly the son of God; but
the Apostle Peter showed him to be both a liar and a wizard, base and
impious and apostate, and in all things opposed to the truth of God, and
that nothing yet remained except that his wickedness, being made
apparent by the command of God, might be made manifest to them all.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p42"></span>Then Simon, having gone in to Nero,
said:  Hear, O good emperor:  I am the son of God come down from
heaven.  Until now I have endured Peter only calling himself an apostle;
but now he has doubled the evil:  for Paul also himself teaches the same
things, and having his mind turned against me, is said to preach along
with him; in reference to whom, if thou shalt not contrive their
destruction, it is very plain that thy kingdom cannot stand.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p43"></span>Then Nero, filled with concern, ordered
to bring them speedily before him.  And on the following day Simon the
magian, and Peter and Paul the apostles of Christ, having come in to
Nero, Simon said:  These are the disciples of the Nazarene, and it is
not at all well that they should be of the people of the Jews, Nero
said:  What is a Nazarene?  Simon said:  There is a city of Judah which
has always been opposed to us, called Nazareth, and to it the teacher of
these men belonged.  Nero said:  God commands us to love every man; why,
then, dost thou persecute them?  Simon said:  This is a race of men who
have turned aside all Judæa from believing in me.  Nero said to Peter: 
Why are you thus unbelieving, according to your race? <span
id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074.md)   Then Peter said to Simon:  Thou
hast been able to impose upon all, but upon me never; and those who have
been deceived, God has through me recalled from their error.  And since
thou hast learned by experience that thou canst not get the better of
me, I wonder with what face thou boastest thyself before the emperor,
and supposest that through thy magic art thou shalt overcome the
disciples of Christ.  Nero said:  Who is Christ?  Peter said:  He is
what this Simon the magian affirms himself to be; but this is a most
wicked man, and his works are of the devil.  But if thou wishest to
know, O good emperor, the things that have been done in Judæa about
Christ, take the writings of Pontius Pilate sent to Claudius, and thus
thou wilt know all.  And Nero ordered them to be brought, and to be read
in their presence; and they were to the following effect: <span
id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075.md) —

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p46"></span>Pontius Pilate to Claudius, greeting. 
There has lately happened an event which I myself was concerned in.  For
the Jews through envy have inflicted on themselves, and those coming
after them, dreadful judgments.  Their fathers had promises that their
God would send them his holy one from heaven, who according to reason
should be called their king, and he had promised to send him to the
earth by means of a virgin.  He, then, when I was procurator, came into
Judæa.  And they saw <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076.md) him
enlightening the blind, cleansing lepers, healing paralytics, expelling
demons from men, raising the dead, subduing the winds, walking upon the
waves of the sea, and doing many other wonders, and all the people of
the Jews calling him Son of God.  Then the chief priests, moved with
envy against him, seized him, and delivered him to me; and telling one
lie after another, they said that he was a wizard, and did contrary to
their law.  And I, having believed that these things were so, gave him
up, after scourging him, to their will; <span
id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077.md) and they crucified him, and after
he was buried set guards over him.  But he, while my soldiers were
guarding him, rose on the third day.  And to such a degree was the
wickedness of the Jews inflamed against him, that they gave money to the
soldiers, saying, Say his disciples have stolen his body.  But they,
having taken the money, were not able to keep silence as to what had
happened; for they have testified that they have seen him (after he was)
risen, and that they <span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_481"></span>have received money from the Jews.  These
things, therefore, have I reported, that no one should falsely speak
otherwise, and that thou shouldest not suppose that the falsehoods of
the Jews are to be believed.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p49"></span>And the letter having been read, Nero
said:  Tell me, Peter, were all these things thus done by him?  Peter
said:  They were, with your permission, O good emperor.  For this Simon
is full of lies and deceit, even if it should seem that he is what he is
not—a god.  And in Christ there is all excellent victory through God and
through man, <span id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078.md) which that
incomprehensible glory assumed which through man deigned to come to the
assistance of men.  But in this Simon there are two essences, of man and
of devil, who through man endeavours to ensnare men.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p51"></span>Simon said:  I wonder, O good emperor,
that you reckon this man of any consequence—a man uneducated, a
fisherman of the poorest, and endowed with power neither in word nor by
rank.  But, that I may not long endure him as an enemy, I shall
forthwith order my angels to come and avenge me upon him.  Peter said: 
I am not afraid of thy angels; but they shall be much more afraid of me
in the power and trust of my Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou falsely
declarest thyself to be.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p52"></span>Nero said:  Art thou not afraid, Peter,
of Simon, who confirms his godhead by deeds?  Peter said:  Godhead is in
Him who searcheth the hidden things of the heart. <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079.md)   Now then, tell me what I am
thinking about, or what I am doing.  I disclose to thy servants who are
here what my thought is, before he tells lies about it, in order that he
may not dare to lie as to what I am thinking about.  Nero said:  Come
hither, and tell me what thou art thinking about.  Peter said:  Order a
barley loaf to be brought, and to be given to me secretly.  And when he
ordered it to be brought, and secretly given to Peter, Peter said:  Now
tell us, Simon, what has been thought about, or what said, or what done.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p54"></span>Nero said:  Do you mean me to believe
that Simon does not know these things, who both raised a dead man, and
presented himself on the third day after he had been beheaded, and who
has done whatever he said he would do?  Peter said:  But he did not do
it before me.  Nero said:  But he did all these before me.  For
assuredly he ordered angels to come to him, and they came.  Peter said: 
If he has done what is very great, why does he not do what is very
small?  Let him tell what I had in my mind, and what I have done.  Nero
said:  Between you, I do not know myself.  Simon said:  Let Peter say
what I am thinking of, or what I am doing.  Peter said:  What Simon has
in his mind I shall show that I know, by my doing what he is thinking
about.  Simon said:  Know this, O emperor, that no one knows the
thoughts of men, but God alone.  Is not, therefore, Peter lying?  Peter
said:  Do thou, then, who sayest that thou art the Son of God, tell what
I have in my mind; disclose, if thou canst, what I have just done in
secret.  For Peter, having blessed the barley loaf which he had
received, and hawing broken it with his right hand and his left, had
heaped it up in his sleeves.  Then Simon, enraged that he was not able
to tell the secret of the apostle, cried out, saying:  Let great dogs
come forth, and eat him up before Cæsar.  And suddenly there appeared
great dogs, and rushed at Peter.  But Peter, stretching forth his
hands <span id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080.md) to pray, showed to the
dogs the loaf which he had blessed; which the dogs seeing, no longer
appeared.  Then Peter said to Nero:  Behold, I have shown thee that I
knew what Simon was thinking of, not by words, but by deeds; for he,
having promised that he would bring angels against me, has brought dogs,
in order that he might show that he had not god-like but dog-like
angels.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p56"></span>Then Nero said to Simon:  What is it,
Simon?  I think we have got the worst of it.  Simon said:  This man,
both in Judæa and in all Palestine and Cæsarea, has done the same to
me; <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081.md) and from very often
striving with me, he has learned that this is adverse to them.  This,
then, he has learned how to escape from me; for the thoughts of men no
one knows but God alone.  And Peter said to Simon:  Certainly thou
feignest thyself to be a god; why, then, dost thou not reveal the
thoughts of every man?

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p58"></span>Then Nero, turning to Paul, said:  Why
dost thou say nothing, Paul?  Paul answered and said:  Know this, O
emperor, that if thou permittest this magician to do such things, it
will bring an access of the greatest mischief to thy country, and will
bring down thine empire from its position.  Nero said to Simon:  What
sayest thou?  Simon said:  If I do not manifestly hold myself out to be
a god, no one will bestow upon me due reverence.  Nero said:  And now,
why dost thou delay, and not show thyself to be a god, in order that
these men may be punished?  Simon said:  Give orders to build for me a
lofty tower of wood, and I, going up upon it, will call my angels, and
order them to take me, in the sight of all, to my father in heaven; and
these men, not being able to do this, are put to shame as <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082.md) uneducated men.  And Nero said to
Peter:  Hast thou heard, Peter, what has been said by Simon?  From this
will appear how much power either he or thy god has.  Peter said:  O
most <span id="page_482">p. 482</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_482"></span>mighty emperor, if thou wert willing,
thou mightst perceive that he is full of demons.  Nero said:  Why do you
make to me roundabouts of circumlocutions?  To-morrow will prove you.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p60"></span>Simon said:  Dost thou believe, O good
emperor, that I who was dead, and rose again, am a magician?  For it had
been brought about by his own cleverness that the unbelieving Simon had
said to Nero:  Order me to be beheaded in a dark place, and there to be
left slain; and if I do not rise on the third day, know that I am a
magician; but if I rise again, know that I am the Son of God.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p61"></span>And Nero having ordered this, in the
dark, by his magic art he managed that a ram should be beheaded.  And
for so long did the ram appear to be Simon until he was beheaded.  And
when he had been beheaded in the dark, he that had beheaded him, taking
the head, found it to be that of a ram; but he would not say anything to
the emperor, lest he should scourge him, having ordered this to be done
in secret.  Thereafter, accordingly. Simon said that he had risen on the
third day, because he took away the head of the ram and the limbs—but
the blood had been there congealed—and on the third day he showed
himself to Nero, and said:  Cause to be wiped away my blood that has
been poured out; for, behold, having been beheaded, as I promised, I
have risen again on the third day.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p62"></span>And when Nero said, To-morrow will prove
you, turning to Paul, he says:  Thou Paul, why dost thou say nothing? 
Either who taught thee, or whom thou hast for a master, or how thou hast
taught in the cities, or what things have happened through thy
teaching?  For I think that thou hast not any wisdom, and art not able
to accomplish any work of power.  Paul answered:  Dost thou suppose that
I ought to speak against a desperate man, a magician, who has given his
soul up to death, whose destruction and perdition will come speedily? 
For he ought to speak who pretends to be what he is not, and deceives
men by magic art.  If thou consentest to hear his words, and to shield
him, thou shalt destroy thy soul and thy kingdom, for he is a most base
man.  And as the Egyptians Jannes and Jambres led Pharaoh and his army
astray until they were swallowed up in the sea, so also he, through the
instruction of his father the devil, persuades men to do many evils to
themselves, and thus deceives many of the innocent, to the peril of thy
kingdom.  But as for the word of the devil, which I see has been poured
out through this man, with groanings of my heart I am dealing with the
Holy Spirit, that it may be clearly shown what it is; for as far as he
seems to raise himself towards heaven, so far will he be sunk down into
the depth of Hades, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.  But
about the teaching of my Master, of which thou didst ask me, none attain
it except the pure, who allow faith to come into their heart. <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083.md)   For as many things as belong to
peace and love, these have I taught.  Round about from Jerusalem, and as
far as Illyricum, <span id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084.md) I have
fulfilled the word of peace.  For I have taught that in honour they
should prefer one another; <span id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085.md) I
have taught those that are eminent and rich not to be lifted up, and
hope in uncertainty of riches, but to place their hope in God; <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086.md) I have taught those in a middle
station to be content with food and covering; <span
id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087.md) I have taught the poor to rejoice
in their own poverty; I have taught fathers to teach their children
instruction in the fear of the Lord, children to obey their parents in
wholesome admonition; <span id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088.md) I have
taught wives to love their own husbands, and to fear them as masters,
and husbands to observe fidelity to their wives; I have taught masters
to treat their slaves with clemency, and slaves to serve their own
masters faithfully; <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089.md) I have
taught the churches of the believers to reverence one almighty,
invisible, and incomprehensible God.  And this teaching has been given
me, not from men, nor through men, but through Jesus Christ, <span
id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090.md) who spoke to me out of heaven, who
also has sent me to preach, saying to me, Go forth, for I will be with
thee; and all things, as many as thou shalt say or do, I shall make
just.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p71"></span>Nero said:  What sayest thou, Peter?  He
answered and said:  All that Paul has said is true. <span
id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091.md)   For when he was a persecutor of
the faith of Christ, a voice called him out of heaven, and taught him
the truth; for he was not an adversary of our faith from hatred, but
from ignorance.  For there were before us false Christs, like Simon,
false apostles, and false prophets, who, contrary to the sacred
writings, set themselves to make void the truth; and against these it
was necessary to have in readiness this man, who from his youth up set
himself to no other thing than to search out the mysteries of the divine
law, by which <span id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092.md) he might become
a vindicator of truth and a persecutor of falsehood.  Since, then, his
persecution was not on account of hatred, but on account of the
vindication of the law, the very truth out of heaven held intercourse
with him, saying, I am the truth which you persecutest; cease perse<span
id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span id="vii.xxv.i-Page_483"></span>cuting
me.  When, therefore, he knew that this was so, leaving off that which
he was vindicating, he began to vindicate this way of Christ which he
was persecuting.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p74"></span>Simon said:  O good emperor, take notice
that these two have conspired against me; for I am the truth, and they
purpose evil against me.  Peter said:  There is no truth in thee; but
all thou sayest is false.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p75"></span>Nero said:  Paul, what sayest thou? 
Paul said:  Those things which thou hast heard from Peter, believe to
have been spoken by me also; for we purpose the same thing, for we have
the same Lord Jesus the Christ.  Simon said:  Dost thou expect me, O
good emperor, to hold an argument with these men, who have come to an
agreement against me?  And having turned to the apostles of Christ, he
said:  Listen, Peter and Paul:  if I can do nothing for you here, we are
going to the place where I must judge you.  Paul said:  O good emperor,
see what threats he holds out against us.  Peter said:  Why was it
necessary to keep from laughing outright at a foolish man, made the
sport of demons, so as to suppose that he cannot be made manifest?

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p76"></span>Simon said:  I spare you until I shall
receive my power.  Paul said:  See if you will go out hence safe.  Peter
said:  If thou do not see, Simon, the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
thou wilt not believe thyself not to be Christ.  Simon said:  Most
sacred emperor, do not believe them, for they are circumcised knaves. 
Paul said:  Before we knew the truth, we had the circumcision of the
flesh; but when the truth appeared, in the circumcision of the heart we
both are circumcised, and circumcise.  Peter said:  If circumcision be a
disgrace, why hast thou been circumcised, Simon?

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p77"></span>Nero said:  Has, then, Simon also been
circumcised?  Peter said:  For not otherwise could he have deceived
souls, unless he feigned himself to be a Jew, and made a show of
teaching the law of God.  Nero said:  Simon, thou, as I see, being
carried away with envy, persecutest these men.  For, as it seems, there
is great hatred between thee and their Christ; and I am afraid that thou
wilt be worsted by them, and involved in great evils.  Simon said:  Thou
art led astray, O emperor.  Nero said:  How am I led astray?  What I see
in thee, I say.  I see that thou art manifestly an enemy of Peter and
Paul and their master.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p78"></span>Simon said:  Christ was not Paul’s
master.  Paul said:  Yes; through revelation He taught me also.  But
tell me what I asked thee—Why wast thou circumcised?  Simon said:  Why
have you asked me this?  Paul said:  We have a reason for asking you
this.  Nero said:  Why art thou afraid to answer them?  Simon said: 
Listen, O emperor.  At that time circumcision was enjoined by God when I
received it.  For this reason was I circumcised.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p79"></span>Paul said:  Hearest thou, O good
emperor, what has been said by Simon?  If, therefore, circumcision be a
good thing, why hast thou, Simon, given up those who have been
circumcised, and forced them, after being condemned, to be put to
death?  Nero said:  Neither about you do I perceive anything good. 
Peter and Paul said:  Whether this thought about us be good or evil has
no reference to the matter; but to us it was necessary that what our
Master promised should come to pass.  Nero said:  If I should not be
willing?  Peter said:  Not as thou willest, but as He promised to us.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p80"></span>Simon said:  O good emperor, these men
have reckoned upon thy clemency, and have bound thee.  Nero said:  But
neither hast thou yet made me sure about thyself.  Simon said:  Since so
many excellent deeds and signs have been shown to thee by me, I wonder
how thou shouldst be in doubt.  Nero said:  I neither doubt nor favour
any of you; but answer me rather what I ask.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p81"></span>Simon said:  Henceforward I answer thee
nothing.  Nero said:  Seeing that thou liest, therefore thou sayest
this.  But if even I can do nothing to thee, God, who can, will do it. 
Simon said:  I no longer answer thee.  Nero said:  Nor do I consider
thee to be anything:  for, as I perceive, thou art a liar in
everything.  But why do I say so much?  The three of you show that your
reasoning is uncertain; and thus in all things you have made me doubt,
so that I find that I can give credit to none of you. <span
id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093.md)

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p83"></span>Peter said:  We preach one God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that has made the heaven and the earth
and the sea, and all that therein is, who is the true King; and of His
kingdom there shall be no end. <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094.md)   Nero said:  What king is lord? 
Paul said:  The Saviour of all the nations.  Simon said:  I am he whom
you speak of.  Peter and Paul said:  May it never be well with thee,
Simon, magician, and full of bitterness.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p85"></span>Simon said:  Listen, O Cæsar Nero, that
thou mayst know that these men are liars, and that I have been sent from
the heavens:  to-morrow I go up into the heavens, that I may make those
who believe in me blessed, and show my wrath upon those who have denied
me.  Peter and Paul said:  Us long ago God called to His own glory; but
thou, called by the devil, hastenest to punishment.  Simon said:  Cæsar
Nero, listen to me.  Separate these madmen from thee, in order that when
I go into heaven to my father, I may be very merciful to thee.  Nero
said:  And whence shall we prove this, that thou goest <span
id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span id="vii.xxv.i-Page_484"></span>away
into heaven?  Simon said:  Order a lofty tower to be made of wood, and
of great beams, that I may go up upon it, and that my angels may find me
in the air; for they cannot come to me upon earth among the sinners. 
Nero said:  I will see whether thou wilt fulfil what thou sayest.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p86"></span>Then Nero ordered a lofty tower to be
made in the Campus Martius, and all the people and the dignities to be
present at the spectacle.  And on the following day, all the multitude
having come together, Nero ordered Peter and Paul to be present, to whom
also he said:  Now the truth has to be made manifest.  Peter and Paul
said:  We do not expose him, but our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
whom he has falsely declared himself to be.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p87"></span>And Paul, having turned to Peter, said: 
It is my part to bend the knee, and to pray to God; and thine to produce
the effect, if thou shouldst see him attempting anything, because thou
wast first taken in hand <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095.md) by
the Lord.  And Paul, bending his knees, prayed.  And Peter, looking
stedfastly upon Simon, said:  Accomplish what thou hast begun; for both
thy exposure and our call is at hand:  for I see my Christ calling both
me and Paul.  Nero said:  And where will you go to against my will? 
Peter said:  Whithersoever our Lord has called us.  Nero said:  And who
is your lord?  Peter said:  Jesus the Christ, whom I see calling us to
Himself.  Nero said:  Do you also then intend to go away to heaven? 
Peter said:  If it shall seem good to Him that calls us.  Simon said: 
In order that thou mayst know, O emperor, that these are deceivers, as
soon as ever I ascend into heaven, I will send my angels to thee, and
will make thee come to me.  Nero said:  Do at once what thou sayest.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p89"></span>Then Simon went up upon the tower in the
face of all, and, crowned with laurels, he stretched forth his hands,
and began to fly.  And when Nero saw him flying, he said to Peter:  This
Simon is true; but thou and Paul are deceivers.  To whom Peter said: 
Immediately shalt thou know that we are true disciples of Christ; but
that he is not Christ, but a magician, and a malefactor.  Nero said:  Do
you still persist?  Behold, you see him going up into heaven.  Then
Peter, looking stedfastly upon Paul, said:  Paul, look up and see.  And
Paul, having looked up, full of tears, and seeing Simon flying, said: 
Peter, why art thou idle? finish what thou hast begun; for already our
Lord Jesus Christ is calling us.  And Nero hearing them, smiled a
little, and said:  These men see themselves worsted already, and are
gone mad.  Peter said:  Now thou shalt know that we are not mad.  Paul
said to Peter:  Do at once what thou doest.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p90"></span>And Peter, looking stedfastly against
Simon, said:  I adjure you, ye angels of Satan, who are carrying him
into the air, to deceive the hearts of the unbelievers, by the God that
created all things, and by Jesus Christ, whom on the third day He raised
from the dead, no longer from this hour to keep him up, but to let him
go.  And immediately, being let go, he fell into a place called Sacra
Via, that is, Holy Way, and was divided into four parts, having perished
by an evil fate.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p91"></span>Then Nero ordered Peter and Paul to be
put in irons, and the body of Simon to be carefully kept three days,
thinking that he would rise on the third day.  To whom Peter said:  He
will no longer rise, since he is truly dead, being condemned to
everlasting punishment.  And Nero said to him:  Who commanded thee to do
such a dreadful deed?  Peter said:  His reflections and blasphemy
against my Lord Jesus Christ have brought him into this gulf of
destruction.  Nero said:  I will destroy you by an evil taking off. 
Peter said:  This is not in thy power, even if it should seem good to
thee to destroy us; but it is necessary that what our Master promised to
us should be fulfilled.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p92"></span>Then Nero, having summoned Agrippa the
proprætor, said to him:  It is necessary that men introducing
mischievous religious observances should die.  Wherefore I order them to
take iron clubs, <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096.md) and to be
killed in the sea-fight.  Agrippa the proprætor said:  Most sacred
emperor, what thou hast ordered is not fitting for these men, since Paul
seems innocent beside Peter.  Nero said:  By what fate, then, shall they
die?  Agrippa answered and said:  As seems to me, it is just that Paul’s
head should be cut off, and that Peter should be raised on a cross as
the cause of the murder.  Nero said:  Thou hast most excellently judged.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p94"></span>Then both Peter and Paul were led away
from the presence of Nero.  And Paul was beheaded on the Ostesian
road. <span id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097.md)

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p96"></span>And Peter, having come to the cross,
said:  Since my Lord Jesus Christ, who came down from the heaven upon
the earth, was raised upon the cross upright, <span
id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098.md) and He has deigned to call to
heaven me, who am of the earth, my cross ought to be fixed head down
most, so as to direct my feet towards heaven; for I am not worthy to be
crucified like my Lord.  Then, having reversed the cross, they nailed
his feet up.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p98"></span><span id="page_485">p. 485</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.i-Page_485"></span>And the multitude was assembled reviling
Cæsar, and wishing to kill him.  But Peter restrained them,
saying: <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099.md)   A few days ago,
being exhorted by the brethren, I was going away; and my Lord Jesus
Christ met me, and having adored Him, I said, Lord, whither art Thou
going?  And He said to me, I am going to Rome to be crucified.  And I
said to Him, Lord, wast Thou not crucified once for all?  And the Lord
answering, said, I saw thee fleeing from death, and I wish to be
crucified instead of thee.  And I said, Lord, I go; I fulfil Thy
command.  And He said to me, Fear not, for I am with thee. <span
id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100.md)   On this account, then, children,
do not hinder my going; for already my feet are going on the road to
heaven.  Do not grieve, therefore, but rather rejoice with me, for
to-day I receive the fruit of my labours.  And thus speaking, he said: 
I thank Thee, good Shepherd, that the sheep which Thou hast entrusted to
me, sympathize with me; I ask, then, that with me they may have a part
in Thy kingdom. <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101.md)   And having
thus spoken, he gave up the ghost.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p102"></span>And immediately there appeared men
glorious and strange in appearance; and they said:  We are here, on
account of the holy and chief apostles, from Jerusalem.  And they, along
with Marcellus, an illustrious man, who, having left Simon, had believed
in Peter, took up his body secretly, and put it under the terebinth near
the place for the exhibition of sea-fights in the place called the
Vatican. <span id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102.md)

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p104"></span>And the men who had said that they came
from Jerusalem said to the people:  Rejoice, and be exceeding glad,
because you have been deemed worthy to have great champions.  And know
that Nero himself, after these not many days, will be utterly destroyed,
and his kingdom shall be given to another.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p105"></span>And after these things the people
revolted against him; and when he knew of it, he fled into desert
places, and through hunger and cold he gave up the ghost, and his body
became food for the wild beasts.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p106"></span>And some devout men of the regions of
the East wished to carry off the relics of the saints, and immediately
there was a great earthquake in the city; <span
id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103.md) and those that dwelt in the city
having become aware of it, ran and seized the men, but they fled.  But
the Romans having taken them, put them in a place three miles from the
city, and there they were guarded a year and seven months, until they
had built the place in which they intended to put them.  And after these
things, all having assembled with glory and singing of praise, they put
them in the place built for them.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p108"></span>And the consummation of the holy
glorious Apostles Peter and Paul was on the 29th of the month of June—in
Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and strength.

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p109"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[477:2059](0081357.htm#fr_2058.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p4"></span> Lambecius proposes to read Gaudos and
Melita.  In the Latin version of the famous Greek scholar Lascaris,
1490, it is *a Melita et Gaudisio insulis*.  \[Comp. [Acts
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#016.md), [Acts
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p4.1"></span>.  The two names are apparently combined
here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[477:2060](0081357.htm#fr_2059.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p6.1"></span>τρακταΐσαντες</span>:  from the Byzantine
verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p6.2"></span>τρακταΐζειν</span> = tractare.  The various
readings in the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p6.3"></span>mss.</span> are:  Being very disorderly;
having been much disturbed.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[477:2061](0081357.htm#fr_2060.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p8"></span> Various reading:  Let it be…and we will
write, etc.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[477:2062](0081357.htm#fr_2061.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p11"></span> Puteoli.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[478:2063](0081357.htm#fr_2062.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p15"></span> The geographical names are given in the
peculiar forms of the text.  Occasionally the usual forms, such as Baiæ,
occur.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[478:2064](0081357.htm#fr_2063.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p20"></span> The distance was thirty-three miles. 
In the *Antonine Itinerary*, “To Aricia is sixteen miles, to *Tres
Tabernæ* seventeen miles, to Appii Forum ten miles.”

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[478:2065](0081357.htm#fr_2064.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p23"></span> Or, do away with belief in
circumcision.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[479:2066](0081357.htm#fr_2065.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p26"></span> Lit., web or tissue.

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[479:2067](0081357.htm#fr_2066.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p30"></span> [Gen.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md), [Gen.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[479:2068](0081357.htm#fr_2067.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p31"></span> [Rom.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011.md), [Eph.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009.md), [Col.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025.md), [Jas.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[479:2069](0081357.htm#fr_2068.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p32"></span> [Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[479:2070](0081357.htm#fr_2069.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p34"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[479:2071](0081357.htm#fr_2070.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p35"></span> Or, He allowed Himself to suffer all
these things.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[479:2072](0081357.htm#fr_2071.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p36"></span> Or, by Him.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[479:2073](0081357.htm#fr_2072.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p37"></span> i.e., That all may profess their faith
in Him.  For similar expressions, see [2 Cor.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013.md), [Heb.
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[479:2074](0081357.htm#fr_2073.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p38"></span> [Ps.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004.md), [Heb.
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[480:2075](0081357.htm#fr_2074.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p44"></span> i.e., How do you happen, as a race, to
be so unbelieving?  The Latin translation has:  against your race—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxv.i-p44.1"></span>κατὰ τοῦ γένους</span>
for <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxv.i-p44.2"></span>κατὰ τὸ
γένος</span>.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[480:2076](0081357.htm#fr_2075.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p44.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p45"></span> For another translation of this letter,
see Latin Gospel of Nicodemus, chap. xiii. (xxix.)  \[This occurs on p.
454; there is another form on p. 459.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[480:2077](0081357.htm#fr_2076.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p47"></span> Or, I saw.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[480:2078](0081357.htm#fr_2077.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p48"></span> Or, to their council.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[481:2079](0081357.htm#fr_2078.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p50"></span> i.e., human nature.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[481:2080](0081357.htm#fr_2079.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p53"></span> [Jer.
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010.md), [Rev.
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[481:2081](0081357.htm#fr_2080.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p55"></span> [Lam.
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041.md), [Mark
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#025.md), [1 Tim.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[481:2082](0081357.htm#fr_2081.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p57"></span> See the *Clementines*, Homilies II.,
III., VI., XVI., XX.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[481:2083](0081357.htm#fr_2082.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p59"></span> Or, are proved to be.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[482:2084](0081357.htm#fr_2083.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p63"></span> Or, the pure in heart admitting the
faith.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[482:2085](0081357.htm#fr_2084.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p64"></span> [Rom. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[482:2086](0081357.htm#fr_2085.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p65"></span> [Rom. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[482:2087](0081357.htm#fr_2086.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p66"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[482:2088](0081357.htm#fr_2087.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p67"></span> Or, those who have a moderate quantity
of food and covering to be content ([1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p67.1"></span>.md).

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[482:2089](0081357.htm#fr_2088.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p68"></span> Or, in the admonition of the Saviour
([Eph. vi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p68.1"></span>.).

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[482:2090](0081357.htm#fr_2089.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p69"></span> [Col. iii.
18-22](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.xxv.i-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[482:2091](0081357.htm#fr_2090.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p70"></span> [Gal. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[482:2092](0081357.htm#fr_2091.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p72"></span> Four of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p72.1"></span>mss.</span> and the Latin version here add: 
For assuredly I have for a long time past received letters from our
bishops throughout all the world about the things done and said by him.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[482:2093](0081357.htm#fr_2092.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p73"></span> i.e., mysteries.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[483:2094](0081357.htm#fr_2093.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p82"></span> Or, to nothing.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[483:2095](0081357.htm#fr_2094.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p84"></span> [Luke i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033.md)<span id="vii.xxv.i-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[484:2096](0081357.htm#fr_2095.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p88"></span> Or, chosen.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[484:2097](0081357.htm#fr_2096.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p93"></span> The text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p93.1"></span>κινάρας</span>, artichokes, for which I have
read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p93.2"></span>κορυνας</span>, clubs.  Sea-fights were a
favourite spectacle of the Roman emperors (Suet., *Nero*, xii.;
*Claud*., xxi.; *Dom*., iv.).  The combatants were captives, or persons
condemned to death (Dion Cass., lx. 33).

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[484:2098](0081357.htm#fr_2097.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p95"></span> For the episode of Perpetua, contained
in three of the Greek <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p95.1"></span>mss.</span>, but not in the Latin versions,
see the end of this book.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[484:2099](0081357.htm#fr_2098.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p97"></span> i.e., head uppermost.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[485:2100](0081357.htm#fr_2099.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p99"></span> One of the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p99.1"></span>mss.</span> here inserts:  Do not be hard
upon him, for he is the servant of this father Satan; but I must fulfil
the command of my Lord.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[485:2101](0081357.htm#fr_2100.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p99.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p100"></span> Some of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p100.1"></span>mss.</span> insert:  Until I bring thee
into my Father’s house.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[485:2102](0081357.htm#fr_2101.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p100.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p101"></span> Several of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p101.1"></span>mss.</span> here add:  I commend unto Thee
the sheep whom Thou didst entrust unto me, that they may not feel that
they are without me, having for a shepherd Thee, through whom I have
been able to feed this flock.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[485:2103](0081357.htm#fr_2102.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p103"></span> In three of the Greek <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxv.i-p103.1"></span>mss.</span>, but not in
the Latin versions, the story of Perpetua is here continued.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[485:2104](0081357.htm#fr_2103.md) <span
id="vii.xxv.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.i-p107"></span> Several<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.i-p107.1"></span>mss.</span> here add:  And the people of
the Romans ran, and took them into the place called the Catacombs on the
Appian Way, at the third milestone; and there the bodies of the saints
were guarded a year and six months, until places were built for them in
which they might be put.  And the body of St. Peter was put into the
Vatican, near the place for the sea-fights, and that of St. Paul into
the Vostesian (or Ostesian) Way, two mile from the city; and in these
places, through their prayers, many good deeds are wrought to the
faithful in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Perpetua.](0081358.md)
