[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081407)  [Next](0081409.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>(Of those who ought not to be
admitted to prefer an accusation, or to bear witness; and that evidence
is not to be given but on things happening in the person’s presence.)

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>Whosoever, therefore, has not been
lawfully married, or has been united without the dotal title (*dotali
titulo*) and the blessing of a priest, cannot by any means bring a
charge against priests, or those who are lawfully married, or bear
witness against them, since every one who is polluted with the stain of
incest is infamous, and is not allowed to accuse the above-named.  And
consequently not only they, but all those too who agree with them, are
to be rejected, and are rendered infamous.  We hold that the same should
also be the case with robbers, or with those who assault the elderly. 
The laws of the world, indeed, put such persons to death; but we, with
whom mercy has the first place, receive them under the mark of infamy to
repentance.  That infamy also with which they are stained, we are not
able to remove; but our desire is to heal their souls by public
penitence, and by satisfaction made to the Church:  for public sins are
not to be purged by secret correction.  Those, again, who are suspected
in the matter of the right faith, should by no means be admitted to
prefer charges against priests, and against those of whose faith there
is no doubt; and such persons should be held of doubtful authority in
matters of human testimony.  Their voice, consequently, should be
reckoned invalid whose faith is doubted; and no credit should be given
to those who are ignorant of the right faith.  Accordingly, in judg<span
id="page_617">p. 617</span> <span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-Page_617"></span>ment, inquiry should be made as to
the conversation and faith of the person who accuses, and of him who is
accused; since those who are not of correct conversation and faith, and
whose life is open to impeachment, are not allowed to accuse their
elders, neither can such permission be given to those whose faith and
life and liberty are unknown.  Nor should vile persons be admitted to
accuse them.  But a clear examination is to be made as to what kind of
persons the accusers are (*rimandæ sunt enucleatim personæ
accusatorum*); for they are not to be admitted readily without writing,
and are never to be admitted *as accusers* on mere writing.  For no one
may either accuse or be accused by mere writing, but with the living
voice; and every one must lay his accusation in the presence of him whom
he seeks to accuse.  And no credit should be given to any accuser in the
absence of him whom he seeks to accuse.  In like manner, witnesses must
not prefer their evidence by writing only; but they must give their
testimony truthfully in their own persons, and in matters which they
have seen and do know.  And they are not to give evidence in any other
cases or matters but in those which are known to have happened in their
presence.  Accusers, moreover, of one blood, are not to bear witness
against those who are not related to the family, nor is that to be the
case with domestics (*familiares*) or those proceeding from the house;
but if it is their wish, and they agree among themselves, the parents
only should give evidence in such cases, and not others.  Neither
accusers nor witnesses should be admitted who are open to any suspicion;
for the feeling of relationship, or friendship, or lordship, is wont to
impede the truth.  Carnal love, and fear, and avarice, commonly blunt
the perceptions of men, and pervert their opinions; so that they look on
gain as godliness, and on money as the reward of prudence.  Let no one,
then, speak deceitfully to his neighbour. <span
id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742.md)   The mouth of the malevolent is a
deep pit.  The innocent man, while he believes easily, falls readily;
but though he falls, he rises; and the shuffler, with all his arts, goes
headlong to ruin, whence he can never rise or escape.  Therefore let
every one weigh well his words, and let him not say to another what he
would not say to himself.  Whence the sacred Scripture says well:  “Do
not that to another which thou wouldest not have done to thyself.” <span
id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743.md)   For we need time to do anything
perfectly (*maturius*); and let us not be precipitate in our counsels or
our works, neither let us violate order.  But if any one has fallen in
anything, let us not consign him to ruin; but let us reprove him with
brotherly affection, as the blessed apostle says:  “If a man be
overtaken in any fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. 
Bear ye one another’s burden, and so will ye fulfil the law of
Christ.” <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744.md)   Furthermore, the
sainted David had deadly crimes to repent of, and yet he was continued
in honour.  The blessed Peter also shed the bitterest tears when he
repented of having denied the Lord; but still he abode an apostle.  And
the Lord by the prophet makes this promise to the sinning:  “In the day
that the sinner is converted, and repenteth, I will not mention any more
against him all his transgressions.” <span
id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[617:2743](0081408.htm#fr_2742.md) <span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p4"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004.md)<span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[617:2744](0081408.htm#fr_2743.md) <span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p5"></span> Comp. [Tobit iv.
15](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#015.md)<span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[617:2745](0081408.htm#fr_2744.md) <span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p6"></span> [Gal.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004.md)<span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[617:2746](0081408.htm#fr_2745.md) <span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p7"></span> [Ezek.
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.iv.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](0081409.md)
