[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081363)  [Next](0081365) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>Addition to Acts of Philip.</span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p2.1"></span>(From a Paris <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p2.2"></span>ms.</span>) <span
id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) </span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p4"></span>And he taught them thus:  My
brethren, sons of my Father—for you are of my family as to Christ,
substance of my city, the Jerusalem above, the delight of my
dwelling-place—why have you been taken captive by your enemy the
serpent, twisted, crooked, and perverse, to whom God has given neither
hands nor feet?  And crooked is his going, since he is the son of the
wicked one; for his father is death, and his mother corruption, and ruin
is in his body.  Do not go then into his destruction; for you are in
bondage by the unbelief and deception of his son, who is without order,
and has no substance; <span id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203)
formless, and has no form in the whole creation, either in the heaven or
in the earth, or among the fishes that are in the waters.  But if you
see him, flee from him, since he has no resemblance to men:  his
dwelling is the abyss, and he walks in darkness.  Flee, then, from him,
that his venom may not be poured out upon you:  if his venom be poured
out upon your body, you walk in his wickedness.  But remain rather in
the true worship, being faithful, reverent, and good, without guile. 
Flee from Satan the dragon, and remove from you his wicked seed, namely
desire, by which he begets disease in the soul, which is the venom of
the serpent.  For desire is of the serpent from the beginning, and she
it is who arms herself against the faithful; for she came forth out of
the darkness, and returns to the darkness.  You ought therefore, after
coming to us, or rather through us to God, to throw out the venom of the
devil from your bodies.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p6"></span>And as the apostle was saying this,
behold, Nicanora came forth from her house, and went with her slaves
into the house of Stachys.  And when she came near the door of the
house, behold, Mariamme spoke to her in the Syriac language:  <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p6.1"></span>Helikomaei, kosma,
etaa, mariacha</span>.  And she explained her words, saying:  O daughter
of the Spirit, thou art my lady, who hast been given in pledge to the
serpent; but I have come to deliver thee:  I shall break thy bonds, and
cut them from their root.  Behold, the Deliverer that frees thee has
come:  behold, the Sun of righteousness has risen to enlighten thee.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p7"></span>And when she was thus speaking, the
gloomy tyrant came running and panting.  And Nicanora, who was before
the door, heard this, and took courage before them all, crying out and
saying:  I am a Hebrew, a daughter of the Hebrews; speak with me in the
language of my fathers, because I have heard your preaching, and have
been cured of this my disease.  I reverence and glorify the goodness of
God, in that He hath made you to be utterly spoiled in this earth.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p8"></span>And when she said this, the tyrant
came, and took hold of her garments, and said:  O Nicanora, did I not
leave thee lying on the bed from thy disease?  Whence, then, hast thou
found this power and strength, so as to be able to come to these
magicians?  Unless, then, thou tell who is the healer, I shall punish
thee most severely.  And Nicanora answered, and said:  O rearer of
tyrants, cast away from thyself this tyranny, and forget thy wicked
works, and abandon this temporary life, and put away vainglory, because
it passes like a shadow:  seek rather what is everlasting, and take away
from thyself the beastly <span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-Page_508"></span>and impious work of base desire, and
reject vain intercourse, which is the husbandry of death, the dark
prison; and overturn the middle wall of corruption, and prepare for
thyself a life chaste and spotless, that we may altogether live in
sanctity.  If, then, thou wishest me to remain with thee, I will live
with thee in continence.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p9"></span>And when the tyrant heard these
words, he seized her by the hair of the head, and dragged her along,
kicking her, and saying:  It would be better for thee to be put to death
by my sword, than to be seen with these foreign magicians and
deceivers.  I will punish thee, therefore, and put to death those who
have deceived thee.  And he turned in a rage to the executioners who
followed him, and said:  Bring me these impostors.  And the executioners
ran to the house of Stachys, and laid hold of Philip, and Bartholomew,
and Mariamme, with the leopard and the kid of the goats, and dragged
them along, and brought them.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p10"></span>When the tyrant saw them, he
gnashed his teeth against them, and said:  Drag along these magicians
and deceivers that have deceived many souls of women by saying, We are
worshippers of God.  And he caused thongs to be brought, and bound their
feet.  And he ordered them to be dragged along from the gate as far as
the temple.  And great multitudes came together to that place.  And they
wondered exceedingly at the leopard and the kid; for they were speaking
like men, and some of the multitude believed the words of the apostles.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p11"></span>And the priests said to the
tyrant:  These men are magicians.  And when he heard that, he burned
with rage, and was filled with anger; and he ordered Philip, and
Bartholomew, and Mariamne to be stripped, saying:  Search them.  Perhaps
you will find their sorcery.  And the executioners stripped them, and
laid hold of Mariamne, and dragged her along, saying:  Uncover her, that
they may learn that it is a woman who follows them.  And he ordered to
bring clubs and strong cords; and after piercing Philip’s ankles they
brought hooks, and put the cords through his ankles, and hung him head
downwards on a tree that was before the door of the temple; and they
fixed pegs into the temple wall, and left him.  And after binding
Bartholomew hand and foot, they extended him naked on the wall; and when
they had stripped Mariamne, the appearance of her body was changed, and
became a glass chest filled with light, and they could not come near
her.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p12"></span>And Philip spoke with Bartholomew
in Hebrew:  Where is John to-day, in the day of our need? for behold, we
are being delivered from our bodies.  And they have laid hands on
Mariamne beyond what is seemly, and they have scourged the leopard and
the kid of the goats, and have set fire to the house of Stachys, because
he took us in.  Let us therefore speak, that fire may come down from
heaven and burn them up.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p13"></span>And as Philip was thus speaking,
behold, John came into the city, and walked about the street, and asked
those in the city:  What is the commotion, and who are these men, and
why are they punished?  And they say to him:  Art thou not of this
city?  And dost thou not know about these men, how they disturbed our
houses, and the whole city?  Moreover, they have even persuaded our
wives to go away from us on the pretence of religion, proclaiming a
foreign name, viz. Christ’s; and they have also shut our temples by the
sorcery they have, and they have put to death the serpents that are in
the city by foreign names that we have never known.  And they have fixed
their abode in the house of Stachys the blind man, whom they made to
recover his sight through the spittle of a woman who accompanies them;
and it is perhaps she who has all the sorcery:  and there accompany them
a leopard and a kid, speaking like men.  But if ever you have seen such
doings, you will not be put about by them.  And John answered, and said
to them:  Show me them.  And they brought him to the temple where Philip
was hanging.  And when Philip saw John, he said to Bartholomew:  O my
brother, behold the son of Barega—that is the living water—has come. 
And John saw Philip hanging head down, tied by his ankles; and saw
Bartholomew also bound to the temple wall.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p14"></span>And he said to the men of the
city:  O children of the serpent, how great is your folly! for the way
of deceit has deceived you, the wicked dragon breathing has breathed
upon you:  why do you punish these men for saying the serpent is your
enemy?

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p15"></span>And when they heard these words
from John, they laid their hands upon him, saying:  We called thee our
fellow-citizen, but now thy speech has made thee manifest that thou also
art in communion with them.  Thou also, therefore, shalt be put to the
same death as they, for the priests have decided thus:  Let us drain out
their blood as they hang head downward, and mix it with wine, and offer
it to the viper.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p16"></span>And when they were thus speaking,
behold, Mariamne rose up from the place in which she was, and came back
to her former appearance.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p17"></span>And the priests reached forth their
hands towards John, wishing to lay hold of him, and they could not. 
Then Philip with Bartholomew said to John:  Where is Jesus, who enjoins
upon us not to take into our own hands vengeance on those that torture
us? for after this I will not endure them.  And Philip spoke in Hebrew,
and said:  My Father Uthael, i.e., O Christ, <span id="page_509">p.
509</span> <span id="vii.xxviii.iii-Page_509"></span>Father of majesty,
whose name all the ages <span id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204) fear,
who art powerful, and the power of the universe, whose name goes forth
in lordship, <span id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) Eloa:  Blessed
art Thou to the ages; Thou whom dominions and powers fear, trembling
before Thy face; King of honour! Father of majesty! whose name has gone
forth to the wild beasts of the desert, and they have become quiet
because of Thee, and through Thee the serpents have departed from us: 
Hear us before we ask.  Thou who seest us before we call, who knowest
our thoughts, the All-surveyor <span
id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206) of all, who sends forth from
Himself unnumbered compassions; let the abyss open its mouth, and
swallow up these godless persons who will not accept the word of Thy
truth.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p21"></span>And in that very hour the abyss
opened its mouth, and all that place was violently shaken, from the
proconsul to all the multitude along with the priests; and they were all
sunk down.  And the places where the apostles and all who were with them
were remained unshaken, and the house of Stachys, and Nicanora the
tyrant’s wife, and the twenty-four wives who fled from their husbands,
and the forty virgins who had not known men.  These alone did not go
down into the abyss, because they had become servants, and had received
the word of God, and His seal; but all the rest of the city were
swallowed down into the abyss.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p22"></span>And the Saviour having appeared at
that hour, said to Philip:  Who is it that has put his hand to the
plough, and has turned back from making the furrow straight? or who
gives his light to others, and himself remains sitting in darkness? or
who dwells in the dirt, and leaves his dwelling-place to strangers? or
who lays down his garment, and goes out in the days of winter naked? or
what slave that has done his master’s service, shall not be called by
him to supper? or who runs with zeal in the racecourse, and does not get
the prize?  Philip, behold my bridal chamber is ready, and blessed is he
who has his own shining garment; for he it is who gets the crown of joy
upon his head.  Behold, the supper is ready, and blessed is he who is
called by the bridegroom.  Great is the harvest of the field; blessed is
the able workman.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p23"></span>And when Philip heard these words
from the Saviour, he answered and said to him:  Thou didst give us
leave, O Jesus of Nazareth, and dost Thou not enjoin us to smite those
who do not wish Thee to reign over them?  But this we know, that Thy
name has not been proclaimed in all the world, and Thou hast sent us to
this city.  And I did not intend to come into this city, and Thou didst
send me, after giving me Thy true commandment, that I should drive away
all deceit, and bring to nothing every idol and demon, and all the power
of the unclean one.  And when I came here, the demons fled from our
faces through Thy name, and the dragons and the serpents withered away,
but these men did not take to themselves Thy true light; and for this
reason I resolved to bring them low, according to their folly.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p24"></span>And the Saviour said:  O Philip,
since thou hast forsaken this commandment of mine, not to render evil
for evil, <span id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) for this reason
thou shalt be debarred in the next world for forty years from being in
the place of my promise:  besides, this is the end of thy departure from
the body in this place; and Bartholomew has his lot in Lycaonia, and
shall be crucified there; and Mariamne shall lay down her body in the
river Jordan.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p26"></span>And the Saviour turned and
stretched out His hand, and made the sign of the cross in the air; and
it was full of light, and had its form after the likeness of a ladder. 
And all the multitude of the men of the city who had gone down into the
abyss came up upon the ladder of the cross of light and none of them
remained in the abyss, but only the tyrant and the priests, and the
viper which they worshipped.  And when the multitudes came up from the
abyss, they looked and saw Philip hanging head down, and Bartholomew
upon the wall of the temple, and they also found Mariamne in her first
shape.  And the Saviour went up into heaven in the sight of Philip and
Bartholomew and Mariamne, and the leopard and the kid of the goats, and
Nicanora and Stachys; and they all with a loud voice glorified God with
fear and trembling, crying out:  There is one God who has sent us His
salvation, whose name these men proclaim:  we repent therefore of the
error in which we were before yesterday, not being worthy of eternal
life; and we believe, having seen the wonderful things that have come to
pass through us.  And some of them threw themselves on their faces, and
worshipped the apostles; and others made ready to flee, saying:  There
may be another earthquake like the one that has just happened.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p27"></span>And stretching out his hands, the
Apostle Philip, hanging head down, said:  Men of the city, hear these
words which I am going to say to you, hanging head down.  Ye have
learned how great are the powers of God, and the wonders which you saw
when your city was destroyed by the earthquake which came upon it.  And
this was manifest to you, that the house of Stachys was not destroyed
and that he did not go down into the abyss, because he believed on the
true God, and received us His servants.  <span id="page_510">p.
510</span> <span id="vii.xxviii.iii-Page_510"></span>And I, having
fulfilled all the will of my God, am His debtor for what I requited to
him that did evil to me.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p28"></span>And some of those who had been
baptized ran to loose Philip hanging head down.  And he answered and
said to them:  My brethren,… <span id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208)
those who are virgins in the members of their flesh and commit
fornication in their hearts, and the fornication of their eyes, shall
abound like the deluge.  And they grow immoderate from listening to
persuasive pleasures, forgetting the God of the knowledge of the Gospel;
and their hearts are full of arrogance, eating and drinking in their
worship, forgetting the holy commandment, and despising it.  That
generation is turned aside; but blessed is he that retires into his
retreat, for he shall obtain rest in his departure.  Knowest thou not,
Bartholomew, that the word of our Lord is true life and knowledge? for
the Lord said to us in His teaching, Every one who shall look upon a
woman, and lust after her in his heart, has completed adultery. <span
id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209)   And on this account our brother
Peter fled from every place in which a woman was, and yet there was
scandal on account of his own daughter; and he prayed to the Lord, and
she had paralysis of her side, that she might not be deceived.  Thou
seest, brother, that the sight of the eyes brings gainsaying, and the
beginning of sin, as it is written, <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) She looked, and saw the tree, that
it was pleasing to her eyes, and good for food, and she was deceived. 
Let the hearing, then, of the virgins be holy; and in their going out
let them walk two and two, for many are the wiles of the enemy.  Let
their walk and conversation be well ordered, that they may be saved; but
if not, let their fruit be common.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p32"></span>My brother Bartholomew, give these
promises to Stachys, and appoint him ruler and bishop in the Church,
that he may be like thee, teaching well.  Do not entrust the office to a
man too young:  appoint not such a one to the chair of the teachers,
lest thou profane the witness of Christ.  For he that teaches should
have his works corresponding to his words, that the word may be ready on
every occasion in its own glory.  But I am being released from my body,
hanging head down.  Take, then, my body, and prepare it for burial in
Syrian paper, and do not put about it linen cloth, since they put it
upon the body of our Lord, and wrap it close in paper and papyrus, and
put it in the vestibule of the holy church.  And pray over me for forty
days, that God may forgive the transgression which I did, in that I
requited evil to him that did evil to me, and there may not be for me in
the world to come the forty years.

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p33"></span>And after thus speaking, Philip
prayed, saying:  My Lord Jesus Christ, Father of the ages, King of all
light, who makest us wise in Thy wisdom, who hast given us the exalted
knowledge, who hast graciously conferred upon us the counsel of Thy
goodness, who hast never departed from us; Thou who takest away disease
from those who take refuge in Thee; Thou who hast given us the Word, to
turn unto Thee those who have been led astray; Thou who hast given us
signs and wonders on behalf of those of little faith; Thou who
presentest the crown to those who have conquered; Thou who art the judge
of the games, who hast given us the crown of joy, who speakest with us,
that we may be able to withstand those that hurt us; Thou art He who
sows and reaps, and completes, and increases, and vivifies all Thine own
servants:  reproaches and threats are to us help and power through those
who turn to Thee through us, who are Thy servants.  Come, Lord, and give
me the crown of victory in the presence of men.  Let not their dark air
envelope me, nor their smoke burn the shape of my soul, that I may cross
the waters of the abyss, and not sink in them.  My Lord Jesus Christ,
let not the enemy find anything that he can bring against me in the
presence of Thee, the true Judge, but clothe me in Thy shining robe,
and…(The rest is wanting.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[507:2203](0081364.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p3"></span> \[The Greek text of this addition
is given by Tischendorf in the supplement appended to his volume
containing *Apocalypses Apocryphæ*, pp. 141–150.  The <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> from which
it is taken is of the eleventh century.  Tischendorf regards this form
as of Gnostic origin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[507:2204](0081364.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p5.1"></span>ὐπόστασιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[509:2205](0081364.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p18"></span> Or, æons.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[509:2206](0081364.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p19.1"></span>δυναστείᾳ</span>.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[509:2207](0081364.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p20.1"></span>πανεπίσκοπος</span>.

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[509:2208](0081364.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p25"></span> [Matt.
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039), [1 Pet.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[510:2209](0081364.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p29"></span> Here a good deal of the text is
wanting.  The Bodleian<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p29.1"></span>ms.</span> fills up the blank to some
extent:—Walking two and two, but let them not talk with the young men,
lest Satan tempt them.  For he is a creeping serpent, and made Adam be
destroyed even to death.  And thus shall it be again at this time, for
the time and the season shall be wicked.  Many women and men shall leave
the work of marriage, and the women shall assume the name of virginity,
but knowing nothing at all about it, and that it has a great and
glorious seal.  And there shall be many men in those days in word only,
and not in its power; for they shall observe virginity in the members of
the flesh, and commit fornication in their hearts, etc.  \[The<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p29.2"></span>ms.</span> is that
referred to on p. 500.  Tischendorf gives large extracts from it; the
Greek text of this paragraph may be found on pp. 154, 155, supplement to
*Apocalypses Apocryphæ*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[510:2210](0081364.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p30"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[510:2211](0081364.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii.iii-p31"></span> [Gen. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxviii.iii-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts and Martyrdom of the Holy Apostle Andrew.](0081365)
