[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081179)  [Next](0081181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.</span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p2"></span>And it happened that, in the time of the
feast, among those who were offering incense to the Lord, Joachim stood
getting ready his gifts in the sight of the Lord.  And the priest, Ruben
by name, coming to him, said:  It is not lawful for thee to stand among
those who are doing sacrifice to God, because God has not blessed thee
so as to give thee seed in Israel.  Being therefore put to shame in the
sight of the people, he retired from the temple of the Lord weeping, and
did not return to his house, but went to his flocks, taking with him his
shepherds into the mountains to a far country, so that for five months
his wife Anna could hear no tidings of him.  And she prayed with tears,
saying:  O Lord, most mighty God of Israel, why hast Thou, seeing that
already Thou hast not given me children, taken from me my husband also? 
Behold, now five months that I have not seen my husband; and I know not
where he is tarrying; <span id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618.md) nor, if
I knew him to be dead, could I bury him.  And while she wept
excessively, she entered into the court of His house; and she fell on
her face in prayer, and poured out her supplications before the Lord. 
After this, rising from her prayer, and lifting her eyes to God, she saw
a sparrow’s nest in a laurel tree, <span
id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619.md) and uttered her voice to the Lord
with groaning, and said:  Lord God Almighty, who hast given offspring to
every creature, to beasts wild and tame, to serpents, and birds, and
fishes, and they all rejoice over their young ones, Thou hast shut out
me alone from the gift of Thy benignity.  For Thou, O God, knowest my
heart, that from the beginning of my married life I have vowed that, if
Thou, O God, shouldst give me son or daughter, I would offer them to
Thee in Thy holy temple.  And while she was thus speaking, suddenly an
angel of the Lord appeared before her, saying:  Be not afraid, Anna, for
there is seed for thee in the decree of God; and all generations even to
the end shall wonder at that which shall be born of thee.  And when he
had thus spoken, he vanished out of her sight.  But she, in fear and
dread because she had seen such a sight, and heard such words, at length
went into her bed-chamber, and threw herself on the bed as if dead.  And
for a whole day and night she remained in great trembling and in
prayer.  And after these things she called to her her servant, and said
to her:  Dost thou see me deceived in my widowhood and in great
perplexity, and hast thou been unwilling to come in to me?  Then she,
with a slight murmur, thus answered and said:  If God hath shut up thy
womb, and hath taken away thy husband from thee, what can I do for
thee?  And when Anna heard this, she lifted up her voice, and wept
aloud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[369:1619](0081180.htm#fr_1618.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p3"></span> Another reading is:  Where he has
died—reading *mortuus* for *moratus*.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[369:1620](0081180.htm#fr_1619.md) <span
id="vii.v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.iii-p4"></span> Comp. [Tobit ii.
10](../../../bib/apo/tob002.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.v.iii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](0081181.md)
