[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081172)  [Next](0081174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="vii.iii.i-Page_351"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Translator’s Introductory Notice.</span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Our</span> aim in these translations has been
to give a rendering of the original as literal as possible; and to this
we have adhered even in cases—and they are not a few—in which the Latin
or the Greek is not in strict accordance with grammatical rule.  It was
thought advisable in all cases to give the reader the means of forming
an accurate estimate of the style as well as the substance of these
curious documents.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>Part I.—Apocryphal Gospels.</span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p5"></span>The portion of the volume, extending from
page 361 to page 476, comprising the Apocryphal Gospels properly so
called, consists of twenty-two separate documents, of which ten are
written in Greek and twelve in Latin.  These twenty-two may be classed
under three heads:  (a) those relating to the history of Joseph and of
the Virgin Mary, previous to the birth of Christ; (b) those relating to
the infancy of the Saviour; and (c) those relating to the history of
Pilate.  The *origines* of the traditions are the Protevangelium of
James, the Gospel of Thomas, and the Acts of Pilate.  All or most of the
others can be referred to these three, as compilations, modifications,
or amplifications.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p6"></span>There is abundant evidence of the
existence of many of these traditions in the second century, though it
cannot be made out that any of the books were then in existence in their
present form.  The greater number of the authorities on the subject,
however, seem to agree in assigning to the first four centuries of the
Christian era, the following five books:  1. The Protevangelium of
James; 2. The Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew; 4. The History of Joseph the
Carpenter; 5. The Gospel of Thomas; 9. The Gospel of Nicodemus.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p7"></span>We proceed to give a very brief notice of
each of them.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p8"></span>I.  *The Protevangelium of James*.—The
name of Protevangelium was first given to it by Postel, whose Latin
version was published in 1552.  The James is usually referred to St.
James the Less, the Lord’s brother; but the titles vary very much. <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549)   Origen, in the end of the second
century, mentions a book of James, but it is by no means clear that he
refers to the book in question.  Justin Martyr, in two passages, refers
to the cave in which Christ was born; and from the end of the fourth
century down, there are numerous allusions in ecclesiastical writings to
statements made in the Protevangelium.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p10"></span>For his edition Tischendorf made use of
seventeen <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>mss.</span>, one of them belonging to the
ninth century.  The Greek is good of the kind, and free from errors and
corruptions.  There are translations of it into English by Jones (1722)
and Cowper (1867).

<span id="vii.iii.i-p11"></span>II.  *The Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew*.—The
majority of the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> attribute this book to Matthew,
though the titles vary much.  The letters prefixed, professing to be
written to and by St. Jerome, exist in several of the <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.iii.i-p11.2"></span>mss.</span>; but no one who
is acquainted with the style of Jerome’s letters will think this one
authentic.  There are, however, in his works many allusions to some of
the legends mentioned in this book.  Chapter i.–xxiv. were edited by
Thilo, chapters xxv. to the end are edited <span id="page_352">p.
352</span> <span id="vii.iii.i-Page_352"></span>for the first time by
Tischendorf.  It is not very clear whether the Latin be original, or a
direct translation from the Greek.  In most part it seems to be
original.  The list of epithets, however, applied to the triangles of
the Alpha in chapter xxxi. are pretty obviously mistranslations of Greek
technical terms, which it might not be difficult to reproduce.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p12"></span>III.  *Gospel of the Nativity of
Mary*.—This work, which is in substance the same as the earlier part of
the preceding, yet differs from it in several important points,
indicating a later date and a different author.  It has acquired great
celebrity from having been transferred almost entire to the *Historia
Lombardica* or *Legenda Aurea* in the end of the thirteenth century. 
Mediæval poetry and sacred art have been very much indebted to its
pages.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p13"></span>The original is in Latin, and is not a
direct translation from the Greek.  In many passages it follows very
closely the Vulgate translation.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p14"></span>IV.  *The History of Joseph the
Carpenter*.—The original language of this history is Coptic.  From the
Coptic it was translated into Arabic.  The Arabic was published by
Wallin in 1722, with a Latin translation and copious notes.  Wallin’s
version has been republished by Fabricius, and later in a somewhat
amended form by Thilo.  This amended form of Wallin’s version is the
text adopted by Tischendorf.  Chapters xiv.–xxiii. have been published
in the Sahidic text by Zoega in 1810 with a Latin translation, and more
correctly by Dulaurier in 1835 with a French translation.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p15"></span>Tischendorf employs various arguments in
support of his opinion that the work belongs to the fourth century.  It
is found, he says, in both dialects of the Coptic:  the eschatology of
it is not inconsistent with an early date:  the feast of the thousand
years of chapter xxvi. had become part of heretical opinion after the
third century.  The death of the Virgin Mary in chapter v. is consistent
with the doctrine of the assumption, which began to prevail in the fifth
century.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p16"></span>V., VI., VII.  *The Gospel of
Thomas*.—Like the Protevangelium of James, the Gospel of Thomas is of
undoubted antiquity.  It is mentioned by name by Origen, quoted by
Irenæus and the author of the Philosophumena, who says that it was used
by the Nachashenes, a Gnostic sect of the second century.  Cyril of
Jerusalem (*d*. 386) attributes the authorship not to the apostle, but
to a Thomas who was one of the three disciples of Manes.  This fact, of
course, indicates that Cyril knew nothing of the antiquity of the book
he was speaking of.  This Manichæan origin has been adopted by many
writers, of whom the best known are in recent times R. Simon and
Mingarelli.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p17"></span>The text of the first Greek form is
obtained from a Bologna <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>ms.</span> published by Mingarelli with a
Latin translation in 1764, a Dresden <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p17.2"></span>ms.</span> of the sixteenth century edited
by Thilo, a Viennese fragment edited by Lambecius, and a Parisian
fragment first brought to light by Coteler in his, edition of the
Apostolical Constitutions, and translated into English by Jones.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p18"></span>The second Greek form is published for
the first time by Tischendorf, who got the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>ms.</span>, which is on paper, of the
fourteenth or fifteenth century, from one of the monasteries on Mount
Sinai.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p19"></span>The Latin form is also published for the
first time, from a Vatican <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>ms. </span> There is another Latin text
existing in a palimpsest, which Tischendorf assigns to the fifth
century, and asserts to be much nearer the ancient Greek copy than any
of the other <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p19.2"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p20"></span>It seems pretty clear, from the contents
of the book, that its author was a Gnostic, a Docetist, and a Marcosian;
and it was held in estimation by the Nachashenes and the Manichæans. 
Its bearing upon Christian art, and to some extent Christian dogma, is
well known.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p21"></span>The Greek of the original is by no means
good, and the Latin translator has in many cases mistaken the meaning of
common Greek words

<span id="vii.iii.i-p22"></span>VIII.  *Arabic Gospel of the Saviour’s
Infancy*.—Chapters i.–ix. are founded on the Gospels of Luke and
Matthew, and on the Protevangelium of James; chapters xxxvi. to the end
are com<span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="vii.iii.i-Page_353"></span>piled from the Gospel of Thomas; the rest
of the book, chapters x. to xxxv., is thoroughly Oriental in its
character, reminding one of the tales of the *Arabian Nights*, or of the
episodes in the *Golden Ass* of Apuleius.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p23"></span>It is evident that the work is a
compilation, and that the compiler was an Oriental.  Various arguments
are adduced to prove that the original language of it was Syriac.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p24"></span>It was first published, with a Latin
translation and copious notes, by Professor Sike of Cambridge in 1697,
afterwards by Fabricius, Jones, Schmid, and Thilo.  Tischendorf’s text
is Sike’s Latin version amended by Fleischer.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p25"></span>There are not sufficient data for fixing
with any accuracy the time at which it was composed or compiled.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p26"></span>IX.–XIV.  *The Gospel of
Nicodemus*. <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) —The six
documents inserted under this name are various forms of two books—two in
Greek and one in Latin of the Acts of Pilate; one in Greek and two in
Latin of the Descent of Christ to the world below.  Of twelve <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>mss.</span>, only two or
three give the second part consecutively with the first, nor does it so
appear in the Coptic translation.  The title of Gospel of Nicodemus does
not appear before the thirteenth century.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p28"></span>Justin Martyr mentions a book called the
Acts of Pilate, and Eusebius informs us that the Emperor Maximim allowed
or ordered a book, composed by the pagans under this title, to be
published in a certain portion of the empire, and even to be taught in
the schools; but neither of these could have been the work under
consideration.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p29"></span>Tischendorf attributes it to the second
century, which is probably too early, though without doubt the legend
was formed by the end of the second century.  Maury (*<span
id="vii.iii.i-p29.1"></span>Mém. de la Société des Antiq. de France,* t.
xx.) places it in the beginning of the fifth century, from 405 to 420;
and Renan (*<span id="vii.iii.i-p29.2"></span>Études d’Hist. Relig*., p.
177) concurs in this opinion.  An able writer in the *Quarterly Review*
(vol. cxvi.) assigns it to 439; the author of the article Pilate, in
Smith’s *Bible Dictionary*, gives the end of the third century as the
probable date.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p30"></span>The author was probably a Hellenistic
Jew converted to Christianity, or, as Tischendorf and Maury conclude, a
Christian imbued with Judaic and Gnostic beliefs.  The original language
was most probably Greek, though, as in the case of Pseudo-Matthew, the
History of Joseph the Carpenter, etc., the original language is, in many
of the prefaces, stated to have been Hebrew.  Some think that Latin was
the original language, on the ground that Pilate would make his report
to the Emperor in that, the official, language.  The Latin text we have,
however, is obviously a translation, made, moreover, by a man to whom
Greek was not very familiar, as is obvious from several instances
specified in our notes to the text.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p31"></span>The *editio princeps* of the Latin text
is without place or date, and it has been re-edited by Jones, Birch,
Fabricius, Thilo, and others.  The Greek text of Part I., and of a
portion of Part II., was first published by Birch, and afterwards in a
much improved form, with the addition of copious notes and prolegomena,
by Thilo.  The latter part of his prolegomena contains a full account of
the English, French, Italian, and German translations.  For his edition
Tischendorf consulted thirty-nine ancient documents, of which a full
account is given in his Prolegomena, pp. lxxi.–lxxvi.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p32"></span>For an interesting account of these
documents, see the introduction to Mr. B. H. Cowper’s translation of the
Apocryphal Gospels, pp. lxxxv.–cii.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p33"></span>XV.  *The Letter of Pontius Pilate*.—The
text is formed from four authorities, none of them ancient.  A
translation of the Greek text of the same letter will be found at p.
480.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p34"></span>XVI., XVII.  *The Report of Pilate*.—The
first of these documents was first published by Fabricius with a Latin
translation; the second by Birch, and then by Thilo.  Tischendorf has
<span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="vii.iii.i-Page_354"></span>made use of five <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p34.1"></span>mss.</span>, the earliest of the twelfth
century.  It does not seem possible to assign the date.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p35"></span>XVIII.  *The Paradosis of Pilate*.—It
has been well remarked by the author of the article in the *Quarterly
Review* above referred to, that the early Church looked on Pilate with
no unfavourable eye; that he is favourably shown in the catacombs; that
the early Fathers interpreted him as a figure of the early Church, and
held him to be guiltless of Christ’s death; that the creeds do not
condemn him, and the Coptic Church has even made him a saint.  He
remarks also that Dante finds punishments for Caiaphas and Annas, but
not for Pilate.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p36"></span>The text was first edited by Birch, and
afterwards by Thilo.  Tischendorf makes use of five <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.iii.i-p36.1"></span>mss.</span>, of which the
earliest belongs to the twelfth century.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p37"></span>XIX.  *The Death of Pilate.*—This is
published for the first time by Tischendorf from a Latin <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
fourteenth century.  The language shows it to be of a late date.  It
appears almost entire in the *Legenda Aurea*.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p38"></span>XX.  *The Narrative of Joseph*.—This
history seems to have been popular in the middle ages, if we may judge
from the number of the Greek <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.iii.i-p38.1"></span>mss.</span> of it which remain.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p39"></span>It was first published by Birch, and
after him by Thilo.  For his edition Tischendorf made use of three <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>mss.</span>, of which the
oldest belongs to the twelfth century.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p40"></span>XXI.  *The Avenging of the
Saviour*.—This version of the Legend of Veronica is written in very
barbarous Latin, probably of the seventh or eighth century.  An
Anglo-Saxon version, which Tischendorf concludes to be derived from the
Latin, was edited and translated for the Cambridge Antiquarian Society,
by C. W. Goodwin, in 1851.  The Anglo-Saxon text is from a <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.iii.i-p40.1"></span>ms.</span> in the Cambridge
Library, one of a number presented to the Cathedral of Exeter by Bishop
Leofric in the beginning of the eleventh century.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p41"></span>The reader will observe that there are
in this document two distinct legends, somewhat clumsily joined
together—that of Nathan’s embassy, and that of Veronica. <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[351:1550](0081173.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p9"></span> \[James the Lord’s brother, in the
earliest Christian literature, is not identified with James the son of
Alphæus, one of the twelve.  On the titles, see footnote on first page
of text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[353:1551](0081173.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p27"></span> \[The numbers here correspond with
those of Tischendorf in his *prolegomena*.  In his table of contents,
however, he gives a separate number to the letter of Pilate, which
closes XIII.  Hence the enumeration differs from that point.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[354:1552](0081173.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p42"></span> \[For a full list of fragments and
titles of other Apocryphal Gospels, see Schaff-Herzog, i. p. 106. 
Twenty-nine are given, but in some cases the same work probably appears
under two titles.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](0081174)
