[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081484)  [Next](0081486.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_721">p. 721</span> <span
id="ix.xv-Page_721"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>Introduction</span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xv-p2.1"></span>to</span>

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.xv-p3.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xv-p5.1"></span>The</span> preceding *Memoirs of Edessa* and
Syriac Documents were inserted in vol. 20 of the Edinburgh series, quite
out of place as it seems to me; and the more so, as other Syriac
fragments were to follow.

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span>2.  In vol. 22, equally out of place, and
mixed up with incongruous material, followed the very interesting work
of Bardesanes, to which I now assign a natural collocation with the
Edessene Memoirs.

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span>3.  In vol. 24, with the *Liturgies* and
other mixed material, comes the third Syriac fagot, another valuable and
very interesting contribution severed from its due connections.

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span>The reader of this volume will rejoice to
find Mr. Pratten’s scattered but most instructive translations here
brought together, and arranged in less confused sequence and relations
one with another.  The several announcements prefixed to each have, in
like manner, been here gathered and set in order.

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span>It may be worth while, just here, to direct
attention to the latest views of scholarship upon Syria, its language
and its antiquities.  A learned critic, who often supplies one of our
weekly newspapers with articles on the Oriental languages worthy of the
best reviews, has directed attention <span
id="fr_3350"></span>[3351](#fn_3350.md) to a searching *critique* of
Mommsen’s recent addition to his *Roman History*, of a chapter which
“deals with Bible-lands in New-Testament times.”  Professor Nöldke of
Strasburg, a leading Semitic scholar, in the *<span
id="ix.xv-p10.1"></span>Zeitschrift* of the German Oriental Society,
thus takes him to task:—

<span id="ix.xv-p11"></span>“Syria enjoyed a higher prosperity under the
Romans *than Mommsen concedes*, and this continued down into the
Christian period.  The Hellenization made rapid strides, but not in such
a manner that the Greek language or Greek culture spread to a
considerable degree; but rather, in such a way that European arts and
manners of life were established, and that a number of elements of
Occidental culture became powerful in the thinking and language of the
educated.  Mommsen, according to my conviction, considers the
Hellenization of Syria *to have advanced much farther than it actually
had*.  That the language of the country had been entirely banished from
the circles of the educated, and that it had assumed the position in
reference to the Greek which the Celtic in full had assumed over against
the Latin, is certainly an exaggerated view.  The Aramaic was an old
developed language (*Cultursprache*), which was already written before a
single letter was seen in Latium.  In the days of the Achæmenidian
rulers this was the official language of Egypt, and even of Asia Minor,
*and was accordingly spread far beyond the original territory*.  Again
we find this language in the days of the Roman emperors not only in
Palmyra, but spread also in the whole country of the Nabatheans, and
down to almost Medina; here again beyond its native limits, as the
official written language.  And that this was not merely a remnant of
the former political supremacy is evident from the fact that the
documents of Palmyra and those of the Nabatheans, in an equal manner,
show a younger stage of development of language than that of the
Achæmenidian period; this stage being virtually the same as is seen in
the various Jewish literary works of that time.”

<span id="ix.xv-p12"></span>As Mommsen is continuing his irreligious
elaborations of history, it may be well to bear in mind his superficial
ideas on such subjects, especially when he is reaching the affairs of
early Christianity.

<span id="ix.xv-p13"></span>1.  Our translator (Mr. Pratten) makes the
following announcements:—

<span id="ix.xv-p14"></span>“The translation of the Syriac pieces which
follow <span id="fr_3351"></span>[3352](#fn_3351.md) is based on a careful
examination of that made by Dr. Cureton, the merits of which are
cordially acknowledged.  It will, however, be seen that it differs from
that in many and important particulars.

<span id="ix.xv-p16"></span>“Many thanks are due to the Dean of
Canterbury for his kindness in giving much valuable help.”

<span id="ix.xv-p17"></span><span id="page_722">p. 722</span> <span
id="ix.xv-Page_722"></span>2.  He thus introduces the treatise of
Bardesanes:—

<span id="ix.xv-p18"></span>“Bardesan, or Bardesanes, according to one
account, was born at Edessa in 154 <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xv-p18.1"></span>a.d.</span>, and it is supposed that he died
sometime between 224 and 230.  Eusebius says that he flourished in the
time of Marcus Aurelius.  He was for some time resident at the court of
Abgar VI., King of Edessa, with whom he was on intimate terms.  He at
first belonged to the Gnostic sect of the Valentinians; but abandoning
it, he seemed to come nearer the orthodox beliefs.  In reality, it is
said, he devised errours of his own.  He wrote many works.  Eusebius
attributes the work now translated, *The Book of Laws*, or *On Fate*, to
Bardesanes.  Many modern critics have come to the conclusion that it was
written by a scholar of Bardesanes, but that it gives us the genuine
opinions and reasonings of Bardesanes.  The question is of interest in
connection with the Clementine *Recognitions*, which contain a large
portion of the work.  The Syriac was first published by Cureton in his
*Spicilegium*.”

<span id="ix.xv-p19"></span>3.  In introducing the *Mara bar Serapion*
and the *Ambrose*, <span id="fr_3352"></span>[3353](#fn_3352.md) he thus
refers to his friend Dr. Payne Smith:—

<span id="ix.xv-p21"></span>The text of the two following short
pieces <span id="fr_3353"></span>[3354](#fn_3353.md) is found in the
*Spicilegium Syriacum* of the late Dr. Cureton.  This careful scholar
speaks of the second of these compositions as containing “some very
obscure passages.”  The same remark holds good also of the first.  Dr.
Payne Smith describes them both as “full of difficulties.”  So far as
these arise from errors in the text, they might have been removed, had I
been able to avail myself of the opportunity kindly offered me by Dr.
Rieu, Keeper of the Oriental <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xv-p22.1"></span>mss.</span> at the British Museum, of inspecting
the original <span class="c9"><span id="ix.xv-p22.2"></span>ms. </span>
As it is, several have, it is hoped, been successfully met by
conjecture.

<span id="ix.xv-p23"></span>To Dr. R. Payne Smith, Dean of Canterbury,
who, as on two previous occasions, has most kindly and patiently
afforded me his valuable assistance, I beg to offer my very grateful
acknowledgments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3350"></span>[721:3351](0081485.htm#fr_3350.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p10"></span> *New-York Independent*, June 24, 1886.

<span id="fn_3351"></span>[721:3352](0081485.htm#fr_3351.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p15"></span> That is, in vol. xxii. of the Edinburgh
edition.

<span id="fn_3352"></span>[722:3353](0081485.htm#fr_3352.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p20"></span> Vol. xxiv., ed. Edinburgh.  The latter was
formerly ascribed to Justin Martyr.

<span id="fn_3353"></span>[722:3354](0081485.htm#fr_3353.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p22"></span> The *Ambrose* and the *Serapion*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bardesan. The Book of the Laws of Divers Countries.](0081486.md)
