[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081364)  [Next](0081366) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxix"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p1"></span> <span id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="vii.xxix-Page_511"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Acts and Martyrdom of the Holy Apostle
Andrew.</span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxix-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p3.1"></span>What</span> we have all, both presbyters and
deacons of the churches of Achaia, beheld with our eyes, we have written
to all the churches established in the name of Christ Jesus, both in the
east and west, north and south.  Peace to you, and to all who believe in
one God, perfect Trinity, true Father unbegotten, true Son
only-begotten, true Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father, and abiding
in the Son, in order that there may be shown one Holy Spirit subsisting
in the Father and Son in precious Godhead.  This faith we have learned
from the blessed Andrew, the apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
passion also we, having seen it set forth before our eyes, have not
hesitated to give an account of, according to the degree of ability we
have.

<span id="vii.xxix-p4"></span>Accordingly the proconsul Ægeates, <span
id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) having come into the city of
Patras, began to compel those believing in Christ to worship the idols;
to whom the blessed Andrew, running up, said:  It behoved thee, being a
judge of men, to acknowledge thy Judge who is in the heaven, and having
acknowledged Him, to worship Him; and worshipping Him who is the true
God, to turn away thy thoughts from those which are not true gods.

<span id="vii.xxix-p6"></span>To whom Ægeates said:  Art thou Andrew,
who destroyest the temples of the gods, and persuadest men about the
religion which, having lately made its appearance, the emperors of the
Romans have given orders to suppress?

<span id="vii.xxix-p7"></span>The blessed Andrew said:  The emperors of
the Romans have never recognised the truth.  And this the Son of God,
who came on account of the salvation of men, manifestly teaches—that
these idols are not only not gods, but also most shameful demons, <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) and hostile to the human race,
teaching men to offend God, so that, by being offended, He turns away
and will not hearken; that therefore, by His turning away and not
hearkening, they may be held captive by the devil; and that they might
work them to such a degree, that when they go out of the body they may
be found deserted and naked, carrying nothing with them but sins.

<span id="vii.xxix-p9"></span>Ægeates said:  These are superfluous and
vain words:  as for your Jesus, for proclaiming these things to the Jews
they nailed him to the tree of the cross.

<span id="vii.xxix-p10"></span>The blessed Andrew answering, said:  Oh,
if thou wouldst recognise the mystery of the cross, with what reasonable
love the Author <span id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) of the life
of the human race for our restoration endured this tree of the cross,
not unwillingly, but willingly!

<span id="vii.xxix-p12"></span>Ægeates said:  Seeing that, betrayed by
his own disciple, and seized by the Jews, he was brought before the
procurator, and according to their request was nailed up by the
procurator’s soldiers, in what way dost thou say that he willingly
endured the tree of the cross?

<span id="vii.xxix-p13"></span>The holy Andrew said:  For this reason I
say willingly, since I was with Him when he was betrayed by His
disciple.  For before He was betrayed, He spoke to us to the effect that
He should be betrayed and crucified for the salvation of men, and
foretold that He should rise again on the third day.  To whom my brother
Peter said, <span id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) Far be it from
thee, Lord; let this by no means be.  And so, being angry, He said to
Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou art not disposed to the
things of God.  And in order that He might most fully explain that He
willingly underwent the passion, He said to us, <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) I have power to lay down my life,
and I have power to take it again.  And, last of all, while He was
supping with us, He said, <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) One
of you will betray me.  At these words, therefore, all becoming
exceedingly grieved, in order that the surmise might be free from doubt,
He made it clear, saying, To whomsoever I shall give the piece of bread
out of my hand, he it is who betrays me.  When, therefore, He gave it to
one of our fellow-disciples, and gave an account of things to come as if
they were already present, <span id="page_512">p. 512</span> <span
id="vii.xxix-Page_512"></span>He showed that He was to be willingly
betrayed.  For neither did He run away, and leave His betrayer at fault;
but remaining in the place in which He knew that he was, He awaited him.

<span id="vii.xxix-p17"></span>Ægeates said:  I wonder that thou, being
a sensible man, shouldst wish to uphold him on any terms whatever; for,
whether willingly or unwillingly, all the same, thou admittest that he
was fastened to the cross.

<span id="vii.xxix-p18"></span>The blessed Andrew said:  This is what I
said, if now thou apprehendest, that great is the mystery of the cross,
which, if thou wishest, as is likely, to hear, attend to me. <span
id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217)

<span id="vii.xxix-p20"></span>Ægeates said:  A mystery it cannot be
called, but a punishment.

<span id="vii.xxix-p21"></span>The blessed Andrew said:  This punishment
is the mystery of man’s restoration.  If thou wilt listen with any
attention, thou wilt prove it.

<span id="vii.xxix-p22"></span>Ægeates said:  I indeed will hear
patiently; but thou, unless thou submissively obey me, shalt
receive <span id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218) the mystery of the
cross in thyself.

<span id="vii.xxix-p24"></span>The blessed Andrew answered:  If I had
been afraid of the tree of the cross, I should not have proclaimed the
glory of the cross.

<span id="vii.xxix-p25"></span>Ægeates said:  Thy speech is foolish,
because thou proclaimest that the cross is not a punishment, and through
thy foolhardiness thou art not afraid of the punishment of death.

<span id="vii.xxix-p26"></span>The holy Andrew said:  It is not through
foolhardiness, but through faith, that I am not afraid of the punishment
of death; for the death of sins <span
id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) is hard.  And on this account I
wish thee to hear the mystery of the cross, in order that thou perhaps,
acknowledging it, mayst believe, and believing, mayst come somehow or
other to the renewing of thy soul.

<span id="vii.xxix-p28"></span>Ægeates said:  That which is shown to
have perished is for renewing.  Do you mean that my soul has perished,
that thou makest me come to the renewing of it through the faith, I know
not what, of which thou hast spoken?

<span id="vii.xxix-p29"></span>The blessed Andrew answered:  This it is
which I desired time to learn, which also I shall teach and make
manifest, that though the souls of men are destroyed, they shall be
renewed through the mystery of the cross.  For the first man through the
tree of transgression brought in death; and it was necessary for the
human race, that through the suffering of the tree, death, which had
come into the world, should be driven out.  And since the first man, who
brought death into the world through the transgression of the tree, had
been produced from the spotless earth, it was necessary that the Son of
God should be begotten a perfect man from the spotless virgin, that He
should restore eternal life, which men had lost through Adam, and should
cut off <span id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) the tree of carnal
appetite through the tree of the cross.  Hanging upon the cross, He
stretched out His blameless hands for the hands which had been
incontinently stretched out; for the most sweet food of the forbidden
tree He received gall for food; and taking our mortality upon Himself,
He made a gift of His immortality to us.

<span id="vii.xxix-p31"></span>Ægeates said:  With these words thou
shalt be able to lead away those who shall believe in thee; but unless
thou hast come to grant me this, that thou offer sacrifices to the
almighty gods, I shall order thee, after having been scourged, to be
fastened to that very cross which thou commendest.

<span id="vii.xxix-p32"></span>The blessed Andrew said:  To God
Almighty, who alone is true, I bring sacrifice day by day; not the smoke
of incense, nor the flesh of bellowing bulls, nor the blood of goats,
but sacrificing a spotless lamb day by day on the altar of the cross;
and though all the people of the faithful partake of His body and drink
His blood, the Lamb that has been sacrificed remains after this entire
and alive.  Truly, therefore, is He sacrificed, and truly is His body
eaten by the people, and His blood is likewise drunk; nevertheless, as I
have said, He remains entire, and spotless, and alive.

<span id="vii.xxix-p33"></span>Ægeates said:  How can this be?

<span id="vii.xxix-p34"></span>The blessed Andrew said:  If thou
wouldest know, take the form of a disciple, that thou mayst learn what
thou art inquiring after.

<span id="vii.xxix-p35"></span>Ægeates said:  I will exact of thee
through tortures the gift of this knowledge.

<span id="vii.xxix-p36"></span>The blessed Andrew declared:  I wonder
that thou, being an intelligent man, shouldest fall into <span
id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) the folly of thinking that thou
mayst be able to persuade me, through thy tortures, to disclose to thee
the sacred things of God.  Thou hast heard the mystery of the cross,
thou hast heard the mystery of the sacrifice.  If thou believest in
Christ the Son of God, who was crucified, I shall altogether disclose to
thee in what manner the Lamb that has been slain may live, after having
been sacrificed and eaten, remaining in His kingdom entire and spotless.

<span id="vii.xxix-p38"></span>Ægeates said:  And by what means does the
lamb remain in his kingdom after he has been slain and eaten by all the
people, as thou hast said?

<span id="vii.xxix-p39"></span>The blessed Andrew said:  If thou
believest with all thy heart, thou shalt be able to learn:  but if thou
believest not, thou shalt not by any means attain to the idea of such
truth.

<span id="vii.xxix-p40"></span>Then Ægeates, enraged, ordered him to be
shut up in prison, where, when he was shut up, a multitude of the people
came together to him <span id="page_513">p. 513</span> <span
id="vii.xxix-Page_513"></span>from almost all the province, so that they
wished to kill Ægeates, and by breaking down the doors of the prison to
set free the blessed Andrew the apostle.

<span id="vii.xxix-p41"></span>Them the blessed Andrew admonished in
these words, saying:  Do not stir up the peace of our Lord Jesus Christ
into seditious and devilish uproar.  For my Lord, when He was betrayed,
endured it with all patience; He did not strive, He did not cry out, nor
in the streets did any one hear Him crying out. <span
id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222)   Therefore do ye also keep
silence, quietness, and peace; and hinder not my martyrdom, but rather
get yourselves also ready beforehand as athletes to the Lord, in order
that you may overcome threatenings by a soul that has no fear of man,
and that you may get the better of injuries through the endurance of the
body.  For this temporary fall is not to be feared; but that should be
feared which has no end.  The fear of men, then, is like smoke which,
while it is raised and gathered together, disappears.  And those
torments ought to be feared which never have an end.  For these
torments, which happen to be somewhat light, any one can bear; but if
they are heavy, they soon destroy life.  But those torments are
everlasting, where there are daily weepings, and mournings, and
lamentations, and never-ending torture, to which the proconsul Ægeates
is not afraid to go.  Be ye therefore rather prepared for this, that
through temporary afflictions ye may attain to everlasting rest, and may
flourish for ever, and reign with Christ. <span
id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223)

<span id="vii.xxix-p44"></span>The holy Apostle Andrew having admonished
the people with these and such like words through the whole night, when
the light of day dawned, Ægeates having sent for him, ordered the
blessed Andrew to be brought to him; and having sat down upon the
tribunal, he said:  I have thought that thou, by thy reflection during
the night, hast turned away thy thoughts from folly, and given up thy
commendation of Christ that thou mightst be able to be with us, and not
throw away the pleasures of life; for it is folly to come for any
purpose to the suffering of the cross, and to give oneself up to most
shameful punishments and burnings.

<span id="vii.xxix-p45"></span>The holy Andrew answered:  I shall be
able to have joy with thee, if thou wilt believe in Christ, and throw
away the worship of idols; for Christ has sent me to this province, in
which I have acquired for Christ a people not the smallest.

<span id="vii.xxix-p46"></span>Ægeates said:  For this reason I compel
thee to make a libation, that these people who have been deceived by
thee may forsake the vanity of thy teaching, and may themselves offer
grateful libations to the gods; for not even one city has remained in
Achaia in which their temples <span id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224)
have not been forsaken and deserted.  And now, through thee, let them be
again restored to the worship of the images, in order that the gods
also, who have been enraged against thee, being pleased by this, may
bring it about that thou mayst return to their friendship and ours.  But
if not, thou awaitest varied tortures, on account of the vengeance of
the gods; and after these, fastened to the tree of the cross which thou
commendest, thou shalt die.

<span id="vii.xxix-p48"></span>The holy Andrew said:  Listen, O son of
death and chaff made ready for eternal burnings, <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225) to me, the servant of God and
apostle of Jesus Christ.  Until now I have conversed with thee kindly
about the perfection of the faith, in order that thou, receiving the
exposition of the truth, being made perfect as its vindicator, mightst
despise vain idols, and worship God, who is in the heavens; but since
thou remainest in the same shamelessness at last, and thinkest me to be
afraid because of thy threats, bring against me whatever may seem to
thee greater in the way of tortures.  For the more shall I be well
pleasing to my King, the more I shall endure in tortures for the
confession of His name.

<span id="vii.xxix-p50"></span>Then the proconsul Ægeates, being
enraged, ordered the apostle of Christ to be afflicted by tortures. 
Being stretched out, therefore, by seven times three <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) soldiers, and beaten with violence,
he was lifted up and brought before the impious Ægeates.  And he spoke
to him thus:  Listen to me, Andrew, and withdraw thy thoughts from the
outpouring of thy blood; but if thou wilt not hearken to me, I shall
cause thee to perish on the tree of the cross.

<span id="vii.xxix-p52"></span>The holy Andrew said:  I am a slave of
the cross of Christ, and I ought rather to pray to attain to the trophy
of the cross than to be afraid; but for thee is laid up eternal torment,
which, however, thou mayst escape after thou hast tested my endurance,
if thou wilt believe in my Christ.  For I am afflicted about thy
destruction, and I am not disturbed about my own suffering.  For my
suffering takes up a space of one day, or two at most; but thy torment
for endless ages shall never come to a close.  Wherefore henceforward
cease from adding to thy miseries, and lighting up everlasting fire for
thyself.

<span id="vii.xxix-p53"></span>Ægeates then being enraged, ordered the
blessed Andrew to be fastened to the cross. <span
id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227)   And he having left them all, goes
up to the cross, and says to it with a clear voice:  Rejoice, O cross,
which has been consecrated by the body <span id="page_514">p. 514</span>
<span id="vii.xxix-Page_514"></span>of Christ, and adorned by His limbs
as if with pearls.  Assuredly before my Lord went up on thee, thou hadst
much earthly fear; but now invested with heavenly longing, thou art
fitted up <span id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228) according to my
prayer.  For I know, from those who believe, how many graces thou hast
in Him, how many gifts prepared beforehand.  Free from care, then, and
with joy, I come to thee, that thou also exulting mayst receive me, the
disciple of Him that was hanged upon thee; because thou hast been always
faithful to me, and I have desired to embrace thee.  O good cross, which
hast received comeliness and beauty from the limbs of the Lord; O much
longed for, and earnestly desired, and fervently sought after, and
already prepared beforehand for my soul longing for thee, take me away
from men, and restore me to my Master, in order that through thee He may
accept me who through thee has redeemed me.

<span id="vii.xxix-p56"></span>And having thus spoken, the blessed
Andrew, standing on the ground, and looking earnestly upon the cross,
stripped himself and gave his clothes to the executioners, having urged
the brethren that the executioners should come and do what had been
commanded them; for they were standing at some distance.  And they
having come up, lifted him on the cross; and having stretched his body
across with ropes, they only bound his feet, but did not sever his
joints, <span id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) having received this
order from the proconsul:  for he wished him to be in distress while
hanging, and in the night-time, as he was suspended, to be eaten up
alive by dogs. <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230)

<span id="vii.xxix-p59"></span>And a great multitude of the brethren
stood by, nearly twenty thousand; and having beheld the executioners
standing off, and that they had done to the blessed *one* nothing of
what those who were hanged up suffer, they thought that they would again
hear something from him; for assuredly, as he was hanging, he moved his
head smiling.  And Stratocles inquired of him:  Why art thou smiling,
Andrew, servant of God?  Thy laughter makes us mourn and weep, because
we are deprived of thee.  And the blessed Andrew answered him:  Shall I
not laugh at all, my son Stratocles, at the empty stratagem of Ægeates,
through which he thinks to take vengeance upon us?  We have nothing to
do with him and his plans.  He cannot hear; for if he could, he would be
aware, having learned it by experience, that a man of Jesus is
unpunished. <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231)

<span id="vii.xxix-p61"></span>And having thus spoken, he discoursed to
them all in common, for the people ran together enraged at the unjust
judgment of Ægeates:  Ye men standing by me, and women, and children,
and elders, bond and free, and as many as will hear; I beseech you,
forsake all this life, ye who have for my sake assembled here; and
hasten to take upon you my life, which leads to heavenly things, and
once for all despise all temporary things, confirming the purposes of
those who believe in Christ.  And he exhorted them all, teaching that
the sufferings of this transitory life are not worthy to be compared
with the future recompense of the eternal life.

<span id="vii.xxix-p62"></span>And the multitude hearing what was said
by him, did not stand off from the place, and the blessed Andrew
continued the rather to say to them more than he had spoken.  And so
much was said by him, that a space of three days and nights was taken
up, and no one was tired and went away from him.  And when also on the
fourth day they beheld his nobleness, and the unweariedness of his
intellect, and the multitude of his words, and the serviceableness of
his exhortations, and the stedfastness of his soul, and the sobriety of
his spirit, and the fixedness of his mind, and the perfection of his
reason, they were enraged against Ægeates; and all with one accord
hastened to the tribunal, and cried out against Ægeates, who was
sitting, saying:  What is thy judgment, O proconsul?  Thou hast judged
wickedly; thy awards are impious.  In what has the man done wrong; what
evil has he done?  The city has been put in an uproar; thou grievest us
all; do not betray Cæsar’s city.  Grant willingly to the Achaians a just
man; grant willingly to us a God-fearing man; do not put to death a
godly man.  Four days he has been hanging, and is alive; having eaten
nothing, he has filled us all.  Take down the man from the cross, and we
shall all seek after wisdom; release the man, and to all Achaia will
mercy be shown.  It is not necessary that he should suffer this,
because, though hanging, he does not cease proclaiming the truth.

<span id="vii.xxix-p63"></span>And when the proconsul refused to listen
to them, at first indeed signing with his hand to the crowd to take
themselves off, they began to be emboldened against him, being in number
about twenty thousand.  And the proconsul having beheld that they had
somehow become maddened, afraid that something frightful would befall
him, rose up from the tribunal and went away with them, having promised
to set free the blessed Andrew.  And some went on before to tell the
apostle the cause for which they came to the place.

<span id="vii.xxix-p64"></span>While all the crowd, therefore, was
exulting that the blessed Andrew was going to be set free, the proconsul
having come up, and all the <span id="page_515">p. 515</span> <span
id="vii.xxix-Page_515"></span>brethren rejoicing along with
Maximilla, <span id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) the blessed
Andrew, having heard this, said to the brethren standing by:  What is it
necessary for me to say to him, when I am departing to the Lord, that
will I also say.  For what reason hast thou again come to us, Ægeates? 
On what account dost thou, being a stranger to us, <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) come to us?  What wilt thou again
dare to do, what to contrive?  Tell us.  Hast thou come to release us,
as having changed thy mind?  I would not agree with thee that thou hadst
really changed thy mind.  Nor would I believe thee, saying that thou art
my friend.  Dost thou, O proconsul, release him that has been bound?  By
no means.  For I have One with whom I shall be for ever; I have One with
whom I shall live to countless ages.  To Him I go; to Him I hasten, who
also having made thee known to me, has said to me, Let not that fearful
man terrify thee; do not think that he will lay hold of thee, who art
mine:  for he is thine enemy.  Therefore, having known thee through him
who has turned towards me, I am delivered from thee.  But if thou
wishest to believe in Christ, there will be opened up for time, as I
promised thee, a way of access; but if thou hast come only to release
me, I shall not be able after this to be brought down from this cross
alive in the body.  For I and my kinsmen depart to our own, allowing
thee to be what thou art, and what thou dost not know about thyself. 
For already I see my King, already I worship Him, already I stand before
Him, where the fellowship <span id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) of
the angels is, where He reigns the only emperor, where there is light
without night, where the flowers never fade, where trouble is never
known, nor the name of grief heard, where there are cheerfulness and
exultation that have no end.  O blessed cross! without the longing for
thee, no one enters into that place.  But I am distressed, Ægeates,
about thine own miseries, because eternal perdition is ready to receive
thee.  Run then, for thine own sake, O pitiable one, while yet thou
canst, lest perchance thou shouldst wish then when thou canst not.

<span id="vii.xxix-p68"></span>When, therefore, he attempted to come
near the tree of the cross, so as to release the blessed Andrew, with
all the city applauding him, the holy Andrew said with a loud voice:  Do
not suffer Andrew, bound upon Thy tree, to be released, O Lord; do not
give me who am in Thy mystery to the shameless devil.  O Jesus Christ,
let not Thine adversary release me, who have been hanged by Thy favour;
O Father, let this insignificant man no longer humble him who has known
Thy greatness.  The executioners, therefore, putting out their hands,
were not able at all to touch him.  Others, then, and others endeavoured
to release him, and no one at all was able to come near him; for their
arms were benumbed.

<span id="vii.xxix-p69"></span>Then the blessed Andrew, having adjured
the people, said:  I entreat you earnestly, brethren, that I may first
make one prayer to my Lord.  So then set about releasing me.  All the
people therefore kept quiet because of the adjuration.  Then the blessed
Andrew, with a loud cry, said:  Do not permit, O Lord, Thy servant at
this time to be removed from Thee; for it is time that my body be
committed to the earth, and Thou shalt order me to come to Thee.  Thou
who givest eternal life, my Teacher whom I have loved, whom on this
cross I confess, whom I know, whom I possess, receive me, O Lord; and as
I have confessed Thee and obeyed Thee, so now in this word hearken to
me; and, before my body come down from the cross, receive me to Thyself,
that through my departure there may be access to Thee of many of my
kindred, finding rest for themselves in Thy majesty.

<span id="vii.xxix-p70"></span>When, therefore, he had said this, he
became in the sight of all glad and exulting; for an exceeding splendour
like lightning coming forth out of heaven shone down upon him, and so
encircled him, that in consequence of such brightness mortal eyes could
not look upon him at all.  And the dazzling light remained about the
space of half an hour.  And when he had thus spoken and glorified the
Lord still more, the light withdrew itself, and he gave up the ghost,
and along with the brightness itself he departed to the Lord in giving
Him thanks.

<span id="vii.xxix-p71"></span>And after the decease of the most blessed
Andrew the apostle, Maximilla being the most powerful of the notable
women, <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235) and continuing among
those who had come, as soon as she learned that the apostle had departed
to the Lord, came up and turned her attention to the cross, along with
Stratocles, taking no heed at all of those standing by, and with
reverence took down the body of the most blessed apostle from the
cross.  And when it was evening, bestowing upon him the necessary care,
she prepared the body for burial with costly spices, and laid it in her
own tomb.  For she had been parted from Ægeates on account of his brutal
disposition and lawless conduct, having chosen for herself a holy and
quiet life; and having been united to the love of Christ, she spent her
life blessedly along with the brethren.

<span id="vii.xxix-p73"></span>Ægeates had been very importunate with
her, and promised that he would make her mistress of his wealth; but not
having been able to persuade her, he was greatly enraged, and was
determined to make a public charge against all <span id="page_516">p.
516</span> <span id="vii.xxix-Page_516"></span>the people, and to send
to Cæsar an accusation against both Maximilla and all the people.  And
while he was arranging these things in the presence of his officers, at
the dead of night he rose up, and unseen by all his people, having been
tormented by the devil, he fell down from a great height, and rolling
into the midst of the market-place of the city, breathed his last.

<span id="vii.xxix-p74"></span>And this was reported to his brother
Stratocles; and he sent his servants, having told them that they should
bury him among those who had died a violent death.  But he sought
nothing of his substance, saying:  Let not my Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
I have believed, suffer me to touch anything whatever of the goods of my
brother, that the condemnation of him who dared to cut off the apostle
of the Lord may not disgrace me.

<span id="vii.xxix-p75"></span>These things were done in the province of
Achaia, in the city of Patras on the day before the kalends of
December, <span id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) where his good
deeds are kept in mind even to this day, to the glory and praise of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen. <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[511:2212](0081365.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="vii.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p5"></span> Another reading is Ægeas.  \[This is the
reading of the Bodleian <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p5.1"></span>ms.</span>, already frequently referred to
(see p. 355).  In most cases its text is followed in the Latin version
collated by Tischendorf.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[511:2213](0081365.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="vii.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p8"></span> [Deut.
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017), [1 Cor.
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[511:2214](0081365.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="vii.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p11"></span> Or, Prince.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[511:2215](0081365.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="vii.xxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p14"></span> [Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[511:2216](0081365.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="vii.xxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p15"></span> [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[511:2217](0081365.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="vii.xxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p16"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[512:2218](0081365.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="vii.xxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p19"></span> Another reading is:  This is what I
spoke of, as you know— that great is the mystery of the cross; and if so
be that you are willing to listen, I will reveal it.

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[512:2219](0081365.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="vii.xxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p23"></span> Perhaps we should read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxix-p23.1"></span>ἀναδείξει</span>, shalt
exhibit, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxix-p23.2"></span>ἀναδέξει</span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[512:2220](0081365.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="vii.xxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p27"></span> Two <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p27.1"></span>mss.</span>, of sinners.

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[512:2221](0081365.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="vii.xxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p30"></span> Or, shut out.

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[512:2222](0081365.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="vii.xxix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p37"></span> Lit., be rolled towards.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[513:2223](0081365.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="vii.xxix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p42"></span> [Matt. xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[513:2224](0081365.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="vii.xxix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p43"></span> Comp. [2 Cor. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[513:2225](0081365.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="vii.xxix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p47"></span> Or, their sacred rites.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[513:2226](0081365.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="vii.xxix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p49"></span> Comp. [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[513:2227](0081365.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="vii.xxix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p51"></span> Another reading is, seven quaternions.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[513:2228](0081365.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="vii.xxix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p54"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p54.1"></span>mss.</span> \[the Bodleian\] has here: 
Giving orders to the centurions that he should be bound hand and foot as
if he were stretched on the rack, and not pierced with nails, that he
might not die soon, but be tormented with long-continuing torture.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[514:2229](0081365.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="vii.xxix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p55"></span> Another reading is:  I am attached to
thee.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[514:2230](0081365.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="vii.xxix-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p57"></span> The original is obscure.  The meaning
seems to be that he was tied only, not nailed.  The nailing, however,
seems to have been an essential part of the punishment of crucifixion.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[514:2231](0081365.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="vii.xxix-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p58"></span> It was common to let loose wild beasts
on the crucified (Sueton., *Nero*, 49).

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[514:2232](0081365.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="vii.xxix-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p60"></span> Instead of this paragraph, on <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxix-p60.1"></span>ms.</span> \[the Bodleian\]
has:  And there ran up a great multitude, about twenty thousand in
number, among whom was the brother of Ægeas, Stratocles by name; and he
cried out with the people, It is an unjust judgment.  And the holy
Andrew, hitting upon the thoughts of the believers, exhorted them to
endure the temporary trial, saying that the suffering counted for
nothing when compared with the eternal recompense.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[515:2233](0081365.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="vii.xxix-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p65"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p65.1"></span>ms.</span> calls her the proconsul’s wife. 
\[So Pseudo-Abdias; but the Greek <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p65.2"></span>mss.</span>, collated by Tischendorf, do not
give this reading.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[515:2234](0081365.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="vii.xxix-p65.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p66"></span> i.e., having nothing to do with us.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[515:2235](0081365.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="vii.xxix-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxix-p67.1"></span>ὁμόνοιαι</span>.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[515:2236](0081365.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="vii.xxix-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p72"></span> Lit., females.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[516:2237](0081365.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="vii.xxix-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p76"></span> i.e., 30th November, St. Andrew’s day.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[516:2238](0081365.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="vii.xxix-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxix-p77"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxix-p77.1"></span>ms.</span> thus ends:  These things were done
in the province of Achaia, in the city of Patras, on the day before the
kalends of December; where also his glorious good deeds are shown even
to this day; and so great fear came upon all, that no one remained who
did not believe in God our Saviour, who wishes all to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth.  To Him be glory to ages of ages. 
Amen.  \[This is the ending of the Latin version (in Tischendorf); the
Bodleian <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxix-p77.2"></span>ms.</span>
has a similar conclusion, but the text is differently arranged.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of Andrew and Matthias.](0081366)
