[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081304)  [Next](0081306.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.v"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.v-p2"></span>Pilate therefore, leaving Jesus within the
prætorium, went out to the Jews, and says to them:  I find not even one
fault in him.  The Jews say to him:  He said, I can destroy that temple,
and in three days raise it again.  Pilate said to them:  What temple? 
The Jews say to him:  *The temple* which Solomon built in forty and six
years; and he says *that he can* destroy and build it in three days. 
Pilate says to them:  I am innocent of the blood of this man; see ye *to
it*.  The Jews say to him:  His blood *be* upon us, and upon our
children.

<span id="vii.xv.v-p3"></span>And Pilate, calling the elders and priests
and Levites, says to them privately:  Do not do so; for in nothing,
though you accuse him, do I find him deserving of death, not even about
the healing and the breaking of the Sabbath.  The priests and Levites
and elders say:  Tell us, if any one blaspheme Cæsar, is he deserving of
death or not?  Pilate says to them:  He deserves to die.  The Jews
answered him:  How much more is he who has blasphemed God deserving to
die!

<span id="vii.xv.v-p4"></span>And the governor ordered the Jews to go
outside of the prætorium; and calling Jesus, said to Him:  What am I to
do to thee?  Jesus says to Pilate:  As it has been given *thee*.  Pilate
says:  How has it been given?  Jesus says:  Moses and the prophets made
proclamation of my death and resurrection.  And the Jews, hearing this,
say to Pilate:  Why do you desire any more to hear blasphemy?  And
Pilate said:  If this speech is blasphemous, do you take him, and lead
him to your synagogue, and judge him according to your law.  The Jews
say to Pilate:  Our law holds, If a man have sinned against a man, he is
worthy to receive forty less one; but he who has blasphemed against God,
to be stoned.

<span id="vii.xv.v-p5"></span>Pilate says to them:  Then judge him
according to your law.  The Jews say to Pilate:  We wish that he be
crucified.  Pilate says to them:  He does not deserve to be crucified.

<span id="vii.xv.v-p6"></span>And the governor, looking upon the people
of the Jews standing round, saw very many of the Jews weeping, and
said:  All the multitude does not wish him to die.  The elders say to
Pilate:  And for this reason have we come—the whole multitude—that he
should die.  Pilate said to the Jews:  What has he done that he <span
id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span id="vii.xv.v-Page_442"></span>should
die?  They say:  Because he said that he was the Son of God, and a king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](0081306.md)
