[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081190)  [Next](0081192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p2"></span>And it came to pass some little time
after, that an enrolment was made according to the edict of Cæsar
Augustus, that all the world was to be enrolled, each man in his native
place.  This enrolment was made by Cyrinus, the governor of Syria. <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639)   It was necessary, therefore, that
Joseph should enrol with the blessed Mary in Bethlehem, because to it
they belonged, being of the tribe of Judah, and of the house and family
of David.  When, therefore, Joseph and the blessed Mary were going along
the road which leads to Bethlehem, Mary said to Joseph:  I see two
peoples before me, the one weeping, and the other rejoicing.  And Joseph
answered:  Sit still on thy beast, and do not speak superfluous words. 
Then there appeared before them a beautiful boy, clothed in white
raiment, who said to Joseph:  Why didst thou say that the words which
Mary spoke about the two peoples were superfluous?  For she saw the
people of the Jews weeping, because they have departed from their God;
and the people of the Gentiles rejoicing, because they have now been
added and made near to the Lord, according to that which He promised to
our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:  for the time is at hand when in
the seed of Abraham all nations shall be blessed. <span
id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640)

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p5"></span>And when he had thus said, the angel
ordered the beast to stand, for the time when she should bring forth was
at hand; and he commanded the blessed Mary to come down off the animal,
and go into a recess under a cavern, in which there never was light, but
always darkness, because the light of day could not reach it.  And when
the blessed Mary had gone into it, it began to shine with as much
brightness as if it were the sixth hour of the day.  The light from God
so shone in the cave, that neither by day nor night was light wanting as
long as the blessed Mary was there.  And there she brought forth a son,
and the angels surrounded Him when He was being born.  And as soon as He
was born, He stood upon His feet, and the angels adored Him, saying: 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good
pleasure. <span id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641)   Now, when the
birth of the Lord was at hand, Joseph had gone away to seek midwives. 
And when he had found them, he returned to the cave, and found with Mary
the infant which she had brought forth.  And Joseph said to the blessed
Mary:  I have brought thee two midwives—Zelomi <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) and Salome; and they are standing
outside before the entrance to the cave, not daring to come in hither,
because of the exceeding brightness.  And when the blessed Mary heard
this, she smiled; and Joseph said to her:  Do not smile; but prudently
allow them to visit thee, in case thou shouldst require them for thy
cure.  Then she ordered them to enter.  And when Zelomi had come in,
Salome having stayed without, Zelomi said to Mary:  Allow me to touch
thee.  And when she had permitted her to make an examination, the
midwife cried out with a loud voice, and said:  Lord, Lord Almighty,
mercy on us!  It has never been heard or thought of, that any one should
have her breasts full of milk, and that the birth of a son should show
his mother to be a virgin.  But there has been no spilling of blood in
his birth, no pain in bringing him forth.  A virgin has conceived, a
virgin has <span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="vii.v.xiv-Page_375"></span>brought forth, and a virgin she remains. 
And hearing these words, Salome said:  Allow me to handle thee, and
prove whether Zelomi have spoken the truth.  And the blessed Mary
allowed her to handle her.  And when she had withdrawn her hand from
handling her, it dried up, and through excess of pain she began to weep
bitterly, and to be in great distress, crying out, and saying:  O Lord
God, Thou knowest that I have always feared Thee, and that without
recompense I have cared for all the poor; I have taken nothing from the
widow and the orphan, and the needy have I not sent empty away.  And,
behold, I am made wretched because of mine unbelief, since without a
cause I wished to try Thy virgin.

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p8"></span>And while she was thus speaking, there
stood by her a young man in shining garments, saying:  Go to the child,
and adore Him, and touch Him with thy hand, and He will heal thee,
because He is the Saviour of the world, and of all that hope in Him. 
And she went to the child with haste, and adored Him, and touched the
fringe of the cloths in which He was wrapped, and instantly her hand was
cured.  And going forth, she began to cry aloud, and to tell the
wonderful things which she had seen, and which she had suffered, and how
she had been cured; so that many through her statements believed.

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p9"></span>And some shepherds also affirmed that
they had seen angels singing a hymn at midnight, praising and blessing
the God of heaven, and saying:  There has been born the Saviour of all,
who is Christ the Lord, in whom salvation shall be brought back to
Israel. <span id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643)

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p11"></span>Moreover, a great star, larger than any
that had been seen since the beginning of the world, shone over the cave
from the evening till the morning.  And the prophets who were in
Jerusalem said that this star pointed out the birth of Christ, who
should restore the promise not only to Israel, but to all nations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[374:1640](0081191.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="vii.v.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p3"></span> [Luke ii.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span id="vii.v.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[374:1641](0081191.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="vii.v.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p4"></span> [Gen. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003)<span id="vii.v.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[374:1642](0081191.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="vii.v.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p6"></span> See Alford’s Greek Testament on [Luke
ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.v.xiv-p6.1"></span>.  \[So Rev. Version, following the weight of
manuscript authority.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[374:1643](0081191.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="vii.v.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p7"></span> Or Zelemi.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[375:1644](0081191.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="vii.v.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xiv-p10"></span> [Luke ii.
8-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008)<span
id="vii.v.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](0081192)
