[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081223)  [Next](0081225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p2"></span>Now, when he had been there for some
time, on a certain day when he was alone, an angel of the Lord stood by
him in a great light.  And when he was disturbed at his appearance, the
angel who had appeared to him restrained his fear, saying:  Fear not,
Joachim, nor be disturbed by my appearance; for I am the angel of the
Lord, sent by Him to thee to tell thee that thy prayers have been heard,
and that thy charitable deeds have gone up into His presence. <span
id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693)   For He hath seen thy shame, and
hath heard the reproach of unfruitfulness which has been unjustly
brought against thee.  For God is the avenger of sin, not of nature: 
and, therefore, when He shuts up the womb of any one, He does so that He
may miraculously open it again; so that that which is born may be
acknowledged to be not of lust, but of the gift of God.  For was it not
the case that the first mother of your nation—Sarah—was barren up to her
eightieth year? <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694)   And,
nevertheless, in extreme old age she brought forth Isaac, to whom the
promise was renewed of the blessing of all nations.  Rachel also, so
favoured of the Lord, and so beloved by holy Jacob, was long barren; and
yet she brought forth Joseph, who was not only the lord of Egypt, but
the deliverer of many nations who were ready to perish of hunger.  Who
among the judges was either stronger than Samson, or more holy than
Samuel?  And yet the mothers of both were barren.  If, therefore, the
reasonableness of my words does not persuade thee, believe in fact that
conceptions very late in life, and births in the case of women that have
been barren, are usually attended with something wonderful.  Accordingly
thy wife Anna will bring forth a daughter to thee, and thou shalt call
her name Mary:  she shall be, as you have vowed, consecrated to the Lord
from her infancy, and <span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="vii.vi.iii-Page_385"></span>she shall be filled with the Holy
Spirit, even from her mother’s womb.  She shall neither eat nor drink
any unclean thing, nor shall she spend her life among the crowds of the
people without, but in the temple of the Lord, that it may not be
possible either to say, or so much as to suspect, any evil concerning
her.  Therefore, when she has grown up, just as she herself shall be
miraculously born of a barren woman, so in an incomparable manner she, a
virgin, shall bring forth the Son of the Most High, who shall be called
Jesus, and who, according to the etymology of His name, shall be the
Saviour of all nations.  And this shall be the sign to thee of those
things which I announce:  When thou shalt come to the Golden gate in
Jerusalem, thou shalt there meet Anna thy wife, who, lately anxious from
the delay of thy return, will then rejoice at the sight of thee.  Having
thus spoken, the angel departed from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[384:1694](0081224.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="vii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p3"></span> Comp. [Acts x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)<span id="vii.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[384:1695](0081224.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="vii.vi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p4"></span> [Gen. xvii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017)<span id="vii.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>. 
Sarah was ninety years old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](0081225)
