[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081380)  [Next](0081382) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p1"></span> <span id="page_571">p. 571</span> <span
id="vii.xxxix-Page_571"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Revelation of Esdras.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxxix-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>Word and Revelation of Esdras, the Holy
Prophet and Beloved of God.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>It</span> came to pass in the thirtieth year,
on the twenty-second of the month, I was in my house.  And I cried out
and said to the Most High:  Lord, give the glory, <span
id="fr_2488"></span>[2489](#fn_2488) in order that I may see Thy
mysteries.  And when it was night, there came an angel, Michael the
archangel, and says to me:  O Prophet Esdras, refrain from bread for
seventy *weeks*. <span id="fr_2489"></span>[2490](#fn_2489)   And I
fasted as he told me.  And there came Raphael the commander of the host,
and gave me a storax rod.  And I fasted twice sixty <span
id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490) weeks.  And I saw the mysteries of
God and His angels.  And I said to them:  I wish to plead before God
about the race of the Christians.  It is good for a man not to be born
rather than to come into the world.  I was therefore taken up into
heaven, and I saw in the first heaven a great army of angels; and they
took me to the judgments.  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Have mercy
on us, O thou chosen of God, Esdras.  Then began I to say:  Woe to
sinners when they see one who is just more than the angels, and they
themselves are in the Gehenna of fire!  And Esdras said:  Have mercy on
the works of Thine hands, Thou who art compassionate, and of great
mercy.  Judge me rather than the souls of the sinners; for it is better
that one soul should be punished, and that the whole world should not
come to destruction.  And God said:  I will give rest in paradise to the
righteous, and I have become <span id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491)
merciful.  And Esdras said:  Lord, why dost Thou confer benefits on the
righteous? for just as one who has been hired out, and has served out
his time, goes and again works as a slave when he come to his masters,
so also the righteous has received his reward in the heavens.  But have
mercy on the sinners, for we know that Thou art merciful.  And God
said:  I do not see how I can have mercy upon them.  And Esdras said: 
They cannot endure Thy wrath.  And God said:  This is *the fate* of
such.  And God said:  I wish to have thee like Paul and John, as thou
hast given me uncorrupted the treasure that cannot be stolen, the
treasure of virginity, the bulwark <span
id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492) of men.  And Esdras said:  It is
good for a man not to be born.  It is good not to be in life.  The
irrational *creatures* are better than man, because they have no
punishment; but Thou hast taken us, and given us up to judgment.  Woe to
the sinners in the world to come! because their judgment is endless, and
the flame unquenchable.  And while I was thus speaking to him, there
came Michael and Gabriel, and all the apostles; and they said:  Rejoice,
O faithful man of God!  And Esdras said: <span
id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493)   Arise, and come hither with me, O
Lord, to judgment.  And the Lord said:  Behold, I give thee my covenant
between me and thee, that you may receive it.  And Esdras said:  Let us
plead in Thy hearing. <span id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494)   And
God said:  Ask Abraham your father how a son pleads with his
father, <span id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495) and come plead with
us.  And Esdras said:  As the Lord liveth, I will not cease pleading
with Thee in behalf of the race of the Christians.  Where are Thine
ancient compassions, O Lord?  Where is Thy long-suffering?  And God
said:  As I have made night and day, I have made the righteous and the
sinner; and he should have lived like the righteous.  And the prophet
said:  Who made Adam the first-formed?  And God said:  My undefiled
hands.  And I put him in paradise to guard the food of the tree of life;
and thereafter he became disobedient, and did this in transgression. 
And the prophet said:  Was he not protected by an angel? and was not his
life guarded by the cherubim to endless ages? and how was he deceived
who was guarded by angels? for Thou didst command all to be present, and
to attend to <span id="page_572">p. 572</span> <span
id="vii.xxxix-Page_572"></span>what was said by Thee. <span
id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496)   But if Thou hadst not given him
Eve, the serpent would not have deceived her; <span
id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497) but whom Thou wilt Thou savest, and
whom Thou wilt Thou destroyest. <span
id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498)   And the prophet said:  Let us
come, my Lord, to a second judgment.  And God said:  I cast fire upon
Sodom and Gomorrah.  And the prophet said:  Lord, Thou dealest with us
according to our deserts.  And God said:  Your sins transcend my
clemency.  And the prophet said:  Call to mind the Scriptures, my
Father, who hast measured out Jerusalem, and set her up again.  Have
mercy, O Lord, upon sinners; have mercy upon Thine own creatures; <span
id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499) have pity upon Thy works.  Then God
remembered those whom He had made, and said to the prophet:  How can I
have mercy upon them?  Vinegar and gall did they give me to drink, <span
id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500) and not even then did they repent. 
And the prophet said:  Reveal Thy cherubim, and let us go together to
judgment; and show me the day of judgment, what like it is.  And God
said:  Thou hast been deceived, Esdras; for such is the day of judgment
as that in which there is no rain upon the earth; for it is a merciful
tribunal as compared with that day.  And the prophet said:  I will not
cease to plead with Thee, unless I see the day of the consummation.  And
God said: <span id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501)   Number the stars
and the sand of the sea; and if thou shalt be able to number this, thou
art also able to plead with me.  And the prophet said:  Lord, Thou
knowest that I wear human flesh; and how can I count the stars of the
heaven, and the sand of the sea?  And God said:  My chosen prophet, no
man will know that great day and the appearing <span
id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502) that comes to judge the world.  For
thy sake, my prophet, I have told thee the day; but the hour have I not
told thee.  And the prophet said:  Lord, tell me also the years.  And
God said:  If I see the righteousness of the world, that it has
abounded, I will have patience with them; but if not, I will stretch
forth my hand, and lay hold of the world by the four quarters, and bring
them all together into the valley of Jehoshaphat, <span
id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503) and I will wipe out the race of
men, so that the world shall be no more.  And the prophet said:  And how
can Thy right hand be glorified?  And God said:  I shall be glorified by
my angels.  And the prophet said:  Lord, if Thou hast resolved to do
this, why didst Thou make man?  Thou didst say to our father
Abraham, <span id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504) Multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand that is by
the sea-shore; <span id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505) and where is
Thy promise?  And God said:  First will I make an earthquake for the
fall of four-footed beasts and of men; and when you see that brother
gives up brother to death, and that children shall rise up against their
parents, and that a woman forsakes her own husband, and when nation
shall rise up against nation in war, then will you know that the end is
near. <span id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506)

<span id="vii.xxxix-p24"></span>For then neither brother pities brother,
nor man wife, nor children parents, nor friends friends, nor a slave his
master; for he who is the adversary of men shall come up from Tartarus,
and shall show men many things.  What shall I make of thee, Esdras? and
wilt thou yet plead with me?  And the prophet said:  Lord, I shall not
cease to plead with Thee.  And God said:  Number the flowers of the
earth.  If thou shalt be able to number them, thou art able also to
plead with me.  And the prophet said:  Lord, I cannot number *them*.  I
wear human flesh; but I shall not cease to plead with Thee.  I wish,
Lord, to see also the under parts of Tartarus.  And God said:  Come down
and see.  And He gave me Michael, and Gabriel, and other thirty-four
angels; and I went down eighty-five steps, and they brought me down five
hundred steps, and I saw a fiery throne, and an old man sitting upon it;
and his judgment was merciless.  And I said to the angels:  Who is this?
and what is his sin?  And they said to me:  This is Herod, who for a
time was a king, and ordered to put to death the children from two years
old and under. <span id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507)   And I said: 
Woe to his soul!  And again they took me down thirty steps, and I there
saw boilings up of fire, and in them *there was* a multitude of sinners;
and I heard their voice, but saw not their forms.  And they took me down
lower many steps, which I could not measure.  And I there saw old men,
and fiery pivots turning in their ears.  And I said:  Who are these? and
what is their sin?  And they said to me:  These are they who would not
listen. <span id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508)   And they took me
down again other five hundred steps, and I there saw the worm that
sleeps not, and fire burning up the sinners.  And they took me down to
the lowest part of destruction, and I saw there the twelve plagues of
the abyss.  And they took me away to the south, and I saw there a man
hanging by the eyelids; and the angels kept scourging him.  And I
asked:  Who is this? and what is his sin?  And Michael the commander
said to me:  This is one who lay with his mother; for having put into
practice a small wish, he has been ordered to be hanged.  And they took
me away to the north, and I saw there a man bound with iron chains.  And
I asked:  Who is this?  And he said to me:  This is he who <span
id="page_573">p. 573</span> <span id="vii.xxxix-Page_573"></span>said, I
am the Son of God, that made stones bread, and water wine.  And the
prophet said:  My lord, let me know what is his form, and I shall tell
the race of men, that they may not believe in him.  And he said to me: 
The form of his countenance is like that of a wild beast; his right eye
like the star that rises in the morning, and the other without motion;
his mouth one cubit; his teeth span long; his fingers like scythes; the
track of his feet of two spans; and in his face an inscription,
Antichrist.  He has been exalted to heaven; he shall go down to
Hades. <span id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509)   At one time he shall
become a child; at another, an old man.  And the prophet said:  Lord,
and how dost Thou permit him, and he deceives the race of men?  And God
said:  Listen, my prophet.  He becomes both child and old man, and no
one believes him that he is my beloved Son.  And after this a trumpet,
and the tombs shall be opened, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible. <span id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510)   Then the
adversary, hearing the dreadful threatening, shall be hidden in outer
darkness.  Then the heaven, and the earth, and the sea shall be
destroyed.  Then shall I burn the heaven eighty cubits, and the earth
eight hundred cubits.  And the prophet said:  And how has the heaven
sinned?  And God said:  Since <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511)
…there is evil.  And the prophet said:  Lord, and the earth, how has it
sinned?  And God said:  Since the adversary, having heard the dreadful
threatening, shall be hidden, even on account of this will I melt the
earth, and with it the opponent of the race of men.  And the prophet
said:  Have mercy, Lord, upon the race of the Christians.  And I saw a
woman hanging, and four wild beasts sucking her breasts.  And the angels
said to me:  She grudged to give her milk, but even threw her infants
into the rivers.  And I saw a dreadful darkness, and a night that had no
stars nor moon; nor is there there young or old, nor brother with
brother, nor mother with child, nor wife with husband.  And I wept, and
said:  O Lord God, have mercy upon the sinners.  And as I said this,
there came a cloud and snatched me up, and carried me away again into
the heavens.  And I saw there many judgments; and I wept bitterly, and
said:  It is good for a man not to have come out of his mother’s womb. 
And those who were in torment cried out, saying:  Since thou hast come
hither, O holy one of God, we have found a little remission.  And the
prophet said:  Blessed are they that weep for their sins.  And God
said:  Hear, O beloved Esdras.  As a husbandman casts the seed of the
corn into the ground, so also the man casts his seed into the parts of
the woman.  The first *month* it is all together; the second it
increases in size; the third it gets hair; the fourth it gets nails; the
fifth it is turned into milk; <span id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512)
and the sixth it is made ready, and receives life; <span
id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) the seventh it is completely
furnished; the ninth the barriers of the gate of the woman are opened;
and it is born safe and sound into the earth.  And the prophet said: 
Lord, it is good for man not to have been born.  Woe to the human race
then, when Thou shalt come to judgment!  And I said to the Lord:  Lord,
why hast Thou created man, and delivered him up to judgment?  And God
said, with a lofty proclamation:  I will not by any means have mercy on
those who transgress my covenant.  And the prophet said:  Lord, where is
Thy goodness?  And God said:  I have prepared all things for man’s sake,
and man does not keep my commandments.  And the prophet said:  Lord,
reveal to me the judgments and paradise.  And the angels took me away
towards the east, and I saw the tree of life.  And I saw there Enoch,
and Elias, and Moses, and Peter, and Paul, and Luke, and Matthias, and
all the righteous, and the patriarchs.  And I saw there the keeping of
the air within bounds, and the blowing of the winds, and the storehouses
of the ice, and the eternal judgments.  And I saw there a man hanging by
the skull.  And they said to me:  This man removed landmarks.  And I saw
there great judgments. <span id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514)   And
I said to the Lord:  O Lord God, and what man, then, who has been born
has not sinned?  And they took me lower down into Tartarus, and I saw
all the sinners lamenting and weeping and mourning bitterly.  And I also
wept, seeing the race of men thus tormented.  Then God says to me: 
Knowest thou, Esdras, the names of the angels at the end of the world? 
Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, Raphael, Gabuthelon, Aker, Arphugitonos,
Beburos, Zebuleon.

<span id="vii.xxxix-p33"></span>Then there came a voice to me:  Come
hither and die, Esdras, my beloved; give that which hath been entrusted
to thee. <span id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515)   And the prophet
said:  And whence can you bring forth my soul?  And the angels said:  We
can put it forth through the mouth.  And the prophet said:  Mouth to
mouth have I spoken with God, <span id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516)
and it comes not forth thence.  And the angels said:  Let us bring it
out through thy nostrils.  And the prophet said:  My nostrils have
smelled the sweet savour of the glory of God.  And the angels said:  We
can bring it out through thine eyes.  And the prophet said:  Mine eyes
have seen the back parts of God. <span
id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517)   And the angels said:  We can
bring it out through the crown of thy head.  <span id="page_574">p.
574</span> <span id="vii.xxxix-Page_574"></span>And the prophet said:  I
walked about with Moses also on the mountain, and it comes not forth
thence.  And the angels said:  We can put it forth through the points of
thy nails.  And the prophet said:  My feet also have walked about on the
altar.  And the angels went away without having done anything, saying: 
Lord, we cannot get his soul.  Then He says to His only begotten Son: 
Go down, my beloved Son, with a great host of angels, and take the soul
of my beloved Esdras.  For the Lord, having taken a great host of
angels, says to the prophet:  Give me the trust which I entrusted to
thee; the crown has been prepared for thee. <span
id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518)   And the prophet said:  Lord, if
Thou take my soul from me, who will be left to plead with Thee for the
race of men?  And God said:  As thou art mortal, and of the earth, do
not plead with me.  And the prophet said:  I will not cease to plead. 
And God said:  Give up just now the trust; the crown has been prepared
for thee.  Come and die, that thou mayst obtain it.  Then the prophet
began to say with tears:  O Lord, what good have I done pleading with
Thee, and I am going to fall down into the earth?  Woe’s me, woe’s me,
that I am going to be eaten up by worms!  Weep, all ye saints and ye
righteous, for me, who have pleaded much, and who am delivered up to
death.  Weep for me, all ye saints and ye righteous, because I have gone
to the pit of Hades.  And God said to him:  Hear, Esdras, my beloved. 
I, who am immortal, endured a cross; I tasted vinegar and gall; I was
laid in a tomb, and I raised up my chosen ones; I called Adam up out of
Hades, that *I might save* <span id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519)
the race of men.  Do not therefore be afraid of death:  for that which
is from me—that is to say, the soul—goes to heaven; and that which is
from the earth—that is to say, the body—goes to the earth, from which it
was taken. <span id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520)   And the prophet
said:  Woe’s me! woe’s me! what shall I set about? what shall I do? I
know not.  And then the blessed Esdras began to say:  O eternal God, the
Maker of the whole creation, who hast measured the heaven with a span,
and who holdest the earth as a handful, <span
id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521) who ridest upon the cherubim, who
didst take the prophet Elias to the heavens in a chariot of fire, <span
id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522) who givest food to all flesh, whom
all things dread and tremble at from the face of Thy power,—listen to
me, who have pleaded much, and give to all who transcribe this book, and
have it, and remember my name, and honour my memory, give them a
blessing from heaven; and bless him <span
id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523) in all things, as Thou didst bless
Joseph at last, and remember not his former wickedness in the day of his
judgment.  And as many as have not believed this book shall be burnt up
like Sodom and Gomorrah.  And there came to him a voice, saying: 
Esdras, my beloved, all things whatever thou hast asked will I give to
each one.  And immediately he gave up his precious soul with much
honour, in the month of October, on the twenty-eighth.  And they
prepared him for burial with incense and psalms; and his precious and
sacred body dispenses strength of soul and body perpetually to those who
have recourse to him from a longing desire.  To whom is due glory,
strength, honour, and adoration,—to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2488"></span>[571:2489](0081381.htm#fr_2488) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p5"></span> i.e., reveal.

<span id="fn_2489"></span>[571:2490](0081381.htm#fr_2489) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p6"></span> Supplied by Tischendorf.  Perhaps it
should be days.

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[571:2491](0081381.htm#fr_2490) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p7"></span> Perhaps this should be five—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxix-p7.1"></span>έ</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxix-p7.2"></span>ξ</span>—which would make
seventy days, as above.

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[571:2492](0081381.htm#fr_2491) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p8"></span> Or, I am.

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[571:2493](0081381.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p9"></span> Lit., wall.

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[571:2494](0081381.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p10"></span> Tischendorf supplies this clause from
conjecture, and adds that some more seems to have fallen out.

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[571:2495](0081381.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p11"></span> Lit., to Thine ear.

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[571:2496](0081381.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p12"></span> This seems to be the meaning of the
text, which is somewhat corrupt.  It obviously refers to Abraham
pleading for Sodom.

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[572:2497](0081381.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p13"></span> This passage is very corrupt in the
text; but a few emendations bring out the meaning above.

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[572:2498](0081381.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p14"></span> Better, him.

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[572:2499](0081381.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p15"></span> Comp. [Exod.
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019), [Rom.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xxxix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[572:2500](0081381.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p16"></span> Lit., framing, or fashioning.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[572:2501](0081381.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p17"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)<span id="vii.xxxix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[572:2502](0081381.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p18"></span> This is inserted by Tischendorf.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[572:2503](0081381.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p19"></span> Comp. [2 Tim.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008), [Titus
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xxxix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[572:2504](0081381.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p20"></span> [Joel
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxxix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[572:2505](0081381.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p21"></span> [Gen. xxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[572:2506](0081381.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p22"></span> Lit., the lip of the sea.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[572:2507](0081381.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p23"></span> Comp. [Matt.
xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xxxix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[572:2508](0081381.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p25"></span> [Matt. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxxix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[572:2509](0081381.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p26"></span> Or, who heard wrong.

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[573:2510](0081381.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p27"></span> Comp. [Matt. xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxxix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[573:2511](0081381.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p28"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="vii.xxxix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[573:2512](0081381.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p29"></span> There is something wanting here in the
text.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[573:2513](0081381.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p30"></span> So in the text.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[573:2514](0081381.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p31"></span> Or, the soul.

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[573:2515](0081381.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p32"></span> Or, tribunals.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[573:2516](0081381.htm#fr_2515) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p34"></span> Or, thy trust, or pledge.  Comp. [1
Tim. 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020), [2 Tim.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxxix-p34.1"></span>, in Textus Receptus.

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[573:2517](0081381.htm#fr_2516) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p35"></span> Comp. [Deut. xxxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010)<span id="vii.xxxix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[573:2518](0081381.htm#fr_2517) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p36"></span> Comp. [Ex. xxxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxxix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[574:2519](0081381.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p37"></span> Comp. [2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxxix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[574:2520](0081381.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p38"></span> The word is wanting in the <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxix-p38.1"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[574:2521](0081381.htm#fr_2520) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p39"></span> [Eccles. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxxix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[574:2522](0081381.htm#fr_2521) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p40"></span> Or, in a measure.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxix-p40.1"></span>Δρακήν</span> in the
text should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxix-p40.2"></span>δρακά</span>.  Comp. [Isa. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxxix-p40.3"></span>
in the LXX.

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[574:2523](0081381.htm#fr_2522) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p40.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p41"></span> Comp. [1 Kings
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#011), [Sir.
48:9](../../../bib/apo/sir048.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxxix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[574:2524](0081381.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="vii.xxxix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxix-p42"></span> So the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxix-p42.1"></span>ms.</span>  Perhaps *them* would be better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation of Paul.](0081382)
