[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081354)  [Next](0081356) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="vii.xxiv-Page_472"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>The Avenging of the Saviour.</span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxiv-p3"></span>This version of the legend of Veronica is
written in very barbarous Latin, probably of the seventh or eighth
century.  An Anglo-Saxon version, which Tischendorf concludes to be
derived from the Latin, was edited and translated for the Cambridge
Antiquarian Society, by C. W. Goodwin, in 1851.  The Anglo-Saxon text is
from a <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> in
the Cambridge Library, one of a number presented to the Cathedral of
Exeter by Bishop Leofric in the beginning of the eleventh century.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p4"></span>The reader will observe that there are in
this document two distinct legends, somewhat clumsily joined
together—that of Nathan’s embassy, and that of Veronica.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxiv-p6"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>Here Beginneth the Avenging of the
Saviour.</span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p7"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>In</span> the days of the Emperor Tiberius
Cæsar, when Herod was tetrarch, Christ was delivered under Pontius
Pilate by the Jews, and revealed by Tiberius.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p8"></span>In those days Titus <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) was a prince under Tiberius in the
region of Equitania, in a city of Libia which is called Burgidalla.  And
Titus had a sore in his right nostril, on account of a cancer, and he
had his face torn even to the eye.  There went forth a certain man from
Judæa, by name Nathan the son of Nahum; for he was an Ishmaelite who
went from land to land, and from sea to sea, and in all the ends of the
earth.  Now Nathan was sent from Judæa to the Emperor Tiberius, to carry
their treaty to the city of Rome.  And Tiberius was ill, and full of
ulcers and fevers, and had nine kinds of leprosy.  And Nathan wished to
go to the city of Rome.  But the north wind blew and hindered his
sailing, and carried him down to the harbour of a city of Libia.  Now
Titus, seeing the ship coming, knew that it was from Judæa; and they all
wondered, and said that they had never seen any vessel so coming from
that quarter.  And Titus ordered the captain to come to him, and asked
him who he was.  And he said:  I am Nathan the son of Nahum, of the race
of the Ishmaelites, and I am a subject of Pontius Pilate in Judæa.  And
I have been sent to go to Tiberius the Roman emperor, to carry a treaty
from Judæa.  And a strong wind came down upon the sea, and has brought
me to a country that I do not know.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p10"></span>And Titus says:  If thou couldst at any
time find anything either of cosmetics or herbs which could cure the
wound that I have in my face, as thou seest, so that I should become
whole, and regain my former health, I should bestow upon thee many good
things.  And Nathan said to him:  I do not know, nor have I ever known,
of such things as thou speakest to me about.  But for all that, if thou
hadst been some time ago in Jerusalem, there thou wouldst have found a
choice prophet, whose name was Emanuel, for He will save His people from
their sins.  And He, as His first miracle in Cana of Galilee, made wine
from water; and by His word He cleansed lepers, He enlightened the eyes
of one born blind, He healed paralytics, He made demons flee, He raised
up three dead; a woman caught in adultery, and condemned by the Jews to
be stoned, He set free; and another woman, named Veronica, who suffered
twelve years from an issue of blood, and came up to Him behind, and
touched the fringe of His garment, He healed; and with five loaves and
two fishes He satisfied five thousand men, to say nothing of little ones
and women, and there remained of the fragments twelve baskets.  All
these things, and many others, were accomplished before His passion. 
After His resurrection we saw Him in the flesh as He had been before. 
And Titus said to Him:  How did he rise again from the dead, seeing that
he was dead?  And Nathan answered <span id="page_473">p. 473</span>
<span id="vii.xxiv-Page_473"></span>and said:  He was manifestly dead,
and hung up on the cross, and again taken down from the cross, and for
three days He lay in the tomb:  thereafter He rose again from the dead,
and went down to Hades, and freed the patriarchs and the prophets, and
the whole human race; thereafter He appeared to His disciples, and ate
with them; thereafter they saw Him going up into heaven.  And so it is
the truth, all this that I tell you.  For I saw it with my own eyes, and
all the house of Israel.  And Titus said in his own words:  Woe to thee,
O Emperor Tiberius, full of ulcers, and enveloped in leprosy, because
such a scandal has been committed in thy kingdom; because thou hast made
such laws <span id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048) in Judæa, in the
land of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, and they have seized the
King, and put to death the Ruler of the peoples; and they have not made
Him come to us to cure thee of thy leprosy, and cleanse me from mine
infirmity:  on which account, if they had been before my face, with my
own hands I should have slain the carcases of those Jews, and hung them
up on the cruel tree, because they have destroyed my Lord, and mine eyes
have not been worthy to see His face.  And when he had thus spoken,
immediately the wound fell from the face of Titus, and his flesh and his
face were restored to health.  And all the sick who were in the same
place were made whole in that hour.  And Titus cried out, and all the
rest with him, in a loud voice, saying:  My King and my God, because I
have never seen Thee, and Thou hast made me whole, bid me go with the
ship over the waters to the land of Thy birth, to take vengeance on
Thine enemies; and help me, O Lord, that I may be able to destroy them,
and avenge Thy death:  do Thou, Lord, deliver them into my hand.  And
having thus spoken, he ordered that he should be baptized.  And he
called Nathan to him, and said to him:  How hast thou seen those
baptized who believe in Christ?  Come to me, and baptize me in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  Amen. <span
id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049)   For I also firmly believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ with all my heart, and with all my soul; because
nowhere in the whole world is there another who has created me, and made
me whole from my wounds.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p13"></span>And having thus spoken, he sent
messengers to Vespasian to come with all haste with his bravest men, so
prepared as if for war.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p14"></span>Then Vespasian brought with him five
thousand armed men, and they went to meet Titus.  And when they had come
to the city of Libia, he said to Titus:  Why is it that thou hast made
me come hither?  And he said:  Know that Jesus has come into this world,
and has been born in Judæa, in a place which is called Bethlehem, and
has been given up by the Jews, and scourged, and crucified on Mount
Calvary, <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050) and has risen again
from the dead on the third day.  And His disciples have seen Him in the
same flesh in which he was born, and He has shown Himself to His
disciples, and they have believed in Him.  And we indeed wish to become
His disciples.  Now, let us go and destroy His enemies from the earth,
that they may now know that there is none like the Lord our God on the
face of the earth.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p16"></span>With this design, then, they went forth
from the city of Libia which is called Burgidalla, <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) and went on board a ship, and
proceeded to Jerusalem, and surrounded the kingdom of the Jews, and
began to send them to destruction.  And when the kings of the Jews heard
of their doings, and the wasting of their land, fear came upon them, and
they were in great perplexity.  Then Archelaus <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052) was perplexed in his words, and
said to his son:  My son, take my kingdom and judge it; and take counsel
with the other kings who are in the land of Judah, that you may be able
to escape from our enemies.  And having thus said, he unsheathed his
sword and leant upon it; and turned his sword, which was very sharp, and
thrust it into his breast, and died.  And his son allied himself with
the other kings who were under him, and they took counsel among
themselves, and went into Jerusalem with their chief men who were in
their counsel, and stood in the same place seven years.  And Titus and
Vespasian took counsel to surround their city.  And they did so.  And
the seven years being fulfilled, there was a very sore famine, and for
want of bread they began to eat earth.  Then all the soldiers who were
of the four kings took counsel among themselves, and said:  Now we are
sure to die:  what will God do to us? or of what good is our life to us,
because the Romans have come to take our place and nation?  It is better
for us to kill each other, than that the Romans should say that they
have slain us, and gained the victory over us.  And they drew their
swords and smote themselves, and died, to the number of twelve thousand
men of them.  Then there was a great stench in that city from the
corpses of those dead men.  And their kings feared with a very great
fear even unto death; and they could not bear the stench of them, nor
bury them, nor throw them forth out of the city.  And they <span
id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span id="vii.xxiv-Page_474"></span>said to
each other:  What shall we do?  We indeed gave up Christ to death, and
now we given up to death ourselves.  Let us bow our heads, and give up
the keys of the city to the Romans, because God has already given us up
to death.  And immediately they went up upon the walls of the city, and
all cried out with a loud voice, saying:  Titus and Vespasian, take the
keys of the city, which have been given to you by Messiah, who is called
Christ.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p19"></span>Then they gave themselves up into the
hands of Titus and Vespasian, and said:  Judge us, seeing that we ought
to die, because we judged Christ; and he was given up without cause. 
Titus and Vespasian seized them, and some they stoned, and some they
hanged on a tree, feet up and head down, and struck them through with
lances; and others they gave up to be sold, and others they divided
among themselves, and made four parts of them, just as they had done of
the garments of the Lord.  And they said:  They sold Christ for thirty
pieces of silver, and we shall sell thirty of them for one denarius. 
And so they did.  And having done so, they seized all the lands of Judæa
and Jerusalem.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p20"></span>Then they made a search about the face or
portrait <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053) of Jesus, how they
might find it. <span id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054)   And they
found a woman named Veronica who had it.  Then they seized Pilate, and
sent him to prison, to be guarded by four quaternions of soldiers at the
door of the prison.  Then they forthwith sent their messengers to
Tiberius, the emperor of the city of Rome, that he should send
Velosianus to them.  And he said to him:  Take all that is necessary for
thee in the sea, and go down into Judæa, and seek out one of the
disciples of him who is called Christ and Lord, that he may come to me,
and in the name of his God cure me of the leprosy and the infirmities by
which I am daily exceedingly burdened, and of my wounds, because I am
ill at ease.  And send upon the kings of the Jews, who are subject to my
authority, thy forces and terrible engines, because they have put to
death Jesus Christ our Lord, and condemn them to death.  And if thou
shalt there find a man as may be able to free me from this infirmity of
mine, I will believe in Christ the Son of God, and will baptize myself
in his name.  And Velosianus said:  My lord emperor, if I find such a
man as may be able to help and free us, what reward shall I promise
him?  Tiberius said to him: The half of my kingdom, without fail, to be
in his hand.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p23"></span>Then Velosianus immediately went forth,
and went on board the ship, and hoisted the sail in the vessel, and went
on sailing through the sea.  And he sailed a year and seven days, after
which he arrived at Jerusalem.  And immediately he ordered some of the
Jews to come to his power, and began carefully to ask what had been the
acts of Christ.  Then Joseph, of the city of Arimathæa, and Nicodemus,
came at the same time.  And Nicodemus said:  I saw Him, and I know
indeed that He is the Saviour of the world.  And Joseph said to him: 
And I took Him down from the cross, and laid Him in a new tomb, which
had been cut out of the rock.  And the Jews kept me shut up on the day
of the preparation, at evening; and while I was standing in prayer on
the Sabbath-day, the house was hung up by the four corners, and I saw
the Lord Jesus Christ like a gleam of light, and for fear I fell to the
ground.  And He said to me, Look upon me, for I am Jesus, whose body
thou buriedst in thy tomb.  And I said to Him, Show me the sepulchre
where I laid Thee.  And Jesus, holding my hand in His right hand, led me
to the place where I buried Him. <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055)

<span id="vii.xxiv-p25"></span>And there came also the woman named
Veronica, and said to him:  And I touched in the crowd the fringe of His
garment, because for twelve years I had suffered from an issue of blood;
and He immediately healed me.  Then Velosianus said to Pilate:  Thou,
Pilate, impious and cruel, why hast thou slain the Son of God?  And
Pilate answered:  His own nation, and the chief priests Annas and
Caiaphas, gave him to me.  Velosianus said:  Impious and cruel, thou art
worthy of death and cruel punishment.  And he sent him back to prison. 
And Velosianus at last sought for the face or the countenance of the
Lord.  And all who were in that same place said:  It is the woman called
Veronica who has the portrait of the Lord in her house.  And immediately
he ordered her to be brought before his power.  And he said to her: 
Hast thou the portrait of the Lord in thy house?  But she said, No. 
Then Velosianus ordered her to be put to the torture, until she should
give up the portrait of the Lord.  And she was forced to say:  I have it
in clean linen, my lord, and I daily adore it.  Velosianus said:  Show
it to me.  Then she showed the portrait of the Lord.  When Velosianus
saw it, he prostrated himself on the ground; and with a ready heart and
true faith he took hold of it, and wrapped it in cloth of gold, and
placed it in a casket, and sealed it with his ring.  And he swore with
an oath, and said:  As the Lord God liveth, and by the health <span
id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span id="vii.xxiv-Page_475"></span>of
Cæsar, no man shall any more see it upon the face of the earth, until I
see the face of my lord Tiberius.  And when he had thus spoken, the
princes, who were the chief men of Judæa, seized Pilate to take him to a
seaport.  And he took the portrait of the Lord, with all His disciples,
and all in his pay, and they went on board the ship the same day.  Then
the woman Veronica, for the love of Christ, left all that she possessed,
and followed Velosianus.  And Velosianus said to her:  What dost thou
wish, woman, or what dost thou seek?  And she answered:  I am seeking
the portrait of our Lord Jesus Christ, who enlightened me, not for my
own merits, but through His own holy affection. <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056)   Give back to me the portrait of
my Lord Jesus Christ; for because of this I die with a righteous
longing.  But if thou do not give it back to me, I will not leave it
until I see where thou wilt put it, because I, most miserable woman that
I am, will serve Him all the days of my life; because I believe that He,
my Redeemer, liveth for everlasting.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p27"></span>Then Velosianus ordered the woman
Veronica to be taken down with him into the ship.  And the sails being
hoisted, they began to go in the vessel in the name of the Lord, and
they sailed through the sea.  But Titus, along with Vespasian, went up
into Judæa, avenging all nations upon their land. <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057)   At the end of a year Velosianus
came to the city of Rome, brought his vessel into the river which is
called Tiberis, or Tiber, and entered the city which is called Rome. 
And he sent his messenger to his lord Tiberius the emperor in the
Lateran about his prosperous arrival.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p29"></span>Then Tiberius the emperor, when he heard
the message of Velosianus, rejoiced greatly, and ordered him to come
before his face.  And when he had come, he called him, saying: 
Velosianus, how hast thou come, and what hast thou seen in the region of
Judæa of Christ the Lord and his disciples?  Tell me, I beseech thee,
that he is going to cure me of mine infirmity, that I may be at once
cleansed from that leprosy which I have over my body, and I give up my
whole kingdom into thy power and his.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p30"></span>And Velosianus said:  My lord emperor, I
found thy servants Titus and Vespasian in Judæa fearing the Lord, and
they were cleansed from all their ulcers and sufferings.  And I found
that all the kings and rulers of Judæa have been hanged by Titus; Annas
and Caiaphas have been stoned, Archelaus has killed himself with his own
lance; and I have sent Pilate to Damascus in bonds, and kept him in
prison under safe keeping.  But I have also found out about Jesus, whom
the Jews most wickedly attacked with swords, and staves, and weapons;
and they crucified him who ought to have freed and enlightened us, and
to have come to us, and they hanged him on a tree.  And Joseph came from
Arimathæa, and Nicodemus with him, bringing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, about a hundred pounds, to anoint the body of Jesus; and they
took him down from the cross, and laid him in a new tomb.  And on the
third day he most assuredly rose again from the dead, and showed himself
to his disciples in the same flesh in which he had been born.  At
length, after forty days, they saw him going up into heaven.  Many,
indeed, and other miracles did Jesus before his passion and after. 
First, of water he made wine; he raised the dead, he cleansed lepers, he
enlightened the blind, he cured paralytics, he put demons to flight; he
made the deaf hear, the dumb speak; Lazarus, when four days dead, he
raised from the tomb; the woman Veronica, who suffered from an issue of
blood twelve years, and touched the fringe of his garment, he made
whole.  Then it pleased the Lord in the heavens, that the Son of God,
who, sent into this world as the first-created, had died upon earth,
should send his angel; and he commanded Titus and Vespasian, whom I knew
in that place where thy throne is.  And it pleased God Almighty that
they went into Judæa and Jerusalem, and seized thy subjects, and put
them under that sentence, as it were, in the same manner as they did
when thy subjects seized Jesus and bound him.  And Vespasian afterwards
said:  What shall we do about those who shall remain?  Titus answered: 
They hanged our Lord on a green tree, and struck him with a lance; now
let us hang them on a dry tree, and pierce their bodies through and
through with the lance.  And they did so.  And Vespasian said:  What
about those who are left?  Titus answered:  They seized the tunic of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and of it made four parts; now let us seize them, and
divide them into four parts,—to thee one, to me one, to thy men another,
and to my servants the fourth part.  And they did so.  And Vespasian
said:  But what shall we do about those who are left?  Titus answered
him:  The Jews sold our Lord for thirty pieces of silver:  now let us
sell thirty of them for one piece of silver.  And they did so.  And they
seized Pilate, and gave him up to me, and I put him in prison, to be
guarded by four quaternions of soldiers in Damascus.  Then they made a
search with great diligence to seek the portrait of the Lord; and they
found a woman named Veronica who had the portrait of the Lord.  Then the
<span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="vii.xxiv-Page_476"></span>Emperor Tiberius said to Velosianus:  How
hast thou it?  And he answered:  I have it in clean cloth of gold,
rolled up in a shawl.  And the Emperor Tiberius said:  Bring it to me,
and spread it before my face, that I, falling to the ground and bending
my knees, may adore it on the ground.  Then Velosianus spread out his
shawl with the cloth of gold on which the portrait of the Lord had been
imprinted; and the Emperor Tiberius saw it.  And he immediately adored
the image of the Lord with a pure heart, and his flesh was cleansed as
the flesh of a little child.  And all the blind, the lepers, the lame,
the dumb, the deaf, and those possessed by various diseases, who were
there present, were healed, and cured, and cleansed.  And the Emperor
Tiberius bowed his head and bent his knees, considering that saying: 
Blessed is the womb which bore Thee, and the breasts which Thou hast
sucked; and he groaned to the Lord, saying with tears:  God of heaven
and earth, do not permit me to sin, but confirm my soul and my body, and
place me in Thy kingdom, because in Thy name do I trust always:  free me
from all evils, as Thou didst free the three children from the furnace
of blazing fire.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p31"></span>Then said the Emperor Tiberius to
Velosianus:  Velosianus, hast thou seen any of those men who saw
Christ?  Velosianus answered:  I have.  He said:  Didst thou ask how
they baptize those who believed in Christ?  Velosianus said:  Here, my
Lord, we have one of the disciples of Christ himself.  Then he ordered
Nathan to be summoned to come to him.  Nathan therefore came and
baptized him in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.  Amen.  Immediately the Emperor Tiberius, made whole from all his
diseases, ascended upon his throne, and said:  Blessed art Thou, O Lord
God Almighty, and worthy to be praised, who hast freed me from the snare
of death, and cleansed me from all mine iniquities; because I have
greatly sinned before Thee, O Lord my God, and I am not worthy to see
Thy face.  And then the Emperor Tiberius was instructed in all the
articles of the faith, fully, and with strong faith.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p32"></span>May that same God Almighty, who is King
of kings and Lord of lords, Himself shield us in His faith, and defend
us, and deliver us from all danger and evil, and deign to bring us to
life everlasting, when this life, which is temporary, shall fail; who is
blessed for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[472:2048](0081355.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p9"></span> The Saxon version has Tirus.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[473:2049](0081355.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p11"></span> *Reges*, kings, instead of *leges*, as
suggested by Mr. Cowper, is a much better reading.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[473:2050](0081355.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p12"></span> Sax.:  Then Nathan came, and baptized
him in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and took
away from him his name of Tirus, and called him in his baptism Titus,
which is in our language Pius.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[473:2051](0081355.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p15"></span> Note this popular but erroneous
appellation of Mount.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[473:2052](0081355.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p17"></span> Sax. omits *which is called Burgidalla*.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[473:2053](0081355.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p18"></span> Sax.:  And Herod the king was so
terrified, that he said to Archelaus his son.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[474:2054](0081355.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p21"></span> Lit., countenance.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[474:2055](0081355.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p22"></span> Sax.:  And they inquired diligently
whether perchance there were there any one who had miraculous relics of
the Saviour, of His clothing, or other precious things; and they sought
so diligently, that they found a woman, etc.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[474:2056](0081355.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p24"></span> In the Saxon, Joseph’s speech is:  I
know that they took Him down from the cross, and laid Him in the tomb
which I had cut out of the rock.  And I was one of those who guarded His
tomb:  and I bent my head and thought I should see Him, but I beheld
nothing of Him, but saw two angels, one at the head and the other at the
foot, and they asked me whom I was seeking.  I answered and said to
them, I seek Jesus who was crucified.  Again they said to me, Go into
Galilee; there shall you see Him, as He said to you before.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[475:2057](0081355.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p26"></span> A few lines of the text are here very
corrupt, and are omitted by Tischendorf.  The meaning of them is:  And
woe’s me, because, contrary to the law, thou hast treated me most
unjustly.  Ah! woe’s me, because thou hast taken my Lord from me; just
as the Jews did contrary to the law in crucifying in this world the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom the eyes of your Cæsar have not seen.  But woe’s me!
have I done contrary to the law?  Have I deserved to suffer this
punishment?

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[475:2058](0081355.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p28"></span> Or, taking vengeance upon all the
nations of their land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul.](0081356)
