[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081373)  [Next](0081375) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>About the Demon that Dwelt in the
Woman.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p2"></span>And the apostle went into the
city, all the multitude accompanying him; and he thought of going to the
parents of the young man whom, when killed by the dragon, he had brought
to life; for they earnestly entreated him to come to them, and to enter
into their house.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p3"></span>And a certain woman, exceedingly
beautiful, suddenly uttered a loud cry, saying:  O apostle of the new
God, who hast come into India, and servant of that holy and only good
God—for through thee he is proclaimed the Saviour of the souls that come
unto him, and through thee he heals the bodies of those that are
punished by the enemy, and thou hast become the cause of life to all who
turn to him—order me to be brought before thee, that I may declare to
thee what has happened to me, and that perhaps there may be hope to me
from thee and those <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-Page_545"></span>who stand beside thee may have
more and more hope in the God whom thou proclaimest.  For I am not a
little tormented by the adversary, who has assailed me for now a period
of five years.  As a woman, I formerly sat down in peace, and peace
encompassed me on all sides and I had nothing to trouble me, for of
nothing else <span id="fr_2361"></span>[2362](#fn_2361) had I a care. 
And it happened on one of the days as I was coming forth from the bath,
there met me one like a man troubled and disturbed; and his voice and
utterance seemed to me to be indistinct and very weak.  And he said,
standing over against me, Thou and I shall be in one love, and we shall
have intercourse with each other, as a man is coupled with his wife. 
And I answered him, saying, To my betrothed I consented not, entreating
him not to marry me; and to thee, wishing to have intercourse with me as
it were in adultery, how shall I give myself up?  And having thus
spoken, I went away from him.  And to my maid I said, Hast thou seen the
young man and his shamelessness, how shamelessly and boldly he talks to
me?  And she said to me, It was an old man I saw talking with thee.  And
when I was in my own house, and had supped, my mind suggested to me some
suspicion, and especially because he had appeared to me in two forms.  I
fell asleep, having this same thing in my thoughts.  And he came that
night, and made me share in his filthy commerce.  And I saw him when it
was day, and fled from him; but, according to his wont, he came at night
and abused me.  And now, as thou seest me, I have been tormented by him
five years, and he has not departed from me.  But I know and am
persuaded that even demons, and spirits, and avenging deities, are
subject to thee, and tremble at thy prayer.  Pray, then, for me, and
drive away from me the demon that torments me, that I also may become
free, and may be brought to my former nature, and I shall receive the
gift <span id="fr_2362"></span>[2363](#fn_2362) that has been granted to
my kindred.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p6"></span>And the apostle said:  O
irrepressible wickedness!  O the shamelessness of the enemy!  O the
sorcerer that is never at rest!  O the ill-favoured one, bring to
subjection the well-favoured!  O the many-formed one!  He appears just
as he may wish, but his essence cannot be changed.  O offspring of the
crafty and insatiable one!  O bitter tree, which also his fruits are
like!  O thou who art of the devil, who fights over those who do not
belong to him!  O thou who art of the deceit that uses shamelessness!  O
thou who art of the wickedness that creeps like a serpent, and art
thyself his kindred!  And when the apostle had thus spoken the fiend
stood before him, no one seeing him but the woman and the apostle, and
with a very loud voice he said in the hearing of all:  What have we to
do with thee, O apostle of the Most High?  What have we to do with thee,
O servant of Jesus Christ?  What have we to do with thee, O thou that
sittest in council with the Holy Spirit.  Wherefore dost thou wish to
destroy us, when our time has not yet come?  On what account dost thou
wish to take away our power? for until the present hour we have had hope
and time left us. <span id="fr_2363"></span>[2364](#fn_2363)   What have
we to do with thee?  Thou hast power over thine own, and we over our
own.  Why dost thou wish to use tyranny against us, and especially thou
who teachest others not to use tyranny?  Why dost thou want those who do
not belong to thee, as if thou wert not satisfied with thine own?  Why
dost thou liken thyself to the Son of God, who has done us hurt?  For
thou art like him altogether, just as if thou hadst been brought forth
by him.  For we thought to bring him also under the yoke, like the rest;
but he turned, and held us under his hand.  For we did not know him; but
he deceived us by the form which he had put on, and his poverty and his
want; for when we saw him such, we thought him to be a man clothed with
flesh, not knowing that it was he who makes men live.  And he gave us
power over our own, and, in the time in which we live, not to let our
own go, but to employ ourselves about them.  But thou wishest to get
more than is necessary, or than has been given thee, and to overpower
us.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p8"></span>And having thus spoken, the demon
wept, saying:  I let thee go, my most lovely yoke-fellow, <span
id="fr_2364"></span>[2365](#fn_2364) whom I found long ago and was at
rest; I leave thee, my beloved and trusty sister, in whom I was well
pleased.  What I shall do I know not, or whom I shall call upon to hear
me and protect me.  I know what I shall do.  I shall go to some place
where the fame of this man has not been heard, and perhaps I shall call
thee, my beloved, by a new name. <span
id="fr_2365"></span>[2366](#fn_2365)   And lifting up his voice, he
said:  Abide in peace, having received an asylum with a greater than I;
but I, as I have said, will go away and seek thy like, and if I find her
not I shall again return to thee:  for I know that when thou art beside
this man, thou hast an asylum in him; but when he has gone away, thou
shalt be as thou wast before he made his appearance, and him indeed wilt
thou forget, and to me there will again be opportunity and boldness; but
now I am afraid of the name of him who has delivered thee.  And having
thus said, the demon disappeared.  And just when he had disappeared,
fire and smoke were seen there, and all there present were struck with
amazement.

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p11"></span><span id="page_546">p.
546</span> <span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-Page_546"></span>And the apostle
seeing this, said to them:  Nothing strange or unusual has that demon
shown, but his own nature, in which also he shall be burnt up; for the
fire shall consume him, and the smoke of him shall be scattered abroad. 
And he began to say:  O Jesus Christ, the secret mystery which has been
revealed to us, Thou art He who disclosest to us all manner of
mysteries, who hast set me apart from all my companions, and who hast
told me three words with which I am set on fire, and I cannot tell them
to others; O Jesus, man slain, dead, buried; Jesus, God of God, and
Saviour who bringest the dead to life, and healest those who are
diseased; O Jesus, who appearest to be in want, and savest as if in want
of nothing, catching the fishes for the morning and the evening meal,
and establishing all in abundance with a little bread; Jesus, who didst
rest from the toil of the journey as a man, and walk upon the waves as
God; <span id="fr_2366"></span>[2367](#fn_2366) Jesus Most High, voice
arising from perfect compassion, Saviour of all, the right hand of the
light overthrowing him that is wicked in his own kind, and bringing all
his kind into one place; Thou who art only begotten, the first-born of
many brethren, <span id="fr_2367"></span>[2368](#fn_2367) God of God
Most High, man despised until now; Jesus Christ, who overlookest us not
when we call upon Thee; who hast been shown forth to all in Thy human
life; who for our sakes hast been judged and kept in prison, and freest
all that are in bonds; who hast been called a deceiver, <span
id="fr_2368"></span>[2369](#fn_2368) and who deliverest Thine own from
deception:  I entreat Thee in behalf of those standing and entreating
Thee, and those that believe in Thee; for they pray to obtain Thy gifts,
being of good hope in Thine aid, occupying Thy place of refuge in Thy
majesty; they give audience, so as to hear from us the words that have
been spoken to them.  Let Thy peace come and dwell in them, that they
may be purified from their former deeds, and may put off the old man
with his deeds, and put on the new now declared to them by me. <span
id="fr_2369"></span>[2370](#fn_2369)

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p16"></span>And having laid his hands on
them, he blessed them, saying:  The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
upon you for ever! <span id="fr_2370"></span>[2371](#fn_2370)   And they
said, Amen.  And the woman begged of him, saying:  Apostle of the Most
High, give me the seal, that that foe may not come back upon me again. 
Then he made her come near him; and putting his hand upon her, he sealed
her in the name of Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost.  And many others
also were sealed along with her.  And the apostle ordered his
servant <span id="fr_2371"></span>[2372](#fn_2371) to set out a table;
and they set out a bench <span id="fr_2372"></span>[2373](#fn_2372)
which they found there.  And having spread a linen cloth upon it, he put
on it the bread of the blessing.  And the apostle standing by it, said: 
Jesus Christ, Son of God, who hast deemed us worthy to communicate of
the Eucharist of Thy sacred body and honourable blood, behold, we are
emboldened by the thanksgiving <span
id="fr_2373"></span>[2374](#fn_2373) and invocation of Thy sacred name;
come now, and communicate with us.  And he began to say:  Come, perfect
compassion; come, communion with mankind; come, Thou that knowest the
mysteries of the chosen one; come, Thou that communicatest in all the
combats <span id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) of the noble
combatant; come, peace that revealest the great things of all greatness;
come, Thou that disclosest secrets, and makest manifest things not to be
spoken; the sacred dove which has brought forth twin young; come, thou
secret mother; come, Thou who art manifest in Thy deeds, and givest joy
and rest to those who are united to Thee; come and communicate with us
in this Eucharist, which we make in Thy name, and in the love <span
id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375) in which we are united in calling
upon Thee. <span id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376)   And having thus
said, he made the sign of the cross upon the bread, and broke it, and
began to distribute it.  And first he gave it to the woman, saying: 
This shall be to thee for remission of sins, and the ransom of
everlasting transgressions.  And after her, he gave also to all the
others who had received the seal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2361"></span>[545:2362](0081374.htm#fr_2361) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p4"></span> Or, no one else.

<span id="fn_2362"></span>[545:2363](0081374.htm#fr_2362) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p5"></span> Or, grace.

<span id="fn_2363"></span>[545:2364](0081374.htm#fr_2363) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p7"></span> Comp. [Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2364"></span>[545:2365](0081374.htm#fr_2364) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p9"></span> Or, wife.

<span id="fn_2365"></span>[545:2366](0081374.htm#fr_2365) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p10"></span> i.e., get another instead of
thee, my beloved.

<span id="fn_2366"></span>[546:2367](0081374.htm#fr_2366) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p12"></span> [Matt.
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#017), [John
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#011), [John
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006), [Matt.
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2367"></span>[546:2368](0081374.htm#fr_2367) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p13"></span> [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2368"></span>[546:2369](0081374.htm#fr_2368) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p14"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2369"></span>[546:2370](0081374.htm#fr_2369) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p15"></span> [Col. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2370"></span>[546:2371](0081374.htm#fr_2370) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p17"></span> [Rom. xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2371"></span>[546:2372](0081374.htm#fr_2371) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p18"></span> Or, deacon.

<span id="fn_2372"></span>[546:2373](0081374.htm#fr_2372) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>συμψέλλιον</span>, which is not
Greek, is obviously the Latin *subsellium*.

<span id="fn_2373"></span>[546:2374](0081374.htm#fr_2373) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p20"></span> Or, Eucharist.

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[546:2375](0081374.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p21"></span> Or, prizes.

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[546:2376](0081374.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p22"></span> Or, love-feast.

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[546:2377](0081374.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii.ii.iii-p23"></span> Or, in Thy calling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: About the Young Man Who Killed the Maiden.](0081375)
