[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081472)  [Next](0081474) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>III. <span
id="fr_3293"></span>[3294](#fn_3293) </span>

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p3"></span>Abgar comes into the East, maintains
Ardachès upon the throne of Persia; reconciles his brothers from whom
our illuminator and his relations are descended.

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p4"></span>Abgar, having gone to the East, finds
on the throne of Persia Ardachès, son of Archavir, and the brothers of
Ardachès contending against him:  for this prince thought to reign over
them in his posterity, and they would not consent to it.  Ardachès
therefore hems them in on all sides, hangs the sword of death over their
heads; distractions and dissension were between their troops and their
other relations and allies:  for King Archavir had three sons and one
daughter; the first of these sons was King Ardachès himself, the second
Garene, the third Sourene; their sister, named Gochm, was wife of the
general of all the Ariks, a general chosen by their father Archavir.

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p5"></span>Abgar prevails on the sons of Archavir
to make peace; he arranges between them the conditions and
stipulations:  Ardachès is to reign with his posterity as he proposed,
and his brothers are to be called Bahlav, from the name of their town
and their vast and fertile country, so that their satrapies shall be the
first, higher in rank than all the satrapies of Persia, as being truly a
race of kings.  Treaties and oaths stipulated that in case of the
extinction of male children of Ardachès, his brothers should come to the
throne; after the reigning race of Ardachès, his brothers are divided
into three races named thus:  the race of Garene Bahlav, the race of
Sourene Bahlav, and the race of their sister, the race of Asbahabied
Bahlav, a race thus called from the name of the domain of her husband.

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p6"></span>St. Gregory is said to have sprung from
the race Sourene Bahlav, and the Gamsarians from the race Garene
Bahlav.  We will relate in the sequel the circumstances of the coming of
these personages, only mentioning their names here in connection with
Ardachès, in order that you may know that these great races are indeed
the blood of Vagharchag, that is to say, the posterity of the great
Archag, brother of Vagharchag.

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p7"></span>Everything being thus arranged, Abgar
takes with him the letter of the treaties, and returns to his dominions;
not in perfect health, but a prey to severe suffering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3293"></span>[703:3294](0081473.htm#fr_3293) <span
id="ix.xiii.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii.iii-p2"></span> Chapter xxviii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](0081474)
