[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081529)  [Next](0081531) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>Pseud-Irenæus.</span>

<span id="x.xvi-p2"></span>\[<span class="c9"><span
id="x.xvi-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 177.\]  This letter should have been
made a preface to the works of Irenæus, or at least an appendix.  It is
worthy of his great name; “the finest thing of the kind in all
antiquity,” says Lardner.  Critics of no mean name have credited it to
Irenæus; but, as this cannot be proved, I have accordingly marked it as
a *pseudonym*.  The same writer condenses the arguments of others, on
which he decides to adhere to the later chronology of Eusebius,
assigning its date to the seventeenth year of Marcus Aurelius. <span
id="fr_3822"></span>[3823](#fn_3822)   Naturally humane and
comparatively gentle in other respects he was; but Stoicism, as well as
heathenism, showed what it could exact of such a character in
maintenance of the popular and imperial superstitions.  Terrible is the
summary of <span id="page_778">p. 778</span> <span
id="x.xvi-Page_778"></span>Lightfoot concerning the barbarities of this
darling of the “philosophers:”  “It is a plain fact, that Christian
blood flowed more freely under M. Aurelius than at any time previously
during the half century since the Bithynian martyrdoms under Trajan, or
was yet to flow at any time during the decades which would elapse before
the Severian persecution.  These persecutions extend throughout his
reign:  they were fierce and deliberate; aggravated, at least in some
cases, by cruel tortures.  They had the emperor’s direct personal
sanction.  They break out in all parts of the empire,—in Rome, in Asia
Minor, in Gaul, in Africa, possibly also in Byzantium.”

<span id="x.xvi-p4"></span>Bishop Lightfoot accounts for the fact, that,
in spite of this sanguinary character of the period, little complaint is
heard from the suffering Church, by a simple statement which is
honourable to Aurelius as a Roman and an emperor.  He was such a
contrast to the Neros and Caligulas, that the wretched Romans loved him
as a father; to reproach him was, therefore, poor policy for
Christians.  They would have been answered, practically:  “If so good a
sovereign finds it necessary to punish you, the fault is your own; you
have only to be as we are, and he will treat you as well as he does us.”

<span id="x.xvi-p5"></span>Of this awful outbreak in Lyons and Vienne,
says Lightfoot: <span id="fr_3823"></span>[3824](#fn_3823)   “The
persecution was wholesale, so that it was not safe for any Christian to
appear out of doors.  No difference of age or sex was made.  The
prisoners were put to the most cruel tortures.  All the elements of
power combined to crush the brethren.”

<span id="x.xvi-p7"></span>To forbear threatenings, to revile not again,
to conquer through patient suffering, to persevere, “looking unto
Jesus,” and to be silent, like Him, before their murderers, was
therefore the world-wide conduct of the saints.  This golden letter
shows what they were called to endure, and how they glorified Christ by
their deaths, from the utmost Orient to the extreme limits of the West.

<span id="x.xvi-p8"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="x.xvi-p8.1"></span>The Letter of the Churches of Vienna and Lugdunum
to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia. <span
id="fr_3824"></span>[3825](#fn_3824) </span>

<span id="x.xvi-p10"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="x.xvi-p10.1"></span>It</span> began thus:—“The servants of Christ
who sojourn in Vienna and Lugdunum of Gaul to the brethren throughout
Asia and Phrygia, who have the same faith and hope of redemption as
ourselves, peace, grace, and glory from God the Father, and from Christ
Jesus our Lord.”

<span id="x.xvi-p11"></span>After some further preliminary remarks the
letter proceeds:—“The greatness of the tribulation in this region, and
the exceeding anger of the heathen *nations* against the saints, and the
sufferings which the blessed Witnesses <span
id="fr_3825"></span>[3826](#fn_3825) endured, neither are we competent
to describe accurately, nor indeed is it possible to detail them in
writing.  For with all his strength did the adversary assail us, even
then giving a foretaste of his activity among us which is to be without
restraint; and he had recourse to every means, accustoming his own
subjects and exercising them beforehand against the servants of God, so
that not only were we excluded from houses, <span
id="fr_3826"></span>[3827](#fn_3826) baths, and the forum, but a
universal prohibition was laid against any one of us appearing in any
place whatsoever.  But the grace of God acted as our general against
him.  It rescued the weak; it arrayed against him men like firm pillars,
who could through patience bear up against the whole force of the
assaults of the wicked one.  These came to close quarters with him,
enduring every form of reproach and torture; and, making light of
grievous trials, they hastened on to Christ, showing in reality that the
‘sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that is to be revealed in us.’ <span
id="fr_3827"></span>[3828](#fn_3827)   And first they nobly endured the
evils which were heaped on them by the populace,—namely, hootings and
blows, draggings, plunderings, stonings, and confinements, <span
id="fr_3828"></span>[3829](#fn_3828) and everything that an infuriated
mob is wont to perpetrate against those whom they deem bitter enemies. 
And at length, being brought to the forum by the tribune of the
soldiers, and the magistrates that had charge of the city, they were
examined in presence of the whole multitude; and having <span
id="page_779">p. 779</span> <span id="x.xvi-Page_779"></span>confessed,
they were shut up in prison until the arrival of the governor.

<span id="x.xvi-p16"></span>“After this, when they were brought before
the governor, and when he displayed a spirit of savage hostility to us,
Vettius Epagathus, one of the brethren, interposed.  For he was a man
who had contained the full measure of love towards God and his
neighbours.  His mode of life had been so strict, that though he was a
young man, he deserved to be described in the words used in regard to
the elderly Zacharias:  ‘He had walked therefore in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord blameless.’ <span
id="fr_3829"></span>[3830](#fn_3829)   He was also eager to serve his
neighbour in any way, he was very zealous for God, and he was fervent in
spirit.  Such being the character of the man, he could not bear that
judgment should be thus unreasonably passed against us, but was moved
with indignation, and requested that he himself should be heard in
defence of his brethren, undertaking to prove that there is nothing
ungodly or impious amongst us.  On this, those who were round the
judgment-seat cried out against him, for he was a man of distinction;
and the governor, not for a moment listening to the just request thus
made to him, merely asked him if he himself were a Christian.  And on
his confessing in the clearest voice that he was, he also was taken up
into the number of the Witnesses, receiving the appellation of the
Advocate of the Christians, <span id="fr_3830"></span>[3831](#fn_3830)
and having himself the Advocate, the Spirit, <span
id="fr_3831"></span>[3832](#fn_3831) more abundantly than Zacharias;
which he showed in the fulness <span
id="fr_3832"></span>[3833](#fn_3832) of his love, in that he had of his
own good-will offered to lay down his own life in defence of the
brethren.  For he was and is a genuine disciple of Christ, ‘following
the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.’ <span
id="fr_3833"></span>[3834](#fn_3833)

<span id="x.xvi-p22"></span>“After this the rest began to be
distinguished, <span id="fr_3834"></span>[3835](#fn_3834) for the
proto-martyrs were decided and ready, and accomplished the confession of
their testimony with all alacrity.  But there appeared also those who
were unprepared and unpractised, and who were still feeble, and unable
to bear the tension of a great contest.  Of these about ten in number
proved abortions; causing great grief and immeasurable sorrow amongst
us, and damping the ardour of the rest who had not yet been
apprehended.  For these, although they suffered every kind of cruelty,
remained nevertheless in the company of the Witnesses, and did not
forsake them.  But then the whole of us were greatly alarmed on account
of our uncertainty as to confession, not because we feared the tortures
inflicted, but because we looked to the end, and dreaded lest any one
should fall away.  Those who were worthy, however, were daily
apprehended, filling up the number of the others:  so that out of the
two churches all the excellent, and those to whom the churches owed most
of all their establishment and prosperity, were collected together in
prison.  Some heathen household slaves belonging to our people were also
apprehended, since the governor had given orders publicly that all of us
should be sought out.  These, through the instigation of Satan, and
through fear of the tortures which they saw the saints enduring, urged
on also by the soldiers, falsely accused us of Thyestean banquets and
Œdipodean connections, and other crimes which it is lawful for us
neither to mention nor think of; and, indeed, we shrink from believing
that any such crimes have ever taken place among men.  When the rumour
of these accusations was spread abroad, all raged against us like wild
beasts; so that if any formerly were temperate in their conduct to us on
account of relationship, they then became exceedingly indignant and
exasperated against us.  And thus was fulfilled that which was spoken by
our Lord:  ‘The time shall come when every one who slayeth you shall
think that he offereth service to God.’ <span
id="fr_3835"></span>[3836](#fn_3835)

<span id="x.xvi-p25"></span>“Then at last the holy Witnesses suffered
tortures beyond all description, Satan striving eagerly that some of the
evil reports might be acknowledged by them. <span
id="fr_3836"></span>[3837](#fn_3836)   But in an exceeding degree did
the whole wrath of mob, general, and soldiers fall on Sanctus, a deacon
from Vienna, and on Maturus, a newly-enlightened but noble combatant,
and on Attalus, a native of Pergamus, who had always been the
Pillar <span id="fr_3837"></span>[3838](#fn_3837) and foundation of the
church there, and on Blandina, through whom Christ showed that the
things that to men appear mean and deformed and contemptible, are with
God deemed worthy of great glory, on account of love to Him,—a love
which is not a mere boastful appearance, but shows itself in the power
which it exercises over the life.  For while we were all afraid, and
especially her mistress in the flesh, who was herself one of the
combatants among the Witnesses, that she would not be able to make a
bold confession on account of the weakness of her body, Blandina was
filled with such power, that those who tortured her one after the other
in every way from morning till evening were wearied and tired,
confessing that they had been baffled, for they had no other torture
they could apply to her; and they were <span id="page_780">p. 780</span>
<span id="x.xvi-Page_780"></span>astonished that she remained in life,
when her whole body was torn and opened up, and they gave their
testimony <span id="fr_3838"></span>[3839](#fn_3838) that one only of
the modes of torture employed was sufficient to have deprived her of
life, not to speak of so many excruciating inflictions.  But the blessed
woman, like a noble athlete, recovered her strength in the midst of the
confession; and her declaration, ‘I am a Christian, and there is no evil
done amongst us,’ brought her refreshment, and rest, and insensibility
to all the sufferings inflicted on her.

<span id="x.xvi-p29"></span>“Sanctus also nobly endured all the
excessive and *superhuman* <span id="fr_3839"></span>[3840](#fn_3839)
tortures which man could possibly devise against him; for the wicked
hoped, on account of the continuance and greatness of the tortures, to
hear him confess some of the unlawful practices.  But he opposed them
with such firmness that he did not tell them even his own name, nor that
of his nation or city, nor if he were slave or free; but in answer to
all these questions, he said in Latin, ‘I am a Christian.’  This was the
confession he made repeatedly, instead of giving his name, his city, his
race, and indeed in reply to every question that was put to him; and
other language the heathens heard not from him.  Hence arose in the
minds of the governor and the torturers a determined resolution to
subdue him; so that, when every other means failed, they at last fixed
red-hot plates of brass to the most delicate parts of his body.  And
these indeed were burned, but he himself remained inflexible and
unyielding, firm in his confession, being bedewed and strengthened by
the heavenly fountain of the water of life which issues from the belly
of Christ. <span id="fr_3840"></span>[3841](#fn_3840)   But his body
bore witness to what had happened:  for it was all wounds and weals,
shrunk and torn up, and had lost externally the human shape.  In him
Christ suffering wrought great wonders, destroying the adversary, and
showing for an example to the rest that there is nothing fearful where
there is the Father’s love, and nothing painful where there is Christ’s
glory.  For the wicked after some days again tortured the Witness,
thinking that, since his body was swollen and inflamed, if they were to
apply the same tortures they would gain the victory over him, especially
since the parts of his body could not bear to be touched by the hand, or
that he would die in consequence of the tortures, and thus inspire the
rest with fear.  Yet not only did no such occurrence take place in
regard to him, but even, contrary to every expectation of man, his body
unbent itself and became erect in the midst of the subsequent tortures,
and resumed its former appearance and the use of its limbs, so that the
second torture turned out through the grace of Christ a cure, not an
affliction.

<span id="x.xvi-p32"></span>“Among those who had denied was a woman of
the name of Biblias.  The devil, thinking that he had already swallowed
her, and wishing to damn her still more by making her accuse falsely,
brought her forth to punishment, and employed force to constrain her,
already feeble and spiritless, to utter accusations of atheism against
us.  But she, in the midst of the tortures, came again to a sound state
of mind, and awoke as it were out of a deep sleep; for the temporary
suffering reminded her of the eternal punishment in Gehenna, and she
contradicted the accusers of Christians, saying, ‘How can children be
eaten by those who do not think it lawful to partake of the blood of
even brute beasts?’  And after this she confessed herself a Christian,
and was added to the number of Witnesses.

<span id="x.xvi-p33"></span>“But when the tyrannical tortures were
rendered by Christ of no avail through the patience of the blessed, the
devil devised other contrivances—confinement in the darkest and most
noisome cells of the prison, the stretching of the feet on the
stocks, <span id="fr_3841"></span>[3842](#fn_3841) even up to the fifth
hole, and the other indignities which attendants stirred up by wrath and
full of the devil are wont to inflict on the imprisoned.  The
consequence was, that very many were suffocated in prison, as many at
least as the Lord, showing His glory, wished to depart in this way.  For
there were others who were tortured so bitterly, that it seemed
impossible for them to survive even though they were to obtain every
kind of attention; and yet they remained alive in prison, destitute
indeed of care from man, but strengthened by the Lord, and invigorated
both in body and soul, and they animated and consoled the rest.  But the
new converts who had been recently apprehended, and whose bodies had not
previously been tortured, could not indure the confinement, but died in
the prison.

<span id="x.xvi-p35"></span>“Now the blessed Pothinus, who had been
entrusted with the service of the bishopric in Lugdunum, was also
dragged before the judgment-seat.  He was now upwards of ninety years of
age, and exceedingly weak in body.  Though he breathed with difficulty
on account of the feebleness of the body, yet he was strengthened <span
id="page_781">p. 781</span> <span id="x.xvi-Page_781"></span>by the
eagerness of his spirit, on account of his earnest desire to bear his
testimony.  His body, indeed, was already dissolved through old age and
disease, yet the life was preserved in him, that Christ might triumph
through him.  When he was brought by the soldiers to the judgment-seat,
under a convoy of the magistrates of the city, and amid exclamations of
every kind from the whole population, as if he himself were the Christ,
he gave the good testimony.  Being asked by the governor who was the God
of the Christians, he said, ‘If thou art worthy, thou shalt know.’ 
Thereupon he was unmercifully dragged about, and endured many blows; for
those who were near maltreated him in every way with their hands and
feet, showing no respect for his age, while those at a distance hurled
against him each one whatever came to hand, all of them believing that
they would sin greatly and act impiously if they in any respect fell
short in their insulting treatment of him.  For they thought that in
this way they would avenge their gods.  And Pothinus, breathing with
difficulty, was cast into prison, and two days after he expired.

<span id="x.xvi-p36"></span>“Upon this a grand dispensation <span
id="fr_3842"></span>[3843](#fn_3842) of God’s providence took place, and
the immeasurable mercy of Jesus was made manifest,—such an occurrence as
but rarely happens among the brotherhood, yet one that does not fall
short of the art of Christ.  For those who in the first apprehension had
denied, were imprisoned along with the others, and shared their
hardships.  Their denial, in fact, turned out at this time to be of no
advantage to them.  For while those who confessed what they really were,
were imprisoned simply as Christians, no other accusation being brought
against them, those who denied were detained as murderers and
profligates.  They, moreover, were doubly punished.  For the confessors
were lightened by the joy of their testimony and their hope in the
promises, and by their love to Christ, and by the Father’s Spirit.  But
the deniers were tormented greatly by their own consciences, so that
when they were led forth their countenances could be distinguished among
all the rest.  For the confessors went forth joyous, with a mingling of
glory and abundant grace in their looks, so that their chains lay like
becoming ornaments around them, as around a bride adorned with golden
fringes wrought with divers colours. <span
id="fr_3843"></span>[3844](#fn_3843)   And they breathed at the same
time the fragrance of Christ, <span id="fr_3844"></span>[3845](#fn_3844)
so that some even thought that they were anointed with this world’s
perfume.  But the deniers were downcast, humbled, sad-looking, and
weighed down with every kind of disgrace.  They were, moreover,
reproached even by the heathens with being base and cowardly, and
charged with the crime of murder; they had lost the altogether
honourable, glorious, and life-giving appellation. <span
id="fr_3845"></span>[3846](#fn_3845)   When the rest saw this, they were
strengthened, and those who were apprehended confessed unhesitatingly,
not allowing the reasoning of the devil to have even a place in their
thoughts.”

<span id="x.xvi-p41"></span>Eusebius omits something, saying that after
a little the letter proceeded as follows:—

<span id="x.xvi-p42"></span>“After these things, then, their testimonies
took every shape through the different ways in which they
departed. <span id="fr_3846"></span>[3847](#fn_3846)   For, plaiting a
crown from different colours and flowers of every kind, they presented
it to the Father.  It was right therefore that the noble athletes, after
having endured divers contests and gained grand victories, should
receive the great crown of incorruption.

<span id="x.xvi-p44"></span>“Maturus, therefore, and Sanctus, and
Blandina, and Attalus were publicly <span
id="fr_3847"></span>[3848](#fn_3847) exposed to the wild beasts—that
common spectacle of heathen barbarity; for a day was expressly assigned
to fights with wild beasts on account of our people.  And Maturus and
Sanctus again endured every form of torture in the amphitheatre, as if
they had had no suffering at all before.  Or rather, like athletes who
had overthrown their adversary several times, <span
id="fr_3848"></span>[3849](#fn_3848) and were now contending for the
crown itself, again they endured the lashes <span
id="fr_3849"></span>[3850](#fn_3849) which were usual there; and they
were dragged about by the wild beasts, and suffered every indignity
which the maddened populace demanded in cries and exhortations
proceeding from various parts of the amphitheatre.  And last of all they
were placed in the iron chair, on which their bodies were roasted, and
they themselves were filled with the fumes of their own flesh.  But the
heathens did not stop even here, but became still more frantic in their
desire to overcome the endurance of the Christians.  But not even thus
did they hear anything else from Sanctus than the utterance of the
confession which he had been accustomed to make from the beginning. 
These, then, after life had lasted a long time throughout the great
contest, were at last sacrificed, <span
id="fr_3850"></span>[3851](#fn_3850) after they alone had <span
id="page_782">p. 782</span> <span id="x.xvi-Page_782"></span>formed a
spectacle to the world, throughout that day, instead of all the
diversity which usually takes place in gladiatorial shows.

<span id="x.xvi-p49"></span>“Blandina <span
id="fr_3851"></span>[3852](#fn_3851) was hung up fastened to a stake,
and exposed, as food to the wild beasts that were let loose against her;
and through her presenting the spectacle of one suspended on something
like a cross, and through her earnest prayers, she inspired the
combatants with great eagerness:  for in the combat they saw, by means
of their sister, with their bodily eyes, Him who was crucified for them,
that He might persuade those who trust in Him that every one that has
suffered for the glory of Christ has eternal communion with the living
God.  When none of the wild beasts at that time touched her, she was
taken down from the stake and conveyed back to prison.  She was thus
reserved for another contest, in order that, gaining the victory in many
preparative conflicts, she might make the condemnation of the Crooked
Serpent <span id="fr_3852"></span>[3853](#fn_3852) unquestionable, and
that she might encourage the brethren.  For though she was an
insignificant, weak, and despised woman, yet she was clothed with the
great and invincible athlete Christ.  On many occasions she had
overpowered the adversary, and in the course of the contest had woven
for herself the crown of incorruption.

<span id="x.xvi-p52"></span>“Attalus also was vehemently demanded by the
mob; for he was a man of mark.  He entered the lists a ready combatant
on account of his good conscience, since he had been truly practised in
the Christian discipline, and had always been a Witness of the truth
among us.  He was led round the amphitheatre, a tablet going before him,
on which was written in Latin, ‘This is Attalus the Christian;’ and the
people swelled with indignation against him.  But the governor, learning
that he was a Roman, ordered him to be taken back to prison and kept
with the rest who were there, with regard to whom he had written to the
Cæsar, and was now awaiting his determination.

<span id="x.xvi-p53"></span>“The intervening time did not prove barren
or unfruitful to the Witnesses, but through their patient endurance the
immeasurable love of Christ was made manifest.  For through the living
the dead were made alive; and the Witnesses conferred favours on those
who were not Witnesses, and the Virgin Mother had much joy in receiving
back alive those whom she had given up as dead abortions.  For through
the Witnesses the greater number of those who had denied returned, as it
were, into their mother’s womb, and were conceived again and
re-quickened; and they learned to confess.  And being now restored to
life, and having their spirits braced, they went up to the judgment-seat
to be again questioned by the governor, while that God who wishes not
the death of the sinner, <span id="fr_3853"></span>[3854](#fn_3853) but
mercifully calls to repentance, put sweetness into their souls.  This
new examination took place because the Cæsar had given orders that the
Witnesses should be punished, but that if any denied they should be set
free.  And as now was commencing here the fair, which is attendee by
vast numbers of men assembling from all nations, he brought the blessed
up to the judgment-seat, exhibiting them as a theatrical show and
spectacle to the mobs.  Wherefore also he again questioned them, and
whoever appeared to have had the rights of Roman citizenship he
beheaded, and the rest he sent to the wild beasts.

<span id="x.xvi-p55"></span>“Now Christ was greatly glorified in those
who formerly denied; for, contrary to every expectation of the heathen,
they confessed.  For these were examined separately, under the belief
that they were to be set free; but confessing, they were added to the
number of the Witnesses.  But there were also some who remained without;
namely, those who had no trace of faith, and no perception of the
marriage garment, <span id="fr_3854"></span>[3855](#fn_3854) nor notion
of the fear of God, but through their conduct caused evil reports of our
way of life, that is, sons of perdition.  But all the rest were added to
the Church.

<span id="x.xvi-p57"></span>“Present at the examination of these was one
Alexander, a native of Phrygia, a physician by profession.  He had lived
for many years in Gaul, and had become well known to all for his love to
God and his boldness in proclaiming the truth, for he was not without a
share of apostolic grace.  He stood near the judgment-seat, and, urging
by signs those who had denied to confess, he looked to those who stood
round the judgment-seat like one in travail.  But the mobs, enraged that
those who had formerly denied should now confess, cried out against
Alexander as if he were the cause of this change.  Then the governor
summoned him before him, and inquired of him who he was; and when
Alexander said he was a Christian, the governor burst into a passion,
and condemned him to the wild beasts.  And on the next day he entered
the amphitheatre along with Attalus; for the governor, wishing to
gratify the mob, again exposed Attalus to the wild beasts.  These two,
after being tortured in the amphitheatre with all the instruments
devised for that purpose, and having undergone an exceedingly severe
contest, at last were themselves sacrificed.  Alexander uttered <span
id="page_783">p. 783</span> <span id="x.xvi-Page_783"></span>no groan or
murmur of any kind, but conversed in his heart with God; but Attalus,
when he was placed on the iron chair, and all the parts of his body were
burning, and when the fumes from his body were borne aloft, said to the
multitude in Latin, ‘Lo! this which ye do is eating men.  But as for us,
we neither eat men nor practise any other wickedness.’  And being asked
what name God has, he answered, ‘God has not a name as men have.’

<span id="x.xvi-p58"></span>“After all these, on the last day of the
gladiatorial shows, Blandina was again brought in along with Ponticus, a
boy of about fifteen years of age.  These two had been taken daily to
the amphitheatre to see the tortures which the rest endured, and force
was used to compel them to swear by the idols of the heathen; but on
account of their remaining stedfast, and setting all their devices at
nought, the multitude were furious against them, so as neither to pity
the tender years of the boy nor to respect the sex of the woman. 
Accordingly they exposed them to every terror, and inflicted on them
every torture, repeatedly trying to compel them to swear.  But they
failed in effecting this; for Ponticus, encouraged by his sister, <span
id="fr_3855"></span>[3856](#fn_3855) so plainly indeed that even the
heathens saw that it was she that encouraged and confirmed him, after
enduring nobly every kind of torture, gave up the ghost; while the
blessed Blandina, last of all, after having like a noble mother
encouraged her children, and sent them on before her victorious to the
King, trod the same path of conflict which her children had trod,
hastening on to them with joy and exultation at her departure, not as
one thrown to the wild beasts, but as one invited to a marriage supper. 
And after she had been scourged and exposed to the wild beasts, and
roasted in the iron chair, she was at last enclosed in a net and cast
before a bull.  And after having been well tossed by the bull, though
without having any feeling of what was happening to her, through her
hope and firm hold of what had been entrusted to her and her converse
with Christ, she also was sacrificed, the heathens themselves
acknowledging that never among them did woman endure so many and such
fearful tortures.

<span id="x.xvi-p60"></span>“Yet not even thus was their madness and
their savage hatred to the saints satiated.  For wild and barbarous
tribes, when excited by the Wild Beast, with difficulty ceased from
their rage, and their insulting conduct found another and peculiar
subject in the bodies of the Witnesses.  For they felt no shame that
they had been overcome, for they were not possessed of human reason; but
their defeat only the more inflamed their rage, and governor and people,
like a wild beast, showed a like unjust hatred of us, that the Scripture
might be fulfilled, ‘He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he
that is righteous, let him be righteous still.’ <span
id="fr_3856"></span>[3857](#fn_3856)   For they threw to the dogs those
who had been suffocated in prison, carefully watching them day and
night, lest any one should receive burial from us.  They then laid out
the mangled remains left by the wild beasts, and the scorched remains
left by the fire, and the heads of the rest along with their trunks, and
in like manner for many days watched them lying unburied with a military
guard.  There were some who raged and gnashed their teeth at them,
seeking to get from them further vengeance.  Others derided and insulted
them, at the same time magnifying their own idols, and ascribing to them
the punishment inflicted on the Christians.  There were persons also of
a milder disposition, who to some extent seemed to sympathize; yet they
also frequently upbraided, saying, ‘Where now is their God, and what
good have they got from that religion which they chose in preference to
their life?’  Such was the diversity which characterized the conduct of
the heathens.  But our state was one of deep sorrow that we could not
bury the bodies.  For night aided us not in this matter; money failed to
persuade, and entreaty did not shame them into compliance; but they kept
up the watch in every way, as if they were to gain some great advantage
from the bodies of the Christians not obtaining burial.

<span id="x.xvi-p62"></span>Something is omitted.  The letter then goes
on:—

<span id="x.xvi-p63"></span>“The bodies of the Witnesses, after having
been maltreated in every way, and exposed in the open air for six days,
were burned, reduced to ashes, and swept by the wicked into the river
Rhone, which flows past, in order that not even a vestige of them might
be visible on earth.  And these things they did, as if they had been
able to overcome God, and deprive them of their second birth, <span
id="fr_3857"></span>[3858](#fn_3857) in order, as they said, that ‘they
may not have hope in a resurrection, trusting to which they introduce
some strange and new mode of worship, and despise dangers, and go
readily and with joy to death.  Now let us see if they will rise again,
and if their God can help them, and rescue them out of our hands.’”

<span id="x.xvi-p65"></span>Eusebius here breaks off his series of
continuous extracts, but he makes a few more for special purposes.  The
first is the account which the churches gave of the character of the
Witnesses:—

<span id="x.xvi-p66"></span>“Who also were to such an extent zealous
<span id="page_784">p. 784</span> <span
id="x.xvi-Page_784"></span>followers and imitators of Christ, who, being
in the shape of God, thought it not an object of desire to be treated
like God; <span id="fr_3858"></span>[3859](#fn_3858) that though they
were in such glory, and had borne their testimony not once, nor twice,
but often, and had been again taken back to prison after exposure to the
wild beasts, and bore about with them the marks of the burnings and
bruises and wounds all over their bodies, yet did they neither proclaim
themselves Witnesses, nor indeed did they permit us to address them by
this name; but if any one of us on any occasion, either by letter or in
conversation, called them Witnesses, they rebuked him sharply.  For they
willingly gave the title of Witness to Christ, ‘the faithful and true
Witness,’ <span id="fr_3859"></span>[3860](#fn_3859) and first-born from
the dead, and the leader to the divine life.  And they reminded us of
those Witnesses who had already departed, and said:  ‘These indeed are
now Witnesses, whom Christ has vouchsafed to take up to Himself in the
very act of confession, thus putting His seal upon their testimony
through their departure.  But we are mean and humble confessors.’  And
with tears they besought the brethren that earnest prayers might be made
for their being perfected.  They in reality did all that is implied in
the term ‘testimony,’ acting with great boldness towards all the
heathen; and their nobleness they made manifest through their patience,
and fearlessness, and intrepidity.  But the title of Witness, as
implying some superiority to their brethren, <span
id="fr_3860"></span>[3861](#fn_3860) they refused, being filled with the
fear of God.”

<span id="x.xvi-p70"></span>After a little they say:—

<span id="x.xvi-p71"></span>“They humbled themselves <span
id="fr_3861"></span>[3862](#fn_3861) under the powerful hand by which
they are now highly exalted.  Then they pleaded for all, <span
id="fr_3862"></span>[3863](#fn_3862) but accused none; they absolved
all, they bound none; and they prayed for those who inflicted the
tortures, even as Stephen the perfect Witness, ‘Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge.’ <span id="fr_3863"></span>[3864](#fn_3863)   But if he
prayed for those who stoned him, how much more for the brethren!”

<span id="x.xvi-p75"></span>After other things, again they say:—

<span id="x.xvi-p76"></span>“For they had this very great conflict with
him, *the devil*, on account of their genuine love, in order that the
Beast being choked, might vomit forth those whom he thought he had
already swallowed.  For they assumed no airs of superiority over the
fallen, but with those things in which they themselves abounded they
aided the needy, displaying towards them the compassion of a mother. 
And pouring out many tears for them to the Father, they begged
life; <span id="fr_3864"></span>[3865](#fn_3864) and He gave it to them,
and they shared it with their neighbours.  And departing victorious over
all to God, having always loved peace, and having recommended peace to
us, in peace they went to God, leaving no sorrow to their Mother, nor
division and dissension to their brethren, but joy and peace, and
concord and love.”

<span id="x.xvi-p78"></span>“The same writing of the fore-mentioned
martyrs,” says Eusebius, “contains a story worth remembrance.

<span id="x.xvi-p79"></span>“For there was one of them of the name of
Alcibiades, who lived an exceedingly austere life, confining his diet to
bread and water, and partaking of nothing else whatsoever.  He tried to
continue this mode of life in prison; but it was revealed to Attalus
after the first conflict which he underwent in the amphitheatre that
Alcibiades was not pursuing the right course in refusing to use the
creatures of God, and in leaving an example which might be a
stumbling-block to others.  And Alcibiades was persuaded, and partook
freely of all kinds of food, and thanked God.  For they were not without
the oversight of the grace of God, but the Holy Spirit was their
counsellor.”

<span id="x.xvi-p80"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3822"></span>[777:3823](0081530.htm#fr_3822) <span
id="x.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p3"></span> Vol. iv. p. 125, this series.  Compare
Lightfoot, *Ap. Fathers*, part ii. vol. i. pp. 499, etc., 510, etc.

<span id="fn_3823"></span>[778:3824](0081530.htm#fr_3823) <span
id="x.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p6"></span> *Ap. Fathers*, part ii. vol. i. p. 499.

<span id="fn_3824"></span>[778:3825](0081530.htm#fr_3824) <span
id="x.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p9"></span> This letter has come down to us in fragments
quoted by Eusebius.  We have used the translation of Lord Hailes as the
basis of ours.  \[Compare Vol. i. p. 309, this series, and note the
adhesion of the primitive Gallican Church to the East,—to the land of
Polycarp and Pothinus.  Concerning Pothinus, see Routh, *Rel. Sac*., i.
p. 328, and the correction by Lightfoot, *Ap. F*., part ii. vol. i. p.
430, etc.  The Gallican Church may yet arise from the dust, and restore
the primitive primacy of Lyons.  God grant it!\]

<span id="fn_3825"></span>[778:3826](0081530.htm#fr_3825) <span
id="x.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p12"></span> We have translated <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi-p12.1"></span>μάρτυρες</span> “witnesses”
and <span class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi-p12.2"></span>μαρτυρία</span>
“testimony” throughout.

<span id="fn_3826"></span>[778:3827](0081530.htm#fr_3826) <span
id="x.xvi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p13"></span> Houses of friends and relatives.  Olshausen
takes them to be public buildings.

<span id="fn_3827"></span>[778:3828](0081530.htm#fr_3827) <span
id="x.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p14"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="x.xvi-p14.1"></span>. 
\[On quotations from Scripture, etc., see Westcott, *Canon*, p. 378, ed.
1855.\]

<span id="fn_3828"></span>[778:3829](0081530.htm#fr_3828) <span
id="x.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p15"></span> By “confinements” in this passage evidently
is meant that the populace prevented them from resorting to public
places, and thus shut them up in their own houses.

<span id="fn_3829"></span>[779:3830](0081530.htm#fr_3829) <span
id="x.xvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p17"></span> [Luke i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)<span id="x.xvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3830"></span>[779:3831](0081530.htm#fr_3830) <span
id="x.xvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p18"></span> From the heathen judge.

<span id="fn_3831"></span>[779:3832](0081530.htm#fr_3831) <span
id="x.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p19"></span> [Luke i.
67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067)<span id="x.xvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3832"></span>[779:3833](0081530.htm#fr_3832) <span
id="x.xvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p20"></span> The writer refers to St. John’s Gospel
([John 15.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span
id="x.xvi-p20.1"></span>):  “Greater love hath no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for his friends.”

<span id="fn_3833"></span>[779:3834](0081530.htm#fr_3833) <span
id="x.xvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p21"></span> [Rev. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span id="x.xvi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3834"></span>[779:3835](0081530.htm#fr_3834) <span
id="x.xvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p23"></span> This expression seems to refer to what took
place in athletic combats.  The athletes were tested before fighting,
and those in every way qualified were permitted to fight, while the
others were rejected.  This testing, Valesius supposes, was called <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi-p23.1"></span>διάκρισις</span>.

<span id="fn_3835"></span>[779:3836](0081530.htm#fr_3835) <span
id="x.xvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p24"></span> [John xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)<span id="x.xvi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3836"></span>[779:3837](0081530.htm#fr_3836) <span
id="x.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p26"></span> The words here admit of two meanings:  that
something blasphemous might be uttered by them—such as speaking against
Christ and swearing by Cæsar:  or that some accusation against the
Christians might be uttered by them—confirming, for instance, the
reports of infanticide and incest prevalent against the Christians.  The
latter in this passage seems unquestionably to be the meaning.

<span id="fn_3837"></span>[779:3838](0081530.htm#fr_3837) <span
id="x.xvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p27"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="x.xvi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3838"></span>[780:3839](0081530.htm#fr_3838) <span
id="x.xvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p28"></span> Heinichen construes differently.  He makes
the “torturers astonished that Blandina gave her testimony that one kind
of torture was sufficient to deprive her of life.”  Perhaps the right
construction is to make <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p28.1"></span>ὅτι</span> mean “because” or “for:”  “They were
astonished as Blandina bearing her testimony, for one kind of torture
was sufficient to have killed her.”

<span id="fn_3839"></span>[780:3840](0081530.htm#fr_3839) <span
id="x.xvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p30"></span> The words <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p30.1"></span>ὑπερβεβλημένως καὶ ὑπὲρ πάντα ἄνθρωπον</span>
naturally go with <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p30.2"></span>ὑπομένων</span>, and therefore intimate that
Sanctus’ endurance was greater than human; but we doubt if this is
intended by the writer.

<span id="fn_3840"></span>[780:3841](0081530.htm#fr_3840) <span
id="x.xvi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p31"></span> [John vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span id="x.xvi-p31.1"></span>:  “He
that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his bosom shall
flow rivers of living water.”

<span id="fn_3841"></span>[780:3842](0081530.htm#fr_3841) <span
id="x.xvi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p34"></span> The holes were placed in a line, so that
the further the hole in which one leg was put from the hole in which the
other leg was put, the more nearly would the two legs form a straight
line, and the greater would be the pain.

<span id="fn_3842"></span>[781:3843](0081530.htm#fr_3842) <span
id="x.xvi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p37"></span> The dispensation is, that those who denied
were not set free, but confined with the others; and that this harsh
treatment and sad state of mind confirmed the resolution of those not
yet apprehended to confess Christ.  Various other explanations have been
given, but this seems the most reasonable.

<span id="fn_3843"></span>[781:3844](0081530.htm#fr_3843) <span
id="x.xvi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p38"></span> [Ps. xlv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)<span id="x.xvi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3844"></span>[781:3845](0081530.htm#fr_3844) <span
id="x.xvi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p39"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="x.xvi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3845"></span>[781:3846](0081530.htm#fr_3845) <span
id="x.xvi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p40"></span> Of Christian.

<span id="fn_3846"></span>[781:3847](0081530.htm#fr_3846) <span
id="x.xvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p43"></span> We have adopted here an emendation of
Routh’s.  The literal version of the common text is:  “The testimonies
of their departure were divided into every form.”

<span id="fn_3847"></span>[781:3848](0081530.htm#fr_3847) <span
id="x.xvi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p45"></span> The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p45.1"></span>εἰς τὸ δημόσιον</span>, was led “to the public
*building*” to the wild beasts.  The public *building* is taken to be
the amphitheatre.

<span id="fn_3848"></span>[781:3849](0081530.htm#fr_3848) <span
id="x.xvi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p46"></span> The words “several times” are represented
in Greek by <span class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi-p46.1"></span>διὰ
πλειόνων κλήρων</span>, lit. “through several lots.”  When there were
several athletes to contend, the pairs were determined by lot.  After
the first contest the victors were again formed into pairs by lot, until
finally there should be but one pair left.  See the process at the
Olympic games described in Lucian Hermotimus, c. xl. p. 782.

<span id="fn_3849"></span>[781:3850](0081530.htm#fr_3849) <span
id="x.xvi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p47"></span> The bestiarii, before fighting with wild
beasts, had to run the gauntlet.

<span id="fn_3850"></span>[781:3851](0081530.htm#fr_3850) <span
id="x.xvi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p48"></span> Rufinus translates *jugulati sunt*. 
Probably, “killed with the sword.”  The term may have been a technical
one, being applied to the gladiators or bestiarii, whose death may have
been looked on as a sacrifice to a god or a dead-hero.

<span id="fn_3851"></span>[782:3852](0081530.htm#fr_3851) <span
id="x.xvi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p50"></span> Blandina was a slave:  hence the mode of
punishment.  On this matter see Lipsius, *De Cruce*.  \[And my note, p.
784.\]

<span id="fn_3852"></span>[782:3853](0081530.htm#fr_3852) <span
id="x.xvi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p51"></span> Lord Hailes remarks that this alludes to
[Isa. xxvii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)<span
id="x.xvi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3853"></span>[782:3854](0081530.htm#fr_3853) <span
id="x.xvi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p54"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span id="x.xvi-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3854"></span>[782:3855](0081530.htm#fr_3854) <span
id="x.xvi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p56"></span> Heinichen renders “the bride’s garment,”
and explains in the following manner.  The bride is the Church, the
garment Christ, and the sons of perdition had no ideas what garment the
Church of Christ should wear, had no idea that they should be clothed
with Christ, and be filled with His Spirit.  It is generally taken to be
the marriage garment of [Matt. xxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012)<span id="x.xvi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3855"></span>[783:3856](0081530.htm#fr_3855) <span
id="x.xvi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p59"></span> She may have been his sister by birth, as
some have supposed, but the term “sister” would have been applied had
she been connected by no other tie than that of a common faith.

<span id="fn_3856"></span>[783:3857](0081530.htm#fr_3856) <span
id="x.xvi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p61"></span> [Rev. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)<span id="x.xvi-p61.1"></span>. 
Lardner thinks the passage is quoted from [Dan. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010)<span id="x.xvi-p61.2"></span>. 
*Credib*., part ii. c. 16.

<span id="fn_3857"></span>[783:3858](0081530.htm#fr_3857) <span
id="x.xvi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p64.1"></span>παλιγγενεσία</span>.  The term refers here to
the new state of affairs at the end of the world.

<span id="fn_3858"></span>[784:3859](0081530.htm#fr_3858) <span
id="x.xvi-p66.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p67"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="x.xvi-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3859"></span>[784:3860](0081530.htm#fr_3859) <span
id="x.xvi-p67.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p68"></span> [Rev.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Rev.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)<span id="x.xvi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3860"></span>[784:3861](0081530.htm#fr_3860) <span
id="x.xvi-p68.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p69"></span> The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p69.1"></span>τὴν πρὸς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς τῶν μαρτύρων
προσηγορίαν</span>, generally translated, “offered to them by their
brethren.”

<span id="fn_3861"></span>[784:3862](0081530.htm#fr_3861) <span
id="x.xvi-p71.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p72"></span> [1 Pet. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="x.xvi-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3862"></span>[784:3863](0081530.htm#fr_3862) <span
id="x.xvi-p72.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p73"></span> The Greek is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi-p73.1"></span>πᾶσι μὲν ἀπελογοῦντο</span>.  Rufinus
translated, “Placabant omnes, neminem accusabant.”  Valesius thought
that the words ought to be translated, “They rendered an account of
their faith to all;” or, “They defended themselves before all.” 
Heinichen has justified the translation in the text by an appeal to a
passage in Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl*., iv. 15.

<span id="fn_3863"></span>[784:3864](0081530.htm#fr_3863) <span
id="x.xvi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p74"></span> [Acts vii.
60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)<span id="x.xvi-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3864"></span>[784:3865](0081530.htm#fr_3864) <span
id="x.xvi-p76.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p77"></span> [Ps. xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004)<span id="x.xvi-p77.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note by the American Editor.](0081531)
