[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081177)  [Next](0081179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.i"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="vii.v.i-Page_368"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.v.i-p1.1"></span>The Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew.</span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.v.i-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.v.i-p3.1"></span>Here</span> beginneth the book of the Birth of
the Blessed Mary and the Infancy of the Saviour.  Written in Hebrew by
the Blessed Evangelist Matthew, and translated into Latin by the Blessed
Presbyter Jerome.

<span id="vii.v.i-p4"></span>To their well-beloved brother Jerome the
Presbyter, Bishops Cromatius and Heliodorus in the Lord, greeting.

<span id="vii.v.i-p5"></span>The birth of the Virgin Mary, and the
nativity and infancy of our Lord Jesus Christ, we find in apocryphal
books.  But considering that in them many things contrary to our faith
are written, we have believed that they ought all to be rejected, lest
perchance we should transfer the joy of Christ to Antichrist. <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612.md)   While, therefore, we were
considering these things, there came holy men, Parmenius and Varinus,
who said that your Holiness had found a Hebrew volume, written by the
hand of the most blessed Evangelist Matthew, in which also the birth of
the virgin mother herself, and the infancy of our Saviour, were
written.  And accordingly we entreat your affection by our Lord Jesus
Christ Himself, to render it from the Hebrew into Latin, <span
id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613.md) not so much for the attainment of
those things which are the insignia of Christ, as for the exclusion of
the craft of heretics, who, in order to teach bad doctrine, have mingled
their own lies with the excellent nativity of Christ, that by the
sweetness of life they might hide the bitterness of death.  It will
therefore become your purest piety, either to listen to us as your
brethren entreating, or to let us have as bishops exacting, the debt of
affection which you may deem due.

<span id="vii.v.i-p8"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.i-p8.1"></span>Reply to Their Letter by Jerome.</span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p9"></span>To my lords the holy and most blessed
Bishops Cromatius and Heliodorus, Jerome, a humble servant of Christ, in
the Lord greeting.

<span id="vii.v.i-p10"></span>He who digs in ground where he knows that
there is gold, <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614.md) does not
instantly snatch at whatever the uptorn trench may pour forth; but,
before the stroke of the quivering spade raises aloft the glittering
mass, he meanwhile lingers over the sods to turn them over and lift them
up, and especially he who has not added to his gains.  An arduous task
is enjoined upon me, since what your Blessedness has commanded me, the
holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew himself did not write for the
purpose of publishing.  For if he had not done it somewhat secretly, he
would have added it also to his Gospel which he published.  But he
composed this book in Hebrew; and so little did he publish it, that at
this day the book written in Hebrew by his own hand is in the possession
of very religious men, to whom in successive periods of time it has been
handed down by those that were before them.  And this book they never at
any time gave to any one to translate.  And so it came to pass, that
when it was published by a disciple of Manichæus named Leucius, who also
wrote the falsely styled Acts of the Apostles, this book afforded
matter, not of edification, but of perdition; and the opinion of the
Synod in regard to it was according to its deserts, that the ears of the
Church should not be open to it.  Let the snapping of those that bark
against us now cease; for we do not add this little book to the
canonical writings, but we translate what was written by an Apostle and
Evangelist, that we may disclose the falsehood of heresy.  In this work,
then, we obey the commands of pious bishops as well as oppose impious
heretics.  It is the love of Christ, therefore, which we fulfil,
believing that they will assist us by their prayers, who through our
obedience attain to a knowledge of the holy infancy of our Saviour.

<span id="vii.v.i-p12"></span>There is extant another letter to the same
bishops, attributed to Jerome:—

<span id="vii.v.i-p13"></span>You ask me to let you know what I think of
a book held by some to be about the nativity of St. Mary.  And so I wish
you to know that there is much in it that is false.  For one Seleucus,
who wrote the Sufferings of the Apostles, composed this book.  But, just
as he wrote what was true about their powers, and the miracles they
worked, but said a great deal that was false about their doctrine; so
here too he has invented many untruths out of his own head.  I shall
take care to render it word for word, exactly as it is in the <span
id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span id="vii.v.i-Page_369"></span>Hebrew,
since it is asserted that it was composed by the holy Evangelist
Matthew, and written in Hebrew, and set at the head of his Gospel. 
Whether this be true or not, I leave to the author of the preface and
the trustworthiness of the writer:  as for myself, I pronounce them
doubtful; I do not affirm that they are clearly false.  But this I say
freely—and I think none of the faithful will deny it—that, whether these
stories be true or inventions, the sacred nativity of St. Mary was
preceded by great miracles, and succeeded by the greatest; and so by
those who believe that God can do these things, they can be believed and
read without damaging their faith or imperilling their souls.  In short,
so far as I can, following the sense rather than the words of the
writer, and sometimes walking in the same path, though not in the same
footsteps, sometimes digressing a little, but still keeping the same
road, I shall in this way keep by the style of the narrative, and shall
say nothing that is not either written there, or might, following the
same train of thought, have been written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[368:1613](0081178.htm#fr_1612.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p6"></span> \[This introduction is, of itself, an
evidence of late origin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[368:1614](0081178.htm#fr_1613.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p7"></span> Lit., to Latin ears.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[368:1615](0081178.htm#fr_1614.md) <span
id="vii.v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v.i-p11"></span> Lit., conscious of gold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](0081179.md)
