[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081384)  [Next](0081386) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xliii"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p1"></span> <span id="page_592">p. 592</span> <span
id="vii.xliii-Page_592"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xliii-p1.1"></span>The Passing of Mary.</span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xliii-p3"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xliii-p3.1"></span>First Latin Form.</span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p4"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xliii-p4.1"></span>Concerning the Passing <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633) of the Blessed Virgin Mary.</span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p6.1"></span>In</span> that time before the Lord came to
His passion, and among many words which the mother asked of the Son, she
began to ask Him about her own departure, addressing Him as follows:—O
most dear Son, I pray Thy holiness, that when my soul goes out of my
body, Thou let me know on the third day before; and do Thou, beloved
Son, with Thy angels, receive it. <span
id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634)   Then He received the prayer of
His beloved mother, and said to her:  O palace and temple of the living
God, O blessed mother, <span id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) O
queen of all saints, and blessed above all women, before thou carriedst
me in thy womb, I always guarded thee, and caused thee to be fed daily
with my angelic food, <span id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636) as thou
knowest:  how can I desert thee, after thou hast carried me, and
nourished me, and brought me down in flight into Egypt, and endured many
hardships for me?  Know, then, that my angels have always guarded thee,
and will guard thee even until thy departure.  But after I undergo
suffering for men, as it is written, and rise again on the third day,
and after forty days ascend into heaven, when thou shalt see me coming
to thee <span id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637) with angels and
archangels, with saints and with virgins, and with my disciples, know
for certain that thy soul will be separated from the body, and I shall
carry it into heaven, where it shall never at all have tribulation or
anguish.  Then she joyed and gloried, and kissed the knees of her Son,
and blessed the Creator of heaven and earth, who gave her such a gift
through Jesus Christ her Son.

<span id="vii.xliii-p11"></span>In the second year, therefore, after the
ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, the most blessed Virgin Mary
continued always in prayer day and night.  And on the third day before
she passed away, an angel of the Lord came to her, and saluted her,
saying:  Hail, Mary, full of grace! the Lord be with thee.  And she
answered, saying:  Thanks to God.  Again he said to her:  Receive this
palm which the Lord promised to thee.  And she, giving thanks to God,
with great joy received from the hand of the angel the palm sent to
her.  The angel of the Lord said to her:  Thy assumption will be after
three days.  And she answered:  Thanks to God. <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638)

<span id="vii.xliii-p13"></span>Then she called Joseph of the city of
Arimathæa, and the other <span id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639)
disciples of the Lord; and when they, both relations and acquaintances,
were assembled, she announced her departure to all standing there.  Then
the blessed Mary washed <span id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640)
herself, and dressed herself like a queen, and waited the advent of her
Son, as He had promised to her.  And she asked all her relations to keep
beside <span id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641) her, and give her
comfort.  And she had along with her three virgins, Sepphora, Abigea,
and Zaël; but the disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ had been already
dispersed throughout the whole world to preach to the people of God.

<span id="vii.xliii-p17"></span>Then at the third hour <span
id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) there were great thunders, and
rains, and lightnings, and tribulation, and an earthquake, <span
id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) while queen Mary was standing in
her chamber.  John the evangelist and apostle was suddenly brought from
Ephesus, and entered the chamber of the blessed Mary, and saluted her,
and said to her:  Hail, Mary, full of grace! the Lord be with thee.  And
she answered:  Thanks to God.  And raising herself up, she kissed Saint
John.  And the blessed Mary said to him:  O my dearest son, why hast
<span id="page_593">p. 593</span> <span
id="vii.xliii-Page_593"></span>thou left me at such a time, and hast not
paid heed to the commands of thy Master, to take care of me, as He
commanded thee while He was hanging on the cross?  And he asked pardon
with bended knee.  Then the blessed Mary gave him her benediction, and
again kissed him.  And when she meant to ask him whence he came, and for
what reason he had come to Jerusalem, behold, all the disciples of the
Lord, except Thomas who is called Didymus, were brought by a cloud to
the door of the chamber of the blessed Mary.  They stood and went in,
and saluted the queen with the following words, and adored her:  Hail,
Mary, full of grace! the Lord be with thee.  And she eagerly rose
quickly, and bowed herself, and kissed them, and gave thanks to God. 
These are the names of the disciples of the Lord who were brought
thither in the cloud:  John the evangelist and James his brother, Peter
and Paul, Andrew, Philip, Luke, Barnabas, Bartholomew and Matthew,
Matthias who is called Justus, <span
id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) Simon the Chananæan, Judas and his
brother, Nicodemus and Maximianus, and many others who cannot be
numbered.  Then the blessed Mary said to her brethren:  What is this,
that you have all come to Jerusalem?  Peter, answering, said to her:  We
had need to ask this of thee, and dost thou question us?  Certainly, as
I think, none of us knows why we have come here to-day with such
rapidity.  I was at Antioch, and now I am here.  All declared plainly
the place where they had been that day.  And they all wondered that they
were there when they heard these things.  The blessed Mary said to
them:  I asked my Son, before He endured the passion, that He and you
should be at my death; and He granted me this gift.  Whence you may know
that my departure will be to-morrow. <span
id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645)   Watch and pray with me, that when
the Lord comes to receive my soul, He may find you watching.  Then all
promised that they would watch.  And they watched and prayed the whole
night, with psalms and chants, with great illuminations.

<span id="vii.xliii-p22"></span>And when the Lord’s day came, at the
third hour, just as the Holy Spirit descended upon the apostles in a
cloud, <span id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646) so Christ descended
with a multitude of angels, and received the soul of His beloved
mother.  For there was such splendour and perfume of sweetness, and
angels singing the songs of songs, where the Lord says, As a lily among
thorns, so is my love among the daughters, <span
id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) that all who were there present
fell on their faces, as the apostles fell when Christ transfigured
Himself before them on Mount Thabor, and for a whole hour and a half no
one was able to rise.  But when the light went away, and at the same
time with the light itself, the soul of the blessed virgin Mary was
taken up into heaven with psalms, and hymns, and songs of songs.  And as
the cloud went up the whole earth shook, and in one moment all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem openly saw the departure of St. Mary.

<span id="vii.xliii-p25"></span>And that same hour Satan entered into
them, and they began to consider what they were to do with her body. 
And they took up weapons, that they might burn her body and kill the
apostles, because from her had gone forth the dispersions of Israel, on
account of their sins and the gathering together of the Gentiles.  But
they were struck with blindness, striking their heads against the walls,
and striking each other. <span id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648)  
Then the apostles, alarmed by so much brightness, arose, and with psalms
carried the holy body down from Mount Zion to the valley of
Jehoshaphat.  But as they were going in the middle of the road, behold,
a certain Jew, <span id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649) Reuben by
name, wishing to throw to the ground the holy bier with the body of the
blessed Mary.  But his hands dried up, even to the elbow; whether he
would or not, he went down even to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, weeping
and lamenting because his hands were raised to the bier, and he was not
able to draw back his hands to himself.  And he began to ask the
apostles <span id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) that by their prayer
he might be saved and made a Christian.  Then the apostles, bending
their knees, asked the Lord to let him loose.  And he, being healed that
same hour, giving thanks to God and kissing the feet of the queen of all
the saints and apostles, was baptized in that same place, and began to
preach the name of our God Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.xliii-p29"></span>Then the apostles with great honour laid
the body in the tomb, weeping and singing through exceeding love and
sweetness.  And suddenly there shone round them a light from heaven, and
they fell to the ground, and the holy body was taken up by angels into
heaven.

<span id="vii.xliii-p30"></span>Then the most blessed Thomas was
suddenly brought to the Mount of Olivet, and saw the most blessed body
going up to heaven, and began to cry out and say:  O holy mother,
blessed mother, spotless mother, if I have now found grace because I see
thee, make thy servant joyful through thy compassion, because thou art
going to heaven.  Then the girdle with which the <span id="page_594">p.
594</span> <span id="vii.xliii-Page_594"></span>apostles had encircled
the most holy body was thrown down from heaven to the blessed Thomas. 
And taking it, and kissing it, and giving thanks to God, he came again
into the Valley of Jehoshaphat.  He found all the apostles and another
great crowd there beating their breasts on account of the brightness
which they had seen.  And seeing and kissing each other, the blessed
Peter said to him:  Truly thou hast always been obdurate and
unbelieving, because for thine unbelief it was not pleasing to God that
thou shouldst be along with us at the burial of the mother of the
Saviour.  And he, beating his breast, said:  I know and firmly believe
that I have always been a bad and an unbelieving man; therefore I ask
pardon of all of you for my obduracy and unbelief.  And they all prayed
for him.  Then the blessed Thomas said:  Where have you laid her body? 
And they pointed out the sepulchre with their finger.  And he said:  The
body which is called most holy is not there.  Then the blessed Peter
said to him:  Already on another occasion thou wouldst not believe the
resurrection of our Master and Lord at our word, unless thou went to
touch Him with thy fingers, and see Him; how wilt thou believe us that
the holy body is here?  Still he persists saying:  It is not here. 
Then, as it were in a rage, they went to the sepulchre, which was a new
one hollowed out in the rock, and took up the stone; but they did not
find the body, not knowing what to say, because they had been convicted
by the words of Thomas.  Then the blessed Thomas told them how he was
singing mass in India—he still had on his sacerdotal robes.  He, not
knowing the word of God, had been brought to the Mount of Olivet, and
saw the most holy body of the blessed Mary going up into heaven, and
prayed her to give him a blessing.  She heard his prayer, and threw him
her girdle which she had about her.  And the apostles seeing the belt
which they had put about her, glorifying God, all asked pardon of the
blessed Thomas, on account of the benediction which the blessed Mary had
given him, and because he had seen the most holy body going up into
heaven.  And the blessed Thomas gave them his benediction, and said: 
Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! <span id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651)

<span id="vii.xliii-p32"></span>And the same cloud by which they had
been brought carried them back each to his own place, just like Philip
when he baptized the eunuch, as is read in the Acts of the
Apostles; <span id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) and as Habakkuk the
prophet carried food to Daniel, who was in the lions’ den, and quickly
returned to Judæa. <span id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653)   And so
also the apostles quickly returned to where they had at first been, to
preach to the people of God.  Nor is it to be wondered at that He should
do such things, who went into the virgin and came out of her though her
womb was closed; who, though the gates were shut, went in to His
disciples; <span id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) who made the deaf
to hear, raised the dead, cleansed the lepers, gave sight to the
blind, <span id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) and did many other
wonderful things.  To believe this is no doubtful matter.

<span id="vii.xliii-p37"></span>I am Joseph who laid the Lord’s body in
my sepulchre, and saw Him rising again; and who, before the ascension
and after the ascension of the Lord, always kept his most sacred temple
the blessed ever-virgin Mary, and *who have kept* in writing and in my
breast the things which came forth from the mouth of God, and how the
things mentioned above were done by the judgment of God.  And I have
made known to all, Jews and Gentiles, those things which I saw with my
eyes, and heard with my ears; and as long as I live I shall not cease to
declare them.  And her, whose assumption is at this day venerated and
worshipped throughout the whole world, let us assiduously entreat that
she be mindful of us in the presence of her most pious Son in heaven, to
whom is praise and glory through endless ages of ages.  Amen. <span
id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656)

<span id="vii.xliii-p39"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[592:2634](0081385.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="vii.xliii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p5"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p5.1"></span>ms.</span> B, the assumption.  \[For the list
of <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xliii-p5.2"></span>mss.</span> used by
Tischendorf, see his *Apocal. Apocr*., p. xliii.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[592:2635](0081385.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="vii.xliii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p7"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> C adds:  And cause all the
apostles to be present at my departure.

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[592:2636](0081385.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="vii.xliii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p8"></span> Puerpera.

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[592:2637](0081385.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="vii.xliii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p9"></span> *Protevangelium of James*, ch. 8, p.
363.

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[592:2638](0081385.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="vii.xliii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p10"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> C has:  When, therefore, thou
shalt see my archangel Gabriel coming to thee with a palm which I shall
send to thee from heaven, know that I shall soon come to thee, my
disciples, and angels, etc.

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[592:2639](0081385.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="vii.xliii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p12"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p12.1"></span>ms.</span> C:  And she began to give great
thanks to God in these words:  My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my
spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[592:2640](0081385.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="vii.xliii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p14"></span> Or, other.

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[592:2641](0081385.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="vii.xliii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p15"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p15.1"></span>ms.</span> A, raised.  *Levavit* instead of
*lavit*.

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[592:2642](0081385.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="vii.xliii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p16"></span> Lit., guard.

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[592:2643](0081385.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="vii.xliii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p18"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> C inserts:  of the second day
after the angel had come to her with the palm.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[592:2644](0081385.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="vii.xliii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p19"></span> Or, earthquakes.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[593:2645](0081385.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="vii.xliii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p20"></span> It was Joseph, the other candidate for
the apostleship, who was called Justus ([Acts i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023)<span id="vii.xliii-p20.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[593:2646](0081385.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="vii.xliii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p21"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p21.1"></span>ms.</span> C adds:  And she showed them the
palm which the Lord had sent her from heaven by His angel.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[593:2647](0081385.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="vii.xliii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p23"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p23.1"></span>ms.</span> C has:  just as the Holy Spirit
appeared in a cloud to His disciples, viz., Peter, James, and John, when
He was transfigured, so, etc.

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[593:2648](0081385.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="vii.xliii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p24"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002)<span id="vii.xliii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[593:2649](0081385.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="vii.xliii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p26"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p26.1"></span>ms.</span> C:  By the divine vengeance, at
that very instant they began to strike and slay each other with their
weapons, and struck their heads against the walls like madmen.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[593:2650](0081385.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="vii.xliii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p27"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p27.1"></span>ms.</span> C inserts:  a scribe of the tribe
of Dan.

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[593:2651](0081385.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="vii.xliii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p28"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p28.1"></span>ms.</span> C adds:  and firmly to promise
that, if he were made whole by their prayers, he would become a
Christian.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[594:2652](0081385.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="vii.xliii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p31"></span> [Ps. cxxxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)<span id="vii.xliii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[594:2653](0081385.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="vii.xliii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p33"></span> [Acts viii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039)<span id="vii.xliii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[594:2654](0081385.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="vii.xliii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p34"></span> [Bel.
33-39](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#033)<span
id="vii.xliii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[594:2655](0081385.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="vii.xliii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p35"></span> [John xx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)<span id="vii.xliii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[594:2656](0081385.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="vii.xliii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p36"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p36.1"></span>ms.</span> C adds:  and in Cana of Galilee
made wine out of water.

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[594:2657](0081385.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="vii.xliii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xliii-p38"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xliii-p38.1"></span>ms.</span> C has this last section as
follows:  For I am Joseph, who laid the body of our Lord Jesus Christ in
my sepulchre, and saw Him and spoke with Him after His resurrection; who
afterwards kept His most pious mother in my house until her assumption
into the heavens, and served her according to my power; who also was
deemed worthy to hear and see from her holy mouth many secrets, which I
have written and keep in my heart.  That which I saw with mine eyes, and
heard with mine ears, of her holy and glorious assumption, I have
written for faithful Christians, and those that fear God; and while I
live I shall not cease to preach, speak, and write them to all nations. 
And let every Christian know, that if he keep this writing by him, even
in his house, whether he be cleric, or lay, or a woman, the devil will
not hurt him; his son will not be lunatic, or demoniac, or deaf, or
blind; no one will die suddenly in his house; in whatever tribulation he
cries to her, he will be heard; and in the day of his death he will have
her with her holy virgins for his help.  I beseech continually that the
same most pious and merciful queen may be always mindful of me, and all
who believe in her and hope before her most pious Son, or Lord Jesus
Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns God
through endless ages of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Passing of Mary:  Second Latin Form.](0081386)
