[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081381)  [Next](0081383.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xl"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p1"></span> <span id="page_575">p. 575</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_575"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xl-p1.1"></span>Revelation of Paul.</span>

<span id="vii.xl-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xl-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xl-p3.1"></span>Revelation</span> of the holy Apostle Paul:  the
things which were revealed to him when he went up even to the third
heaven, and was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable
words. <span id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524.md)

<span id="vii.xl-p5"></span>There dwelt a certain nobleman in the city
of Tarsus, in the house of St. Paul the apostle, in the government of
Theodosius the worshipful king, and of the most illustrious
Gratianus; <span id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525.md) and there was
revealed to him an angel of the Lord, saying:  Upturn the foundation of
this house, and lift up what thou shalt find.  But he thought that he
had had a dream.  And the angel having persisted even to a third vision,
the nobleman was compelled to upturn the foundation; and having dug, he
found a marble <span id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526.md) box containing
this revelation; and having taken it, he showed it to the ruler of the
city.  And the ruler, seeing it sealed up with lead, sent it to the King
Theodosius, thinking that it was something else. <span
id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527.md)   And the king having received it,
and transcribed it, sent the original writing to Jerusalem.  And there
was written in it thus:—

<span id="vii.xl-p9"></span>The word of the Lord came to me, saying: 
Say to this people, Till when do you sin, and add to your sin, and
provoke to anger the God who made you, saying that you are children to
Abraham, <span id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528.md) but doing the works
of Satan, going on in speaking against God, boasting only in your
addressing *of God*, but poor on account of the substance of sin?  Know,
ye sons of men, that the whole creation has been made subject to God;
but the human race alone, by sinning, provokes God to anger.  For often
the great light, the sun, has come before God, saying against men:  Lord
God Almighty, how long dost Thou endure all the sin of men?  Command me,
and I will burn them up.  And there came a voice to him:  My
long-suffering endures them all, that they may repent; but if not, they
shall come to me, and I will judge them.  And often also the moon and
the stars have come before God, saying:  Lord God Almighty, Thou hast
given us the dominion of the night, and we no longer cover the thefts,
and adulteries, and blood-sheddings of men; command us, and we shall do
marvels against them.  And there came a voice:  My long-suffering bears
with them, that they may turn to me; but if not, they shall come to me,
and I will judge them.  And in like manner also the sea cried out,
saying:  Lord God Almighty, the sons of men have profaned Thy holy name;
command me, and I shall rise up and cover the earth, and wipe out from
it <span id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529.md) the sons of men.  And
there came a voice, saying:  My long-suffering bears with them, that
they may repent; but if not, they shall come to me, and I will judge
them.  You see, ye sons of men, that the whole creation has been made
subject to God, but the human race alone sins before God.  On account of
all these things, bless God without ceasing, and yet more when the sun
is setting.  For at this hour all the angels come to God to adore Him,
and they bring before Him the works of men, of each what he has done
from morning even to evening, whether good or evil.  And one angel goes
rejoicing on account of man when he behaves well, and another goes with
a sad countenance.  All the angels at the appointed hour meet for the
worship of God, to bring each day’s works of men.  But do ye men bless
God without ceasing.  Whenever, therefore, at the appointed hour the
angels of pious men come, rejoicing and singing psalms, they meet for
the worship of the Lord; and, behold, the Spirit of God *says* to them: 
Whence do ye come rejoicing?  And they answered and said:  We are here
from the pious men, who in all piety spend their life, fearing the name
of God.  Command them, Lord, to abide even to the end in Thy
righteousness.  And there came to them a voice:  I have both kept and
will keep them void of offence in my kingdom.  And when it came to pass
that they went away, there came other angels with a cheerful
countenance, shining like the sun.  And behold a voice to them:  Whence
have ye come?  And they answered and said:  We have come from those who
have held themselves aloof from the world and the things in the world
for Thy holy name’s sake, who in deserts, and mountains, and caves, and
the <span id="page_576">p. 576</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_576"></span>dens of the earth, in beds on the ground,
and in fastings, spend their life. <span
id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530.md)   Command us to be with them.  And
there came a voice:  Go with them in peace, guarding them.  Moreover,
when they went away, behold, there came other angels to worship before
God, mourning and weeping.  And the Spirit went forth to meet them, and
there came a voice to them:  Whence have ye come?  And they answered and
said:  We have come from those who have been called by Thy name, and are
slaves to the matter of sin. <span id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531.md)
  Why, then, is it necessary to minister unto them?  And there came a
voice to them:  Do not cease to minister unto them; perhaps they will
turn; but if not, they shall come to me, and I will judge them.  Know,
sons of men, that all that is done by you day by day, the angels write
in the heavens.  Do you therefore cease not to bless God.

<span id="vii.xl-p14"></span>And I was in the Holy Spirit, and an angel
says to me:  Come, follow me, that I may show thee the place of the
just, where they go after their end.  And I went along with the angel,
and he brought me up into the heavens under the firmament; and I
perceived and saw powers great and dreadful, full of wrath, and through
the mouth of them a flame of fire coming out, and clothed in garments of
fire.  And I asked the angel:  Who are these?  And he said to me:  These
are they who are sent away to the souls of the sinners in the hour of
necessity; for they have not believed that there is judgment and
retribution.  And I looked up into the heaven, and saw angels, whose
faces shone like the sun, girded with golden girdles, having in their
hands prizes, on which the name of the Lord was inscribed, full of all
meekness and compassion.  And I asked the angel:  Who are these?  And he
answered and said to me:  These are they who are sent forth in the day
of the resurrection to bring the souls of the righteous, <span
id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532.md) who intrepidly walk according to
God. <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533.md)   And I said to the
angel:  I wish to see the souls of the righteous and of the sinners, how
they go out of the world.  And the angel said to me:  Look to the
earth.  And I looked, and saw the whole world as nothing disappearing
before me.  And I said to the angel:  Is this the greatness of men?  And
he said to me:  Yes; for thus every unjust man disappears.  And I
looked, and saw a cloud of fire wrapped over all the world; and I said: 
What is this, my lord?  And he said to me:  This is the unrighteousness
mingled with the destruction of the sinners.  And I wept, and said to
the angel:  I wished to see the departures of the righteous and of the
sinners, in what manner they go out of the world.  And the angel says to
me:  Paul, look down, and see what thou hast asked.  And I looked, and
saw one of the sons of men falling near death.  And the angel says to
me:  This is a righteous man, and, behold, all his works stand beside
him in the hour of his necessity. <span
id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534.md)   And there were beside him good
angels, and along with them also evil angels.  And the evil angels
indeed found no place in him, but the good took possession of <span
id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535.md) the soul of the righteous man, and
said to it:  Take note of the body whence thou art coming out; for it is
necessary for thee again to return to it in the day of the resurrection,
that thou mayst receive what God hath promised to the righteous.  And
the good angels who had received the soul of the righteous man, saluted
it, as being well known to them.  And it went with them; and the Spirit
came forth to meet them, saying:  Come, soul, enter into the place of
the resurrection, which God hath prepared for His righteous ones.  And
the angel said to me:  Look down to the earth, and behold the soul of
the impious, how it goes forth from its tabernacle, which has provoked
God to anger, saying, Let us eat and drink; <span
id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536.md) for who is it that has gone down to
Hades, and come up and announced that there is judgment and
retribution?  And take heed, and see all his works which he has done
standing before him.  And the evil angels came and the good.  The good
therefore found no place of rest in it, but the evil took possession of
it, saying:  O wretched soul, pay heed to thy flesh; take note of that
whence thou art coming forth, for thou must return into thy flesh in the
day of the resurrection, that thou mayst receive the recompense of thy
sins.  And when it had gone forth from its tabernacle, the angel who had
lived along with it ran up to it, saying to it:  O wretched soul,
whither goest thou?  I am he who each day wrote down thy sins.  Thou
hast destroyed the time of repentance; be exceedingly ashamed.  And when
it came, all the angels saw it, and cried out with one voice, saying: 
Woe to thee, wretched soul! what excuse hast thou come to give to God? 
And the angel of that soul said:  Weep for it, all of you, along with
me.  And the angel came up, and worshipped the Lord, saying:  Lord,
behold the soul which has dwelt in wickedness in its time, and in its
temporary life; do to it according to Thy decision.  And there came a
voice to that soul, saying:  Where is the fruit of thy righteousness? 
And it was silent, <span id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537.md) not being
able to give an answer.  And again there came a voice to it:  He who has
shown mercy will have mercy shown <span id="page_577">p. 577</span>
<span id="vii.xl-Page_577"></span>to him; <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538.md) he who has not shown mercy will not
have mercy shown to him.  Let this soul be delivered to the merciless
angel Temeluch, and let it be cast into outer darkness, where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth.  And there was a voice as of tens of
thousands, saying:  Righteous art Thou, O Lord, and righteous is Thy
judgment. <span id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539.md)   And moreover I
saw, and, behold, another soul was led by an angel; and it wept,
saying:  Have mercy upon me, O righteous Judge, and deliver me from the
hand of this angel, because he is dreadful and merciless.  And a voice
came to it, saying:  Thou wast altogether merciless, and for this reason
thou hast been delivered up to such an angel.  Confess thy sins which
thou hast done in the world.  And that soul said:  I have not sinned, O
righteous Judge.  And the Lord said to that soul:  Verily thou seemest
as if thou wert in the world, and wert hiding thy deeds from men. 
Knowest thou not that whensoever any one dies, his deeds run before him,
whether they are good or evil?  And when it heard this, it was silent. 
And I heard the Judge saying:  Let the angel come, having in his hands
the record of thy sins.  And the Judge says to the angel:  I say to thee
the angel, Disclose all.  Say what he has done five years before his
death.  By myself I swear to thee, that in the first period of his life
there was forgetfulness of all his former sins.  And the angel answered
and said:  Lord, command the souls to stand beside their angels; and
that same hour they stood beside them.  And the lord of that soul said: 
Take note of these souls, and whether thou hast in any way sinned
against them.  And it answered and said:  Lord, a year has not been
completed since I killed the one and lived with the other.  And not only
this, but I also wronged it.  And the Lord said to it:  Knowest thou not
that he who wrongs any one in the world is kept, as soon as he dies, in
the place until he whom he has wronged come, and both shall be judged
before me, and each receive according to his works?  And I heard a voice
saying:  Let this soul be delivered to the angel Tartaruch, and guarded
till the great day of judgment.  And I heard a voice as of tens of
thousands saying:  Righteous art Thou, O Lord, and righteous Thy
judgment.

<span id="vii.xl-p23"></span>And the angel says to me:  Hast thou seen
all these things?  And I answered:  Yes my lord.  And again he said to
me:  Come, follow me, and I shall show thee the place of the righteous. 
And I followed him, and he set me before the doors of the city.  And I
saw a golden gate, and two golden pillars before it, and two golden
plates upon it full of inscriptions.  And the angel said to me:  Blessed
is he who shall enter into these doors; because not every one goeth in,
but only those who have single-mindedness, and guiltlessness, and a pure
heart. <span id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540.md)   And I asked the
angel:  For what purpose have the inscriptions been graven on these
plates?  And he said to me:  These are the names of the righteous, and
of those who serve God.  And I said to him:  Is it so that their names
have been inscribed in heaven itself while they are yet alive?  And the
angel said to me:… <span id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541.md) of the
angels, such as serve Him well are acknowledged by God.  And straightway
the gate was opened, and there came forth a hoary-headed man to meet us;
and he said to me:  Welcome, Paul, beloved of God! and, with a joyful
countenance, he kissed me with tears.  And I said to him:  Father, why
weepest thou?  And he said to me:  Because God hath prepared many good
things for men, and they do not His will in order that they may enjoy
them.  And I asked the angel:  My lord, who is this?  And he said to
me:  This is Enoch, the witness of the last day. <span
id="fr_2542"></span>[2543](#fn_2542.md)   And the angel says to me:  See
that whatever I show thee in this place thou do not announce, except
what I tell thee.  And he set me upon <span
id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543.md) the river whose source springs up
in the circle of heaven; and it is this river which encircleth the whole
earth.  And he says to me:  This river is Ocean.  And there was then a
great light.  And I said:  My lord, what is this?  And he said to me: 
This is the land of the meek.  Knowest thou not that it is written,
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth? <span
id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544.md)   The souls of the righteous,
therefore, are kept in this place.  And I said to the angel:  When,
then, will they be made manifest?  And he said to me:  When the Judge
shall come in the day of the resurrection, and sit down.  Then,
accordingly, shall he command, and shall reveal the earth, and it shall
be lighted up; and the saints shall appear in it, and shall delight
themselves in the good <span id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545.md) that
have been reserved from the foundation of the world.  And there were by
the bank of the river, trees planted, full of different fruits.  And I
looked towards the rising of the sun, and I saw there trees of great
size full of fruits; and that land was more brilliant than silver and
gold; and there were vines growing on those date-palms, and myriads of
shoots, and myriads of clusters on each branch.  And I said to the
archangel:  What is this, my lord?  And <span id="page_578">p.
578</span> <span id="vii.xl-Page_578"></span>he says to me:  This is the
Acherusian lake, and within it the city of God.  All are not permitted
to enter into it, except whosoever shall repent of his sins; and as soon
as he shall repent, and alter his life, he is delivered to Michael, and
they cast him into the Acherusian lake, and then he brings him in the
city of God, near the righteous.  And I wondered and blessed God at all
that I saw.  And the angel said to me:  Follow me, that I may bring thee
into the city of God, and into its light.  And its light was greater
than the light of the world, and greater than gold, and walls encircled
it.  And the length and the breadth of it were a hundred stadia.  And I
saw twelve gates, exceedingly ornamented, leading into the city; and
four rivers encircled it, flowing with milk, and honey, and oil, and
wine.  And I said to the angel:  My lord, what are these rivers?  And he
said to me:  These are the righteous who, when in the world, did not
make use of these things, but humbled themselves for the sake of God;
and here they receive a recompense ten thousand fold.

<span id="vii.xl-p30"></span>And I, going into the city, saw a very
lofty tree before the doors of the city, having no fruit, and a few men
under it; and they wept exceedingly, and the trees bent down to them. 
And I, seeing them, wept, and asked the angel:  Who are these, that they
have not turned to go into the city?  And he said to me:  Yes, the root
of all evils is vainglory.  And I said:  And these trees, why have they
thus humbled themselves?  And the angel answered and said to me:  For
this reason the trees are not fruit-bearing, because they have not
withheld themselves from vaunting.  And I asked the angel:  My lord, for
what reason have they been put aside before the doors of the city?  And
he answered and said to me:  On account of the great goodness of God,
since by this way Christ is going to come into the city, and that those
who go along with Him may plead for these men, and that they may be
brought in along with them.  And I was going along, guided by the angel,
and he set me upon the river.  And I saw there all the prophets; and
they came and saluted me, saying:  Welcome, Paul, beloved of God.  And I
said to the angel:  My lord, who are these?  And he said to me:  These
are all the prophets, and these are the songs of all the
prophecies, <span id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546.md) and of whoever
hath grieved his soul, not doing its will, for God’s sake.  Having
departed, then, he comes here, and the prophets salute him.  And the
angel brought me to the south of the city, where the river of milk is. 
And I saw there all the infants that King Herod slew for the Lord’s
name’s sake.  And the angel took me again to the east of the city, and I
saw there Abraham, Isaac, Jacob.  And I asked the angel:  My lord, what
place is this?  And he said to me:  Every one who is hospitable to men
comes hither when he comes out of the world, and they salute him as a
friend of God on account of his love to strangers.  And again he took me
away to another place, and I saw there a river like oil on the north of
the city, and I saw people there rejoicing and singing praises.  And I
asked:  Who are these, my lord?  And he said to me:  These are they who
have given themselves up to God; for they are brought into this city. 
And I looked, and saw in the midst of the city an altar, great and very
lofty; and there was one standing near the altar, whose face shone like
the sun, and he had in his hands a psaltery and a harp, and he sung the
Alleluia delightfully, and his voice filled all the city.  And all with
one consent accompanied him, so that the city was shaken by their
shouting.  And I asked the angel:  Who is this that singeth
delightfully, whom all accompany?  And he said to me:  This is the
prophet David; this is the heavenly Jerusalem.  When, therefore, Christ
shall come in His second appearing, David himself goes forth with all
the saints.  For as it is in the heavens, so also upon earth:  for it is
not permitted without David to offer sacrifice even in the day of the
sacrifice of the precious body and blood of Christ; but it is necessary
for David to sing the Alleluia.  And I asked the angel:  My lord, what
is the meaning of Alleluia?  It is called in Hebrew, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xl-p31.1"></span>thebel</span>, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xl-p31.2"></span>marematha</span>—speech to God
who founded all things:  let us glorify Him in the same.  So that every
one who sings the Alleluia glorifies God.

<span id="vii.xl-p32"></span>When these things, therefore, had been thus
said to me by the angel, he led me outside of the city, and the
Acherusian lake, and the good land, and set me upon the river of the
ocean that supports the firmament of the heaven, and said to me: 
Knowest thou where I am going?  And I said:  No, my lord.  And he said
to me:  Follow me, that I may show thee where the souls of the impious
and the sinners are.  And he took me to the setting of the sun, and
*where* the beginning of the heaven had been founded upon the river of
the ocean.  And I saw beyond the river, and there was no light there,
but darkness, and grief, and groaning; and I saw a bubbling river, and a
great multitude both of men and women who had been cast into it, some up
to the knees, others up to the navel, and many even up to the crown of
the head.  And I asked:  Who are these?  And he said to me:  These are
they who lived unrepenting in fornications and adulteries.  And I saw at
the south-west of the river another river, where there flowed a river of
fire, and there was there a multitude of many souls.  And I asked the
angel:  Who are these, <span id="page_579">p. 579</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_579"></span>my lord?  And he said to me:  These are the
thieves, and slanderers, and flatterers, who did not set up God as their
help, but hoped in the vanity of their riches.  And I said to him:  What
is the depth of this river?  And he said to me:  Its depth has no
measure, but it is immeasurable.  And I groaned and wept because of
mankind.  And the angel said to me:  Why weepest thou?  Art thou more
merciful than God? for, being holy, God, repenting over men, waits for
their conversion and repentance; but they, deceived by their own will,
come here, and are eternally punished.  And I looked into the fiery
river, and saw an old man dragged along by two, and they pulled him in
up to the knee.  And the angel Temeluch coming, laid hold of an iron
with his hand, and with it drew up the entrails of that old man through
his mouth.  And I asked the angel:  My lord, who is this that suffers
this punishment?  And he said to me:  This old man whom thou seest was a
presbyter; and when he had eaten and drunk, then he performed the
service of God.  And I saw there another old man carried in haste by
four angels; and they threw him into the fiery river up to the girdle,
and he was frightfully burnt by the lightnings.  And I said to the
angel:  Who is this, my lord?  And he said to me:  This whom thou seest
was a bishop, and that name indeed he was well pleased to have; but in
the goodness of God he did not walk, righteous judgment he did not
judge, the widow and the orphan he did not pity, he was neither
affectionate nor hospitable; <span id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547.md)
but now he has been recompensed according to his works.  And I looked,
and saw in the middle of the river another man up to the navel, having
his hands all bloody, and worms were coming up through his mouth.  And I
asked the angel:  Who is this, my lord?  And he said to me:  This whom
thou seest was a deacon, who ate and drank, and ministered to God.  And
I looked to another place where there was a brazen wall in flames, and
within it men and women eating up their own tongues, dreadfully judged. 
And I asked the angel:  Who are these, my lord?  And he said to me: 
These are they who in the church speak against their neighbours, and do
not attend to the word of God.  And I looked, and saw a bloody pit.  And
I said:  What is this pit?  And he said to me:  This is the place where
are cast the wizards, and sorcerers, and the whoremongers, and the
adulterers, and those that oppress widows and orphans.  And I saw in
another place women wearing black, and led away into a dark place.  And
I asked:  Who are these, my lord?  And he said to me:  These are they
who did not listen to their parents, but before their marriage defiled
their virginity.  And I saw women wearing white robes, being blind, and
standing upon obelisks of fire; and an angel was mercilessly beating
them, saying:  Now you know where you are; you did not attend when the
Scriptures were read to you.  And the angel said to me:  These are they
who corrupted themselves and killed their infants.  Their infants
therefore came crying out:  Avenge us of our mothers.  And they were
given to an angel to be carried away into a spacious place, but their
parents into everlasting fire.

<span id="vii.xl-p34"></span>And the angel took me up from these
torments, and set me above a well, which had seven seals upon its
mouth.  And the angel who was with me said to the angel at the well of
that place:  Open the well, that Paul the beloved of God may see,
because there has been given to him authority to see the torments.  And
the angel of the place said to me:  Stand afar off, until I open the
seals.  And when he had opened them, there came forth a stench which it
was impossible to bear.  And having come near the place, I saw that well
filled with darkness and gloom, and great narrowness of space in it. 
And the angel who was with me said to me:  This place of the well which
thou seest is cast off from the glory of God, and none of the angels is
importunate in behalf of them; and as many as have professed that the
holy Mary is not the mother of God, and that the Lord did not become man
out of her, and that the bread of the thanksgiving and the cup of
blessing are not His flesh and blood, <span
id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548.md) are cast into this well:  and as I
said before no angel is importunate in their behalf.  And I saw towards
the setting of the sun, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth,
many men and women there tormented.  And I said to the angel:  Who are
these, my lord?  And he said to me:  These are they who say that there
is no resurrection of the dead; and to them mercy never comes.

<span id="vii.xl-p38"></span>Having heard this, I wept bitterly; and
looking up into the firmament, I saw the heaven opened, and the
archangel Gabriel coming down with hosts of angels, who were going round
about all the torments.  And they who were judged in the torments seeing
them, all cried out with one loud voice:  Have mercy upon us, Gabriel,
who standest in the presence of God; for we heard that there was a
judgment:  behold, we know it.  And the archangel Gabriel answered and
said:  As the Lord liveth, beside whom I stand, night and day without
ceasing I plead in behalf <span id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_580"></span>of the race of men; but they did not do any
good when in life, but spent the period of their life in vanity.  And
now I shall weep, even I, along with the beloved Paul; perhaps the good
Lord may have compassion, and grant you remission.  And they assented
with one voice:  Have mercy upon us, O Lord.  And they fell down before
God, and supplicated, saying:  Have mercy, O Lord, upon the sons of men
whom Thou hast made after Thine image.  And the heaven was shaken like a
leaf, and I saw the four and twenty elders lying on their face; and I
saw the altar, and the throne, and the veil; and all of them entreated
the glory of God; <span id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549.md) and I saw
the Son of God with glory and great power coming down to the
earth. <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550.md)   And when the sound
of the trumpet took place, all who were in the torments cried out,
saying:  Have mercy upon us Son of God; for to Thee has been given power
over things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth. 
And there came a voice saying:  What good work have you done, that you
are asking for rest?  For you have done as you wished, and have not
repented, but you have spent your life in profligacy.  But now for the
sake of Gabriel, the angel of my righteousness and for the sake of Paul
my beloved, I give you a night and the day of the holy Lord’s day, on
which I rose from the dead, for rest.  And all who were in the torments
cried out, saying:  We bless Thee, O Son of the living God; better for
us is such rest than the life which we lived when spending our time in
the world.

<span id="vii.xl-p41"></span>And after these things the angel says to
me:  Behold, thou hast seen all the torments:  come, follow me, that I
may lead thee away to paradise, and that thou mayst change thy soul by
the sight of the righteous; for many desire to salute thee.  And he took
me by an impulse of the Spirit, and brought me into paradise.  And he
says to me:  This is paradise, where Adam and Eve transgressed.  And I
saw there a beautiful tree of great size, on which the Holy Spirit
rested; and from the root of it there came forth all manner of most
sweet-smelling water, parting into four channels.  And I said to the
angel:  My lord, what is this tree, that there comes forth from it a
great abundance of this water, and where does it go?  And he answered
and said to me:  Before the heaven and the earth existed, He divided
them into four kingdoms and heads, of which the names are Phison, Gehon,
Tigris, Euphrates.  And having again taken hold of me by the hand, he
led me near the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.  And he says to
me:  This is the tree by means of which death came into the world, and
Adam took of the fruit of it from his wife, and ate; and thereafter they
were cast out hence.  And he showed me another, the tree of life, and
said to me:  This the cherubim and the flaming sword guard.  And when I
was closely observing the tree, and wondering, I saw a woman coming from
afar off, and a multitude of angels singing praises to her.  And I asked
the angel:  Who is this, my lord, who is in so great honour and beauty? 
And the angel says to me:  This is the holy Mary, the mother of the
Lord.  And she came and saluted me, saying:  Welcome, Paul, beloved of
God, and angels, and men; thou hast proclaimed the word of God in the
world, and established churches, and all bear testimony to thee who have
been saved by means of thee:  for, having been delivered from the
deception of idols through thy teaching, they come here.

<span id="vii.xl-p42"></span>While they were yet speaking to me, I
gazed, and saw other three men coming.  And I asked the angel:  Who are
these, my lord?  And he said to me:  These are Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, the righteous forefathers.  And they came and saluted me,
saying:  Welcome, Paul, beloved of God.…God did not grieve us.  But we
know thee in the flesh, before thou camest forth out of the world.  And
in succession they told me their names from Abraham to Manasseh.  And
one of them, Joseph who was sold in Egypt, says to me:  Hear me, Paul,
friend of God:  I did not requite my brethren who cursed me.  For
blessed is he who is able to endure trial, because the Lord will give
him in requital sevenfold reward in the world to come. <span
id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551.md)   And while he was yet speaking
with me, I saw another coming afar off, and the appearance of him was as
the appearance of an angel.  And I asked the angel, saying:  My lord,
who is this?  And he said to me:  This is Moses the lawgiver, by whom
God led forth the children of Israel out of the slavery of Egypt.  And
when he came near me, he saluted me weeping.  And I said to him: 
Father, why weepest thou, being righteous and meek? <span
id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552.md)   And he answered and said to me: 
I must weep for every man, because I brought trouble upon a people that
does not understand, and they have not borne fruit; and I see the sheep
of which I was shepherd scattered, and the toil which I toiled for the
children of Israel has been counted for nothing; and they saw
powers <span id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553.md) and hosts in the midst
of them, and they did not understand; and I see the Gentiles
worshipping, and believing through thy word, and being converted, and
coming here, and out of my people that was so great not one has
understood.  For, when the Jews hanged the Son of God upon the cross,
all the angels and archangels, and the righteous, and the whole creation
<span id="page_581">p. 581</span> <span id="vii.xl-Page_581"></span>of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth,
lamented and mourned with a great lamentation, but the impious and
insensate Jews did not understand; wherefore there has been prepared for
them the fire everlasting, and the worm that dies not.

<span id="vii.xl-p46"></span>While he was yet speaking, there came other
three, and saluted me, saying:  Welcome, Paul, beloved of God, the boast
of the churches, and model of angels.  And I asked:  Who are you?  And
the first said:  I am Isaiah, whom Manasseh sawed with a wood saw. <span
id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554.md)   And the second said:  I am
Jeremiah, whom the Jews stoned, but they remained burnt up with
everlasting fire.  And the third said:  I am Ezekiel, whom the slayers
of the Messiah pierced; all these things have we endured, and we have
not been able to turn the stony heart of the Jews.  And I threw myself
on my face, entreating the goodness of God, because He had had mercy
upon me, and had delivered me from the race of the Hebrews.  And there
came a voice saying:  Blessed art thou, Paul, beloved of God; and
blessed are those who through thee have believed in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, because for them has been prepared everlasting life.

<span id="vii.xl-p48"></span>While this voice was yet speaking, there
came another, crying:  Blessed art thou, Paul.  And I asked the angel: 
Who is this, my lord?  And he said to me:  This is Noah, who lived in
the time of the deluge.  And when we had saluted each other, I asked
him:  Who art thou?  And he said to me:  I am Noah, who in a hundred
years built the ark, and without putting off the coat which I wore, or
shaving my head; moreover, I practised continence, and did not come near
my wife; and in the hundred years my coat was not dirtied, and the hair
of my head was not diminished.  And I ceased not to proclaim to men,
Repent, for, behold, a deluge is coming.  And no one paid heed; but all
derided me, not refraining from their lawless deeds, until the water of
the deluge came and destroyed them all.

<span id="vii.xl-p49"></span>And looking away, I saw other two from afar
off.  And I asked the angel:  Who are these, my lord?  And he said to
me:  These are Enoch and Elias.  And they came and saluted me, saying: 
Welcome, Paul, beloved of God!  And I said to them:  Who are you?  And
Elias the prophet answered and said to me:  I am Elias the prophet, who
prayed to God, and He caused that no rain should come down upon the
earth for three years and six months, on account of the unrighteousness
of the sons of men.  For often, of a truth, even the angel besought God
on account of the rain; and I heard, Be patient until Elias my beloved
shall pray, and I send rain upon the earth. <span
id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[575:2525](0081382.htm#fr_2524.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p4"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.xl-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[575:2526](0081382.htm#fr_2525.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p6"></span> The <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xl-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> have Kontianus.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[575:2527](0081382.htm#fr_2526.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p7"></span> Or, according to the primary meaning of the
word, shining, sparkling.  The translation of the Syriac version has, “a
box of white glass.”

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[575:2528](0081382.htm#fr_2527.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p8"></span> Syr., Thinking that there was something of
gold within it.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[575:2529](0081382.htm#fr_2528.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p10"></span> Syr., of the living God.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[575:2530](0081382.htm#fr_2529.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p11"></span> Or, sweep off it.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[576:2531](0081382.htm#fr_2530.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p12"></span> Comp. [Heb. xi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038.md)<span id="vii.xl-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[576:2532](0081382.htm#fr_2531.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p13"></span> i.e., to sinful matter—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xl-p13.1"></span>ὕλη</span>—the source of
the <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xl-p13.2"></span>σῶμα</span> in
the Gnostic doctrine.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[576:2533](0081382.htm#fr_2532.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p15"></span> Comp. [Matt. xiii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041.md)<span id="vii.xl-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[576:2534](0081382.htm#fr_2533.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p16"></span> Or, come to God.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[576:2535](0081382.htm#fr_2534.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p17"></span> Comp. [Rev. xiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.xl-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[576:2536](0081382.htm#fr_2535.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p18"></span> Or, bare rule over.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[576:2537](0081382.htm#fr_2536.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p19"></span> [Isa.
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013.md), [1 Cor.
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032.md)<span id="vii.xl-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[576:2538](0081382.htm#fr_2537.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p20"></span> Lit., shut up.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[577:2539](0081382.htm#fr_2538.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p21"></span> [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.xl-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[577:2540](0081382.htm#fr_2539.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p22"></span> [Ps. cxix.
137](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#137.md)<span id="vii.xl-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[577:2541](0081382.htm#fr_2540.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p24"></span> Comp. [Ps. xxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xl-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[577:2542](0081382.htm#fr_2541.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p25"></span> The hiatus is thus filled up in the
Syriac:  Yes, not only are their names written, but their works from day
to day:  the angel their minister brings tidings of their works every
day from morning to morning; they are known to God by their hearts and
their works.  And after they are recorded, if there happen to them a
matter of sin or deficiency, it is purified by chastisement according to
their sin, that there be not unto them any defect in their strivings.

<span id="fn_2542"></span>[577:2543](0081382.htm#fr_2542.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p26"></span> [Rev. xi.
3-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xl-p26.1"></span>. 
Enoch and Elijah were supposed to be the two witnesses there mentioned.

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[577:2544](0081382.htm#fr_2543.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p27"></span> Or, above.

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[577:2545](0081382.htm#fr_2544.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p28"></span> [Matt. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.xl-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[577:2546](0081382.htm#fr_2545.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p29"></span> Or, the good things.

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[578:2547](0081382.htm#fr_2546.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p31"></span> Syr., This is the place of the prophets. 
A very slight change in the Greek text would give this reading.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[579:2548](0081382.htm#fr_2547.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p33"></span> Comp. [1 Tim. iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xl-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[579:2549](0081382.htm#fr_2548.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p35"></span> The Syriac has:  Those who do not confess
Jesus Christ, nor His resurrection, nor His humanity, but consider Him
as all mortal, and who say that the sacrament of the body of our Lord is
bread.

<span id="vii.xl-p36"></span>The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xl-p36.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span> in the text was the occasion of
the three years’ struggle between Nestorius and Cyril of Alexandria,
which ended by the condemnation of the former by the Council of Ephesus,
<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xl-p36.2"></span>a.d.</span> 431.

<span id="vii.xl-p37"></span>The view of the Eucharist in the text is
not inconsistent with an early date, though it must be remembered that
the idea of a substantial presence became the orthodox doctrine only
after the Second Council of Nicæa in <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xl-p37.1"></span>a.d.</span> 787.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[580:2550](0081382.htm#fr_2549.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p39"></span> [Rev. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.xl-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[580:2551](0081382.htm#fr_2550.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p40"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.xl-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[580:2552](0081382.htm#fr_2551.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p43"></span> Comp. [Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.xl-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[580:2553](0081382.htm#fr_2552.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p44"></span> [Num. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xl-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[580:2554](0081382.htm#fr_2553.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p45"></span> Or, miracles.

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[581:2555](0081382.htm#fr_2554.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p47"></span> For this tradition, see the Bible
Dictionaries under Manasseh.  Comp. [Heb. xi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037.md)<span id="vii.xl-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[581:2556](0081382.htm#fr_2555.md) <span
id="vii.xl-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p50"></span> Here the \[Greek\]<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xl-p50.1"></span>ms.</span> abruptly ends.  The Syriac thus
continues:—And He gave not until I called upon Him again; then He gave
unto them.  But blessed art thou, O Paul, that thy generation and those
thou teachest are the sons of the kingdom.  And know thou, O Paul, that
every man who believes through thee hath a great blessing, and a
blessing is reserved for him.  Then he departed from me.  And the angel
who was with me led me forth, and said unto me:  Lo, unto thee is given
this mystery and revelation.  As thou pleasest, make it known unto the
sons of men.—And then follow details of the depositing of the revelation
under the foundation of the house in Tarsus,—details which Tischendorf
says the translator of the Syriac did not find in his original.  \[The
close of the English translation of the Syriac version is given in full
by Tischendorf (pp. 68, 69).  It varies greatly from the above paragraph
in the text, besides the addition of the details which Tischendorf
regards as spurious.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation of John.](0081383.md)
