[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081315)  [Next](0081317.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.xvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p2"></span>And Nicodemus rising up, stood in the
midst of the counsel, and said:  You have said rightly.  And are not the
men who have come down from Galilee God-fearing, men of peace, hating a
lie?  And they recounted with an oath, how “we saw Jesus sitting on
Mount Mambre with his disciples, and he taught them in our hearing,” and
that they saw him taken up into heaven.  And no one asked them this: 
How he was taken up into heaven.  And, as the writing of the holy book
teaches us, holy Elias too was taken up into heaven, and Elisæus cried
out with a loud voice, and Elias threw his sheepskin over Elisæus; and
again Elisæus threw that sheepskin over the Jordan, and went over and
came to Jericho.  And the sons of the prophets met him, and said to
Elisæus, Where is thy master Elias?  And he said, He has been taken up
into heaven.  And they said to Elisæus, Has a spirit snatched him away,
and thrown him upon one of the mountains?  But rather let us take our
boys <span id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967.md) with us and seek him. 
And they persuaded Elisæus, and he went with them.  And they sought him
for three days and three nights, and found him not, because he was taken
up.  And now, men, hear me, and let us send into all Israel, and see
lest Jesus can have been taken up somewhere or other, and thrown upon
one of the mountains.  And that saying pleased all.  And they sent to
all the mountains of Israel to seek Jesus, and they found Him not; but
they found Joseph of Arimathæa, and no one dared to lay hold of him.

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p4"></span>And they reported to the elders and
priests and Levites:  We have gone round all the mountains of Israel,
and not found Jesus; but we have found Joseph in Arimathæa.  And hearing
of Joseph, they rejoiced, and gave glory to the God of Israel.  And the
rulers of the synagogue, and the priests and the Levites, taking counsel
in what manner they should send to Joseph, took paper, and wrote to
Joseph:—

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p5"></span>Peace to thee and all that is thine!  We
know that we have sinned against God, and against thee; and thou hast
prayed to the God of Israel, and He has delivered thee out of our
hands.  And now deign to come to thy fathers and thy children, because
we have been vehemently grieved.  We have all sought for thee—we who
opened the door, and found thee not.  We know that we counselled evil
counsel against thee; but the Lord hath supplanted our counsel against
thee.  Thou art worthy to be honoured, father Joseph, by all the people.

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p6"></span>And they chose out of all Israel seven
men friendly to Joseph, whom also Joseph knew to be friendly; and the
rulers of the synagogue and the priests and the Levites say to them: 
See, if he take the letter and read it, for certain he will come with
you to us; but if he do not read it, you may know that he is
ill-disposed toward us, and, saluting him in peace, return to us.  And
blessing them, they sent them away.  And they came to Arimathæa to
Joseph, and <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="vii.xv.xvi-Page_446"></span>adored him on their face upon the
ground, and said:  Peace to thee and all thine!  And Joseph said:  Peace
to you, and to all the people of Israel!  And they gave him the roll of
the letter.  And Joseph took and read it, and rolled up the letter, and
blessed God, and said:  Blessed *be* the Lord God, who hath delivered
Israel from shedding innocent blood; and blessed *be* God, who sent His
angel, and covered me under his wings.  And he kissed them, and set a
table for them; and they ate and drank, and slept there.

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p7"></span>And they rose in the morning; and Joseph
saddled his ass, and travelled with them, and they came into the holy
city Jerusalem.  And there met them all the people, crying out, and
saying:  Peace *be* in thy coming in, father Joseph!  To whom he
answered and said:  The peace of the Lord *be* upon all the people!  And
they all kissed him.  And they prayed with Joseph, and were terrified at
the sight of him.  And Nicodemus took him into his house, and made a
great feast, and called Annas and Caiaphas, and the elders and chief
priests and Levites, to his house.  And making merry, and eating and
drinking with Joseph, they blessed God, and went every one to his own
house.  And Joseph remained in the house of Nicodemus.

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p8"></span>And on the next day, which is the
preparation, the priests and the rulers of the synagogue and the Levites
rose early, and came to the house of Nicodemus.  And Nicodemus met them,
and said to them:  Peace to you!  And they said to him:  Peace to thee
and Joseph, and to thy house and Joseph’s house!  And Nicodemus brought
them into his house.  And the council sat; and Joseph sat between Annas
and Caiaphas, and no one dared to say a word.  And Joseph said to them: 
Why have you called me?  And they made signs with their eyes to
Nicodemus, that he should speak with Joseph.  And Nicodemus, opening his
mouth, said:  Father Joseph, thou knowest that the reverend teachers,
priests, and Levites seek to hear a word from thee.  And Joseph said: 
Ask.  And Annas and Caiaphas, taking up the law, adjured Joseph,
saying:  Give glory to the God of Israel, and give confession to Him,
that thou wilt not hide any word <span
id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968.md) from us.  And they said to him: 
With grief were we grieved that thou didst beg the body of Jesus, and
wrap it in clean linen, and lay it in a tomb.  Therefore we shut thee up
in a house where there was no window, and put a lock and a seal on the
gate; and on the first day of the week we opened the gates, and found
thee not.  We were therefore exceedingly grieved, and astonishment came
over all the people of God.  And therefore hast thou been sent for; and
now tell us what has happened.

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p10"></span>Then said Joseph:  On the day of the
Preparation, about the tenth hour, you shut me in, and I remained there
the whole Sabbath in full.  And when midnight came, as I was standing
and praying, the house where you shut me in was hung up by the four
corners, and there was a flashing of light in mine eyes.  And I fell to
the ground trembling.  Then some one lifted me up from the place where I
had fallen, and poured over me an abundance of water from the head even
to the feet, and put round my nostrils the odour of a wonderful
ointment, and rubbed my face with the water itself, as if washing me,
and kissed me, and said to me, Joseph, fear not; but open thine eyes,
and see who it is that speaks to thee.  And looking, I saw Jesus; and
being terrified, I thought it was a phantom.  And with prayer and the
commandments I spoke to him, and he spoke with me.  And I said to him: 
Art thou Rabbi Elias?  And he said to me:  I am not Elias.  And I said: 
Who art thou, my lord?  And he said to me:  I am Jesus, whose body thou
didst beg from Pilate, and wrap in clean linen; and thou didst lay a
napkin on my face, and didst lay me in thy new tomb, and roll a stone to
the door of the tomb.  Then I said to him that was speaking to me:  Show
me, Lord, where I laid thee.  And he led me, and showed me the place
where I laid him, and the linen which I had put on him, and the napkin
which I had wrapped upon his face; and I knew that it was Jesus.  And he
took hold of me with his hand, and put me in the midst of my house
though the gates were shut, and put me in my bed, and said to me:  Peace
to thee!  And he kissed me, and said to me:  For forty days go not out
of thy house; for, lo, I go to my brethren into Galilee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[445:1968](0081316.htm#fr_1967.md) <span
id="vii.xv.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p3"></span> i.e., servants.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[446:1969](0081316.htm#fr_1968.md) <span
id="vii.xv.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xvi-p9"></span> The Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv.xvi-p9.1"></span>ῥῆ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv.xvi-p9.2"></span>μα</span>means *thing* as well as *word*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](0081317.md)
