[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081345)  [Next](0081347.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xx"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p1"></span> <span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span
id="vii.xx-Page_462"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>The Report of Pontius Pilate, Procurator of
Judæa,</span>

<span id="vii.xx-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xx-p2.1"></span>Sent to Rome to Tiberius Cæsar.</span>

<span id="vii.xx-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xx-p4"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xx-p4.1"></span>Second Greek Form.</span>

<span id="vii.xx-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xx-p5.1"></span>To</span> the most mighty, venerable, awful,
most divine, the august,—Pilatus Pontius, the governor of the East:  I
have to report to thy reverence, through this writing of mine, being
seized with great trembling and fear, O most mighty emperor, the
conjuncture of the present times, as the end of these things has shown. 
For while I, my lord, according to the commandment of thy clemency, was
discharging the duties of my government, which is one of the cities of
the East, Jerusalem by name, in which is built the temple of the Jewish
nation, all the multitude of the Jews came together, and delivered to me
a certain man named Jesus, bringing against him many and groundless
charges; and they were not able to convict him in anything.  And one
heresy of theirs against him was, that he said that the Sabbath was not
their right rest.  And that man wrought many cures, in addition to good
works.  He made the blind see; he cleansed lepers; he raised the dead;
he healed paralytics who could not move at all, except that they only
had their voice, and the joining of their bones; and he gave them the
power of walking about and running, commanding *them* by a single word. 
And another mightier work he did, which was strange even with our gods: 
he raised up a dead man, Lazarus, who had been dead four days, by a
single word ordering the dead man to be raised, although his body was
already corrupted by the worms that grow in wounds; and that
ill-smelling body lying in the tomb he ordered to run; and as a
bridegroom from the bridal chamber, so he came forth out of the tomb,
filled with exceeding fragrance.  And some that were cruelly vexed by
demons, and had their dwellings in deserts, and ate the flesh of their
own limbs, and lived along with reptiles and wild beasts, he made to be
dwellers in cities in their own houses, and by a word he rendered them
sound-minded; and he made those that were troubled by unclean spirits to
be intelligent and reputable; and sending away the demons in them into a
herd of swine, he suffocated them in the sea.  Another man, again, who
had a withered hand, and lived in sorrow, and had not even the half of
his body sound, he rendered sound by a single word.  And a woman that
had a flow of blood for many years, so that, in consequence of the
flowing of her blood, all the joinings of her bones appeared, and were
transparent like glass; and assuredly all the physicians had left her
without hope, and had not cleansed her, for there was not in her a
single hope of health:  once, then, as Jesus was passing by, she took
hold of the fringe of his clothes behind, and that same hour the power
of her body was completely restored, and she became whole, as if nothing
were the matter with her, and she began to run swiftly to her own city
Paneas. <span id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020.md)

<span id="vii.xx-p7"></span>And these things indeed were so.  And the
Jews gave information that Jesus did these things on the Sabbath.  And I
also ascertained that the miracles done by him were greater than any
which the gods whom we worship could do.

<span id="vii.xx-p8"></span>Him then Herod and Archelaus and Philip, and
Annas and Caiaphas, with all the people, delivered to me to try him. 
And as many were exciting an insurrection against me, I ordered him to
be crucified.

<span id="vii.xx-p9"></span>And when he had been crucified, there was
darkness over the whole earth, the sun having been completely hidden,
and the heaven appearing dark though it was day, so that the stars
appeared, but had at the same time their brightness darkened, as I
suppose your reverence is not ignorant of, because in all the world they
lighted lamps from the sixth hour until evening.  And the moon, being
like blood, did not shine the whole night, and yet she happened to be at
<span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span id="vii.xx-Page_463"></span>the
full.  And the stars also, and Orion, made a lament about the Jews, on
account of the wickedness that had been done by them. <span
id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021.md)

<span id="vii.xx-p11"></span>And on the first of the week, about the
third hour of the night, the sun was seen such as it had never at any
time shone, and all the heaven was lighted up.  And as lightnings come
on in winter, so majestic men of indescribable splendour of dress and of
glory appeared in the air, and an innumerable multitude of angels crying
out, and saying:  Glory in the highest to God, and on earth peace, among
men goodwill:  come up out of Hades, ye who have been kept in slavery in
the underground regions of Hades.  And at their voice all the mountains
and hills were shaken, and the rocks were burst asunder; and great
chasms were made in the earth, so that also what was in the abyss
appeared.

<span id="vii.xx-p12"></span>And there were seen in that terror dead men
raised up, <span id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022.md) as the Jews that
saw them said:  We have seen Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
twelve patriarchs, that died two thousand five hundred years ago; and we
have seen Noah manifestly in the body.  And all the multitude walked
about, and sang praises to God with aloud voice, saying:  The Lord our
God that has risen from the dead has brought to life all the dead, and
has plundered Hades, and put him to death.

<span id="vii.xx-p14"></span>All that night therefore, my lord, O king,
the light ceased not.  And many of the Jews died, and were engulphed and
swallowed up in the chasms in that night, so that not even their bodies
appeared.  Those, I say, of the Jews suffered that had spoken against
Jesus.  And one synagogue was left in Jerusalem, since all those
synagogues that had been against Jesus were engulphed.

<span id="vii.xx-p15"></span>From that fear, then, being in perplexity,
and seized with much trembling, at that same hour I ordered what had
been done by them all to be written; and I have reported it to thy
mightiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[462:2021](0081346.htm#fr_2020.md) <span
id="vii.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p6"></span> This is a conjecture of Thilo’s.  The<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xx-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> have Spania.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[463:2022](0081346.htm#fr_2021.md) <span
id="vii.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p10"></span> Instead of this last sentence, one of the
<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xx-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> has:  And
the whole world was shaken by unspeakable miracles, and all the creation
was like to be swallowed up by the lower regions; so that also the
sanctuary of their temple was rent from top to bottom.  And again there
was thunder, and a mighty noise from heaven, so that all our land shook
and trembled.  Another:  And there began to be earthquakes in the hour
in which the nails were fixed in Jesus’ hands and feet, until evening.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[463:2023](0081346.htm#fr_2022.md) <span
id="vii.xx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p13"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xx-p13.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  To the number of five
hundred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giving Up of Pontius Pilate.](0081347.md)
