[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081267)  [Next](0081269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.</span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p2"></span>And Nicodemus stood up, and stood
before the Sanhedrin, saying:  You say well; <span
id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) you are not ignorant, you people of
the Lord, of these men that come down from Galilee, that they fear God,
and are men of substance, haters of covetousness, men of peace; and they
have declared with an oath, We saw Jesus upon the mountain Mamilch with
his disciples, and he taught what we heard from him, and we saw him
taken up into heaven.  And no one asked them in what form he went up. 
For assuredly, as the book of the Holy Scriptures taught us, Helias also
was taken up into heaven, and Elissæus cried out <span id="page_423">p.
423</span> <span id="vii.xii.xvi-Page_423"></span>with a loud voice, and
Helias threw his sheepskin upon Elissæus, and Elissæus threw his
sheepskin upon the Jordan, and crossed, and came into Jericho.  And the
children of the prophets met him, and said, O Elissæus, where is thy
master Helias?  And he said, He has been taken up into heaven.  And they
said to Elissæus, Has not a spirit seized him, and thrown him upon one
of the mountains?  But let us take our servants <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) with us, and seek him.  And they
persuaded Elissæus, and he went away with them.  And they sought him
three days, and did not find him; and they knew he had been taken
up. <span id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848)   And now listen to me,
and let us send into every district of Israel, and see lest perchance
Christ has been taken up by a spirit, and thrown upon one of the
mountains?  And this proposal pleased all.  And they sent into every
district of Israel, and sought Jesus, and did not find Him; but they
found Joseph in Arimathæa, and no one dared to lay hands on him.

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p6"></span>And they reported to the elders, and
the priests, and the Levites:  We have gone round to every district of
Israel, and have not found Jesus; but Joseph we have found in
Arimathæa.  And hearing about Joseph, they were glad, and gave glory to
the God of Israel.  And the rulers of the synagogue, and the priests and
the Levites, having held a council as to the manner in which they should
meet with Joseph, took a piece of paper, and wrote to Joseph as
follows:—

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p7"></span>Peace to thee!  We know that we have
sinned against God, and against thee; and we have prayed to the God of
Israel, that thou shouldst deign to come to thy fathers, and to thy
children, because we have all been grieved.  For having opened the door,
we did not find thee.  And we know that we have counselled evil counsel
against thee; but the Lord has defended thee, and the Lord Himself has
scattered to the winds our counsel against thee, O honourable father
Joseph.

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p8"></span>And they chose from all Israel seven
men, friends of Joseph, whom also Joseph himself was acquainted with;
and the rulers of the synagogue, and the priests and the Levites, say to
them:  Take notice:  if, after receiving our letter, he read it, know
that he will come with you to us; but if he do not read it, know that he
is ill-disposed towards us.  And having saluted him in peace, return to
us.  And having blessed the men, they dismissed them.  And the men came
to Joseph, and did reverence to him, and said to him:  Peace to thee! 
And he said:  Peace to you, and to all the people of Israel!  And they
gave him the roll of the letter.  And Joseph having received it, read
the letter and rolled it up, and blessed God, and said:  Blessed be the
Lord God, who has delivered Israel, that they should not shed innocent
blood; and blessed be the Lord, who sent out His angel, and covered me
under his wings.  And he set a table for them; and they ate and drank,
and slept there.  And they rose up early, and prayed.  And Joseph
saddled his ass, and set out with the men; and they came to the holy
city Jerusalem.  And all the people met Joseph, and cried out:  Peace to
thee in thy coming in!  And he said to all the people:  Peace to you!
and he kissed them.  And the people prayed with Joseph, and they were
astonished at the sight of him.  And Nicodemus received him into his
house, and made a great feast, and called Annas and Caiaphas, and the
elders, and the priests, and the Levites to his house.  And they
rejoiced, eating and drinking with Joseph; and after singing hymns, each
proceeded to his own house.  But Joseph remained in the house of
Nicodemus.

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p9"></span>And on the following day, which was the
preparation, the rulers of the synagogue and the priests and the Levites
went early to the house of Nicodemus; and Nicodemus met them, and said: 
Peace to you!  And they said:  Peace to thee, and to Joseph, and to all
thy house, and to all the house of Joseph!  And he brought them into his
house.  And all the Sanhedrin sat down, and Joseph sat down between
Annas and Caiaphas:  and no one dared to say a word to him.  And Joseph
said:  Why have you called me?  And they signalled to Nicodemus to speak
to Joseph.  And Nicodemus, opening his mouth, said to Joseph:  Father,
thou knowest that the honourable teachers, and the priests and the
Levites, see to learn a word from thee.  And Joseph said:  Ask.  And
Annas and Caiaphas having taken the law, made Joseph swear, saying: 
Give glory to the God of Israel, and give Him confession; for Achar
being made to swear by the prophet Jesus, <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) did not forsware himself, but
declared unto him all, and did not hide a word from him.  Do thou also
accordingly not hide from us to the extent of a word.  And Joseph said: 
I shall not hide from you one word.  And they said to him:  With grief
were we grieved because thou didst beg the body of Jesus, and wrap it in
clean linen, and lay it in a tomb.  And on account of this we secured
thee in a room where there was no windows:  and we put locks and seals
upon the doors and guards kept watching where thou wast locked in.  And
on the first day of the week we opened, and found thee not, and were
grieved exceedingly; and astonishment fell upon all the people of the
Lord until yesterday.  And now relate to us what has happened to thee.

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p11"></span>And Joseph said:  On the preparation,
about <span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-Page_424"></span>the tenth hour, you locked me up, and I
remained all the Sabbath.  And at midnight, as I was standing and
praying, the room where you locked me in was hung up by the four
corners, and I saw a light like lightning into my eyes. <span
id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850)   And I was afraid, and fell to the
ground.  And some one took me by the hand, and removed me from the place
where I had fallen; and moisture of water was poured from my head even
to my feet, and a smell of perfumes came about my nostrils.  And he
wiped my face, and kissed me, and said to me, Fear not, Joseph; open
thine eyes, and see who it is that speaks to thee.  And looking up, I
saw Jesus.  And I trembled and thought it was a phantom; and I said the
commandments, and he said them with me. <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851)   Even so you are not ignorant that
a phantom, if it meet anybody, and hear the commandments, takes to
flight.  And seeing that he said them with me, I said to him, Rabbi
Helias.  And he said to me, I am not Helias.  And I said to him, Who art
thou, my lord?  And he said to me, I am Jesus, whose body thou didst beg
from Pilate; and thou didst clothe me with clean linen, and didst put a
napkin on my face, and didst lay me in thy new tomb, and didst roll a
great stone to the door of the tomb.  And I said to him that was
speaking to me, Show me the place where I laid thee.  And he carried me
away, and showed me the place where I laid him; and the linen cloth was
lying in it, and the napkin for his face.  And I knew that it was
Jesus.  And he took me by the hand, and placed me, though the doors were
locked, in the middle of my house, and led me away to my bed, and said
to me, Peace to thee!  And he kissed me, and said to me, For forty days
go not forth out of thy house; for, behold, I go to my brethren into
Galilee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[422:1847](0081268.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p3"></span> Perhaps better as a question.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[423:1848](0081268.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p4"></span> Lit., boys.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[423:1849](0081268.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p5"></span> [2 Kings ii.
12-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[423:1850](0081268.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p10"></span> i.e., Joshua.  [Josh.
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[424:1851](0081268.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p12"></span> Comp. [Acts x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[424:1852](0081268.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="vii.xii.xvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii.xvi-p13"></span> Or, and he spoke to me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](0081269)
