[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081379)  [Next](0081381.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_565">p. 565</span>
<span id="vii.xxxviii-Page_565"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Revelation of Moses.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>Account</span> and life of Adam and Eve,
the first-created, revealed by God to His servant Moses, when he
received from the hand of the Lord the tables of the law of the
covenant, instructed by the archangel Michael.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p4"></span>This is the account of Adam and Eve. 
After they went forth out of paradise, Adam took Eve his wife, and went
up into the east.  And he remained there eighteen years and two months;
and Eve conceived and brought forth two sons, Diaphotus called Cain, and
Amilabes <span id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454.md) called Abel.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p6"></span>And after this, Adam and Eve were with
one another; and when they lay down, Eve said to Adam her lord:  My
lord, I have seen in a dream this night the blood of my son Amilabes,
who is called Abel, thrown into the mouth of Cain his brother, and he
drank it without pity.  And he entreated him to grant him a little of
it, but he did not listen to him, but drank it all up; and it did not
remain in his belly, but came forth out of his mouth.  And Adam said to
Eve:  Let us arise, and go and see what has happened to them, lest
perchance the enemy should be in any way warring against them.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p7"></span>And having both gone, they found Abel
killed by the hand of Cain his brother.  And God says to the archangel
Michael:  Say to Adam, Do not relate the mystery which thou knowest to
thy son Cain, for he is a son of wrath.  But grieve thyself not; for I
will give thee instead of him another son, who shall show thee all
things, as many as thou shalt do to him; but do thou tell him nothing. 
This God said to His angel; and Adam kept the word in his heart, and
with him Eve also, having grief about Abel their son.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p8"></span>And after this, Adam knew his wife Eve,
and she conceived and brought forth Seth.  And Adam says to Eve: 
Behold, we have brought forth a son instead of Abel whom Cain slew; let
us give glory and sacrifice to God.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p9"></span>And Adam had <span
id="fr_2455"></span>[2456](#fn_2455.md) thirty sons and thirty
daughters. <span id="fr_2456"></span>[2457](#fn_2456.md)   And he fell into
disease, and cried with a loud voice, and said:  Let all my sons come to
me, that I may see them before I die.  And they were all brought
together, for the earth was inhabited in three parts; and they all came
to the door of the house into which he had entered to pray to God.  And
his son Seth said:  Father Adam, what is thy disease?  And he says:  My
children, great trouble has hold of me.  And they say:  What is the
trouble and disease?  And Seth answered and said to him:  Is it that
thou rememberest the *fruits* of paradise of which thou didst eat, and
grievest thyself because of the desire of them?  If it is so, tell me,
and I will go and bring thee fruit from paradise.  For I will put dung
upon my head, and weep and pray, and the Lord will hearken to me, and
send his angel; and I shall bring *it* to thee, <span
id="fr_2457"></span>[2458](#fn_2457.md) that thy trouble may cease from
thee.  Adam says to him:  No, my son Seth; but I have disease and
trouble.  Seth says to him:  And how have they come upon thee?  Adam
said to him:  When God made us, me and your mother, for whose sake also
I die, He gave us every plant in paradise; but about one he commanded us
not to eat of it, because on account of it we should die.  And the hour
was at hand for the angels who guarded your mother to go up and worship
the Lord; and the enemy gave to her, and she ate of the tree, knowing
that I was not near her, nor the holy angels; then she gave me also to
eat.  And when we had both eaten, God was angry with us.  And the Lord,
coming into paradise, set His throne, and called with a dreadful voice,
saying, Adam, where art thou? and why art thou hidden from my face?
shall the house be hidden from him that built it?  And He says, Since
thou hast forsaken my covenant, I have brought upon thy body seventy
strokes. <span id="fr_2458"></span>[2459](#fn_2458.md)   The trouble of the
first stroke is the injury of the eyes; the trouble of the second
stroke, of the hearing; and so in succession, all the strokes shall
overtake thee.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p14"></span>And Adam thus speaking to his sons,
groaned out loud, and said:  What shall I do?  I am in great grief.  And
Eve also wept, saying:  My lord Adam, arise, give me the half of thy
disease, <span id="page_566">p. 566</span> <span
id="vii.xxxviii-Page_566"></span>and let me bear it, because through me
this has happened to thee; through me thou art in distresses and
troubles.  And Adam said to Eve:  Arise, and go with our son Seth near
paradise, and put earth upon your heads, and weep, beseeching the Lord
that He may have compassion upon me, and send His angel to paradise, and
give me of the tree in which flows the oil out of it, and that thou
mayest bring it to me; and I shall anoint myself, and have rest, and
show thee the manner in which we were deceived at first.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p15"></span>And Seth and Eve went into the regions
of paradise.  And as they were going along, Eve saw her son, and a wild
beast fighting with him.  And Eye wept, saying:  Woe’s me, woe’s me; for
if I come to the day of the resurrection, all who have sinned will curse
me, saying, Eve did not keep the commandment of God.  And Eve cried out
to the wild beast, saying:  O thou evil wild beast, wilt thou not be
afraid to fight with the image of God?  How has thy mouth been opened?
how have thy teeth been strengthened? how hast thou not been mindful of
thy subjection, that thou wast formerly subject to the image of God? 
Then the wild beast cried out, saying:  O Eve, not against us thy
upbraiding nor thy weeping, but against thyself, since the beginning of
the wild beasts was from thee.  How was thy mouth opened to eat of the
tree about which God had commanded thee not to eat of it?  For this
reason also our nature has been changed.  Now, therefore, thou shalt not
be able to bear up, if I begin to reproach thee.  And Seth says to the
wild beast:  Shut thy mouth and be silent, and stand off from the image
of God till the day of judgment.  Then the wild beast says to Seth: 
Behold, I stand off, Seth, from the image of God.  Then the wild beast
fled, and left him wounded, and went to his covert.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p16"></span>And Seth went with his mother Eve near
paradise:  and they wept there, beseeching God to send His angel, to
give <span id="fr_2459"></span>[2460](#fn_2459.md) them the oil of
compassion.  And God sent to them the archangel Michael, and he said to
them these words:  Seth, man of God, do not weary thyself praying in
this supplication about the tree in which flows the oil to anoint thy
father Adam; for it will not happen to thee now, but at the last times. 
Then shall arise all flesh from Adam even to that great day, as many as
shall be a holy people; then shall be given to them all the delight of
paradise, and God shall be in the midst of them; and there shall not any
more be sinners before Him, because the wicked heart shall be taken from
them, and there shall be given to them a heart made to understand what
is good, and to worship God only.  Do thou again go to thy father, since
the measure of his life has been fulfilled, equal to <span
id="fr_2460"></span>[2461](#fn_2460.md) three days.  And when his soul goes
out, thou wilt behold its dreadful passage.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p19"></span>And the angel, having said this, went
away from them.  And Seth and Eve came to the tent where Adam was
lying.  And Adam says to Eve:  Why didst thou work mischief against us,
and bring upon us great wrath, which is death, holding sway over all our
race?  And he says to her:  Call all our children, and our children’s
children, and relate to them the manner of our transgression.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p20"></span>Then Eve says to them:  Listen, all my
children, and my children’s children, and I shall relate to you how our
enemy deceived us.  It came to pass, while we were keeping paradise,
that we kept each the portion allotted to him by God.  And I was keeping
in my lot the south and west.  And the devil went into the lot of Adam
where were the male wild beasts; since God parted to us the wild beasts,
and had given all the males to your father, and all the females He gave
to me, and each of us watched his own.  And the devil spoke to the
serpent, saying, Arise, come to me, and I shall tell you a thing in
which thou mayst be of service.  Then the serpent came to him, and the
devil says to him, I hear that thou art more sagacious than all the wild
beasts, and I have come to make thy acquaintance; <span
id="fr_2461"></span>[2462](#fn_2461.md) and I have found thee greater than
all the wild beasts, and they associate with thee; notwithstanding, thou
doest reverence to one far inferior.  Why eatest thou of the tares <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462.md) of Adam and his wife, and not of
the fruit of paradise?  Arise and come hither, and we shall make him be
cast out of paradise through his wife, as we also were cast out through
him.  The serpent says to him, I am afraid lest the Lord be angry with
me.  The devil says to him, Be not afraid; only become my instrument,
and I will speak through thy mouth a word by which thou shalt be able to
deceive him.  Then straightway he hung by the walls of paradise about
the hour when the angels of God went up to worship.  Then Satan came in
the form of an angel, and praised God as did the angels; and looking out
from the wall, I saw him like an angel.  And says he to me, Art thou
Eve?  And I said to him, I am.  And says he to me, What doest thou in
paradise?  And I said to him, God has set us to keep it, and to eat of
it.  The devil answered me through the mouth of the serpent, Ye do well,
but you do not eat of every plant.  And I <span id="page_567">p.
567</span> <span id="vii.xxxviii-Page_567"></span>say to him, Yes, of
every plant we eat, but one only which is in the midst of paradise,
about which God has commanded us not to eat of it, since you will die
the death.  Then says the serpent to me, As God liveth, I am grieved for
you, because you are like cattle.  For I do not wish you to be ignorant
of this; but rise, come hither, listen to me, and eat, and perceive the
value of the tree, as He told us.  But I said to him, I am afraid lest
God be angry with me.  And he says to me, Be not afraid; for as soon as
thou eatest, thine eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods in
knowing what is good and what is evil.  And God, knowing this, that ye
shall be like Him, has had a grudge against you, and said, Ye shall not
eat of it.  But do thou observe the plant, and thou shalt see great
glory about it.  And I observed the plant, and saw great glory about
it.  And I said to him, It is beautiful to the eyes to perceive; and I
was afraid to take of the fruit.  And he says to me, Come, I will give
to thee:  follow me.  And I opened to him, and he came inside into
paradise, and went through it before me.  And having walked a little, he
turned, and says to me, I have changed my mind, and will not give thee
to eat.  And this he said, wishing at last to entice and destroy me. 
And he says to me, Swear to me that thou wilt give also to thy husband. 
And I said to him, I know not by what oath I shall swear to thee; but
what I know I say to thee, By the throne of the Lord, and the cherubim,
and the tree of life, I will give also to my husband to eat.  And when
he had taken the oath from me, then he went and ascended upon it.  And
he put upon the fruit which he gave me to eat the poison of his
wickedness, that is, of his desire; for desire is the head <span
id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463.md) of all sin.  And I bent down the
branch to the ground, and took of the fruit, and ate.  And in that very
hour mine eyes were opened. and I knew that I was stripped <span
id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464.md) of the righteousness with which I
had been clothed; and I wept, saying, What is this thou hast done to me,
because I have been deprived of the glory with which I was clothed?  And
I wept too about the oath.  And he came down out of the tree, and went
out of sight.  And I sought leaves in my portion, <span
id="fr_2465"></span>[2466](#fn_2465.md) that I might cover my shame; and I
did not find them from the plants of paradise, since, at the time that I
ate, the leaves of all the plants in my portion fell, except of the fig
alone.  And having taken leaves off it, I made myself a girdle, and it
is from those plants of which I ate.  And I cried out with a loud voice,
saying, Adam, Adam, where art thou?  Arise, come to me, and I shall show
thee a great mystery.  And when your father came, I said to him words of
wickedness, which brought us down from great glory.  For as soon as he
came I opened my mouth, and the devil spoke; and I began to advise him,
saying, Come hither, my lord Adam, listen to me, and eat of the fruit of
the tree of which God said to us not to eat of it, and thou shalt be as
God.  And your father answered and said, I am afraid lest God be angry
with me.  And I said to him, Be not afraid, for as soon as thou shalt
eat thou shalt know good and evil.  And then I quickly persuaded him,
and he ate; and his eyes were opened, and he was aware, he also, of his
nakedness.  And he says to me, O wicked woman, why hast thou wrought
mischief in us?  Thou hast alienated me from the glory of God.  And that
same hour we heard the archangel Michael sounding his trumpet, calling
the angels, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Come with me to paradise, and
hear the word in which I judge Adam.  And when we heard the archangel
sounding, we said, Behold, God is coming into paradise to judge us.  And
we were afraid, and hid ourselves.  And God came up into paradise,
riding upon a chariot of cherubim, and the angels praising Him.  When
God came into paradise, the plants both of Adam’s lot and of my lot
bloomed, and all lifted themselves up; and the throne of God was made
ready where the tree of life was.  And God called Adam, saying, Adam,
where art thou hidden, thinking that I shall not find thee?  Shall the
house be hidden from him that built it?  Then your father answered and
said, Not, Lord, did we hide ourselves as thinking that we should not be
found by Thee; but I am afraid, because I am naked, and stand in awe of
Thy power, O Lord.  God says to him, Who hath shown thee that thou art
naked, unless it be that thou hast forsaken my commandment which I gave
thee to keep it?  Then Adam remembered the word which I spake to him
when I wished to deceive him, I will put thee out of danger from God. 
And he turned and said to me, Why hast thou done this?  And I also
remembered the word of the serpent, and said, The serpent deceived me. 
God says to Adam, Since thou hast disobeyed my commandment, and obeyed
thy wife, cursed is the ground in thy labours.  For whenever thou
labourest it, and it will not give its strength, thorns and thistles
shall it raise for thee; and in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy
bread.  And thou shalt be in distresses of many kinds.  Thou shalt weary
thyself, and rest not; thou shalt be afflicted by bitterness, and shall
not taste of sweetness; thou shalt be afflicted by heat, and oppressed
by cold; and thou shalt toil much, and not grow rich; and thou shalt
make haste, <span id="fr_2466"></span>[2467](#fn_2466.md) and not attain
<span id="page_568">p. 568</span> <span
id="vii.xxxviii-Page_568"></span>thine end; and the wild beasts, of
which thou wast lord, shall rise up against thee in rebellion, because
thou hast not kept my commandment.  And having turned to me, the Lord
says to me, Since thou hast obeyed the serpent, and disobeyed my
commandment, thou shalt be in distresses <span
id="fr_2467"></span>[2468](#fn_2467.md) and unbearable pains; thou shalt
bring forth children with great tremblings; and in one hour shalt thou
come *to bring them forth*, <span id="fr_2468"></span>[2469](#fn_2468.md)
and lose thy life in consequence of thy great straits and pangs.  And
thou shalt confess, and say, Lord, Lord, save me; and I shall not return
to the sin of the flesh.  And on this account in thine own words I shall
judge thee, on account of the enmity which the enemy hath put in thee;
and thou shalt turn again to thy husband, and he shall be thy
lord. <span id="fr_2469"></span>[2470](#fn_2469.md)   And after speaking
thus to me, He spoke to the serpent in great wrath, saying to him, Since
thou hast done this, and hast become an ungracious instrument until thou
shouldst deceive those that were remiss in heart, cursed art thou of all
the beasts.  Thou shalt be deprived of the food which thou eatest; and
dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life; upon thy breast and belly
shalt thou go, and thou shalt be deprived both of thy hands and feet;
there shall not be granted thee ear, nor wing, nor one limb of all which
those have whom thou hast enticed by thy wickedness, and hast caused
them to be cast out of paradise.  And I shall put enmity between thee
and between his seed.  He shall lie in wait for <span
id="fr_2470"></span>[2471](#fn_2470.md) thy head, and thou for his heel,
until the day of judgment.  And having thus said, He commands His angels
that we be cast out of paradise.  And as we were being driven along, and
were lamenting, your father Adam entreated the angels, saying, Allow me
a little, that I may entreat God, and that He may have compassion upon
me, and pity me, for I only have sinned.  And they stopped driving him. 
And Adam cried out with weeping, saying, Pardon me, Lord, what I have
done.  Then says the Lord to His angels, Why have you stopped driving
Adam out of paradise?  It is not that the sin is mine, or that I have
judged ill?  Then the angels, falling to the ground, worshipped the
Lord, saying, Just art Thou, Lord, and judgest what is right.  And
turning to Adam, the Lord said, I will not permit thee henceforth to be
in paradise.  And Adam answered and said, Lord, give me of the tree of
life, that I may eat before I am cast out.  Then the Lord said to Adam,
Thou shalt not now take of it, for it has been assigned to the cherubim
and the flaming sword, which turneth to guard it on account of thee,
that thou mayst not taste of it and be free from death for ever, but
that thou mayst have the war which the enemy has set in thee.  But when
thou art gone out of paradise, if thou shalt keep thyself from all evil,
as being destined to die, I will again raise thee up when the
resurrection comes, and then there shall be given thee of the tree of
life, and thou shalt be free from death for ever.  And having thus said,
the Lord commanded us to be cast out of paradise.  And your father wept
before the angels over against paradise.  And the angels say to him,
What dost thou wish that we should do for thee, Adam?  And your father
answered and said to the angels, Behold, you cast me out.  I beseech
you, allow me to take sweet odours out of paradise, in order that, after
I go out, I may offer sacrifice to God, that God may listen to me.  And
the angels, advancing, said to God, Jael, eternal King, order to be
given to Adam sacrifices <span id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471.md) of
sweet odour out of paradise.  And God ordered Adam to go, that he might
take perfumes of sweet odour out of paradise for his food.  And the
angels let him go, and he gathered both kinds—saffron and spikenard, and
calamus <span id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472.md) and cinnamon, and
other seeds for his food; and having taken them, he went forth out of
paradise.  And we came to the earth. <span
id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473.md)

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p34"></span>Now, then, my children, I have shown
you the manner in which we were deceived.  But do ye watch over
yourselves, so as not to forsake what is good.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p35"></span>And when she had thus spoken in the
midst of her sons, and Adam was lying in his disease, and he had one
other day before going out of the body, Eve says to Adam:  Why is it
that thou diest, and I live? or how long time have I to spend after thou
diest? tell me.  Then says Adam to Eve:  Do not trouble thyself about
matters; for thou wilt not be long after me, but we shall both die
alike, and thou wilt be laid into my place. <span
id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474.md)   And when I am dead you will
leave <span id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475.md) me, and let no one
touch me, until the angel of the Lord shall say something about me; for
God will not forget me, but will seek His own vessel which He
fashioned.  Arise, rather, pray to God until I restore my spirit into
the hands of Him who has given it; because we know not how we shall meet
Him who made us, whether He shall be angry with us, or turn and have
mercy upon us.  Then arose Eve, and went <span id="page_569">p.
569</span> <span id="vii.xxxviii-Page_569"></span>outside; and falling
to the ground, she said:  I have sinned, O God; I have sinned, O Father
of all; I have sinned to Thee, I have sinned against Thy chosen angels,
I have sinned against the cherubim, I have sinned against Thine unshaken
throne; I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned much, I have sinned before
Thee, and every sin <span id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476.md) through
me has come upon the creation.  And while Eve was still praying, being
on her knees, behold, there came to her the angel of humanity, and
raised her up, saying:  Arise, Eve, from thy repentance; for, behold,
Adam thy husband has gone forth from his body; arise and see his spirit
carried up to Him that made <span id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477.md)
it, to meet Him.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p40"></span>And Eve arose, and covered her face
with her hand; and the angel says to her:  Raise thyself from the things
of earth.  And Eve gazed up into heaven, and she saw a chariot of light
going along under four shining eagles—and it was not possible for any
one born of woman <span id="fr_2478"></span>[2479](#fn_2478.md) to tell the
glory of them, or to see the face of them—and angels going before the
chariot.  And when they came to the place where your father Adam was
lying, the chariot stood still, and the seraphim between your father and
the chariot.  And I saw golden censers, and three vials; and, behold,
all the angels with incense, and the censers, and the vials, came to the
altar, and blew them up, and the smoke of the incense covered the
firmaments.  And the angels fell down and worshipped God, crying out and
saying:  Holy Jael, forgive; for he is Thine image, and the work of
Thine holy hands.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p42"></span>And again, I Eve saw two great and
awful mysteries standing before God.  And I wept for fear, and cried out
to my son Seth, saying:  Arise, Seth, from the body of thy father Adam,
and come to me, that thou mayst see what the eye of no one hath ever
seen; and they are praying for thy father Adam. <span
id="fr_2479"></span>[2480](#fn_2479.md)

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p44"></span>Then Seth arose and went to his
mother, and said to her:  What has befallen thee? and why weepest thou? 
She says to him:  Look up with thine eyes, and see the seven firmaments
opened, and see with thine eyes how the body of thy father lies upon its
face, and all the holy angels with him, praying for him, and saying: 
Pardon him, O Father of the universe; for he is Thine image.  What then,
my child Seth, will this be? and when will he be delivered into the
hands of our invisible Father and God?  And who are the two dark-faced
ones who stand by at the prayer of thy father?  And Seth says to his
mother:  These are the sun and the moon, and they are falling down and
praying for my father Adam.  Eve says to him:  And where is their light,
and why have they become black-looking?  And Seth says to her:  They
cannot shine in the presence of the Light of the universe, <span
id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480.md) and for this reason the light from
them has been hidden.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p46"></span>And while Seth was speaking to his
mother, the angels lying upon their faces sounded their trumpets, and
cried out with an awful voice, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord
upon what He has made, for He has had compassion upon Adam, the work of
His hands.  When the angels had sounded this forth, there came one of
the six-winged seraphim, and hurried Adam to the Acherusian lake, and
washed him in presence of God.  And he spent three hours <span
id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481.md) lying, and thus the Lord of the
universe, sitting upon His holy throne, stretched forth His hands, and
raised Adam, and delivered him to the archangel Michael, saying to him: 
Raise him into paradise, even to the third heaven, and let him be there
until that great and dreadful day which I am to bring upon the world. 
And the archangel Michael, having taken Adam, led him away, and anointed
him, as God said to him at the pardoning of Adam.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p48"></span>After all these things, therefore, the
archangel asked about the funeral rites of the remains; and God
commanded that all the angels should come together into His presence,
each according to his rank.  And all the angels were assembled, some
with censers, some with trumpets.  And the Lord of Hosts went up, <span
id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482.md) and the winds drew Him, and
cherubim riding upon the winds, and the angels of heaven went before
Him; and they came to where the body of Adam was, and took it.  And they
came to paradise, and all the trees of paradise were moved so that all
begotten from Adam hung their heads in sleep at the sweet smell, except
Seth, because he had been begotten according to the appointment of God.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p50"></span>The body of Adam, then, was lying on
the ground in paradise, and Seth was grieved exceedingly about him.  And
the Lord God says:  Adam, why hast thou done this?  If thou hadst kept
my commandment, those that brought thee down to this place would not
have rejoiced.  Nevertheless I say unto thee, that I will turn their joy
into grief, but I will turn thy grief into joy; and having turned, I
will set thee in thy kingdom, on the throne of him that deceived thee;
and he shall be cast into this place, that thou mayst sit upon him. 
Then shall be condemned, he and those who hear him; and they shall be
much grieved, and shall weep, seeing thee sitting upon his glorious
throne.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p51"></span><span id="page_570">p. 570</span>
<span id="vii.xxxviii-Page_570"></span>And then He said to the archangel
Michael:  Go into paradise, into the third heaven, and bring me three
cloths of fine linen and silk.  And God said to Michael, Gabriel, Uriel,
and Raphael: <span id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483.md)   Cover Adam’s
body with the cloths, and bring olive oil of sweet odour, and pour upon
him.  And having thus done, they prepared his body for burial.  And the
Lord said:  Let also the body of Abel be brought.  And having brought
other cloths, they prepared it also for burial, since it had not been
prepared for burial since the day on which his brother Cain slew him. 
For the wicked Cain, having taken great pains to hide it, had not been
able; for the earth did not receive it, saying:  I will not receive a
body into companionship <span id="fr_2484"></span>[2485](#fn_2484.md) until
that dust which was taken up and fashioned upon me come to me.  And then
the angels took it up, and laid it on the rock until his father died. 
And both were buried, according to the commandment of God, in the
regions of paradise, in the place in which God found the dust. <span
id="fr_2485"></span>[2486](#fn_2485.md)   And God sent seven angels into
paradise, and they brought many sweet-smelling herbs, and laid them in
the earth; and thus they took the two bodies, and buried them in the
place which they had dug and built.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p55"></span>And God called Adam, and said:  Adam,
Adam.  And the body answered out of the ground, and said:  Here am I,
Lord.  And the Lord says to him:  I said to thee, Dust <span
id="fr_2486"></span>[2487](#fn_2486.md) thou art, and unto dust thou shalt
return.  Again I promise thee the resurrection.  I will raise thee up in
the last day in the resurrection, with every man who is of thy seed.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p57"></span>And after these words God made a
three-cornered seal, and sealed the tomb, that no one should do anything
to him in the six days, until his rib should return to him.  And the
beneficent God and the holy angels having laid him in his place, after
the six days Eve also died.  And while she lived she wept about her
falling asleep, because she knew not where her body was to be laid.  For
when the Lord was present in paradise when they buried Adam, both she
and her children fell asleep, except Seth, as I said.  And Eve, in the
hour of her death, besought that she might be buried where Adam her
husband was, saying thus:  My Lord, Lord and God of all virtue, do not
separate me, Thy servant, from the body of Adam, for of his members Thou
madest me; but grant to me, even me, the unworthy and the sinner, to be
buried by his body.  And as I was along with him in paradise, and not
separated from him after the transgression, so also let no one separate
us.  After having prayed, therefore, she looked up into heaven, and
stood up, and said, beating her breast:  God of all, receive my spirit. 
And straightway she gave up her spirit to God.

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p58"></span>And when she was dead, the archangel
Michael stood beside her; and there came three angels, and took her
body, and buried it where the body of Abel was.  And the archangel
Michael said to Seth:  Thus bury every man that dies, until the day of
the resurrection.  And after having given this law, he said to him:  Do
not mourn beyond six days.  And on the seventh day, rest, and rejoice in
it, because in it God and we the angels rejoice in the righteous soul
that has departed from earth.  Having thus spoken, the archangel Michael
went up into heaven, glorifying, and saying the Alleluia: <span
id="fr_2487"></span>[2488](#fn_2487.md)   Holy, holy, holy Lord, to the
glory of God the Father, because to Him is due glory, honour, and
adoration, with His unbeginning and life-giving Spirit, now and ever,
and to ages of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[565:2455](0081380.htm#fr_2454.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p5"></span> There is great variety as to these
names in the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>mss.</span>  The true reading was probably
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>διαφύτωρ</span>
or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p5.3"></span>διαφυτευτής</span>, a planter, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p5.4"></span>μηλατάς</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p5.5"></span>μηλοβότης</span>, a
keeper of sheep.

<span id="fn_2455"></span>[565:2456](0081380.htm#fr_2455.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p10"></span> Lit., made.

<span id="fn_2456"></span>[565:2457](0081380.htm#fr_2456.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p11"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  And Adam lived 930
years; and when he came to his end he cried, etc.

<span id="fn_2457"></span>[565:2458](0081380.htm#fr_2457.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p12"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  and he will bring to me
of the tree in which compassion flows, and thy trouble shall cease from
thee.

<span id="fn_2458"></span>[565:2459](0081380.htm#fr_2458.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p13"></span> Or, plagues.

<span id="fn_2459"></span>[566:2460](0081380.htm#fr_2459.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p17"></span> Lit., and he will give.

<span id="fn_2460"></span>[566:2461](0081380.htm#fr_2460.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p18"></span> Perhaps for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>ἴσον</span> we should read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p18.2"></span>εἴσω</span>, within. 
Another reading is:  for the days of his life have been fulfilled, and
he will live from today three days, and he will die.

<span id="fn_2461"></span>[566:2462](0081380.htm#fr_2461.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p21"></span> C has:  I take counsel with thee. 
\[C is a Vienna manuscript of the twelfth century; see p. 358, and
Tischendorf, *Apocalypses Apocryphæ*, pp. xi., xii.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[566:2463](0081380.htm#fr_2462.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p22"></span> It seems to be settled that the
*zizania* of the Greeks, the *zawân* of the Arabs, was darnel; but, from
the associations connected with the word, it is better to keep the
common translation.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[567:2464](0081380.htm#fr_2463.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p23"></span> C has, root and origin.

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[567:2465](0081380.htm#fr_2464.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p24"></span> Lit, naked.

<span id="fn_2465"></span>[567:2466](0081380.htm#fr_2465.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p25"></span> i.e., of the garden.

<span id="fn_2466"></span>[567:2467](0081380.htm#fr_2466.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p26"></span> I have read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>ταχυνθήσει</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p26.2"></span>παχυνθήσει</span>,
thou shalt grow fat.

<span id="fn_2467"></span>[568:2468](0081380.htm#fr_2467.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p27"></span> The text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p27.1"></span>ματαίοις</span>, vain;
the true reading is probably <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p27.2"></span>καμάτοις</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p27.3"></span>μόχθοις</span>.

<span id="fn_2468"></span>[568:2469](0081380.htm#fr_2468.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p28"></span> Inserted from<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p28.1"></span>ms.</span> C.

<span id="fn_2469"></span>[568:2470](0081380.htm#fr_2469.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p29"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>ms.</span> B. inserts:  And Eve was twelve
years old when the demon deceived her, and gave her evil desires.  For
night and day he ceased not to bear hatred against them, because he
himself was formerly in paradise; and therefore he supplanted them,
because he could not bear to see them in paradise.  \[B is a Vienna<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p29.2"></span>ms.</span> of the
thirteenth or fourteenth century; see Tischendorf, *Apocal. Apocr*., p.
xi.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2470"></span>[568:2471](0081380.htm#fr_2470.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p30"></span> This is after the version of the
LXX., and it is also the interpretation of Gesenius of the Hebrew *<span
id="vii.xxxviii-p30.1"></span>shûph*, [Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.xxxviii-p30.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[568:2472](0081380.htm#fr_2471.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p31"></span> Or, incense.

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[568:2473](0081380.htm#fr_2472.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p32"></span> This is the “sweet cane” of [Isa.
43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024.md), [Jer.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.xxxviii-p32.1"></span>.  See also [Exod.
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023.md), [Cant.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014.md), [Ezek.
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.xxxviii-p32.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[568:2474](0081380.htm#fr_2473.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p33"></span> Or, and we were upon the earth.

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[568:2475](0081380.htm#fr_2474.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p36"></span> Perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p36.1"></span>τάφον</span>, tomb, would be better than
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p36.2"></span>τόπον</span>.

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[568:2476](0081380.htm#fr_2475.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p37"></span> Or, anoint.

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[569:2477](0081380.htm#fr_2476.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p38"></span> Or, all sin.

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[569:2478](0081380.htm#fr_2477.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p39"></span> The text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p39.1"></span>πονήσαντα</span>, a
misprint for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p39.2"></span>ποιήσαντα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p39.3"></span> .</span>

<span id="fn_2478"></span>[569:2479](0081380.htm#fr_2478.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p41"></span> Lit., of a womb.

<span id="fn_2479"></span>[569:2480](0081380.htm#fr_2479.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p43"></span> The last clause is not in C.

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[569:2481](0081380.htm#fr_2480.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p45"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p45.1"></span>ms.</span> A here ends thus:  the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. 
Amen.  \[A is the Venice <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p45.2"></span>ms.</span> “of about the thirteenth
century;” Tischendorf, *Apocal. Apocr*., p. xi.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[569:2482](0081380.htm#fr_2481.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p47"></span> The <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p47.1"></span>mss.</span> originally had *days*, and
*hours* is substituted in another hand.

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[569:2483](0081380.htm#fr_2482.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p49"></span> i.e., mounted His chariot.

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[570:2484](0081380.htm#fr_2483.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p52"></span> According to a Jewish tradition,
these were the four angels who stood round the throne of God.

<span id="fn_2484"></span>[570:2485](0081380.htm#fr_2484.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p53"></span> Probably the reading should be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxviii-p53.1"></span>ἕτερον</span>,
another, and not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p53.2"></span>ἑταῖρον</span>.  Or it may mean:  I will
not receive a friendly body, i.e., one upon which I have no claims.

<span id="fn_2485"></span>[570:2486](0081380.htm#fr_2485.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p54"></span> i.e., of which Adam was made.

<span id="fn_2486"></span>[570:2487](0081380.htm#fr_2486.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p56"></span> Lit., earth.

<span id="fn_2487"></span>[570:2488](0081380.htm#fr_2487.md) <span
id="vii.xxxviii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxviii-p59"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxviii-p59.1"></span>ms.</span> D ends here with:  To whom be
glory and strength to ages of ages.  Amen.  \[D is the Milan manuscript
which Tischendorf assigns to “About the eleventh century,” *Apocalypses
Apocryphæ*, p. xi.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation of Esdras.](0081381.md)
