[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081436)  [Next](0081438.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p2"></span>On the question of an accused
bishop appealing to the seat of the apostles.

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p3"></span>It is determined, moreover, that,
in the case of an accused bishop appealing to the seat of the apostles,
that should be held to be a settle<span id="page_638">p. 638</span>
<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-Page_638"></span>ment which is the decision
of the pontiff of that same seat.  On all occasions, however, in cases
concerning priests, let this form be maintained, that no one be bound by
a decision pronounced by another than his own proper judge.  It is the
duty also of all the faithful to be ready to help the oppressed and the
miserable in their distress, in order that by the manifestation of
another manner of recompense (*vindictæ*) they may be able to keep the
recompense (*vengeance*) of God from themselves.  For he offers
(*libat*) things prosperous to the Lord who keeps off things adverse
from the afflicted.  Whence it is written, “A brother aiding a brother
shall be exalted.” <span id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866.md)   For the
Church of God ought to be without spot or wrinkle, and therefore it
ought not to be trodden and defiled by certain persons; for it is
written, “My dove, my undefiled, is but one.” <span
id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867.md)   Hence, again, the Lord says to
Moses, “There is a place with me (*penes me*), and thou shalt stand upon
a rock.” <span id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868.md)   What place is
there that belongs not to the Lord, seeing that all things consist in
Him by whom they were created?  There is a place, however, with God—to
wit, the unity of the holy Church—in which there is a standing upon a
rock, while the perfection of the confession (*confessionis soliditas*)
is held in lowliness.  We admonish thee, our brother, and all our
brethren who are rulers in the Church of Christ, which He hath purchased
with His blood, to keep back, by whatever checks ye possess, all men
from that abyss into which some brethren are slipping, in reviling the
Lord’s pastors, and persecuting them both by word and deed; and we
counsel you not to suffer them to be wounded with the hook of passion: 
for it is written, “For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness
of God.” <span id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869.md)   Hence it is said
again, “Let every man be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to
wrath.” <span id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870.md)   Now I doubt not
that with God’s help you observe all these things; but as an occasion
for counsel has arisen, I also secretly attach my word to your good
desires and deeds, so that what you are doing of yourselves and
independently of admonition you may do presently not by yourselves
alone, now that the counsellor himself is added to you.  Wherefore,
brethren, it becomes you and all the faithful to love each other, and
not to calumniate or accuse one another:  for it is written, “Love thy
neighbour, and be faithful unto him.  But if thou bewrayest his secrets,
thou shalt follow no more after him.  For as a man who destroyeth his
friend, so is he that loseth the love of his neighbour.  And as one that
letteth a bird go out of his hand, so art thou who hast let thy
neighbour go, and shalt not get him again.  Follow after him no more,
for he is far off.  For he is as a roe escaped out of the snare, since
his soul is wounded.  Further thou wilt not be able to bind him up, and
after reviling there may be reconcilement; but to bewray the secrets of
a friend is the despair of an unhappy mind.  He that winketh with the
eye worketh evil, and every one will cast him off.  When thou art
present, he will speak sweetly, and will admire thy words.  But at last
he will writhe his mouth, and slander thy sayings.  I have hated many
things, but nothing like him; and the Lord will hate him.  Whoso casteth
a stone on high, it will fall upon his own head; and a deceitful stroke
shall make wounds in the deceiver.  Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall
therein; and he that placeth a stone in his neighbour’s way shall
stumble thereon; and he that setteth a trap for another shall perish in
it.  He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon him; and he shall not
know whence it cometh on him.  Mockery and reproach are from the proud;
and vengeance, as a lion, shall lie in wait for them.  They that rejoice
at the fall of the righteous shall be taken in the snare; and anguish
shall consume them before they die.  Wrath and fury are both
abominations, and the sinful man shall have them both.” <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871.md)   “He that desireth to be avenged
shall find vengeance from the Lord, and He will surely keep his sins *in
remembrance*.  Forgive thy neighbour the hurt that he hath done thee; so
shall thy sins also be forgiven thee when thou prayest.  One man beareth
hatred against another, and doth he seek pardon from the Lord?  He
showeth no mercy to a man which is like himself, and doth he ask
forgiveness of his own sins from the Most High?  He, though he is but
flesh, nourishes hatred; and does he implore mercy from God?  Who will
entreat for pardon of his sins?  Remember thy end, and let enmity
cease.  For corruption and death impend on His commandments.  Remember
the fear of God, and bear no malice to thy neighbour.  Remember the
covenant of the Highest, and wink at the ignorance of thy neighbour. 
Abstain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins.  For a furious
man will kindle strife, and a sinful man will disquiet friends, and will
make debate among them that be at peace.  For according to the trees of
the wood, so will the fire burn; and according as a man’s strength is,
so will his wrath be; and according to his riches, his anger will rise. 
An hasty contention will kindle a fire; and an hasty fighting will shed
blood; and a tale-bearing (*testificans*) tongue will cause death.  If
thou blow the spark, it shall burn like a fire; and if thou spit upon
it, it shall be quenched; and both these come out of thy mouth.  The
whisperer and double-<span id="page_639">p. 639</span> <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-Page_639"></span>tongued is cursed; for he has
destroyed many that were at peace.  A backbiting (*tertia*) tongue hath
disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation.  Strong cities
of the rich hath it pulled down, and overthrown the houses of great
men.  It has destroyed the strength of peoples, and has scattered strong
nations.  A backbiting tongue hath cast out virtuous women (*viratas*,
spirited), and deprived them of their labours.  Whoso hearkeneth unto it
shall never find rest, and shall never have a friend on whom he may
repose.  The stroke of the whip maketh marks; but the stroke of the
tongue will break the bones.  Many have fallen by the edge of the sword,
but not so many as have fallen by the tongue.  Well is he that is
defended from the evil tongue, and hath not passed through the venom
thereof; who hath not drawn the yoke thereof, nor hath been bound in her
bands.  For the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof
are bands of brass.  The death thereof is an evil death, and the grave
were better than it.  Its endurance shall not abide, but it shall
possess the ways of the unrighteous.  In its flame it shall not burn the
righteous.  Such as forsake the Lord shall fall into it; and it shall
burn in them, and not be quenched; and it shall be sent upon them as a
lion, and devour them as a leopard.  Hedge thine ears (*sæpi aures*)
about with thorns, and refuse to listen to the evil tongue, and make a
door for thy mouth and bars for thine ears.  Smelt (*confla*) thy gold
and thy silver, and make a balance for thy words, and a right bridle for
thy mouth.  And beware lest thou slide perchance in thy tongue, and fall
in the sight of thine enemies that be in wait for thee, and thy fall be
irremediable unto death.” <span id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872.md)  
Let all beware of these things, and “keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile.” <span id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873.md)  
“Finally, dearly beloved, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His
might.  Put on the armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the devil; for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places
(*cœlestibus*).  Wherefore take unto you the armour of God, that ye may
be able to withstand in the evil day, and to stand perfect in all
(*omnibus perfecti*).  Stand therefore, having your loins girt about
with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness, and your
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; in all (*in
omnibus*) taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one.  And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.” <span
id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874.md)   It is our wish, brother, that
those things which we have written to you should be made known generally
to all, in order that things which touch the others should be made known
to all.  May Almighty God protect you, brother, and all our brethren
everywhere situate, even to the end,—even He who has thought good to
redeem the whole world, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for ever. 
Amen.—Given on the 16th day of October, in the consulship of the most
illustrious Africanus and Decius.

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p13"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[638:2867](0081437.htm#fr_2866.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p4"></span> [Prov. xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[638:2868](0081437.htm#fr_2867.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p5"></span> [Song of Sol.
6.9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[638:2869](0081437.htm#fr_2868.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p6"></span> [Ex. xxxiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#021.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[638:2870](0081437.htm#fr_2869.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p7"></span> [Jas. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[638:2871](0081437.htm#fr_2870.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p8"></span> [Jas. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[638:2872](0081437.htm#fr_2871.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p9"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
27.17-30](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[639:2873](0081437.htm#fr_2872.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p10"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
28](../../../bib/apo/sir028.htm#000.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[639:2874](0081437.htm#fr_2873.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p11"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[639:2875](0081437.htm#fr_2874.md) <span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p12"></span> [Eph. vi.
10-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md)<span
id="viii.viii.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note by the American Editor.](0081438.md)
