[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081321)  [Next](0081323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4 (20).</span>

<span id="vii.xvi.iv-p2"></span>And when all the saints were exulting,
lo, Satan, the prince and leader of death, said to Hades:  Make thyself
ready to receive Jesus, who boasts himself to be the Son of God, and is
a man fearing death, and saying, My soul is sorrowful, even unto death. 
And he has withstood me much, doing me evil; and many whom I made blind,
lame, deaf, leprous, and demoniac, he has healed with a word; and those
whom I have brought to thee dead, he has dragged away from thee.

<span id="vii.xvi.iv-p3"></span>Hades, answering, said to Prince Satan: 
Who is he that is so powerful, when he is a man in fear of death?  For
all the powerful of the earth are kept in subjection by my power, whom
thou hast brought into subjection by thy power.  If then, thou art
powerful, what is that man Jesus like, who, though fearing death,
withstands thy power?  If he is so powerful in humanity, verily I say
unto thee, he is all-powerful in divinity, and his power can no one
resist.  And when he says that he fears death, he wishes to lay hold on
thee, and woe will be to thee to the ages of eternity.  And Satan,
prince of Tartarus, answered and said:  Why hast thou doubted, and
feared to receive this Jesus, thy adversary and mine?  For I have
tempted him, and I have roused up my ancient people the Jews with hatred
and anger against him; I have sharpened a lance to strike him; I have
mixed gall and vinegar to give him to drink; and I have prepared wood to
crucify him, and nails to pierce him, and his death is near at hand,
that I may bring him to thee, subject to thee and me.

<span id="vii.xvi.iv-p4"></span>Tartarus answered and said:  Thou hast
told me that it is he himself who has dragged away the dead from me. 
Now there are many who are here kept by me, who, while they lived on
earth, took the dead from me, not by their own powers, but by godly
prayers, and their almighty God dragged them away from me.  Who is that
Jesus, who by his word has withdrawn the dead from me without prayers? 
Perhaps he is the same who, by, the word of his command, brought alive
Lazarus, after he had been four days in stench and corruption, whom I
kept dead.  Satan prince of death answered and said:  That Jesus is the
same.  And when Hades heard this he said to him:  I adjure thee by thy
powers and mine, do not bring him to me.  For I at that time, when I
heard the command of his word, trembled with terror and dismay, and all
<span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="vii.xvi.iv-Page_450"></span>my officers at the same time were
confounded along with me.  Nor could we keep that Lazarus; but, shaking
himself like an eagle, he sprang out, and went forth from us with all
activity and speed, and the same ground which held the dead body of
Lazarus immediately gave him forth alive.  So now, I know that that man
who could do these things is God, strong in authority, powerful in
humanity, and He is the Saviour of the human race.  But if thou bring
Him to me, all who are here shut up in the cruelty of the prison, and
bound by their sins in chains that cannot be loosened, He will let
loose, and will bring to the life of His divinity for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](0081323)
