[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081486)  [Next](0081488) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_735">p. 735</span> <span
id="ix.xvii-Page_735"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.xvii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="ix.xvii-p3.1"></span>A Letter of Mara, Son of Serapion. <span
id="fr_3462"></span>[3463](#fn_3462) </span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xvii-p5.1"></span>Mara</span>, son of Serapion, to Serapion, my
son:  peace.

<span id="ix.xvii-p6"></span>When thy master and guardian wrote me a
letter, and informed me that thou wast very diligent in study, *though
so* young in years, I blessed God that thou, a little boy, *and* without
a guide *to direct thee*, hadst begun in good earnest; and to myself
*also* this was a comfort—that I heard of thee, little boy *as thou art,
as displaying* such greatness of mind and conscientiousness: <span
id="fr_3463"></span>[3464](#fn_3463)   *a character* which, in the case
of many *who have begun well*, has shown no eagerness to continue.

<span id="ix.xvii-p8"></span>On this account, lo, I have written for
thee this record, *touching* that which I have by careful observation
discovered in the world.  For the kind of life men lead has been
carefully observed by me.  I tread the path of learning, <span
id="fr_3464"></span>[3465](#fn_3464) and from the study of Greek
philosophy <span id="fr_3465"></span>[3466](#fn_3465) have I found out
all these things, although they suffered shipwreck when the birth of
life took place. <span id="fr_3466"></span>[3467](#fn_3466)

<span id="ix.xvii-p12"></span>Be diligent, then, my son, in *attention
to* those things which are becoming for the free, <span
id="fr_3467"></span>[3468](#fn_3467) *so as* to devote thyself to
learning, and to follow after wisdom; and endeavour thus to become
confirmed in those *habits* with which thou hast begun.  Call to mind
also my precepts, as a quiet person who is fond of the pursuit of
learning.  And, even though *such a life* should seem to thee very
irksome, *yet* when thou hast made experience of it for a little while,
it will become very pleasant to thee:  for to me also it so happened. 
When, moreover, a person has left his home, and is able *still* to
preserve his *previous* character, and properly does that which it
behoves him to do, he is that chosen man who is called “the blessing of
God,” and one who does not find aught else to compare with his
freedom. <span id="fr_3468"></span>[3469](#fn_3468)   For, as for those
persons who are called to the pursuit of learning, they are seeking to
extricate themselves from the turmoils of time; and those who take hold
upon wisdom, they are clinging to the hope of righteousness; and those
who take their stand on truth, they are displaying the banner of their
virtue; and those who cultivate philosophy, they are looking to escape
from the vexations of the world.  And do thou too, my son, thus wisely
behave thyself in *regard to* these things, as a wise person who seeks
to spend a pure life; and *beware* lest the gain which many hunger after
enervate thee, and thy mind turn to covet riches, which have no
stability.  For, when they are acquired by fraud, they do not continue;
nor, even when justly *obtained*, do they last; and all those things
which are seen by thee in the world, as belonging to that which is
*only* for a little time, *are destined* to depart like a dream:  for
they are *but as* the risings and settings of the seasons.

<span id="ix.xvii-p15"></span>About the *objects of that* vainglory,
too, of which the life of men is full, be not thou solicitous:  seeing
that from those things which give us joy there quickly comes to us
harm.  Most especially *is this the case with* the birth of beloved
children.  For in two respects it plainly brings us harm:  in the case
of the virtuous, *our very* affection for them torments us, and from
their *very excellence of* character we suffer torture; and, in the case
of the vicious, we are worried with their correction, and afflicted with
their misconduct.

<span id="ix.xvii-p16"></span>Thou hast heard, <span
id="fr_3469"></span>[3470](#fn_3469) moreover, concerning our
companions, that, when they were leaving Samosata, they were distressed
*about it*, and, as if complaining of the time *in which their lot was
cast*, said thus:  “We are now far removed from our home, and we cannot
return *again* to our <span id="page_736">p. 736</span> <span
id="ix.xvii-Page_736"></span>city, or behold our people, or offer to our
gods the greeting of praise.”  Meet was it that that day should be
called *a day* of lamentation, because one heavy grief possessed them
all alike.  For they wept as they remembered their fathers, and *they
thought of* their mothers <span id="fr_3470"></span>[3471](#fn_3470)
with sobs, and they were distressed for their brethren, *and* grieved
for their betrothed whom they had left behind.  And, although we had
heard that their <span id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471) former
companions were proceeding to Seleucia, we clandestinely *set out, and*
proceeded on the way towards them, and united our own misery with
theirs.  Then was our grief exceedingly violent, and fitly did our
weeping abound, by reason of our desperate plight, and our wailing
gathered *itself into* a dense cloud, <span
id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472) and our misery grew vaster than a
mountain:  for not one of us had the power to ward off the disasters
that assailed him.  For affection for the living was intense, as well as
sorrow for the dead, and our miseries were driving us on without any way
*of escape*.  For we saw our brethren and our children captives, and we
remembered our deceased companions, who were laid *to rest* in a
foreign <span id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473) land.  Each one of
us, too, was anxious for himself, lest he should have disaster added to
disaster, or lest another calamity should overtake that which went
before it.  What enjoyment could men have that were prisoners, *and* who
experienced *things like* these?

<span id="ix.xvii-p22"></span>But as for thee, my beloved, be not
distressed because in thy loneliness thou hast <span
id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474) been driven from place to place. 
For to these things men are born, since they *are destined* to meet with
the accidents of time.  But *rather* let thy thought be this, that to
wise men every place is alike, and *that* in every city the good have
many fathers and mothers.  Else, *if thou doubt it*, take thee a proof
from *what thou hast seen* thyself.  How many people who know thee not
love thee as *one of* their own children; and *what* a host of women
receive thee as *they would* their own beloved ones!  Verily, as a
stranger thou hast been fortunate; verily, for thy small love many
people have conceived an ardent affection for thee.

<span id="ix.xvii-p24"></span>What, again, are we to say concerning the
delusion <span id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475) which has taken up
its abode in the world?  Both by reason of toil <span
id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476) painful is the journey through it,
and by its agitations are we, like a reed by the force of the wind, bent
now in this direction, now in that.  For I have been amazed at many who
cast away their children, and I have been astonished at others who bring
up those that are not theirs.  There are persons who acquire riches in
the world, and I have also been astonished at others who inherit that
which is not *of* their own *acquisition*.  Thus *mayest thou*
understand and see that we are walking under the guidance of delusion.

<span id="ix.xvii-p27"></span>Begin and tell us, O wisest of men, <span
id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477) on which of *his* possessions a man
can place reliance, or concerning what things he can say that they are
such as abide.  *Wilt thou say so* of abundance of riches? they are
snatched away.  Of fortresses? they are spoiled.  Of cities? they are
laid waste.  Of greatness? it is brought down.  Of magnificence? it is
overthrown.  Of beauty? it withers.  Or of laws? they pass away.  Or of
poverty? it is despised.  Or of children? they die.  Or of friends? they
prove false.  Or of the praises *of men?* jealousy goes before them.

<span id="ix.xvii-p29"></span>Let a man, therefore, rejoice in his
empire, like Darius; or in his good fortune, like Polycrates; or in his
bravery, like Achilles; or in his wife, like Agamemnon; or in his
offspring, like Priam; or in his skill, like Archimedes; or in his
wisdom, like Socrates; or in his learning, like Pythagoras; or in his
ingenuity, like Palamedes;—the life of men, my son, departs from the
world, but their praises and their virtues abide for ever.

<span id="ix.xvii-p30"></span>Do thou, then, my little son, choose thee
that which fadeth not away.  For those who occupy themselves with these
things are called modest, and *are* beloved, and lovers of a good name.

<span id="ix.xvii-p31"></span>When, moreover, anything untoward befalls
thee, do not lay the blame on man, nor be angry against God, nor
fulminate against the time thou livest in.

<span id="ix.xvii-p32"></span>If thou shalt continue in this mind, thy
gift is not small which thou hast received from God, which has no need
of riches, and is never reduced to poverty.  For without fear shalt thou
pass thy life, <span id="fr_3478"></span>[3479](#fn_3478) and with
rejoicing.  For fear and apologies for *one’s* nature belong not to the
wise, but to such as walk contrary to law.  For no man has even been
deprived of his wisdom, as of his property.

<span id="ix.xvii-p34"></span>Follow diligently learning rather than
riches.  For the greater are *one’s* possessions, the greater is the
evil *attendant upon them*.  For I have myself observed that, where *a
man’s* goods are many, so also are the tribulations which happen *to
him;* and, where luxuries are accumulated, there also do sorrows
congregate; and, where riches are abundant, there is *stored up* the
bitterness of many a year.

<span id="ix.xvii-p35"></span><span id="page_737">p. 737</span> <span
id="ix.xvii-Page_737"></span>If, therefore, thou shalt behave with
understanding, and shalt diligently watch over *thy conduct*, God will
not refrain from helping thee, nor men from loving thee.

<span id="ix.xvii-p36"></span>Let that which thou art able to acquire
suffice thee; and if, moreover, thou art able to do without property,
thou shalt be called blessed, and no man whatsoever shall be jealous of
thee.

<span id="ix.xvii-p37"></span>And remember also this, that nothing will
disturb thy life very greatly, except *it be the love of* gain; *and*
that no man after his death is called an owner of property:  because it
is by the desire of this that weak men are led captive, and they know
not that a man dwells among his possessions *only* in the manner of a
chance-comer, and they are haunted with fear because these *possessions*
are not secured to them:  for they abandoned that which is their own,
and seek that which is not theirs.

<span id="ix.xvii-p38"></span>What are we to say, when the wise are
dragged by force by the hands of tyrants, and their wisdom is deprived
of its freedom <span id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) by slander,
and they are plundered for their *superior* intelligence, without *the
opportunity of making* a defence?  *They are not wholly to be pitied*. 
For what benefit did the Athenians obtain by putting Socrates to death,
seeing that they received as retribution for it famine and pestilence? 
Or the people of Samos by the burning of Pythagoras, seeing that in one
hour the whole <span id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) of their
country was covered with sand?  Or the Jews *by the murder* of their
Wise King, seeing that from that very time their kingdom was driven away
*from them?*  For with justice did God grant a recompense to the wisdom
of *all* three of them.  For the Athenians died by famine; and the
people of Samos were covered by the sea without remedy; and the Jews,
brought to desolation and expelled from their kingdom, are driven away
into every land.  *Nay*, Socrates did “not” die, because of Plato; nor
yet Pythagoras, because of the statue of Hera; nor yet the Wise King,
because of the new laws which he enacted.

<span id="ix.xvii-p41"></span>Moreover I, my son, have attentively
observed mankind, in what a dismal state of ruin they are.  And I have
been amazed that they are not utterly prostrated <span
id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481) by the calamities which surround
them, and *that* even *their* wars <span
id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) are not enough for them, nor the
pains *they endure*, nor the diseases, nor the death, nor the poverty;
but *that*, like savage beasts, they must needs rush upon one another in
*their* enmity, *trying* which of them shall inflict the greater
mischief on his fellow.  For they have broken away from the bounds of
truth, and transgress all honest laws, because they are bent on
fulfilling their selfish desires; for, whensoever a man is eagerly set
on *obtaining* that which he desires, how is it possible that he should
fitly do that which it behoves him *to do?* and they acknowledge no
restraint, <span id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) and but seldom
stretch out their hands towards truth and goodness, but in their manner
of life behave like the deaf <span id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484)
and the blind.  Moreover, the wicked rejoice, and the righteous are
disquieted.  He that has, denies *that he has;* and he that has not,
struggles to acquire.  The poor seek *help*, and the rich hide *their
wealth*, and every man laughs at his fellow.  Those that are drunken are
stupefied, and those that have recovered themselves are ashamed. <span
id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485)   Some weep, and some sing; and
some laugh, and others are a prey to care.  They rejoice in things evil,
and a man that speaks the truth they despise.

<span id="ix.xvii-p47"></span>Should a man, then, be surprised when the
world is seeking to wither him with *its* scorn, seeing that they *and
he* have not one *and the same* manner of life?  “These” are the things
for which they care.  One of them is looking *forward to the time* when
in battle he shah obtain the renown of victory; yet the valiant perceive
not by how many foolish objects of desire a man is led captive in the
world.  But would that for a little while self-repentance visited them! 
For, while victorious by their bravery, they are overcome by the power
of covetousness.  For I have made trial of men, and with this result: 
that the one thing on which they are intent, is abundance of riches. 
Therefore also it is that they have no settled purpose; but, through the
instability of their minds, a man is of a sudden cast down *from his
elation of spirit* to be swallowed up with sadness.  They look not at
the vast wealth of eternity, *nor consider* that every visitation of
trouble is conducting us all alike to the same *final* period.  For they
are devoted to the majesty of the belly, *that* huge blot *on the
character* of the vicious.

<span id="ix.xvii-p48"></span>Moreover, *as regards* this *letter* which
it has come into my mind to write to thee, it is not enough to read it,
but the best thing is that it be put in practice. <span
id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486)   For I know for myself, that when
thou shalt have made experiment of <span id="page_738">p. 738</span>
<span id="ix.xvii-Page_738"></span>this mode of life, it will be very
pleasant to thee, and thou wilt be free from sore vexation; because it
is *only* on account of children that we tolerate riches. <span
id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487)

<span id="ix.xvii-p51"></span>Put, therefore, sadness away from thee, O
*most* beloved of mankind,—a thing which never in anywise benefits *a
man;* and drive care away from thee, which brings with it no advantage
whatsoever.  For we have no resource or skill *that can avail
us*—*nothing* but a great mind *able* to cope with the disasters and to
endure the tribulations which we are always receiving at the hands of
the times.  For at these things does it behove us to look, and not
*only* at those which are fraught with rejoicing and good repute.

<span id="ix.xvii-p52"></span>Devote thyself to wisdom, the fount of all
things good, the treasure that faileth not.  There shalt thou lay thy
head, and be at ease.  For this shall be to thee father and mother, and
a good companion for thy life.

<span id="ix.xvii-p53"></span>Enter into closest intimacy with fortitude
and patience, those *virtues* which are able *successfully* to encounter
the tribulations that befall feeble men.  For so great is their
strength, that they are adequate to sustain hunger, and *can* endure
thirst, and mitigate every trouble.  With toil, moreover, yea even with
dissolution, they make right merry.

<span id="ix.xvii-p54"></span>To these things give diligent attention,
and thou shalt lead an untroubled life, and I also shall have
comfort, <span id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) and thou shalt be
called “the delight of his parents.”

<span id="ix.xvii-p56"></span>For in that time of yore, when our city
was standing in her greatness, thou mayest be aware that against many
persons *among us* abominable words were uttered; but for
ourselves, <span id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) we acknowledged
long ago that we received love, no less than honour, to the fullest
extent from the multitude of her people:  it was the state of the times
*only* that forbade *our* completing those things which we had resolved
on doing. <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490)   And here also in
the prison-house we give thanks to God that we have received the love of
many:  for we are striving to our utmost to maintain a life of sobriety
and cheerfulness; <span id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) and, if
anyone drive us by force, he will *but* be bearing public testimony
against himself, that he is estranged from all things good, and he will
receive disgrace and shame from the foul mark of shame *that is upon
him*.  For we have shown our truth—*that truth* which in our *now*
ruined kingdom we possessed not. <span
id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492)   But, if the Romans shall permit
us to go *back* to our own country, *as called upon* by justice and
righteousness *to do*, they will be acting like humane men, and will
earn the name of good and righteous, and at the same time *will have* a
peaceful country in which to dwell:  for they will exhibit their
greatness when they shall leave us free men, *and* we shall be obedient
to the sovereign power which the time has allotted to us.  But let them
not like tyrants, drive us as *though we were* slaves.  Yet, if it has
been *already* determined what shall be done, we shall receive nothing
more *dreadful* than the peaceful death which is in store for us.

<span id="ix.xvii-p61"></span>But thou, my little son, if thou resolve
diligently to acquaint thyself with these things, first of all put a
check on appetite, and set limits to that in which thou art
*indulging*.  Seek the power to refrain from being angry; and, instead
of *yielding to* outbursts of passion, listen to *the promptings of*
kindness.

<span id="ix.xvii-p62"></span>For myself, what I am henceforth
solicitous about is this—*that*, so far as I have recollections *of the
past*, I may leave behind me a book *containing them*, and with a
prudent mind finish the journey which I am appointed *to take*, and
depart without suffering out of the sad afflictions of the world.  For
my prayer is, that I may receive *my* dismissal; and *by* what kind of
death concerns me not.  But, if any one should be troubled or anxious
*about this*, I have no counsel to give him:  for yonder, in the
dwelling-place of all the world, will he find us before him.

<span id="ix.xvii-p63"></span>One of his friends asked Mara, son of
Serapion, when in bonds at his side:  “Nay, by thy life, Mara, tell me
what *cause* of laughter thou hast seen, that thou laughest.”  “I am
laughing,” said Mara, “at Time: <span
id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493)   inasmuch as, although he has not
borrowed any evil from me, he is paying me back.”

<span id="ix.xvii-p65"></span>*Here* endeth the letter of Mara, son of
Serapion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3462"></span>[735:3463](0081487.htm#fr_3462) <span
id="ix.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p4"></span> \[Elucidation I. p. 742, *infra*.  See p.
722, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3463"></span>[735:3464](0081487.htm#fr_3463) <span
id="ix.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p7"></span> Lit. “good conscience.”

<span id="fn_3464"></span>[735:3465](0081487.htm#fr_3464) <span
id="ix.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p9"></span> Or, “my daily converse is with learning.” 
So Dr. Payne Smith is inclined to take these difficult words, supplying,
as Cureton evidently does, the pronoun \*\*\*.  The construction would
be easier if we could take the participle \*\*\* as a passive, and
render:  “It (the kind of life men lead) has been explored by me by
means of study.”

<span id="fn_3465"></span>[735:3466](0081487.htm#fr_3465) <span
id="ix.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p10"></span> Lit. “Græcism.”

<span id="fn_3466"></span>[735:3467](0081487.htm#fr_3466) <span
id="ix.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p11"></span> The meaning probably is, that the maxims
referred to lost their importance for him when he entered upon the new
life of a Christian (so Cureton), or their importance to mankind when
Christianity itself was born into the world.  But why he did not
substitute more distinctive Christian teaching is not clear.  Perhaps
the fear of persecution influenced him.

<span id="fn_3467"></span>[735:3468](0081487.htm#fr_3467) <span
id="ix.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p13"></span> That is, the matters constituting “a
*liberal* education.”

<span id="fn_3468"></span>[735:3469](0081487.htm#fr_3468) <span
id="ix.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p14"></span> Cureton’s less literal rendering probably
gives the true sense:  “with whose liberty nothing else can be
compared.”

<span id="fn_3469"></span>[735:3470](0081487.htm#fr_3469) <span
id="ix.xvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p17"></span> Cureton:  “I have heard.”  The unpointed
text is here ambiguous.

<span id="fn_3470"></span>[736:3471](0081487.htm#fr_3470) <span
id="ix.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p18"></span> Read \*\*\*, instead of \*\*\*,
“peoples.”

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[736:3472](0081487.htm#fr_3471) <span
id="ix.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p19"></span> Perhaps “our” is meant.

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[736:3473](0081487.htm#fr_3472) <span
id="ix.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p20"></span> Cureton:  “and the dark cloud collected
our sighs.”  But the words immediately following, as well as the fact
that in each of the clauses the nominative is placed last, favours the
rendering given.

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[736:3474](0081487.htm#fr_3473) <span
id="ix.xvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p21"></span> Lit., “borrowed.”

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[736:3475](0081487.htm#fr_3474) <span
id="ix.xvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p23"></span> Lit., “because thy loneliness has.”

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[736:3476](0081487.htm#fr_3475) <span
id="ix.xvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p25"></span> Or “error.”  He may refer either to the
delusion of those who pursue supposed earthly good, or to the false
appearances by which men are deceived in such pursuit.

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[736:3477](0081487.htm#fr_3476) <span
id="ix.xvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p26"></span> For \*\*\* read \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[736:3478](0081487.htm#fr_3477) <span
id="ix.xvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p28"></span> Cureton:  “A sage among men once began to
say to us.”  This would require \*\*\*, not \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3478"></span>[736:3479](0081487.htm#fr_3478) <span
id="ix.xvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p33"></span> \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[737:3480](0081487.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="ix.xvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p39"></span> Lit., “made captive.”

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[737:3481](0081487.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="ix.xvii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p40"></span> For \*\*\* read \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[737:3482](0081487.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="ix.xvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p42"></span> No verb is found in the lexicons to which
\*\*\* can be referred.  It may perhaps be Eshtaphel of a verb \*\*\*,
cognate with \*\*\*, “to be bent.”

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[737:3483](0081487.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="ix.xvii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p43"></span> For \*\*\* read \*\*\*.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[737:3484](0081487.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="ix.xvii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p44"></span> Or “moderation.”

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[737:3485](0081487.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="ix.xvii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p45"></span> Cureton:  “dumb.”  The word \*\*\* has
both senses.

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[737:3486](0081487.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="ix.xvii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p46"></span> Or “penitent.”

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[737:3487](0081487.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="ix.xvii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p49"></span> So Dr. Payne Smith, who is inclined to
take \*\*\* in the sense, “it goes before, it is best, with respect to
it.”  Cureton translates, “it should also proceed to practice,” joining
\*\*\* with the participle just mentioned; whereas Dr. Smith connects it
with \*\*\*, thus:  “but that it should be *put* in practice is best
with respect to it.”

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[738:3488](0081487.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="ix.xvii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p50"></span> This appears to show that the life of
learned seclusion which he has been recommending is one of
celibacy—monasticism.

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[738:3489](0081487.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="ix.xvii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p55"></span> Or, “and thou shalt be to me a comfort,”
as Cureton.

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[738:3490](0081487.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="ix.xvii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p57"></span> That is, “myself.”

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[738:3491](0081487.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="ix.xvii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p58"></span> Such appears to be the sense of this
obscure passage.  The literal rendering is, “We acknowledged of old that
we received equal love and honour to the fullest extent from her
multitude” (or, from her greatness); “but the time forbade *our*
completing those things which were *already* accomplished in our mind.” 
What things he refers to (for his words seem to have a particular
reference) is not clear.  The word rendered “greatness,” or “multitude,”
is in reality two words in pointed<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xvii-p58.1"></span>mss.</span>  Here it does not appear, except
from the sense, which is intended.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[738:3492](0081487.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="ix.xvii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p59"></span> Lit., “We are putting ourself to the
proof to see how far we can stand in wisdom,” etc.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[738:3493](0081487.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="ix.xvii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p60"></span> “This is a very hopeless passage.…Perhaps
the codex has \*\*\*, ‘the kingdom of *our* ruin,’ i.e., the ruined
country in which we used to dwell.  For possibly it refers to what he
has said before about the ruined greatness of his city, captured by the
Romans.  I suppose Mara was a Persian.”—Dr. <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.xvii-p60.1"></span>Payne Smith</span>.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[738:3494](0081487.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="ix.xvii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p64"></span> Or, “the time.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ambrose.](0081488)
