[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081366)  [Next](0081368.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span id="page_526">p. 526</span> <span
id="vii.xxxi-Page_526"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Acts of Peter and Andrew.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>From a Bodleian <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p2.2"></span>ms</span>. <span
id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278.md) </span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxxi-p5"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>Acts of the Holy Apostles Peter and
Andrew.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>It</span> came to pass when Andrew the apostle
of Christ went forth from the city of the man-eaters, behold a luminous
cloud snatched him up, and carried him away to the mountain where Peter
and Matthew and Alexander were sitting.  And when he saw them, they
saluted him with great joy.  Then Peter says to him:  What has happened
to thee, brother Andrew?  Hast thou sown the word of truth in the
country of the man-eaters or not?  Andrew says to him:  Yes, father
Peter, through thy prayers; but the men of that city have done me many
mischiefs, for they dragged me through their street three days, so that
my blood stained the whole street.  Peter says to him:  Be a man in the
Lord, brother Andrew, and come hither, and rest from thy labour.  For if
the good husbandman laboriously till the ground, it will also bear
fruit, and straightway all his toil will be turned into joy; but if he
toil, and his land bring forth no fruit, he has double toil.

<span id="vii.xxxi-p7"></span>And while he was thus speaking, the Lord
Jesus Christ appeared to them in the form of a child, and said to them: 
Hail, Peter, bishop of the whole of my Church! hail, Andrew!  My
co-heirs, be courageous, and struggle for mankind; for verily I say unto
you, you shall endure toils in this world for mankind.  *But be bold; I
will give you rest* in one hour of repose in the kingdom of my Father. 
Arise, then, and go into the city of the barbarians, and preach in it;
and I will be with you in the wonders that shall happen in it by your
hands.  And the Lord Jesus, after saluting them, went up into the
heavens in glory.

<span id="vii.xxxi-p8"></span>And Peter, and Andrew, and Alexander, and
Rufus, and Matthias, went into the city of the barbarians.  And after
they had come near the city, Andrew answered and said to Peter:  Father
Peter, have we again to undergo toils in this city, as in the country of
the man-eaters?  Peter says to him:  I do not know.  But, behold, there
is an old man before us sowing in his field:  if we go up to him, let us
say to him, Give us bread; and if he give us bread, we may know that we
are not to suffer in this city; but if he say to us, We have no bread,
on the other hand, we shall know that suffering again awaits us.  And
when they came up to the old man, Peter says to him:  Hail, farmer!  And
the farmer says to them:  Hail you too, merchants!  Peter says to him: 
Have you bread to give to these children, for we have been in want?  The
old man says to them:  Wait a little, and look after the oxen, and the
plough, and the land, that I may go into the city, and get you loaves. 
Peter says to him:  If you provide hospitality for us, we shall took
after the cattle and the field.  The old man says:  So be it.  Peter
says to him:  Are the oxen your own?  The old man says:  No; I have them
on hire.  Peter says to him:  Go into the city.  And the old man went
into the city.  And Peter arose, and girded up his cloak and his
under-garment, and says to Andrew:  It is not right for us to rest and
be idle; above all, when the old man is working for us, having left his
own work.  Then Peter took hold of the plough, and sowed the wheat.  And
Andrew was behind the oxen, and says to Peter:  Father Peter, why dost
thou bring toil upon us, especially when we have work enough already! 
Then Andrew took the plough out of Peter’s hand, and sowed the wheat,
saying:  O seed cast into the ground in the field of the righteous, come
up, and come to the light.  Let the young men of the city therefore come
forth, whom I found in the pit of destruction until to-day; for, behold,
the apostles of Christ are coming into the city, pardoning the sins of
those who believe in them, and healing every disease, and every
sickness.  Pray ye for me, that He may have mercy upon me, and that I
may be delivered from this strait.

<span id="vii.xxxi-p9"></span>And many of the multitude believed in
Christ, because of the saying of the woman; <span
id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279.md) and they fell at the feet of the
apostles, and adored them.  <span id="page_527">p. 527</span> <span
id="vii.xxxi-Page_527"></span>And they laid their hands upon them.  And
they healed those in the city that were sick, and gave sight to the
blind and, hearing to the deaf, and drove out the demons.  All the
multitude glorified the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.xxxi-p11"></span>And there was a certain rich man in the
city, by name Onesiphorus.  He, having seen the miracles done by the
apostles, says to them:  If I believe in your God, can I also do a
miracle like you?  Andrew says to him:  If thou wilt forsake all that
belongs to thee, and thy wife and thy children, as we also have done,
then thou also shalt do miracles.  When Onesiphorus heard this, he was
filled with rage, and took his scarf and threw it over Andrew’s neck,
and struck him, and said to him:  Thou art a sorcerer.  How dost thou
force me to abandon my wife, and my children, and my goods?  Then Peter,
having turned and seen him striking Andrew, says to him:  Man, stop now
striking Andrew.  Onesiphorus says to him:  I see that thou art more
sensible than he.  Do thou then tell me to leave my wife, and my
children, and my goods.  What dost thou say?  Peter says to him:  One
thing I say unto thee:  it is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for a rich man to go into the kingdom of heaven. <span
id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280.md)   When Onesiphorus heard this, he
was even more filled with rage and anger, and took his scarf off the
neck of Andrew, and threw it upon the neck of Peter; and so he dragged
him along, saying:  Verily thou art a great sorcerer, more than the
other; for a camel cannot go through the eye of a needle.  But if thou
wilt show me this miracle, I will believe in thy God; and not only I,
but also the whole city.  But if not, thou shalt be grievously punished
in the midst of the city.  And when Peter heard this, he was exceedingly
grieved, and stood and stretched forth his hands towards heaven, and
prayed, saying:  O Lord our God, listen to me at this time; for they
will ensnare us from Thine own words:  for no prophet has spoken to set
forth this his explanation, and no patriarch that we might learn the
interpretation of it; and now we seek for ourselves the explanation with
boldness.  Do Thou then, Lord, not overlook us:  for thou art He who is
praised by the cherubim.

<span id="vii.xxxi-p13"></span>And after he had said this, the Saviour
appeared in the form of a child of twelve years old, wearing a linen
garment; and He says to them:  Be courageous, and tremble not, my chosen
disciples; for I am with you always.  Let the needle and the camel be
brought.  And after saying this, He went up into the heavens.  And there
was a certain merchant <span id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281.md) in the
city who had believed in the Lord through the Apostle Philip; and when
he heard of this, he ran and searched for a needle with a big eye, to do
a favour to the apostles.  When Peter learned this, he said:  My son, do
not search for a big needle; for nothing is impossible with God:  rather
bring us a small needle.  And after the needle had been brought, and all
the multitude of the city were standing by to see, Peter looked up and
saw a camel coming.  And he ordered her to be brought.  Then he fixed
the needle in the ground, and cried out with a loud voice, saying:  In
the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, I
order thee, O camel, to go through the eye of the needle.  Then the eye
of the needle was opened like a gate, and the camel went through it, and
all the multitude saw it.  Again Peter says to the camel:  Go again
through the needle.  And the camel went a second time.  When Onesiphorus
saw this, he said to Peter; Truly thou art a great sorcerer; but I do
not believe unless I send and bring a camel and a needle.  And he called
one of his servants, and said to him privately:  Go and bring me here a
camel and a needle; find also a polluted woman, and force her to come
here:  for these men are sorcerers.  And Peter having learned the
mystery through the Spirit, says to Onesiphorus:  Send and bring the
camel, and the woman, and the needle.  And when they brought them, Peter
took the needle, and fixed it in the ground.  And the woman was sitting
on the camel.  Then Peter says:  In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
the crucified, I order thee, O camel, to go through this needle.  And
immediately the eye of the needle was opened, and became like a gate,
and the camel went through it.  Peter again says to the camel:  Go
through it again, that all may see the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ,
in order that some may believe on Him.  Then the camel again went
through the needle.  And Onesiphorus seeing it, cried out, and said: 
Truly great is the God of Peter and Andrew, and I from this time forth
believe in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Now then, hear my words,
O Peter.  I have corn lands, vineyards, and fields; I have also
twenty-seven pounds of gold, and fifty pounds of silver; and I have very
many slaves.  I give my possessions to the poor, that I also may do one
miracle like you.  And Peter was grieved lest the powers should not work
in him, seeing that he had not received the seal in Christ.  And while
he was considering this, behold, a voice out of the heaven saying to
him:  Do to him what he wishes, because I will accomplish for him what
he desires.  Peter says to him:  My son, come hither; do as we do.  And
Onesiphorus came up, and stood before the camel and the needle, and
said:  In the n… (Here the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p14.2"></span>ms.</span> ends.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[526:2279](0081367.htm#fr_2278.md) <span
id="vii.xxxi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p3"></span> \[This is the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> frequently referred to in the
previous pages.  The Greek text of this fragment is given by Tischendorf
in the supplement to *Apocalypses Apocr*., pp. 161–167.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[526:2280](0081367.htm#fr_2279.md) <span
id="vii.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p10"></span> Something seems to have fallen out here.

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[527:2281](0081367.htm#fr_2280.md) <span
id="vii.xxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p12"></span> [Matt. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.xxxi-p12.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[527:2282](0081367.htm#fr_2281.md) <span
id="vii.xxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxi-p14.1"></span>πανταπωλης</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts and Martyrdom of St. Matthew the Apostle.](0081368.md)
