[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081382)  [Next](0081384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xli"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p1"></span> <span id="page_582">p. 582</span> <span
id="vii.xli-Page_582"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xli-p1.1"></span>Revelation of John.</span>

<span id="vii.xli-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xli-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xli-p3.1"></span>Revelation of Saint John the Theologian.</span>

<span id="vii.xli-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p4.1"></span>After</span> the taking up of our Lord Jesus
Christ, I John was alone upon Mount Tabor, <span
id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556) where also He showed us His
undefiled Godhead; and as I was not able to stand, I fell upon the
ground, and prayed to the Lord, and said:  O Lord my God, who hast
deemed me worthy to be Thy servant, hear my voice, and teach me about
Thy coming.  When Thou shalt come to the earth, what will happen?  The
heaven and the earth, and the sun and the moon, what will happen to them
in those times?  Reveal to me all; for I am emboldened, because Thou
listenest to Thy servant.

<span id="vii.xli-p6"></span>And I spent seven days praying; and after
this a cloud of light caught me up from the mountain, and set me before
the face of the heaven.  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Look up,
John, servant of God, and know.  And having looked up, I saw the heaven
opened, and there came forth from within the heaven a smell of perfumes
of much sweet odour; and I saw an exceeding great flood of light, more
resplendent than the sun.  And again I heard a voice saying to me: 
Behold, righteous John.  And I directed my sight, and saw a book lying,
of the thickness, methought, of seven mountains; <span
id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) and the length of it the mind of
man cannot comprehend, having seven seals.  And I said:  O Lord my God,
reveal to me what is written in this book.  And I heard a voice saying
to me:  Hear, righteous John.  In this book which thou seest there have
been written the things in the heaven, and the things in the earth, and
the things in the abyss, and the judgments and righteousness of all the
human race. <span id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558)   And I said: 
Lord, when shall these things come to pass? and what do those times
bring?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous John. <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559)   There shall be in that time
abundance of corn and wine, such as there hath never been upon the
earth, nor shall ever be until those times come.  Then the ear of corn
shall produce a half chœnix, <span id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560)
and the bend of the branch shall produce a thousand clusters, and the
cluster shall produce a half jar of wine; and in the following year
there shall not be found upon the face of all the earth a half chœnix of
corn or a half jar of wine.

<span id="vii.xli-p11"></span>And again I said:  Lord, thereafter what
wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous John. 
Then shall appear the denier, and he who is set apart in the darkness,
who is called Antichrist.  And again I said:  Lord, reveal to me what he
is like.  And I heard a voice saying to me:  The appearance of his face
is dusky; <span id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561) the hairs of his
head are sharp, like darts; his eyebrows like a wild beast’s; his right
eye like the star which rises in the morning, and the other like a
lion’s; his mouth about one cubit; his teeth span long; his fingers like
scythes; the print of his feet of two spans; and on his face an
inscription, Antichrist; he shall be exalted even to heaven, and shall
be cast down even to Hades, making false displays. <span
id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562)   And then will I make the heaven
brazen, so that it shall not give moisture <span
id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563) upon the earth; and I will hide the
clouds in secret places, so that they shall not bring moisture upon the
earth; and I will command the horns of the wind, so that the wind shall
not blow upon the earth. <span id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564)

<span id="vii.xli-p16"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and how many
years <span id="page_583">p. 583</span> <span
id="vii.xli-Page_583"></span>will he do this upon the earth?  And I
heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous John.  Three years shall
those times be; and I will make the three years like three months, and
the three months like three weeks, and the three weeks like three days,
and the three days like three hours, and the three hours like three
seconds, as said the prophet David, His throne hast Thou broken down to
the ground; Thou hast shortened the days of his time; Thou hast poured
shame upon him. <span id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565)   And then I
shall send forth Enoch and Elias to convict him; and they shall show him
to be a liar and a deceiver; and he shall kill them at the altar, as
said the prophet, Then shall they offer calves upon Thine altar. <span
id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566)

<span id="vii.xli-p19"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what will come to pass?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear,
righteous John.  Then all the human race shall die, and there shall not
be a living man upon all the earth.  And again I said:  Lord, after that
what wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous
John.  Then will I send forth mine angels, and they shall take the ram’s
horns that lie upon the cloud; and Michael and Gabriel shall go forth
out of the heaven and sound with those horns, as the prophet David
foretold, With the voice of a trumpet of horn. <span
id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567)   And the voice of the trumpet
shall be heard from the one quarter of the world to the other; <span
id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) and from the voice of that trumpet
all the earth shall be shaken, as the prophet foretold, And at the voice
of the bird every plant shall arise; <span
id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) that is, at the voice of the
archangel all the human race shall arise. <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570)

<span id="vii.xli-p24"></span>And again I said:  Lord, those who are
dead from Adam even to this day, and who dwell in Hades from the
beginning of the world, and who die at the last ages, what like shall
they arise?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous John. 
All the human race shall arise thirty years old.

<span id="vii.xli-p25"></span>And again I said:  Lord, they die male and
female, and some old, and some young, and some infants.  In the
resurrection what like shall they arise?  And I heard a voice saying to
me:  Hear, righteous John.  Just as the bees are, and differ not one
from another, but are all of one appearance and one size, so also shall
every man be in the resurrection.  There is neither fair, nor ruddy, nor
black, neither Ethiopian nor different countenances; but they shall all
arise of one appearance and one stature.  All the human race shall arise
without bodies, as I told you that in the resurrection they neither
marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God. <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571)

<span id="vii.xli-p27"></span>And again I said:  Lord, is it possible in
that world to recognise each other, a brother his brother, or a friend
his friend, or a father his own children, or the children their own
parents?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, John.  To the
righteous there is recognition, but to the sinners not at all; they
cannot in the resurrection recognise each other.  And again I John
said:  Lord, is there there recollection of the things that are here,
either fields or vineyards, or other things here?  And I heard a voice
saying to me:  Hear, righteous John.  The prophet David speaks, saying,
I remembered that we are dust:  as for man, his days are as grass; as a
flower of the field, so he shall flourish:  for a wind hath passed over
it, and it shall be no more, and it shall not any longer know its
place. <span id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572)   And again the same
said:  His spirit <span id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) shall go
forth, and he returns to his earth; in that day all his thoughts shall
perish. <span id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574)

<span id="vii.xli-p31"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous
John.  Then will I send forth mine angels over the face of all the
earth, and they shall lift off the earth everything honourable, and
everything precious, and the venerable and holy images, and the glorious
and precious crosses, and the sacred vessels of the churches, and the
divine and sacred books; and all the precious and holy things shall be
lifted up by clouds into the air.  And then will I order to be lifted up
the great and venerable sceptre, <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) on which I stretched forth my
hands, and all the orders of my angels shall do reverence to it.  And
then shall be lifted up all the race of men upon clouds, as the Apostle
Paul foretold. <span id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576)   Along with
them we shall be snatched up in <span
id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) clouds to meet the Lord in the
air.  And then shall come forth every evil spirit, both in the earth and
in the abyss, wherever they are on the face of all the earth, from the
rising of the sun even to the setting, and they shall be united to him
that is served by the devil, that is, Antichrist, and they shall be
lifted up upon the clouds.

<span id="vii.xli-p35"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to <span id="page_584">p.
584</span> <span id="vii.xli-Page_584"></span>me:  Hear, righteous
John.  Then shall I send forth mine angels over the face of all the
earth, and they shall burn up the earth eight thousand five
hundred <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) cubits, and the great
mountains shall be burnt up, and all the rocks shall be melted and shall
become as dust, and every tree shall be burnt up, and every beast, and
every creeping thing creeping upon the earth, and every thing moving
upon the face of the earth, and every flying thing flying in the air;
and there shall no longer be upon the face of all the earth anything
moving, and the earth shall be without motion.

<span id="vii.xli-p37"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous
John.  Then shall I uncover the four parts of the east, and there shall
come forth four great winds, and they shall sweep <span
id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) all the face of the earth from the
one end of the earth to the other; and the Lord shall sweep sin from off
the earth, and the earth shall be made white like snow, and it shall
become as a leaf of paper, without cave, or mountain, or hill, or rock;
but the face of the earth from the rising even to the setting of the sun
shall be like a table, and white as snow; and the reins of the earth
shall be consumed by fire, and it shall cry unto me, saying, I am a
virgin before thee, O Lord, and there is no sin in me; as the prophet
David said aforetime, Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be
made pure; Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than
snow. <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580)   And again he <span
id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581) said:  Every chasm shall be filled
up, and every mountain and hill brought low, and the crooked places
shall be made straight, and the rough ways into smooth; and all flesh
shall see the salvation of God. <span
id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582)

<span id="vii.xli-p42"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous
John.  Then shall the earth be cleansed from sin, and all the earth
shall be filled with a sweet smell, because I am about to come down upon
the earth; and then shall come forth the great and venerable sceptre,
with thousands of angels worshipping it, as I said before; and then
shall appear the sign of the Son of man from the heaven with power and
great glory. <span id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583)   And then the
worker of iniquity with his servants shall behold it, and gnash his
teeth exceedingly, and all the unclean spirits shall be turned to
flight.  And then, seized by invisible power, having no means of flight,
they shall gnash their teeth against him, saying to him:  Where is thy
power?  How hast thou led us astray? and we have fled away, and have
fallen away from the glory which we had beside Him who is coming to
judge us, and the whole human race.  Woe to us! because He banishes us
into outer darkness.

<span id="vii.xli-p44"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what wilt Thou do?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Then will I send
an angel out of heaven, and he shall cry with a loud voice, saying,
Hear, O earth, and be strong, saith the Lord; for I am coming down to
thee.  And the voice of the angel shall be heard from the one end of the
world even to the other, and even to the remotest part of the abyss. 
And then shall be shaken all the power of the angels and of the
many-eyed ones, and there shall be a great noise in the heavens, and the
nine regions of the heaven shall be shaken, and there shall be fear and
astonishment upon all the angels.  And then the heavens shall be rent
from the rising of the sun even to the setting, and an innumerable
multitude of angels shall come down to the earth; and then the treasures
of the heavens shall be opened, and they shall bring down every precious
thing, and the perfume of incense, and they shall bring down to the
earth Jerusalem robed like a bride. <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584)   And then there shall go before me
myriads of angels and archangels, bearing my throne, crying out, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord of Sabaoth; heaven and earth are full of Thy
glory. <span id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585)   And then will I come
forth with power and great glory, and every eye in <span
id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) the clouds shall see me; and then
every knee shall bend, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
things under the earth. <span id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587)   And
then the heaven shall remain empty; and I will come down upon the earth,
and all that is in the air shall be brought down upon the earth, and all
the human race and every evil spirit along with Antichrist, and they
shall all be set before me naked, and chained by the neck.

<span id="vii.xli-p49"></span>And again I said:  Lord, what will become
of the heavens, and the sun, and the moon, along with the stars?  And I
heard a voice saying to me:  Behold, righteous John.  And I looked, and
saw a Lamb having seven eyes and seven horns. <span
id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588)   And again I heard a voice saying
to me:  I will bid the Lamb come before me, and will say, Who will open
this book?  And all the multitudes of the angels will answer, Give this
book to the Lamb to open it.  And then will I order the book to be
opened.  And when He shall open the first seal, the stars of the heaven
shall fall, from the one end of it to the other.  And when He shall open
the second seal, the moon shall be hidden, and there shall be no light
<span id="page_585">p. 585</span> <span id="vii.xli-Page_585"></span>in
her.  And when He shall open the third seal, the light of the sun shall
be withheld, and there shall not be light upon the earth.  And when He
shall open the fourth seal, the heavens shall be dissolved, and the air
shall be thrown into utter confusion, as saith the prophet:  And the
heavens are the works of Thy hands; they shall perish, but Thou
endurest, and they shall all wax old as a garment. <span
id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589)   And when He shall open the fifth
seal, the earth shall be rent, and all the tribunals upon the face of
all the earth shall be revealed.  And when He shall open the sixth seal,
the half of the sea shall disappear.  And when He shall open the seventh
seal, Hades shall be uncovered.

<span id="vii.xli-p52"></span>And I said:  Lord, who will be the first
to be questioned, and to receive judgment?  And I heard a voice saying
to me, The unclean spirits, along with the adversary.  I bid them go
into outer darkness, where the depths <span
id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) are.  And I said:  Lord, and in
what place does it lie?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear,
righteous John.  As big a stone as a man of thirty years old can roll,
and let go down into the depth, even falling down for twenty years will
not arrive at the bottom of Hades; as the prophet David said before, And
He made darkness His secret place. <span
id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591)

<span id="vii.xli-p55"></span>And I said:  Lord, and after them what
nation <span id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) will be questioned? 
And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear, righteous John.  There will be
questioned of Adam’s race those nations, both the Greek and those who
have believed in idols, and in the sun, and in the stars, and those who
have defiled the faith by heresy, and who have not believed the
holy <span id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593) resurrection, and who
have not confessed the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost:  then
will I send them away into Hades, as the prophet David foretold, Let the
sinners be turned into Hades, and all the nations that forget God. <span
id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594)   And again he said:  They were put
in Hades like sheep; death shall be their shepherd. <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595)

<span id="vii.xli-p60"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after them
whom wilt Thou judge?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear,
righteous John.  Then the race of the Hebrews shall be examined, who
nailed me to the tree like a malefactor.  And I said:  And what
punishment will these get, and in what place, seeing that they did such
things to Thee?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  They shall go away
into Tartarus, as the prophet David foretold, They cried out, and there
was none to save; to the Lord, and He did not hearken to them. <span
id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596)   And again the Apostle Paul said: 
As many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law, and as
many as have sinned in law shall be judged by means of law. <span
id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597)

<span id="vii.xli-p63"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and what of those
who have received baptism?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Then the
race of the Christians shall be examined, who have received baptism; and
then the righteous shall come at my command, and the angels shall go and
collect <span id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598) them from among the
sinners, as the prophet David foretold:  The Lord will not suffer the
rod of the sinners in the lot of the righteous; <span
id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599) and all the righteous shall be
placed on my right hand, <span id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600) and
shall shine like the sun. <span id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601)  
As thou seest, John, the stars of heaven, that they were all made
together, but differ in light, <span
id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602) so shall it be with the righteous
and the sinners; for the righteous shall shine as lights and as the sun,
but the sinners shall stand in darkness.

<span id="vii.xli-p69"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and do all the
Christians go into one punishment?—kings, high priests, priests,
patriarchs, rich and poor, bond and free?  And I heard a voice saying to
me:  Hear, righteous John.  As the prophet David foretold, The
expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever. <span
id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603)   Now about kings:  they shall be
driven like slaves, and shall weep like infants; and about patriarchs,
and priests, and Levites, of those that have sinned, they shall be
separated in their punishments, according to the nature <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) of the peculiar transgression of
each,—some in the river of fire, and some to the worm that dieth not,
and others in the seven-mouthed pit of punishment.  To these punishments
the sinners will be apportioned.

<span id="vii.xli-p72"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and where will
the righteous dwell?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Then shall
paradise be revealed; and the whole world and paradise shall be made
one, and the righteous shall be on the face of all the earth with my
angels, as the Holy Spirit foretold through the prophet David:  The
righteous shall inherit the earth, and dwell therein for ever and
ever. <span id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605)

<span id="vii.xli-p74"></span>And again I said:  Lord, how great is the
multitude of the angels? and which is the greater, that of angels or of
men?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  As great as is the multitude of
the angels, so great is the race of men, as the prophet has said, He set
bounds to the nations according to the number of the angels of
God. <span id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606)

<span id="vii.xli-p76"></span>And again I said:  Lord, and after that
what <span id="page_586">p. 586</span> <span
id="vii.xli-Page_586"></span>wilt Thou do? and what is to become of the
world?  Reveal to me all.  And I heard a voice saying to me:  Hear,
righteous John.  After that there is no pain, there is no grief, there
is no groaning; there is no recollection of evils, there are no tears,
there is no envy, there is no hatred of brethren, there is no
unrighteousness, there is no arrogance, there is no slander, there is no
bitterness, there are none of the cares of life, there is no pain from
parents or children, there is no pain from gold, there are no wicked
thoughts, there is no devil, there is no death, there is no night, but
all is day. <span id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607)   As I said
before, And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, that is, men
who have been made like the angels through their excellent course of
life; them also must I bring, and they will hear my voice, and there
shall be one fold, one shepherd. <span
id="fr_2608"></span>[2609](#fn_2608)

<span id="vii.xli-p79"></span>And again I heard a voice saying to me: 
Behold, thou hast heard all these things, righteous John; deliver them
to faithful men, that they also may teach others, and not think lightly
of them, <span id="fr_2609"></span>[2610](#fn_2609) nor cast our pearls
before swine, lest perchance they should trample them with their
feet. <span id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610)

<span id="vii.xli-p82"></span>And while I was still hearing this voice,
the cloud brought me down, and put me on Mount Thabor.  And there came a
voice to me, saying:  Blessed are those who keep judgment and do
righteousness in all time. <span id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611)  
And blessed is the house where this description lies, as the Lord said,
He that loveth me keepeth my sayings <span
id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612) in Christ Jesus our Lord; to Him be
glory for ever.  Amen. <span id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[582:2557](0081383.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="vii.xli-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p5"></span> For the history of the tradition that the
transfiguration occurred on Mount Tabor, see Robinson’s *Researches*,
ii. 358.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[582:2558](0081383.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="vii.xli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p7"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  700 cubits.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[582:2559](0081383.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="vii.xli-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p8"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p8.1"></span>ms.</span> B adds:  And they shall be
manifested at the consummation of the age, in the judgment to come. 
Just as the prophet Daniel saw the judgment, I sat, and the books were
opened.  Then also shall the twelve apostles sit, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.  And when I heard this from my Lord, I again asked: 
Show me, my Lord, when these things shall come to pass, etc.  \[B is the
designation of a Paris manuscript dated 1523.  All the manuscripts are
comparatively recent; see Tischendorf, pp. xviii., xix.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[582:2560](0081383.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="vii.xli-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p9"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p9.1"></span>ms.</span> B. here inserts [Luke xxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011)<span id="vii.xli-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[582:2561](0081383.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="vii.xli-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p10"></span> The chœnix of corn was a man’s daily
allowance.  It was equal to two points according to some, a pint and a
half according to others.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[582:2562](0081383.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="vii.xli-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p12"></span> Or, gloomy.

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[582:2563](0081383.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="vii.xli-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p13"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p13.1"></span>ms.</span> B. adds:  And he will love most of
all the nation of the Hebrews; and the righteous shall hide themselves,
and flee to mountains and caves.  And he shall take vengeance on many of
the righteous; and blessed is he who shall not believe in him.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[582:2564](0081383.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="vii.xli-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p14"></span> Or, dew.

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[582:2565](0081383.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="vii.xli-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p15"></span> To the description of Antichrist, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.xli-p15.1"></span>ms.</span> E adds:  He holds
in his hand a cup of death; and all that worship him drink of it.  His
right eye is like the morning star, and his left like a lion’s; because
he was taken prisoner by the archangel Michael, and he took his godhead
from him.  And I was sent from the bosom of my Father, and I drew up the
head of the polluted one, and his eye was consumed.  And when they
worship him, he writes on their right hands, that they may sit with him
in the outer fire; and for all who have not been baptized, and have not
believed, have been reserved all anger and wrath.  And I said:  My Lord,
and what miracles does he do?  Hear, righteous John:  He shall remove
mountains and hills, and he shall beckon with his polluted hand, Come
all to me; and through his displays and deceits they will be brought
together to his own place.  He will raise the dead, and show in
everything like God.  \[E is one of the Venice manuscripts.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[583:2566](0081383.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="vii.xli-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p17"></span> [Ps.
89:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045)<span id="vii.xli-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[583:2567](0081383.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="vii.xli-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p18"></span> [Ps. li.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)<span id="vii.xli-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[583:2568](0081383.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="vii.xli-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p20"></span> [Ps. xcviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006)<span id="vii.xli-p20.1"></span>
according to the LXX.

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[583:2569](0081383.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="vii.xli-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p21"></span> Lit., from quarters even to quarters of
the world.

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[583:2570](0081383.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="vii.xli-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p22"></span> Adapted from [Eccles. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#004)<span id="vii.xli-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[583:2571](0081383.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="vii.xli-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p23"></span> To this section<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p23.1"></span>ms.</span> E adds many details:  They that
have gold and silver shall throw them into the streets, and into every
place in the world, and no one will heed them.  They shall throw into
the streets ivory vessels, and robes adorned with stones and pearls;
kings and rulers wasting away with hunger, patriarchs and governors (or
abbots), elders and peoples.  Where is the fine wine, and the tables,
and the pomp of the world?  They shall not be found in all the world;
and men shall die in the mountains and in the streets, and in every
place of the world.  And the living shall die from the stink of the
dead, etc.  Whosoever shall not worship the beast and his pomp shall be
called a witness (or martyr) in the kingdom of heaven, and shall inherit
eternal life with my holy ones.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[583:2572](0081383.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="vii.xli-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p26"></span> Comp. [Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span id="vii.xli-p26.1"></span>,
and parallel passages.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[583:2573](0081383.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="vii.xli-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p28"></span> [Ps. ciii.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#014)<span id="vii.xli-p28.1"></span>
according to LXX.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[583:2574](0081383.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="vii.xli-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p29"></span> Or, breath.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[583:2575](0081383.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="vii.xli-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p30"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span id="vii.xli-p30.1"></span>
according to LXX.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[583:2576](0081383.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="vii.xli-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p32"></span> Another reading is *cross*.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[583:2577](0081383.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="vii.xli-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p33"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span id="vii.xli-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[583:2578](0081383.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="vii.xli-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p34"></span> Or, by.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[584:2579](0081383.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="vii.xli-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p36"></span> Two <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p36.1"></span>mss.</span> have this number; the other four
have 500, 1800, 30, 60-100ths.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[584:2580](0081383.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="vii.xli-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p38"></span> Or, winnow.

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[584:2581](0081383.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="vii.xli-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p39"></span> [Ps. li.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span id="vii.xli-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[584:2582](0081383.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="vii.xli-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p40"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p40.1"></span>ms.</span> D has:  Again another prophet has
said.  \[D is another Paris manuscript of the fifteenth century.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[584:2583](0081383.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="vii.xli-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p41"></span> [Isa. xl.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004)<span id="vii.xli-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[584:2584](0081383.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="vii.xli-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p43"></span> Comp. [Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span id="vii.xli-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[584:2585](0081383.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="vii.xli-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p45"></span> [Rev. xxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)<span id="vii.xli-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[584:2586](0081383.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="vii.xli-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p46"></span> Comp. [Isa. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)<span id="vii.xli-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[584:2587](0081383.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="vii.xli-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p47"></span> Or, upon.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[584:2588](0081383.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="vii.xli-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p48"></span> [Phil. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="vii.xli-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[584:2589](0081383.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="vii.xli-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p50"></span> [Rev. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)<span id="vii.xli-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[585:2590](0081383.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="vii.xli-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p51"></span> [Ps. cii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#026)<span id="vii.xli-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[585:2591](0081383.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="vii.xli-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p53"></span> Or, regions sunk in water.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[585:2592](0081383.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="vii.xli-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p54"></span> [Ps. xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)<span id="vii.xli-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[585:2593](0081383.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="vii.xli-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p56"></span> Lit., tongue.

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[585:2594](0081383.htm#fr_2593) <span
id="vii.xli-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p57"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xli-p57.1"></span>ms</span>. D inserts, *Trinity and*.

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[585:2595](0081383.htm#fr_2594) <span
id="vii.xli-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p58"></span> [Ps. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)<span id="vii.xli-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[585:2596](0081383.htm#fr_2595) <span
id="vii.xli-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p59"></span> [Ps. xlix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014)<span id="vii.xli-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[585:2597](0081383.htm#fr_2596) <span
id="vii.xli-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p61"></span> [Ps. xviii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041)<span id="vii.xli-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[585:2598](0081383.htm#fr_2597) <span
id="vii.xli-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p62"></span> [Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="vii.xli-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[585:2599](0081383.htm#fr_2598) <span
id="vii.xli-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p64"></span> Lit., heap up.

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[585:2600](0081383.htm#fr_2599) <span
id="vii.xli-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p65"></span> [Ps. cxxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003)<span id="vii.xli-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[585:2601](0081383.htm#fr_2600) <span
id="vii.xli-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p66"></span> [Matt. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="vii.xli-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[585:2602](0081383.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="vii.xli-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p67"></span> [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span id="vii.xli-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[585:2603](0081383.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="vii.xli-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p68"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span id="vii.xli-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[585:2604](0081383.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="vii.xli-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p70"></span> [Ps. ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)<span id="vii.xli-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[585:2605](0081383.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="vii.xli-p70.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p71"></span> Lit., proportion or analogy.

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[585:2606](0081383.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="vii.xli-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p73"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#029)<span id="vii.xli-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[585:2607](0081383.htm#fr_2606) <span
id="vii.xli-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p75"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)<span id="vii.xli-p75.1"></span>
according to the LXX.

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[586:2608](0081383.htm#fr_2607) <span
id="vii.xli-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p77"></span> [Rev.
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017), [Rev.
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004)<span id="vii.xli-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2608"></span>[586:2609](0081383.htm#fr_2608) <span
id="vii.xli-p77.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p78"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="vii.xli-p78.1"></span>. 
\[The correct text of [John x. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xli-p78.2"></span> is:  “one flock, one shepherd,” but it was
altered quite early.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2609"></span>[586:2610](0081383.htm#fr_2609) <span
id="vii.xli-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p80"></span> i.e., the things heard.

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[586:2611](0081383.htm#fr_2610) <span
id="vii.xli-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p81"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="vii.xli-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[586:2612](0081383.htm#fr_2611) <span
id="vii.xli-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p83"></span> [Ps. cvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003)<span id="vii.xli-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[586:2613](0081383.htm#fr_2612) <span
id="vii.xli-p83.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p84"></span> [John xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span id="vii.xli-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[586:2614](0081383.htm#fr_2613) <span
id="vii.xli-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p85"></span> As a specimen of the eschatology of these
documents, Tischendorf gives the following extracts from the termination
of <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xli-p85.1"></span>ms.</span> E:—

<span id="vii.xli-p86"></span>Hear, righteous John:  All these shall be
assembled, and they shall be in the pit of lamentation:  and I shall set
my throne in the place, and shall sit with the twelve apostles and the
four and twenty elders, and thou thyself an elder on account of thy
blameless life; and to finish three services thou shalt receive a white
robe and an unfading crown from the hand of the Lord, and thou shalt sit
with the four and twenty elders, etc.  And after this the angels shall
come forth, having a golden censer and shining lamps; and they shall
gather together on the Lord’s right hand those who have lived well, and
done His will, and He shall make them to dwell for ever and ever in
light and joy, and they shall obtain life everlasting.  And when He
shall separate the sheep from the goats, that is, the righteous from the
sinners, the righteous on the right, and the sinners on the left; then
shall He send the angel Raguel, saying:  Go and sound the trumpet for
the angels of cold and snow and ice, and bring together every kind of
wrath upon those that stand on the left.  Because I will not pardon them
when they see the glory of God, the impious and unrepentant, and the
priests who did not what was commanded.  You who have tears, weep for
the sinners.  And Temeluch shall call out to Taruch:  Open the
punishments, thou keeper of the keys; open the judgments; open the worm
that dieth not, and the wicked dragon; make ready Hades; open the
darkness; let loose the fiery river, and the frightful darkness in the
depths of Hades.  Then the pitiful sinners, seeing their works, and
having no consolation, shall go down weeping into streams as it were of
blood.  And there is none to pity them, neither father to help, nor
mother to compassionate, but rather the angels going against them, and
saying:  Ye poor wretches, why are you weeping?  In the world you had no
compassion on the weak, you did not help them.  And these go away into
everlasting punishment.  There you will not be able to bear the sight of
Him who was born of the virgin; you lived unrepenting in the world, and
you will get no pity, but everlasting punishment.  And Temeluch says to
Taruch:  Rouse up the fat three-headed serpent; sound the trumpet for
the frightful wild beasts to gather them together to feed upon them
(i.e., the sinners); to open the twelve plagues, that all the creeping
things may be brought together against the impious and unrepenting.  And
Temeluch will gather together the multitude of the sinners, and will
kick the earth; and the earth will be split up in diverse places, and
the sinners will be melted in frightful punishments.  Then shall God
send Michael, the leader of His hosts; and having sealed the place,
Temeluch shall strike them with the previous cross, and the earth shall
be brought together as before.  Then their angels lamented exceedingly,
then the all-holy Virgin and all the saints wept for them, and they
shall do them no good.  And John says:  Why are the sinners thus
punished?  And I heard a voice saying to me:  They walked in the world
each other after his own will, and therefore are they thus punished.

<span id="vii.xli-p87"></span>Blessed is the man who reads the writing: 
blessed is he who has transcribed it, and given it to other Catholic
churches:  blessed are all who fear God.  Hear ye priests, and ye
readers; hear ye people, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Book of John Concerning the Falling Asleep of Mary.](0081384)
