[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081462)  [Next](0081464) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_673">p. 673</span> <span
id="ix.viii-Page_673"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>Ancient Syriac Documents.</span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span> <span id="fr_3124"></span>[3125](#fn_3124)
<span class="c6"><span id="ix.viii-p4.2"></span>The Teaching of Simon
Cephas <span id="fr_3125"></span>[3126](#fn_3125) in the City of
Rome. <span id="fr_3126"></span>[3127](#fn_3126) </span>

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix.viii-p7.1"></span>In</span> the third <span
id="fr_3127"></span>[3128](#fn_3127) year of Claudius Cæsar, Simon
Cephas departed from Antioch to go to Rome.  And as he passed on he
preached in the *divers* countries the word of our Lord.  And, when he
had nearly arrived there, <span id="fr_3128"></span>[3129](#fn_3128)
many had heard *of it* and went out to meet him, and the whole church
received him with great joy.  And some of the princes of the city,
wearers of the imperial headbands, <span
id="fr_3129"></span>[3130](#fn_3129) came to him, that they might see
him and hear his word.  And, when the whole city was gathered together
about him, he stood up to speak to them, and to show them the preaching
of his doctrine, of what sort it was.  And he began to speak to them
thus:—

<span id="ix.viii-p11"></span>Men, people of Rome, saints of all Italy,
hear ye that which I say to you.  This day I preach and proclaim Jesus
the Son of God, who came down from heaven, and became man, and was with
us as *one of* ourselves, and wrought marvellous mighty-works and signs
and wonders before us, and before all the Jews that are in the land of
Palestine.  And you yourselves also heard of those things which He did: 
because they came to Him from other countries also, on account of the
fame of His healing and the report of the marvellous help He gave; <span
id="fr_3130"></span>[3131](#fn_3130) and whosoever drew near to Him was
healed by His word.  And, inasmuch as He was God, at the same time that
He healed He also forgave sins:  for His healing, which was open to
view, bore witness of His hidden forgiveness, that it was real and
trustworthy.  For this Jesus did the prophets announce in their
mysterious sayings, as they were looking forward to see Him and to hear
His word:  Him who was with His Father from eternity and from
everlasting; God, who was hidden in the height, and appeared in the
depth; the glorious Son, who was from His Progenitor, and is to be
glorified, together with His Father, and His divine Spirit, and the
terrible power of His dominion.  And He was crucified of His own will by
the hands of sinners, and was taken up to His Father, even as I and my
companions saw.  And He is about to come again, in His own glory and
that of His holy angels, even as we heard Him say to us.  For we cannot
say anything which was not heard by us from Him, neither do we write in
the book of His Gospel anything which He Himself did not say to us: 
because this word is spoken in order that the mouth of liars may be
shut, in the day when men shall give an account of idle words at the
place of judgment.

<span id="ix.viii-p13"></span>Moreover, because we were catchers of
fish, <span id="fr_3131"></span>[3132](#fn_3131) and not skilled in
books, therefore did He also say to us:  “I will send you the Spirit,
the Paraclete, that He may teach you that which ye know not;” for it is
by *His* gift that we speak those things which ye hear.  And, further,
by it we bring aid to the sick, and healing to the diseased:  that by
the hearing of His word and by the aid of His power ye may believe in
Christ, that He is God, the Son of God; and may be delivered from the
service of bondage, and may worship Him and His Father, and glorify His
divine Spirit.  For when we glorify the Father, we glorify the Son also
with Him; and when we worship the Son, we worship the Father also with
Him; and when we confess the Spirit, we confess the Father also and the
Son:  because in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Spirit, were we commanded to baptize those who believe, that they may
live for ever.

<span id="ix.viii-p15"></span>Flee therefore from the words of the
wisdom of this world, in which there is no profit, and draw near to
those which are true and faithful, and acceptable before God; whose
reward also is laid up in store, and whose recompense standeth *sure*. 
Now, too, <span id="fr_3132"></span>[3133](#fn_3132) the light has
arisen on the <span id="page_674">p. 674</span> <span
id="ix.viii-Page_674"></span>creation, and the world has obtained the
eyes of the mind, that every man may see and understand that it is not
fit that creatures should be worshipped instead of the Creator, nor
together with the Creator:  because everything which is a creature is
*made to be* a worshipper of its Maker, and is not to be worshipped like
its Creator.  But this *One* who came to us is God, the Son of God, in
His own nature, notwithstanding that He mingled <span
id="fr_3133"></span>[3134](#fn_3133) His Godhead with our manhood, in
order that He might renew our manhood by the aid of His Godhead.  And on
this account it is right that we should worship Him, because He is to be
worshipped together with His Father, and that we should not worship
creatures, who were created for the worship of the Creator.  For He is
Himself the God of truth and verity; He is Himself from before *all*
worlds and creatures; He is Himself the veritable Son, and the glorious
fruit <span id="fr_3134"></span>[3135](#fn_3134) which is from the
exalted Father.

<span id="ix.viii-p21"></span>But ye see the wonderful works which
accompany and follow these words.  One would not credit it:  the time
lo! is short since He ascended to His Father, and see how His Gospel has
winged its flight through the whole creation—that thereby it may be
known and believed that He Himself is the Creator of creatures, and that
by His bidding creatures subsist.  And, whereas ye saw the sun become
darkened at His death, ye yourselves also are witnesses.  The earth,
moreover, quaked when He was slain, and the veil was rent at His death. 
And concerning these things the governor Pilate also was witness:  for
he himself sent and made them known to Cæsar, <span
id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135) and these things, and more than
these, were read before him, and before the princes of your city.  And
on this account Cæsar was angry against Pilate because he had unjustly
listened to the persuasion of the Jews; and for this reason he sent and
took away from him the authority which he had given to him.  And this
same thing was published and known in all the dominion of the Romans. 
That, therefore, which Pilate saw and made known to Cæsar and to your
honourable senate, the same do I preach and declare, as do also my
fellow-apostles.  And ye know that Pilate could not have written to the
imperial government of that which did not take place and which he had
not seen with his own eyes; but that which did take place and was
actually done—this it was that he wrote and made known.  Moreover, the
watchers of the sepulchre also were witnesses of those things which took
place there:  they became as dead men; and, when those watchers were
questioned before Pilate, they confessed before him how large a bribe
the chief-priests of the Jews had given them, so that they might say
that we His disciples had stolen the corpse of Christ.  Lo! then, ye
have heard many things; and moreover, if ye be not willing to be
persuaded by those things which ye have heard, be at least persuaded by
the mighty-works which ye see, which are done by His name.

<span id="ix.viii-p23"></span>Let not Simon the sorcerer delude you by
semblances which are not realities, which he exhibits to you, as to men
who have no understanding, who know not how to discern that which they
see and hear.  Send, therefore, and fetch him to where all your city is
assembled together, and choose you some sign for us to do before you;
and, whichever ye see do that same sign, it will be your part to believe
in it.

<span id="ix.viii-p24"></span>And immediately they sent and fetched
Simon the sorcerer; <span id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136) and the
men who were adherents of his opinion said to him:  As a man concerning
whom we have confidence that there is power in thee to do anything
whatsoever, <span id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137) do thou some sign
before us all, and let this Simon the Galilæan, who preaches Christ, see
*it*.  And, whilst they were thus speaking to him, there happened to be
passing along a dead person, a son of one of those who were chiefs and
men of note and renown among them.  And all of them, as they were
assembled together, said to him:  Whichever of you shall restore to life
this dead person, he is true, and to be believed in and received, and we
will all follow him in whatsoever he saith to us.  And they said to
Simon the sorcerer:  Because thou wast here before Simon the Galilæan,
and we knew thee before him, exhibit thou first the power which
accompanieth thee. <span id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138)

<span id="ix.viii-p28"></span>Then Simon reluctantly drew near to the
dead person; and they set down the bier before him; and he looked to the
right hand and to the left, and gazed up into heaven, saying many
words:  some of them he uttered aloud, and some of them secretly and not
aloud.  And he delayed a long while, and nothing took place, and nothing
was done, and the dead person was lying upon his bier.

<span id="ix.viii-p29"></span>And forthwith Simon Cephas drew near
boldly towards the dead man, and cried aloud before <span
id="page_675">p. 675</span> <span id="ix.viii-Page_675"></span>all the
assembly which was standing there:  In the name of Jesus Christ, whom
the Jews crucified at Jerusalem, and whom we preach, rise up thence. 
And as soon as the word of Simon was spoken the dead man came to life
and rose up from the bier.

<span id="ix.viii-p30"></span>And all the people saw and marvelled; and
they said to Simon:  Christ, whom thou preachest, is true.  And many
cried out, and said:  Let Simon the sorcerer and the deceiver of us all
be stoned.  But Simon, by reason that every one was running to see the
dead man that was come to life, escaped from them from one street to
another and from house to house, and fell not into their hands on that
day.

<span id="ix.viii-p31"></span>But the whole city took hold of Simon
Cephas, and they received him gladly and affectionately; and he ceased
not from doing signs and wonders in the name of Christ; and many
believed in him.  Cuprinus, <span id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139)
moreover, the father of him that was restored to life, took Simon with
him to his house, and entertained him in a suitable manner, while he and
all his household believed in Christ, that He is the Son of the living
God.  And many of the Jews and of the pagans became disciples there. 
And, when there was great rejoicing at his teaching, he built churches
there, in Rome and in the cities round about, and in all the villages of
the people of Italy; and he served there *in* the rank of the
Superintendence of Rulers twenty-five years. <span
id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140)

<span id="ix.viii-p34"></span>And after these years Nero Cæsar seized
him and shut him up in prison.  And he knew that he would crucify him;
so he called Ansus, <span id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141) the
deacon, and made him bishop in his stead in Rome.  And these things did
Simon himself speak; and moreover also the rest, the other things which
he had *in charge*, he commanded Ansus to teach before the people,
saying to him:  Beside the New Testament and the Old let there not be
read before the people <span id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142)
anything else: <span id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143)   which is not
right.

<span id="ix.viii-p39"></span>And, when Cæsar had commanded that Simon
should be crucified with his head downwards, as he himself had requested
of Cæsar, and that Paul’s head should be taken off, there was great
commotion among the people, and bitter distress in all the church,
seeing that they were deprived of the sight of the apostles.  And Isus
the guide arose and took up their bodies by night, and buried them with
great honour, and there came to be a gathering-place there for many.

<span id="ix.viii-p40"></span>And at that very time, as if by a
righteous judgment, Nero abandoned his empire and fled, and there was a
cessation for a little while from the persecution which Nero Cæsar had
raised against them.  And many years after the great coronation <span
id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) of the apostles, who had departed
out of the world, while ordination to the priesthood was proceeding both
in all Rome and in all Italy, it happened then that there was a great
famine in the city of Rome. <span id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145)

<span id="ix.viii-p43"></span>Here endeth the teaching of Simon Cephas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3124"></span>[673:3125](0081463.htm#fr_3124) <span
id="ix.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span> This is found in the same <span
class="c9"><span id="ix.viii-p4.1"></span>ms</span>. as the preceding,
quoted as A.  There is also another copy of it in Cod. Add. 14,609,
referred to here as B.  \[It looks like an afterthought of a later age,
when the teaching of Peter was elevated into a specialty.\]

<span id="fn_3125"></span>[673:3126](0081463.htm#fr_3125) <span
id="ix.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span> B. reads “the Apostle Peter.”

<span id="fn_3126"></span>[673:3127](0081463.htm#fr_3126) <span
id="ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span> \[This apocryphal history proceeds on the
theory that St. Peter *preceded* St. Paul at Rome, which cannot be
reconciled with Scripture and chronology.  [Gal.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009), [Rom.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)<span id="ix.viii-p6.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3127"></span>[673:3128](0081463.htm#fr_3127) <span
id="ix.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span> The reading of the <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.viii-p8.1"></span>ms.</span> is “thirtieth.”

<span id="fn_3128"></span>[673:3129](0081463.htm#fr_3128) <span
id="ix.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span> From this place to “the light” (last line
of text on this page), A. is lost, and the text has been supplied from
B.

<span id="fn_3129"></span>[673:3130](0081463.htm#fr_3129) <span
id="ix.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p10"></span> The <span class="c9"><span
id="ix.viii-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> gives, “clad in the white.”

<span id="fn_3130"></span>[673:3131](0081463.htm#fr_3130) <span
id="ix.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p12"></span> Lit. “His marvellous helps.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="ix.viii-p12.1"></span>Tr.</span>  \[See p. 652,
*supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3131"></span>[673:3132](0081463.htm#fr_3131) <span
id="ix.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p14"></span> \[[Mark i.
16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016)<span
id="ix.viii-p14.1"></span>.  Compare [Jer. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#016)<span id="ix.viii-p14.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3132"></span>[673:3133](0081463.htm#fr_3132) <span
id="ix.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p16"></span> The text A. is resumed after this word. 
The reading “and now that the light,” etc., seems faulty.  The \*\*\*
(that) might easily have been occasioned by the \*\*\* of the word which
it precedes.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.viii-p16.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3133"></span>[674:3134](0081463.htm#fr_3133) <span
id="ix.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p17"></span> The word so rendered is much effaced in
B., but it seems to be \*\*\*, “humbled.”

<span id="ix.viii-p18"></span>This, however, might require further
change of the text, such as Cureton suggests, so as to give the sense,
“He humbled His Godhead *on account of* our manhood,” unless we
translated “*in* our manhood”—neither of which renderings seems to give
so good a sense as that in the text of A.—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.viii-p18.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="ix.viii-p19"></span>Respecting the word “mingled” (\*\*\*),
which was supposed to countenance the Eutychian heresy, see Assemani,
*Bibl. Orient*., vol. i. p. 81.

<span id="fn_3134"></span>[674:3135](0081463.htm#fr_3134) <span
id="ix.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p20"></span> Or “offspring.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="ix.viii-p20.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[674:3136](0081463.htm#fr_3135) <span
id="ix.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p22"></span> \[On the *Acts of Pilate* see Lardner,
*Credib*., vi. p. 605, and Jones, *On the Canon*, vol. ii. p. 342.  If
Leucius Charinus forged what goes by the name, it does not prove that
genuine records of the kind never existed.  The reverse is probable. 
See vol. i. p. 179.

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[674:3137](0081463.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="ix.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p25"></span> \[Vol. vii. p. 453.  Compare vol. vi. p.
438, note 15; also vol. i. p. 171.  On Justin’s simple narrative all the
rest was embroidered by a later hand.\]

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[674:3138](0081463.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="ix.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p26"></span> From this place to “a gathering-place,”
p. 675, line 20, col. 2, the text of A. is lost.

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[674:3139](0081463.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="ix.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p27"></span> \[St. Peter’s visit could not have been
previous to St. Paul’s, and up to that time Simon had certainly not
*corrupted* the Romans ([Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="ix.viii-p27.1"></span>). 
The subject may be elucidated by what follows, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[675:3140](0081463.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="ix.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p32"></span> Perhaps Cyprianus, which is found written
in Syriac in the same manner as the word here.

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[675:3141](0081463.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="ix.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p33"></span> This is the time often allotted to
Peter’s episcopate at Rome, although it is certain that he did not
constantly reside there during that period:  we find him the year after
at Jerusalem.  \[The chronological incredibility of this residence in
Rome has been fully demonstrated; but it is so entirely inconsistent
with the scriptural history, and with that of St. Paul in particular,
that no other argument is necessary.  On the other hand, it appears to
me conclusively established, that St. Peter closed his life in Rome,
under Nero.  And I think this apostle’s visit fully explained by the
fact that the Roman Christians were so largely “of the circumcision,”
that St. Paul himself might naturally have invited him to share his own
labours in Rome, on the well-known rule of his conduct ([Rom.
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020), [2 Cor.
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013)<span
id="ix.viii-p33.1"></span>).  See vol. vi. elucid. p. 47.\]

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[675:3142](0081463.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="ix.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p35"></span> B. has Lainus = *Linus*, the person
undoubtedly meant.  The error arose chiefly from the \*\*\* \[L\] being
taken as the sign of the accusative case.  Below, the name appears as
Isus, and in the *Acts of Barsamya* we have Anus.

<span id="ix.viii-p36"></span>This sign of the accusative may be
omitted.—<span class="c9"><span id="ix.viii-p36.1"></span>Tr.</span>

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[675:3143](0081463.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="ix.viii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p37"></span> In canon x. (see next note) it is said
“in the pulpit of the church;” and in the *Teaching of Addæus* it is
said that “a large multitude of the people assembled for the reading of
the Old Testament and the New.”  The inhibition seems, therefore, to
refer only to public reading.  \[See p. 661, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[675:3144](0081463.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="ix.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p38"></span> This agrees with the tenth canon in the
*Teaching of the Apostles*.  \[See p. 668, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[675:3145](0081463.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="ix.viii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p41"></span> That is, their martyrdom.  But B. reads
“labour.”

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[675:3146](0081463.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="ix.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p42"></span> This abrupt termination seems to indicate
that there was something more which followed.  The famine referred to
seems to be the same as that mentioned in the interpolated passage at
the end of the *Acts of Sharbil*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of Sharbil, Who Was a Priest of Idols, and Was Converted to
the Confession of Christianity in Christ.](0081464)
