[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081157)  [Next](0081159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—The Flight of
Simon.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p2"></span>While Peter was thus talking,
there entered one of those who had gone before to Antioch, and who,
coming back from Antioch, said to Peter:  “I wish you to know, my lord,
that Simon, by doing many miracles publicly in Antioch, and calling you
a magician and a juggler *and a murderer*, <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521) has worked them up to such hatred
against you, that every man is eager to taste your very flesh if you
should sojourn there. <span id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522)  
Wherefore we who went before, along with our brethren who were in
pretence attached by you to Simon, seeing the city raging wildly against
you, met secretly and considered what we ought to do.  And assuredly,
while we were in great perplexity, Cornelius the centurion arrived, who
had been sent by the emperor to the governor of the province.  He was
the person whom our Lord cured when he was possessed of a demon in
Cæsarea.  This man we sent for secretly; and informing him of the cause
of our despondency, we begged his help.  He promised most readily that
he would alarm Simon, and make him take to flight, if we should assist
him in his effort.  And when we all promised that we should readily do
everything, he said, ‘I shall spread abroad the news <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) through many friends that I have
secretly come to apprehend him; and I shall pretend that I am in search
of him, because the emperor, having put to death many magicians, and
having received information in regard to him, has sent me to search him
out, that he may punish him as he punished the magicians before him;
while those of your party who are with him must report to him, as if
they had heard it from a secret source, that I have been sent to
apprehend him.  And perchance when he hears it from them, he will be
alarmed and take to flight.’  When, therefore, we had intended to do
something else, nevertheless the affair turned out in the following
way.  For when he heard the news from many strangers who gratified him
greatly by secretly informing him, and also from our brethren who
pretended to be attached to him, and took it as the opinion of his own
followers, he resolved on retiring.  And hastening away from Antioch, he
has come here with Athenodorus, as we have heard.  Wherefore we advise
you not yet to enter that city, until we ascertain whether they can
forget in his absence the accusations which he brought against you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[343:1522](0081158.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p3"></span> Supplied from *Epitome*.  The
passage in *Epitome Second* renders it likely that the sentence ran: 
“But Simon, while doing many miracles publicly in Antioch, did nothing
else by his discourses than excite hatred amongst them against you, and
by calling you,” etc.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[343:1523](0081158.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p4"></span> This passage is amended
principally according to Wieseler and the *Recognitions*.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[343:1524](0081158.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiii.xiii-p5"></span> An emendation of Wieseler’s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0081159)
