[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081342)  [Next](0081344.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11 (27).</span>

<span id="vii.xvii.xi-p2"></span>And when the paper was finished and
read through, all that heard it fell on their faces, weeping bitterly,
and cruelly beating their breasts, crying out, and saying through all: 
Woe to us!  Why has this happened to us wretched?  Pilate flees; Annas
and Caiaphas flee; the priests and Levites flee; moreover also the
people of the Jews, weeping and saying, Woe to us wretched! we have shed
sacred blood upon the earth.

<span id="vii.xvii.xi-p3"></span>For three days, therefore, and three
nights, they did not taste bread and water at all; nor did any of them
return to the synagogue.  But on the third day again the council was
assembled, and the other paper of Leucius was read through; and it was
found neither more nor less, to a single letter, than that which the
writing of Karinus contained.  Then the synagogue was perplexed; and
they all lamented forty days and forty nights, looking for destruction
from God, and the vengeance of God.  But He, pitier affectionate and
most high, did not immediately destroy them, bountifully giving them a
place of repentance.  But they were not found worthy to be turned to the
Lord.

<span id="vii.xvii.xi-p4"></span>These are the testimonies of Karinus
and Leucius, dearest brethren, concerning Christ the Son of God, and His
holy deeds in the lower world; to whom let us all give praise and glory
through immeasurable age of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of Pontius Pilate, Which He Wrote to the Roman
Emperor, Concerning Our Lord Jesus Christ.](0081344.md)
