[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081388)  [Next](0081390.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii"></span> <span id="page_601">p. 601</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_601"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii-p2.1"></span>to</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="viii.ii-p3.1"></span>The Decretals.</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>The</span> learned editors of the Edinburgh
series have given us only a specimen of these frauds, which, pretending
to be a series of “papal edicts” from Clement and his successors during
the *ante-Nicene ages*, are, in fact, the manufactured product of the
*ninth century*,—the most stupendous imposture of the world’s history,
the most successful and the most stubborn in its hold upon enlightened
nations.  Like the mason’s framework of lath and scantlings, on which he
turns an arch of massive stone, the Decretals served their purpose,
enabling Nicholas I. to found the Papacy by their insignificant aid. 
That swelling arch of vanity once reared, the framework might be knocked
out; but the fabric stood, and has borne up every weight imposed upon it
for ages.  Its strong abutments have been ignorance and despotism. 
Nicholas produced his flimsy framework of imposture, and amazed the
whole Church by the audacity of the claims he founded upon it.  The age,
however, was unlearned and uncritical; and, in spite of remonstrances
from France under lead of Hincmar, bishop of Rheims, the West patiently
submitted to the overthrow of the ancient Canons and the Nicene
Constitutions, and bowed to the yoke of a new canon-law, of which these
frauds were not only made an integral, but the essential, part.  The
East never accepted them for a moment:  her great patriarchates retain
the Nicene System to this day.  But, as the established religion of the
“Holy Roman Empire,” the national churches of Western Europe, one by
one, succumbed to this revolt from historic Catholicity.  The Eastern
churches were the more numerous.  They stood by the Constitutions
confirmed by all the Œcumenical Synods; they altered not a word of the
Nicene Creed; they stood up for the great Catholic law, “Let the ancient
customs prevail;” and they were, and are to this day, *the grand
historic stem of Christendom*.  The Papacy created the Western schism,
and contrived to call it “the schism of the Greeks.”  The Decretals had
created the Papacy, and they enabled the first Pope to assume that
communion with himself was the test of Catholic communion:  hence his
excommunication of the Easterns, which, after brief intervals of
relaxation, settled into the chronic schism of the Papacy, and produced
the awful history of the mediæval Church in Western Europe.

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>In naming Nicholas I. as the founder of the
Papacy, and the first Pope, I merely reach the logical consequence of
admitted facts and demonstrated truths.  I merely apply the recognised
principles of modern thought and scientific law to the science of
history, and dismiss the technology of empiricism in this science, as
our age has abolished similar empiricisms in the exact sciences.  For
ages after Copernicus, even those who basked in the light of the true
system of the universe went on in the old ruts, *talking* as if the
Ptolemaic theory were yet a reality:  and so the very historians whose
lucid pages explode the whole fabric of the Papal communion, still go
on, in the language of fable, giving to the early Bishops of Rome the
title of “Popes;” counting St. Peter as the first Pope; bewildering the
student by many confusions of fact with fable; and conceding to the
modern fabric of Romanism the name of “the Catholic Church,” with all
the immense advantages that accrue to falsehood by such a surrender of
truth, and the consequent endowment of imposture with the raiment and
the domain of Apostolic antiquity.

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span><span id="page_602">p. 602</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_602"></span>The student of this series must have noted
the following fundamental facts:—

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>1.  That the name *papa* was common to all
bishops, and signified no pre-eminence in those who bore it.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span>2.  That the Apostolic Sees were all
equally accounted *matrices* of unity, and the *roots* of other Catholic
churches.

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>3.  That, down to the Council of Nicæa,
the whole system of the Church was framed on this principle, and that
these were the “ancient customs” which that council ordained to be
perpetual.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>4.  That “because it was the old capital
of the empire,” and *for no other reason* (the Petrine idea never once
mentioned), the primacy of *honour* was conceded to Old Rome, and
*equal* honour to New Rome, because it was the new capital. <span
id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680.md)   It was to be named second on the
list of patriarchates, but to be in no wise inferior to Old Rome; while
the ancient and all-commanding patriarchate of Alexandria yielded this
credit to the *parvenu* of Byzantium only on the principle of the
Gospel, “in honour preferring one another,” and only because the
imperial capital must be the centre of Catholic concourse.

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span>Now, the rest of the story must be sought
in post-Nicene history.  The salient points are as follows:—

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>1.  The mighty centralization about
Constantinople; the three councils held within its walls; the virtual
session of the other councils under its eaves; the inconsiderable figure
of “Old Rome” in strictly ecclesiastical history; her barrenness of
literature, and of great heroic sons, like Athanasius and Chrysostom in
the East, and Cyprian and Augustine in the West; and her decadence as a
capital,—had led Leo I., and others after him, to dwell much upon “St.
Peter,” and to favour new ideas of his personal greatness, and of a
transmitted grandeur as the inheritance of his successors.  As yet,
these were but “great swelling words of vanity;” but they led to the
formulated fraud of the Decretals.

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span>2.  Ambition once entering the pale of
Catholicity, we find a counter idea to that of the councils at the root
of the first usurpation of unscriptural dignity.  John “the Faster,”
bishop of New Rome, conceived himself not merely equal (as the councils
had decreed) to the bishop of Old Rome, but his superior, in view of the
decrepitude of the latter, and its occupation by the Goths, while the
imperial dignity of Constantinople was now matured.  He called himself
“Œcumenical Bishop.”

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span>3.  Gregory was then bishop of “Old Rome,”
and that was the time to assert the principle of the Decretals, had any
such idea ever been heard of.  How did he meet his brother’s arrogance? 
Not appealing to decretals, not by asserting that such was his own
dignity derived from St. Peter, but by protesting against such abasement
of all the other patriarchs and all other bishops (who were all equals),
and by pronouncing the impious assumption of such a nefarious title to
denote a “forerunner of Antichrist.”  Plainly, then, there was no “Pope”
known to Christendom at the close of the sixth century.

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span>4.  But hardly was Gregory in his grave
when court policy led the Emperor Phocas (one of the most infamous of
men) to gratify the wicked ambition of the new Bishop of Rome by giving
to him the titular honour of being a “forerunner of Antichrist.” 
Boniface III. (607 <span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span>) assumed the daring title of
“Universal Bishop.”  But it was a mere court-title:  the Church never
recognised it; and so it went down to his successors as mere “sounding
brass and a tinkling cymbal” till the days of Charlemagne.

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span>5.  In his times the Petrine fable had
grown upon the Western mind.  All Western Europe had but one Apostolic
See.  As “*the* Apostolic See” it was known throughout the West, just as
“*the* Post-Office” means that which is nearest to one’s own dwelling. 
What was geographically true, had grown to be theologically false,
however; and the Bishop of Rome began to consider himself the only
inheritor of Apostolic precedency, if not of all Apostolic authority and
power.

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span><span id="page_603">p. 603</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_603"></span>6.  The formation of the Western Empire
favoured this assumption:  but it did not take definite shape while
Charlemagne lived, for he regarded himself, like Constantine, the “head
of the Church;” <span id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681.md) and in his
day he acted as supreme pontiff, called the Council of Frankfort,
overruled the Roman bishop, and, in short, was a lay-Pope throughout his
empire.  That nobody refused him all he claimed, that Adrian “couched
like a strong ass” under the burden of his rebukes, and that Leo paid
him bodily “homage,” demonstrated that no such character as a “Pope” was
yet in existence.  Leo III. had personally “adored” Charlemagne with the
homage afterwards rendered to the pontiffs, and Adrian had set him the
example of personal submission.

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span>7.  But, Charlemagne’s feeble sons and
successors proving incapable of exercising his power, the West only
waited for an ambitious and original genius to come to the See of Rome,
to yield him all that Charlemagne had claimed, and to invest him with
the more sacred character of the Apostolic head to the whole Church.

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span>8.  Such a character arose in Nicholas I. 
He found the Decretals made to his hand by some impostor, and he saw a
benighted age ready to accept his assumptions.  He therefore used them,
and passed them into the organic canon-law of the West.  The “Holy Roman
Empire” reluctantly received the impious frauds <span
id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682.md) the East contemptuously resisted. 
Thus the Papacy was formed on the base of the “Holy Roman Empire,” and
arrogated to itself the right to cut off and anathematize the greater
part of Christendom, with the old patriarchal Sees.  So we have in
Nicholas the first figure in history in whose person is concentrated
what Rome means by the Papacy.  No “Pope” ever existed previously, in
the sense of her canon-law; and it was not till two centuries longer
that even a “Pope” presumed to pronounce that title *peculiar* to the
Bishop of Rome. <span id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683.md)

<span id="viii.ii-p25"></span>Such, then, are the historical facts,
which render vastly important some study of the Decretals.  I shall give
what follows exclusively from “Roman-Catholic” sources.  Says the
learned Dupin: <span id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684.md) —

<span id="viii.ii-p27"></span>1.  All these *Decretals* were unknown to
all the ancient Fathers, to all the Popes and all the ecclesiastical
authors *that wrote before the ninth century*.  Now, what rational man
can believe that so vast a number of letters, composed by so many holy
Popes, containing so many important points in relation to the discipline
of the Church, could be unknown to Eusebius, to St. Jerome, to St.
Augustine, to St. Basil, and, in short, to all those authors that have
spoken of their writings, or who have written upon the discipline of the
Church?  Could it possibly happen that the Popes, to whom these epistles
are so very favourable, would never have cited and alleged them to
aggrandize their own reputation?  Who could ever imagine that the
decisions of these Decretals *should be never so much as quoted* in any
council or in any canon?  He that will seriously consider with himself,
that, since these Decretals have been imposed upon the world, *they have
been cited in an infinite number of places by Popes, by councils, and as
often by canonists*, will be readily convinced that they would have
acquired immense credit, and been very often quoted by antiquity, if
they had been genuine and true.

<span id="viii.ii-p28"></span>Here I must direct attention to the
all-important fact, that whatever may have been the authorship of these
forgeries, the Roman pontiffs, and the “Roman Catholic” communion as
such, have committed themselves over and over again to the fraud, as
Dupin remarks above, and that, long after the imposture was demonstrated
and exposed; in proof of which I cite the following, from one whose eyes
were opened by his patient investigation of such facts, but who, while a
member of the Roman communion, wrote to his co-religionist Cardinal
Manning as follows: <span id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685.md) —

<span id="viii.ii-p30"></span>Is it credible that the Papacy should have
so often appealed to these forgeries for its extended claims, had it any
better authorities—*distinctive* authorities—to fall back upon?  Every
disputant on the Latin side finds in these forgeries a convincing
argument against the Greeks.  ‘To prove this,’ the universal
jurisdiction of the Pope, said Abbot Barlaam, himself converted by them
from the Greek Church, to convert his countrymen, ‘one need only look
through the decretal epistles of the Roman pontiffs from St. Clement to
St. Sylvester.’  In the <span id="page_604">p. 604</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_604"></span>twenty-fifth session of the Council of
Florence the provincial of the Dominicans is ordered to address the
Greeks on the rights of the Pope, the Pope being present.  Twice he
argues from the pseudo-decretal of St. Anacletus, at another time from a
synodical letter of St. Athanasius to Felix, at another time from a
letter of Julius to the Easterns, *all forgeries*.  Afterwards, in reply
to objections taken by Bessarion, in conference, to their authority,
apart from any question of their authenticity, his position in another
speech is, ‘that *those decretal epistles of the Popes*, being synodical
epistles in each case, are entitled to the same authority as the Canons
themselves.’  Can we need further evidence of the weight attached to
them on the Latin side?

<span id="viii.ii-p31"></span>“Popes appealed to them in their official
capacity, as well as private doctors; (1) Leo IX., for instance, to the
pseudo-donation in the prolix epistle written by him, or in his name, to
Michael Cerularius, patriarch of Constantinople, on the eve of the
schism.  (2) Eugenius IV. to the pseudo-decretals of St. Alexander and
Julius, during the negotiations for healing it, in his instructions to
the Armenians.  (3) But why, my lord, need I travel any further for
proofs, when in the Catechism of the Council of Trent, that has been for
three centuries *the accredited instructor of the clergy themselves,
recommended authoritatively by so many Popes, notwithstanding the real
value of these miserable impostures* had been for three centuries before
the world, I find these words: <span
id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686.md)   ‘On the primacy of the Supreme
Pontiff, see the third epistle (that is, pseudo-decretal) of
Anacletus’!  Such is, actually, the authority to which the clergy of our
own days are referred, *in the first instance*, for sound and true views
on the primacy.  (4) Afterwards, when they have mastered what is said
there, they may turn to three more authorities, all culled likewise from
Gratian, which they will not fail to interpret in accordance with the
ideas they have already imbibed.  Nor can I refrain from calling
attention to a much more flagrant case.  On the sacrament of
confirmation there had been many questions raised by the Reformers,
calculated to set people thinking, and anxious to know the strict truth
respecting it.  On this the Catechism proceeds as follows: <span
id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687.md) —

<span id="viii.ii-p34"></span>“‘Since it has been already shown how
necessary it would be to teach generally respecting all the sacraments,
by whom they were instituted, so there is need of similar instruction
respecting confirmation, that the faithful may be the more attracted by
the holiness of this sacrament.  *Pastors must therefore explain* that
not only was Christ our Lord the author of it, but that, on the
authority of the Roman pontiff St. Fabian (i.e., the pseudo-decretal
attributed to him), He instituted the rite of the chrism, and the words
used by the Catholic Church in its administration.’

<span id="viii.ii-p35"></span>“Strange phenomenon, indeed, that the
asseverations of such authorities should be still *ordered to be taught
as Gospel* from our pulpits in these days, when everybody that is
acquainted with the merest rudiments of ecclesiastical history knows how
absolutely unauthenticated they are in point of fact, and how
unquestionably the authorities cited to prove them are forgeries.

<span id="viii.ii-p36"></span>“Absolutely, my lord, with such evidence
before me, I am unable to resist the inference that *truthfulness* is
not one of the strongest characteristics of the teaching of even the
modern Church of Rome; for is not this a case palpably where its highest
living authorities are both indifferent to having possible untruths
preached from the pulpit, and something more than indifferent to having
forgeries, after their detection as such, adduced from the pulpit to
authenticate facts?

<span id="viii.ii-p37"></span>“This, again, strongly reminds me of a
conversation I had with the excellent French priest who received me into
the Roman-Catholic Church, some time subsequently to that event.  I had,
as an Anglican, inquired very laboriously into the genuineness of the
*Santa Casa*:  and having visited Nazareth and Loretto since, and
plunged into the question anew at each place, came back more thoroughly
convinced than ever of its utterly fictitious character, notwithstanding
the privileges bestowed upon it by so many Popes.  On stating my
convictions to him, his only reply was:  ‘There are many things in the
Breviary which I do not believe, myself.’  Oh the stumbling-blocks of a
system in the construction of which forgeries have been so largely used,
in which it is still thought possible for the clergy to derive
edification from legends which they cannot believe, and the people
instruction from works of acknowledged imposture!

<span id="viii.ii-p38"></span>Further, Dupin remarks: <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688.md) —

<span id="viii.ii-p40"></span>“The first man that published them, if we
may believe Hincmar, was one Riculphus, bishop of Mentz, who died about
the ninth century.  It is commonly believed, seeing the collection bears
the name of Isidore, that he brought them from Spain.  But it never
could have been composed by the great Archbishop of Seville; and there
is great reason to believe that no Spaniard, but rather some German or
Frenchman, began this imposture,

<span id="viii.ii-p41"></span>“It likewise seems probable that some of
these Decretals have been foisted in since the time of Riculphus. 
Benedict, a deacon of the church of Mentz, who made a collection of
canons for the successors of Riculphus, may have put the last hand to
this collection of false Decretals attributed to one Isidore, a
different person from the famous Bishop of Seville, and surnamed
Peccator, or Mercator.  About his time a certain Isidore did come from
Spain, along with some merchants, and then withdrew to Mentz.  Not
improbably, therefore, this man’s name was given to the collection, and
it was naturally believed that it was brought from Spain.

<span id="viii.ii-p42"></span>“And since these letters first appeared in
an unlearned, dark age, what wonder is it that they were received <span
id="page_605">p. 605</span> <span id="viii.ii-Page_605"></span>with very
little opposition?  And yet Archbishop Hincmar of Rheims, with other
French bishops, made great difficulty in accepting them, even in that
time.  Soon after, however, they acquired some authority, owing to the
support of the court of Rome, the pretensions of which they mightily
favoured.

<span id="viii.ii-p43"></span>On the twin imposture of the “Donation of
Constantine,” it may be well to cite the same learned authority.  But
this shall be found elsewhere. <span
id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689.md)

<span id="viii.ii-p45"></span>Let me now recur to the same candid
Gallican doctor, Dupin, who remarks as follows:—

<span id="viii.ii-p46"></span>“2.  The imposture of these letters is
invincibly proved from hence:  because they are made up of a
*contexture* of passages out of Fathers, councils, papal epistles, and
imperial ordinances, which have appeared after the third century, *down
to the middle of the ninth*.

<span id="viii.ii-p47"></span>“3.  The citations of Scripture in all
these letters *follow the Vulgate* of St. Jerome, which demonstrates
that they are since his time (<span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii-p47.1"></span>a.d.</span> 420), and consequently do not
proceed from Popes who lived long before St. Jerome.

<span id="viii.ii-p48"></span>“4.  The matter of these letters is not at
all in keeping with the ages when those to whom they are attributed were
living.

<span id="viii.ii-p49"></span>“5.  These *Decretals* are full of
anachronisms.  The consulships and names of consuls mentioned in them
are confused and out of order; and, moreover, the true dates of the
writers themselves, as Bishops of Rome, do not agree with those assumed
in these letters.

<span id="viii.ii-p50"></span>“6.  Their style is extremely barbarous,
full of solecisms; and in them we often meet with certain words *never
used till the later ages*.  Also, they are all of one style!  How does
it happen that so many different Popes, living in divers centuries,
should all write in the same manner?”

<span id="viii.ii-p51"></span>Dupin then goes on to examine the whole
series with learning and candour, showing that *every single one of
them* “carries with it unequivocal signs of lying and imposture.”  To
his pages let the student recur, therefore.  I follow him in the
following enumeration of the frauds he calmly exposes with searching
logic and demonstration:—

<span id="viii.ii-p52"></span>1.  *St. Clement to St. James the Lord’s
Brother*.—Plainly spurious.

<span id="viii.ii-p53"></span>2.  *The Second Epistle of Clement to the
Same*.—Equally so.

<span id="viii.ii-p54"></span>3.  *St. Clement to all Suffragan Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and Others of the Clergy:  to all Princes Great and
Small, and to all the Faithful.*

<span id="viii.ii-p55"></span>Dupin remarks:  “This very title suffices
to prove the forgery, as, in the days of St. Clement, there were no
“princes great or small” in the Church.”  He adds that it speaks of
“subdeacons,” an order not then existing, and that it is patched up from
scraps of the apocryphal *Recognitions*.

<span id="viii.ii-p56"></span>4.  *A Fourth Letter of the Same*.  It is
self-refuted by “the same reasons.”

<span id="viii.ii-p57"></span>5.  *The Fifth Letter to St. James of St.
Clement, Bishop of Rome and Successor of St. Peter*.

<span id="viii.ii-p58"></span>“But,” says Dupin, “as St. James died
before St. Peter, it necessarily follows, that this epistle cannot have
been written by St. Clement.”  Further, “We have one genuine epistle of
St. Clement, the style of which is wholly different from that of these
Decretals.”

<span id="viii.ii-p59"></span>6.  *The Epistle of Anacletus*.—Barbarous,
full of solecisms and falsehoods.

<span id="viii.ii-p60"></span>7.  *A Second Epistle of
Anacletus*.—Filled with passages out of authors who lived long after the
times of Anacletus.

<span id="viii.ii-p61"></span>8.  *A Third Letter, etc.*.—Spurious for
the same reasons.

<span id="viii.ii-p62"></span>9.  *An Epistle of Evaristus*.—Patched up
out of writings of Innocent in the fifth century, dated under consuls
not contemporaries of the alleged writer.

<span id="viii.ii-p63"></span>10.  *A Second Epistle of the
Same*.—Stuffed with patchwork of later centuries.

<span id="viii.ii-p64"></span>11.  *An Epistle of Alexander*.—Contains
passages from at least one author of the eighth century.

<span id="viii.ii-p65"></span>12.  *A Second Epistle of the
Same*.—Refers to the Council of Laodicea, which was held (<span
class="c9"><span id="viii.ii-p65.1"></span>a.d.</span> 365) after
Alexander was dead.

<span id="viii.ii-p66"></span>13.  *A Third Epistle, etc*.—Quotes an
author of the fifth century.

<span id="viii.ii-p67"></span>14.  *An Epistle of Xystus*.—Dated under a
consul that lived in another age, and quotes authors of centuries later
than his own day.

<span id="viii.ii-p68"></span>15.  *A Second Epistle of the
Same*.—Subject to the same objections, anachronisms, etc.

<span id="viii.ii-p69"></span><span id="page_606">p. 606</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_606"></span>16.  *An Epistle of Telesphorus*.—False
dates, patched from subsequent authors, etc.

<span id="viii.ii-p70"></span>17.  *An Epistle of
Hyginus*.—Anachronisms, etc.

<span id="viii.ii-p71"></span>18.  *A Second of the Same*.—Stuffed with
anachronisms, and falsely dated by consuls not of his age.

<span id="viii.ii-p72"></span>19.  *An Epistle of Pius I*.—Full of
absurdities, and quotes “the Theodosian Code”!

<span id="viii.ii-p73"></span>20.  *A Second*.—It is addressed to
Justus, etc.  Bad Latin, and wholly unknown to antiquity, though
Baronius has tried to sustain it.

<span id="viii.ii-p74"></span>21.  *A Third Letter, etc*.—Addressed to
Justus, bishop of Vienna.  False for the same reasons.

<span id="viii.ii-p75"></span>22.  *An Epistle of Anicetus*.—Full of
blunders as to dates, etc.  Mentions names, titles, and the like,
unheard of till later ages.

<span id="viii.ii-p76"></span>23.  *An Epistle of Soter*.—Dated under
consuls who lived before Soter was bishop of Rome.

<span id="viii.ii-p77"></span>24.  *A Second Letter, etc*.—Speaks of
“monks,” “palls,” and other things of later times; is patched out of
writings of subsequent ages, and dated under consuls not his
contemporaries.

<span id="viii.ii-p78"></span>25.  *An Epistle of Eleutherus*.—Subject
to like objections.

<span id="viii.ii-p79"></span>26.  *A Second Letter, etc*.—Anachronisms.

<span id="viii.ii-p80"></span>27.  *A Third Letter, etc*.—Addressed to
“Desiderius, bishop of Vienna.”  There was no such bishop till the sixth
century.

<span id="viii.ii-p81"></span>28.  *A Fourth Letter, etc*.—Quotes later
authors, and is disproved by its style.

<span id="viii.ii-p82"></span>29.  *An Epistle of Zephyrinus*.—Little
importance to be attached to anything from such a source; but Dupin (who
lived before his bad character came to light in the writings of
Hippolytus) convicts it of ignorance, and shows that it is a patchwork
of later ideas and writers.

<span id="viii.ii-p83"></span>30.  *A Second Letter*.—“Yet more plainly
an imposture,” says Dupin.

<span id="viii.ii-p84"></span>31.  *An Epistle of St. Callistus*.—What
sort of a “saint” he was, our readers are already informed.  This
epistle is like the preceding ones of Zephyrinus.

<span id="viii.ii-p85"></span>32.  *A Second Epistle, etc*.—Quotes from
writings of the eighth century.

<span id="viii.ii-p86"></span>33.  *An Epistle of Urban*.—Quotes the
Vulgate, the Theodosian Code, and Gregory the Fourth.

<span id="viii.ii-p87"></span>34.  *An Epistle of
Pontianus*.—Anachronisms.

<span id="viii.ii-p88"></span>35.  *A Second Epistle, etc*.—Barbarous
and impossible.

<span id="viii.ii-p89"></span>36.  *An Epistle of Anterus*.—Equally
impossible; stuffed with anachronisms.

<span id="viii.ii-p90"></span>37.  *An Epistle of Fabianus*.—Contradicts
the facts of history touching Cyprian, Cornelius, and Novatus.

<span id="viii.ii-p91"></span>38.  *A Second Epistle, etc*.—Self-refuted
by its monstrous details of mistake and the like.

<span id="viii.ii-p92"></span>39.  *A Third Epistle, etc*.—Quotes
authors of the sixth century.

<span id="viii.ii-p93"></span>40.  *An Epistle of
Cornelius*.—Contradicts historical facts, etc.

<span id="viii.ii-p94"></span>41.  *A Second Epistle, etc*.—Equally full
of blunders.  “But nothing,” says Dupin, “shows the imposture of these
two letters more palpably than the difference of style from those truly
ascribed to Cornelius in Cyprian’s works.”

<span id="viii.ii-p95"></span>42.  *A Third Letter, etc*.—Equally false
on its face.  Dupin, with his usual candour, remarks:  “We find in it
the word ‘Mass,’ which was unknown to the contemporaries of Cornelius.”

<span id="viii.ii-p96"></span>43.  *An Epistle of Lucius*.—It is dated
six months before he became Bishop of Rome, and quotes authors who lived
ages after he was dead.

<span id="viii.ii-p97"></span>44.  *An Epistle of Stephen*.—“Filled with
citations out of subsequent authors.”

<span id="viii.ii-p98"></span>45.  *A Second Epistle, etc*.—Open to the
like objection; it does not harmonize with the times to which it is
referred.

<span id="viii.ii-p99"></span>Here Dupin grows weary, and winds up his
review as follows:—

<span id="viii.ii-p100"></span>For like reasons, we must pass judgment,
in like manner, on the two Epistles of Sixtus II.; the two of Dionysius;
the three of St. Felix I; the two of Eutychianus; one of Caius; two of
Marcellinus and those <span id="page_607">p. 607</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_607"></span>of Marcellus; the three of Eusebius; those
of Miltiades, and the rest of Isidore’s collection:  they are full of
passages out of Fathers, Popes, and councils, more modern than the very
Popes by whom they are pretended to be written.  In them are many things
that clash with the known history of those times, and were *purposely
framed to favour the court of Rome and to sustain her pretensions
against the rights of bishops and the liberties of churches*.  But it
would take up too much time to show the gross falsehood of these
monuments.  They are now rejected by common consent, and even by those
authors who are most favourable to the court of Rome, who are obliged to
abandon the patronage of these epistles, though they have done a great
deal of service in developing the greatness of the court of Rome, and
*ruining the ancient discipline of the Church*, especially with
reference to the rights of bishops and ecclesiastical decisions.

<span id="viii.ii-p101"></span>The following is the <span
class="c9"><span id="viii.ii-p101.1"></span>Translator’s Preface</span>
to these frauds:—

<span id="viii.ii-p102"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii-p102.1"></span>In</span> regard to these Decretals, Dean
Milman says:  “Up to this period the Decretals, the letters or edicts of
the Bishops of Rome, according to the authorized or common collection of
Dionysius, commenced with Pope Siricius, towards the close of the fourth
century.  To the collection of Dionysius was added that of the authentic
councils, which bore the name of Isidore of Seville.  On a sudden was
promulgated, unannounced, without preparation, not absolutely
unquestioned, but apparently overawing at once all doubt, a new code,
which to the former authentic documents added fifty-nine letters and
decrees of the twenty oldest popes from Clement to Melchiades, <span
id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690.md) and the donation of
Constantine; <span id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691.md) and in the third
part, among the decrees of the popes and of the councils from Sylvester
to Gregory II., thirty-nine false decrees, and the acts of several
unauthentic councils.” <span id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692.md)

<span id="viii.ii-p106"></span>In regard to the authorship and date of
the False Decretals, Dean Milman says:  “The author or authors of this
most audacious and elaborate of pious frauds are unknown; the date and
place of its compilation are driven into such narrow limits that they
may be determined within a few years, and within a very circumscribed
region.  The False Decretals came not from Rome; the time of their
arrival at Rome, after they were known beyond the Alps, appears almost
certain.  In one year Nicholas I. is apparently ignorant of their
existence; the next he speaks of them with full knowledge.  They contain
words manifestly used at the Council of Paris, <span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii-p106.1"></span>a.d.</span> 829, consequently are of later
date.  They were known to the Levite Benedict of Mentz, who composed a
supplement to the collection of capitularies by Ansegise, between <span
class="c9"><span id="viii.ii-p106.2"></span>a.d.</span> 840–847.  The
city of Mentz is designated with nearly equal certainty as the place in
which, if not actually composed, they were first promulgated as the
canon law of Christendom.” <span id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[602:2681](0081389.htm#fr_2680.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span> Compare these Canons:  Nicæa, vi.;
Constantinople, ii., iii.; Ephesus, viii.; and Chalcedon, xxviii.

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[603:2682](0081389.htm#fr_2681.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span> *Episcopus ab extra*; i.e., head of
temporalities.

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[603:2683](0081389.htm#fr_2682.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span> Hincmar of Rheims opposed them as he
could.  See Prichard’s *Hincmar*, Oxford, 1849.

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[603:2684](0081389.htm#fr_2683.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p24"></span> See vol. v. p. 154, Elucidation III.

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[603:2685](0081389.htm#fr_2684.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p26"></span> See his *Eccles. History*, Cent. iii. p.
173, ed. London, 1693.

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[603:2686](0081389.htm#fr_2685.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p29"></span> Ed. Hayes, London, 1868.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[604:2687](0081389.htm#fr_2686.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p32"></span> *De Ord. Sacram*., § 49.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[604:2688](0081389.htm#fr_2687.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p33"></span> § 5.

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[604:2689](0081389.htm#fr_2688.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p39"></span> P. 173, as above.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[605:2690](0081389.htm#fr_2689.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p44"></span> Elucidation II., *infra*.

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[607:2691](0081389.htm#fr_2690.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p103"></span> \[Elucidation I.\]

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[607:2692](0081389.htm#fr_2691.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p104"></span> \[Elucidation II.\]

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[607:2693](0081389.htm#fr_2692.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p105"></span> *History of Latin Christianity*, vol.
iii. p. 191.

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[607:2694](0081389.htm#fr_2693.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p106.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p107"></span> *History of Latin Christianity*, vol.
iii. p. 193.  \[In the marvellous confusion of vol. ix. of the Edinburgh
series, these Decretals are mixed up with genuine works as “Fragments of
the Third Century.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistles of Zephyrinus.](0081390.md)
