[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081359)  [Next](0081361.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span
id="vii.xxvii-Page_493"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>The Acts of Barnabus.</span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxvii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>The Journeyings and Martyrdom of St. Barnabas
the Apostle.</span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>Since</span> from the descent of the presence
of our Saviour Jesus Christ, the unwearied and benevolent and mighty
Shepherd and Teacher and Physician, I beheld and saw the ineffable and
holy and unspotted mystery of the Christians, who hold the hope in
holiness, and who have been sealed; and since I have zealously served
Him, I have deemed it necessary to give account of the mysteries which I
have heard and seen.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p5"></span>I John, accompanying the holy apostles
Barnabas and Paul, being formerly a servant of Cyrillus the high priest
of Jupiter, but now having received the gift of the Holy Spirit through
Paul and Barnabas and Silas, *who were* worthy of the calling, and who
baptized me in Iconium.  After I was baptized, then, I saw a certain man
standing clothed in white raiment; and he said to me:  Be of good
courage, John, for assuredly thy name shall be changed to Mark, and thy
glory shall be proclaimed in all the world.  And the darkness in thee
has passed away from thee, and there has been given to thee
understanding to know the mysteries of God.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p6"></span>And when I saw the vision, becoming
greatly terrified, I went to the feet of Barnabas, and related to him
the mysteries which I had seen and heard from that man.  And the Apostle
Paul was not by when I disclosed the mysteries.  And Barnabas said to
me:  Tell no one the miracle which thou hast seen.  For by me also this
night the Lord stood, saying, Be of good courage:  for as thou hast
given thy life for my name to death and banishment from thy nation, thus
also shalt thou be made perfect.  Moreover, as for the servant who is
with you, take him also with thyself; for he has certain mysteries.  Now
then, my child, keep to thyself the things which thou hast seen and
heard; for a time will come for thee to reveal them. <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132.md)

<span id="vii.xxvii-p8"></span>And I, having been instructed in these
things by him, remained in Iconium <span
id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133.md) many days; for there was there a
holy man and a pious, who also entertained us, whose house also Paul had
sanctified.  Thence, therefore, we came to Seleucia, and after staying
three days sailed away to Cyprus; and I was ministering to them until we
had gone round all Cyprus.  And setting sail from Cyprus, we landed in
Perga of Pamphylia.  And there I then stayed about two months, wishing
to sail to the regions of the West; and the Holy Spirit did not allow
me.  Turning, therefore, I again sought the apostles; and having learned
that they were in Antioch, I went to them.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p10"></span>And I found Paul in bed in Antioch from
the toil of the journey, who also seeing me, was exceedingly grieved on
account of my delaying in Pamphylia.  And Barnabas coming, encouraged
him, and tasted bread, and he took a little of it.  And they preached
the word of the Lord, and enlightened many of the Jews and Greeks.  And
I only attended to them, and was afraid of Paul to come near him, both
because he held me as having spent much time in Pamphylia, and because
he was quite enraged against me.  And I gave repentance on my knees upon
the earth to Paul, and he would not endure it.  And when I remained for
three Sabbaths in entreaty and prayer on my knees, I was unable to
prevail upon him about myself; for his great grievance against me was on
account of my keeping several parchments in Pamphylia.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p11"></span>And when it came to pass that they
finished teaching in Antioch, on the first of the week they took counsel
together to set out for the places of the East, and after that to go
into Cyprus, and oversee all the churches in which they had spoken the
word of God.  And Barnabas entreated Paul to go first to Cyprus, and
oversee his own in his village; and Lucius <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134.md) entreated him to take the oversight
of his city Cyrene.  And a vision was seen by Paul in sleep, that he
should hasten to Jerusalem, because the brethren expected him there. 
But Barnabas urged that they should go to Cyprus, and pass the winter,
and then that they should go to Jerusalem at the feast.  Great
contention, therefore, arose between them. <span
id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135.md)   And Barnabas urged me also to
accompany them, on account of my being their servant from the beginning,
and on account <span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span
id="vii.xxvii-Page_494"></span>of my having served them in all Cyprus
until they came to Perga of Pamphylia; and I there had remained many
days.  But Paul cried out against Barnabas, saying:  It is impossible
for him to go with us.  And those who were with us there urged me also
to accompany them, because there was a vow upon me to follow them to the
end.  So that Paul said to Barnabas:  If thou wilt take John who also is
surnamed Mark with thee, go another road; for he shall not come with
us.  And Barnabas coming to himself, said:  The grace of God does not
desert <span id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136.md) him who has once
served the Gospel and journeyed with us.  If, therefore, this be
agreeable to thee, Father Paul, I take him and go.  And he said:  Go
thou in the grace of Christ, and we in the power of the Spirit.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p15"></span>Therefore, bending their knees, they
prayed to God.  And Paul, groaning aloud, wept, and in like manner also
Barnabas, saying to one another:  It would have been good for us, as at
first, so also at last, to work in common among men; but since it has
thus seemed good to thee, Father Paul, pray for me that my labour may be
made perfect to commendation:  for thou knowest how I have served thee
also to the grace of Christ that has been given to thee.  For I go to
Cyprus, and hasten to be made perfect; <span
id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137.md) for I know that I shall no more see
thy face, O Father Paul.  And falling on the ground at his feet, he wept
long.  And Paul said to him:  The Lord stood by me also this night,
saying, Do not force Barnabas not to go to Cyprus, for there it has been
prepared for him to enlighten many; and do thou also, in the grace that
has been given to thee, go to Jerusalem to worship in the holy place,
and there it shall be shown thee where thy martyrdom has been prepared. 
And we saluted one another, and Barnabas took me to himself.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p17"></span>And having come down to Laodiceia, <span
id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138.md) we sought to cross to Cyprus; and
having found a ship going to Cyprus, we embarked.  And when we had set
sail, the wind was found to be contrary.  And we came to Corasium; <span
id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139.md) and having gone down to the shore
where there was a fountain, we rested there, showing ourselves to no
one, that no one might know that Barnabas had separated from Paul.  And
having set sail from Corasium, we came to the regions of Isauria, and
thence came to a certain island called Pityusa; <span
id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140.md) and a storm having come on, we
remained there three days; and a certain pious man entertained us, by
name Euphemus, whom also Barnabas instructed in many things in the
faith, with all his house.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p21"></span>And thence we sailed past the
Aconesiæ, <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141.md) and came to the
city of Anemurium; and having gone into it, we found two Greeks.  And
coming to us, they asked whence and who we were.  And Barnabas said to
them:  If you wish to know whence and who we are, throw away the
clothing which you have, and I shall put on you clothing which never
becomes soiled; for neither is there in it anything filthy, but it is
altogether splendid.  And being astonished at the saying, they asked
us:  What is that garment which you are going to give us?  And Barnabas
said to them:  If you shall confess your sins, and submit yourselves to
our Lord Jesus Christ, you shall receive that garment which is
incorruptible for ever.  And being pricked at heart by the Holy Spirit,
they fell at his feet, entreating and saying:  We beseech thee, father,
give us that garment; for we believe in the living and true God whom
thou proclaimest.  And leading them down to <span
id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142.md) the fountain, he baptized them into
the name of Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost.  And they knew that they
were clothed with power, and a holy robe.  And having taken from me one
robe, he put it on the one; and his own robe he put on the other.  And
they brought money to him, and straightway Barnabas distributed it to
the poor.  And from them also the sailors were able to gain many
things. <span id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143.md)

<span id="vii.xxvii-p25"></span>And they having come down to the shore,
he spoke to them the word of God; and he having blessed them, we saluted
them, and went on board the ship.  And the one of them who was named
Stephanus wished to accompany us, and Barnabas did not permit him.  And
we, having gone across, sailed down to Cyprus by night; and having come
to the place called Crommyacita, <span
id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144.md) we found Timon and Ariston the
temple servants, at whose house also we were entertained.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p27"></span>And Timon was afflicted by much fever. 
And having laid our hands upon him, we straightway removed his fever,
having called upon the name of the Lord Jesus.  And Barnabas had
received documents from Matthew, a book of the word <span
id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145.md) of God, and a narrative of miracles
and doctrines.  This Barnabas laid upon the sick in each place that we
came to, and it immediately made a cure of their sufferings.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p29"></span>And when we had come to Lapithus, <span
id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146.md) and an idol festival <span
id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147.md) being celebrated in the theatre,
they did not allow us to go into the city, but we rested a little at the
gate.  And Timon, after he rose up from his disease, came with us.  And
having gone forth from Lapithus, we travelled <span id="page_495">p.
495</span> <span id="vii.xxvii-Page_495"></span>through the mountains,
and came to the city of Lampadistus, of which also Timon was a native;
in addition to whom, having found also that Heracleius was there, we
were entertained by him.  He was of the city of Tamasus, <span
id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148.md) and had come to visit his
relations; and Barnabas, looking stedfastly at him, recognised him,
having met with him formerly at Citium with Paul; to whom also the Holy
Spirit was given at baptism, and he changed his name to Heracleides. 
And having ordained him bishop over Cyprus, and having confirmed the
church in Tamasus, we left him in the house of his brethren that dwelt
there.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p33"></span>And having crossed the mountain called
Chionodes, <span id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149.md) we came to Old
Paphos, and there found Rhodon, a temple servant, who also, having
himself believed, accompanied us.  And we met a certain Jew, by name
Barjesus, coming from Paphos, who also recognised Barnabas, as having
been formerly with Paul.  He did not wish us to go into Paphos; but
having turned away, we came to Curium. <span
id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150.md)

<span id="vii.xxvii-p36"></span>And we found that a certain abominable
race was being performed <span id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151.md) in
the road near the city, where a multitude of women and men naked were
performing the race.  And there was great deception and error in that
place.  And Barnabas turning, rebuked it; and the western part fell, so
that many were wounded, and many of them also died and the rest fled to
the temple of Apollo, which was close at hand in the *city*, which was
called sacred. <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152.md)   And when we
came near the temple, a great multitude of Jews who were there, having
been put up to it by Barjesus, stood outside of the city, and did not
allow us to go into the city; but we spent the evening under a tree near
the city, and rested there.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p39"></span>And on the following day, we came to a
certain village where Aristoclianus dwelt.  He being a leper, had been
cleansed in Antioch, whom also Paul and Barnabas sealed to be a bishop,
and sent to his village in Cyprus, because there were many Greeks
there.  And we were entertained in the cave by him in the mountain, and
there we remained one day.  And thence we came to Amathus and there was
a great multitude of Greeks in the temple in the mountain, low women and
men pouring libations.  There also Barjesus, getting the start of us,
gained over the nation of the Jews, and did not allow us to enter into
the city; but a certain widow woman, eighty years old, being outside of
the city, and she also not worshipping the idols, coming forward to us,
took us into her house one hour.  And when we came out we shook the dust
off our feet over against that temple where the libation of the
abominable took place.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p40"></span>And having gone out thence, we came
through desert places, and Timon also accompanied us.  And having come
to Citium, and there being a great uproar there also in their
hippodrome, having learned this, we came forth out of the city, having
all shaken the dust off our feet; for no one received us, except that we
rested one hour in the gate near the aqueduct.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p41"></span>And having set sail in a ship from
Citium, we came to Salamis, and landed in the so-called islands, where
there was a place full of idols; and there there took place high
festivals <span id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153.md) and libations.  And
having found Heracleides there again, we instructed him to proclaim the
Gospel of God, and to set up churches, and ministers in them.  And
having gone into Salamis, we came to the synagogue near the place called
Biblia; and when we had gone into it, Barnabas, having unrolled the
Gospel which he had received from Matthew his fellow-labourer, began to
teach the Jews.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p43"></span>And Barjesus, having arrived after two
days, after not a few Jews had been instructed, was enraged, and brought
together all the multitude of the Jews; and they having laid hold of
Barnabas, wished to hand him over to Hypatius, the governor of Salamis. 
And having bound him to take him away to the governor, and a pious
Jebusite, <span id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154.md) a kinsman of Nero,
having come to Cyprus, the Jews, learning this, took Barnabas by night,
and bound him with a rope by the neck; and having dragged him to the
hippodrome from the synagogue, and having gone out of the city, standing
round him, they burned him with fire, so that even his bones became
dust.  And straightway that night, having taken his dust, they cast it
into a cloth; and having secured it with lead, they intended to throw it
into the sea.  But I, finding an opportunity in the night, and being
able along with Timon and Rhodon to carry it. we came to a certain
place, and having found a cave, put it down there, where the nation of
the Jebusites formerly dwelt.  And having found a secret place in it, we
put it away, with the documents which he had received from Matthew.  And
it was the fourth hour of the night of the second of the week. <span
id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155.md)

<span id="vii.xxvii-p46"></span>And when we were hid in the place, the
Jews made no little search after us; and having almost found us, they
pursued us as far as the <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="vii.xxvii-Page_496"></span>village of the Ledrians; and we, having
found there also a cave near the village, took refuge in it, and thus
escaped them.  And we were hid in the cave three days; and the Jews
having gone away, we came forth and left the place by night.  And taking
with us Ariston and Rhodon, we came to the village of Limnes. <span
id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156.md)

<span id="vii.xxvii-p48"></span>And having come to the shore, we found
an Egyptian ship; and having embarked in it, we landed at Alexandria. 
And there I remained, teaching the brethren that came the word of the
Lord, enlightening them, and preaching what I had been taught by the
apostles of Christ, who also baptized me into the name of Father, and
Son, and Holy Ghost; who also changed my name to Mark in the water of
baptism, by which also I hope to bring many to the glory of God through
His grace; because to Him is due honour and everlasting glory.  Amen.

<span id="vii.xxvii-p49"></span>The journeyings and martyrdom of the
holy apostle Barnabas have been fulfilled through God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[493:2133](0081360.htm#fr_2132.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p7"></span> Or, will come to reveal thee.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[493:2134](0081360.htm#fr_2133.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p9"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>ms.</span> has *Jerusalem*, and adds, *and we
came to Antioch*, which suits the geography better.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[493:2135](0081360.htm#fr_2134.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p12"></span> [Acts
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md), [Rom.
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[493:2136](0081360.htm#fr_2135.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p13"></span> [Acts xv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039.md)<span id="vii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[494:2137](0081360.htm#fr_2136.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p14"></span> Or, turn away.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[494:2138](0081360.htm#fr_2137.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p16"></span> i.e., to finish my course.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[494:2139](0081360.htm#fr_2138.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p18"></span> This is the Syrian Laodiceia, opposite
Cyprus.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[494:2140](0081360.htm#fr_2139.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p19"></span> Perhaps Corycus.

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[494:2141](0081360.htm#fr_2140.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p20"></span> Or, Pityussa, close to the Zephyrian
promontory.

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[494:2142](0081360.htm#fr_2141.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p22"></span> Perhaps Aphrodisias.

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[494:2143](0081360.htm#fr_2142.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p23"></span> Or, into.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[494:2144](0081360.htm#fr_2143.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p24"></span> To make much profit.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[494:2145](0081360.htm#fr_2144.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p26"></span> Crommyon Pr.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[494:2146](0081360.htm#fr_2145.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p28"></span> Lit., the voice.

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[494:2147](0081360.htm#fr_2146.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p30"></span> Lapethus.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[494:2148](0081360.htm#fr_2147.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p31"></span> Lit., an idol-frenzy,—a term often
applied to the worship of Bacchus.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[495:2149](0081360.htm#fr_2148.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p32"></span> Tamassus.

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[495:2150](0081360.htm#fr_2149.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p34"></span> i.e., snowy, an epithet of Olympus, the
mountain they crossed.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[495:2151](0081360.htm#fr_2150.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p35"></span> Perhaps Curtium, which was nearer Palæo
Paphos than Curias Pr. was.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[495:2152](0081360.htm#fr_2151.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p37"></span> i.e., as a religious service.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[495:2153](0081360.htm#fr_2152.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p38"></span> Another reading is:  *In the city
called Curium*.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[495:2154](0081360.htm#fr_2153.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p42"></span> Lit., assemblies of the whole nation.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[495:2155](0081360.htm#fr_2154.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p44"></span> Another reading is:  *Eusebius the
Jebusite*.  There is a legend that the Jebusites colonized Cyprus after
they were driven out of Palestine by King David.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[495:2156](0081360.htm#fr_2155.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p45"></span> The Vatican<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvii-p45.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  on the 17th of the month
Paün according to the Egyptians, and according to the Romans the 11th of
the month of June.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[496:2157](0081360.htm#fr_2156.md) <span
id="vii.xxvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvii-p47"></span> This place does not appear on the
ancient maps, but there is a modern C. Limniti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Acts of Philip.](0081361.md)
