[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081365)  [Next](0081367.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxx"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p1"></span> <span id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="vii.xxx-Page_517"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Acts of Andrew and Matthias <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238.md) </span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxx-p3.1"></span>In the City of the Man-eaters.</span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxx-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p5.1"></span>About</span> that time all the apostles had
come together to the same place, and shared among themselves the
countries, casting lots, in order that each might go away into the part
that had fallen to him.  By lot, then, it fell to Matthias to set out to
the country of the man-eaters.  And the men of that city used neither to
eat bread nor drink wine; but they ate the flesh of men, and drank their
blood.  Every man, therefore, who came into their city they laid hold
of, and digging they thrust out his eyes, and gave him a drug to drink,
prepared by sorcery and magic; and from drinking the drug his heart was
altered and his mind deranged.

<span id="vii.xxx-p6"></span>Matthias then having come into the gate of
their city, the men of that city laid hold of him, and thrust out his
eyes; and after putting them out they made him drink the drug of their
magical deception, and led him away to the prison, and put beside him
grass to eat, and he ate it not.  For when he had partaken of their
drug, his heart was not altered, nor his mind deranged; but he kept
praying to God, weeping, and saying:  Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake
we have forsaken all things and have followed Thee, knowing that Thou
art the helper of all who hope in Thee, attend then and behold what they
have done to Matthias Thy servant, how they have made me nigh to the
brutes; for Thou art He who knowest all things.  If, therefore, Thou
hast ordained that the wicked men in this city should eat me up, I will
not by any means flee from Thy dispensation.  Afford to me then, O Lord,
the light of mine eyes, that at least I may behold what the wicked men
in this city have in hand for me; do not forsake me, O my Lord Jesus
Christ, and do not give me up to this bitter death.

<span id="vii.xxx-p7"></span>While Matthias was thus praying in the
prison, a light shone, and there came forth out of the light a voice
saying:  Beloved Matthias, receive thy sight.  And immediately he
received his sight.  And again there came forth a voice saying:  Be of
good courage, our Matthias, and be not dismayed; for I shall not by any
means forsake thee, for I shall deliver thee from all danger; and not
only thee, but also all thy brethren who are with thee:  for I am with
thee everywhere and at all times.  But remain here twenty-seven days for
the edification <span id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239.md) of many
souls; and after that I shall send forth Andrew to thee, and he shall
lead thee forth out of this prison; and not thee only, but also all who
hear.  Having said this, the Saviour said again to Matthias, Peace be to
thee, our Matthias, and went into heaven.  Then Matthias having beheld
Him, said to the Lord:  Let thy grace abide with me, O my Lord Jesus.

<span id="vii.xxx-p9"></span>Then Matthias therefore <span
id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240.md) sat down in the prison, and sang. 
And it came to pass that, when the executioners came into the prison to
bring forth the men to eat them, Matthias also shut his eyes, that they
might not behold that he saw.  And the executioners having come to him,
read the ticket in his hand, and said among themselves:  Yet three days,
and we shall bring out this one also from the prison, and slay him. 
Because in the case of every man whom they laid hold of, they noted that
day on which they laid hold of him, and tied a ticket to his right hand,
that they might know the completion of the thirty days.

<span id="vii.xxx-p11"></span>And it came to pass when the twenty-seven
days were fulfilled since Matthias was seized, the Lord appeared in the
country where Andrew was teaching, and said to him:  Rise up, and set
out with thy disciples to the country of the man-eaters, and bring forth
Matthias out of that place; for yet three days, and the men of the city
will bring him forth and slay him for their food.  And Andrew answered
and said:  My Lord, I shall not be able to accomplish the journey
thither before the limited period of the three days; but send Thine
angel quickly, that he may bring him out thence:  for thou knowest,
Lord, that I also am flesh, and shall not be able to go there quickly. 
And He says to Andrew:  Obey Him who made thee, and Him who is able to
say in a word, and <span id="page_518">p. 518</span> <span
id="vii.xxx-Page_518"></span>that city shall be removed thence, and all
that dwell in it.  For I command the horns of the winds, <span
id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241.md) and they drive it thence.  But rise
up early, and go down to the sea with thy disciples, and thou shalt find
a boat upon the shore, and thou shalt go aboard with thy disciples.  And
having said this, the Saviour again said:  Peace to thee, Andrew, along
with those with thee!  And He went into the heavens.

<span id="vii.xxx-p13"></span>And Andrew having risen up early,
proceeded to the sea along with his disciples; and having come down to
the shore, he saw a little boat, and in the boat three men sitting.  For
the Lord by His own power had prepared a boat, and He it was in human
shape a pilot in the boat; and He brought two angels whom He made to
appear like men, and they were in the boat sitting. <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242.md)   Andrew, therefore, having beheld
the boat, and the three who were in it, rejoiced with exceeding great
joy; and having gone to them, he said:  Where are you going, brethren,
with this little boat?  And the Lord answered and said to him:  We are
going to the country of the man-eaters.  And Andrew having beheld Jesus,
did not recognise Him; for Jesus was hiding His Godhead, and He appeared
to Andrew like a pilot.  And Jesus having heard Andrew saying, I too am
going to the country of the man-eaters, says to him:  Every man avoids
that city, and how are you going there?  And Andrew answered and said: 
We have some small business to do there, and we must get through with
it; but if thou canst, do us this kindness to convey us to the country
of the man-eaters, to which also you intend to go.  Jesus answered and
said to them:  Come on board.

<span id="vii.xxx-p15"></span>And Andrew said:  I wish to make some
explanation to thee, young man, before we come on board thy boat.  And
Jesus said:  Say what thou wilt.  And Andrew said to Him:  We have no
passage-money to give thee; we have not even bread for our nourishment. 
And Jesus answered and said to him:  How, then, are you going away
without giving us the passage-money, and without having bread for your
nourishment?  And Andrew said to Jesus, Listen, brother; do not think
that it is through masterfulness that we do not give thee our
passage-money, but we are disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, the good
God.  For He chose for Himself us twelve, and gave us such a
commandment, saying, When you go to preach, do not carry money in the
journey, nor bread, nor bag, nor shoes, nor staff, nor two coats. <span
id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243.md)   If, therefore, thou wilt do us
the kindness, brother, tell us at once; if not, let us know, and we
shall go and seek another boat for ourselves.  And Jesus answered and
said to Andrew:  If this is the commandment which you received, and you
keep it, come on board my boat with all joy.  For I really wish you, the
disciples of Him who is called Jesus, to come on board my boat, rather
than those who give me of their silver and gold; for I am altogether
worthy that the apostle of the Lord should come on board my boat.  And
Andrew answered and said:  Permit me, brother, may the Lord grant thee
glory and honour.  And Andrew went on board the boat with his disciples.

<span id="vii.xxx-p17"></span>And having gone on board, he sat down by
the boat’s sail.  And Jesus answered and said to one of the angels: 
Rise and go down to the hold of the boat, and bring up three loaves,
that the men may eat, lest perchance they be hungry, from having come to
us off a long journey.  And he rose and went down to the hold of the
boat, and brought up three loaves, as the Lord commanded him; and he
gave them the loaves.  Then Jesus said to Andrew:  Rise up, brother,
with thy friends; partake of food, that you may be strong to bear the
tossing of the sea.  And Andrew answered and said to his disciples:  My
children, we have found great kindness from this man.  Stand up, then,
and partake of the nourishment of bread, that you may be strong to bear
the tossing of the sea.  And his disciples were not able to answer him a
word, for they were in distress because of the sea.  Then Jesus forced
Andrew to partake himself also of the nourishment of bread along with
his disciples.  And Andrew answered and said to Jesus, not knowing that
it was Jesus:  Brother, may the Lord give thee heavenly bread out of His
kingdom.  Allow me then brother; for thou seest the children, that they
are distressed because of the sea.  And Jesus answered and said to
Andrew:  Assuredly the brethren are without experience of the sea; but
inquire of them whether they want to go to land, and thyself to remain,
until thou shalt finish thy business, and again come back to them.  Then
Andrew said to his disciples:  My children, do you wish to go to the
land, and me to remain here until I shall finish my business for which I
have been sent?  And they answered and said to Andrew:  If we go away
from thee, may we become strangers to the good things which the Lord
hath provided for us.  Now, therefore, we are with thee, wherever thou
mayst go.

<span id="vii.xxx-p18"></span>Jesus answered and said to Andrew:  If
thou art truly a disciple of Him who is called Jesus, tell thy disciples
the miracles which thy Teacher did, that their soul may rejoice, and
that they may forget the fear of the sea; for, behold, we are going to
take the boat off from the land.  And immediately Jesus said to one of
the angels:  Let go the boat; and he let go the boat from <span
id="page_519">p. 519</span> <span id="vii.xxx-Page_519"></span>the
land.  And Jesus came and sat down beside the rudder, and steered the
boat.  Then Andrew exhorted and comforted his disciples, saying:  My
children, who have given up your life to the Lord, fear not; for the
Lord will not at all forsake you for ever.  For at that time when I was
alone with our Lord, we went on board the boat with Him, and He lay down
to sleep in the boat, trying us; for He was not <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244.md) fast asleep.  And a great wind
having arisen, and the sea being stormy, so that the waves were
uplifted, and came under the sail of the boat, and when we were in great
fear, the Lord stood up and rebuked the winds, and there was a calm in
the sea; for all things feared Him, as being made by Him. <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245.md)   Now, therefore, my children, fear
not.  For the Lord Jesus will not at all forsake us.  And having said
this, the holy Andrew prayed in his heart that his disciples might be
led to sleep.  And as Andrew was praying, his disciples fell asleep.

<span id="vii.xxx-p21"></span>And Andrew, turning round to the Lord, not
knowing that it was the Lord, said to Him:  Tell me, O man, and show me
the skill of thy steering; for I have never seen any man so steering in
the sea as I now see thee.  For sixteen years have I sailed the sea, and
behold this is the seventeenth, and I have not seen such skill; for
truly the boat is just as if on land.  Show me then, young man, thy
skill.  Then Jesus answered and said to Andrew:  We also have often
sailed the sea, and been in danger; but since thou art a disciple of Him
called Jesus, the sea has recognised thee that thou art righteous, and
has become calm, and has not lifted its waves against the boat.  Then
Andrew cried out with a loud voice, saying:  I thank Thee, my Lord Jesus
Christ, that I have met a man who glorifies Thy name.

<span id="vii.xxx-p22"></span>And Jesus answered and said:  O Andrew,
tell me, thou disciple of Him called Jesus, wherefore the unbelieving
Jews did not believe in Him, saying that He was not God, but man.  Show
me, O disciple of Him called Jesus; for I have heard that He showed His
Godhead to His disciples.  And Andrew answered and said:  Truly,
brother, He showed us that He was God.  Do not think, then, that He is
man.  For He made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all that
is in them.  And Jesus answered and said:  How then did the Jews not
believe Him?  Perhaps He did not do miracles before them?  Andrew said: 
Hast thou not heard of the miracles which He did before them?  He made
the blind see, the lame walk, the deaf hear; He cleansed lepers, He
changed water into wine; and having taken five loaves and two fishes, He
made a crowd recline on the grass, and having blessed, He gave them to
eat; and those that ate were five thousand men, <span
id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246.md) and they were filled:  and they
took up what was over to them twelve baskets of fragments. <span
id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247.md)   And after all these things they
did not believe Him.

<span id="vii.xxx-p25"></span>And Jesus answered and said to Andrew: 
Perhaps He did these miracles before the people, and not before the
chief priests, and because of this they did not believe Him.

<span id="vii.xxx-p26"></span>And Andrew answered and said:  Nay,
brother, He did them also before the chief priests, not only openly, but
also in secret, and they did not believe Him.  Jesus answered and said: 
What are the miracles which He did in secret?  Disclose them to me.  And
Andrew answered and said:  O man, who hast the spirit of
inquisitiveness, why dost thou put me to the test?  And Jesus answered
and said:  I do not put thee to the test by saying this, O disciple of
Him called Jesus; but my soul rejoices and exults, and not only mine,
but also every soul that hears the wonders of Jesus.

<span id="vii.xxx-p27"></span>And Andrew answered and said:  O child,
the Lord shall fill thy soul with all joy and all good, as thou hast
persuaded me now to relate to thee the miracles which our Lord did in
secret.

<span id="vii.xxx-p28"></span>It came to pass as we, the twelve
disciples, were going with our Lord into a temple of the Gentiles, that
He might make known to us the ignorance of the devil, that the chief
priests, having beheld us following Jesus, said to us, O wretches, why
do you walk with him who says, I am the Son of God?  Do you mean to say
that God has a son?  Which of you has ever at any time seen God
associating with a woman?  Is not this the son of Joseph the carpenter,
and his mother is Mary, and his brothers James and Simon? <span
id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248.md)   And when we heard these words,
our hearts were turned into weakness.  And Jesus, having known that our
hearts were giving way, took us into a desert place, and did great
miracles before us, and displayed to us all His Godhead.  And we spoke
to the chief priests, saying, Come ye also, and see; for, behold, He has
persuaded us.

<span id="vii.xxx-p30"></span>And the chief priests having come, went
with us; and when we had gone into the temple of the Gentiles, Jesus
showed us the heaven, <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249.md) that we
might know whether the things were true or not.  And there went in along
with us thirty men of the people, and four chief priests.  And Jesus,
having looked on the right hand and on the left of the temple, saw two
sculptured sphinxes, one on the right and one on the left.  <span
id="page_520">p. 520</span> <span id="vii.xxx-Page_520"></span>And Jesus
having turned to us, said, Behold the sign of the cross; for these are
like the cherubim and the seraphim which are in heaven.  Then Jesus,
having looked to the right, where the sphinx was, said to it, I say unto
thee, thou image of that which is in heaven, which the hands of
craftsmen have sculptured, be separated from thy place, and come down,
and answer and convict the chief priests, and show them whether I am God
or man.

<span id="vii.xxx-p32"></span>And immediately at that very time the
sphinx removed from its place, and having assumed a human voice, said, O
foolish sons of Israel, not only has the blinding of their own hearts
not been enough for them, but they also wish others to be blind like
themselves, saying that God is man, who in the beginning fashioned man,
and put His breath into all, who gave motion to those things which moved
not; He it is who called Abraham, who loved his son Isaac, who brought
back his beloved Jacob into his land; He is the Judge of living and
dead; He it is who prepareth great benefits for those who obey Him, and
prepareth punishment for those who believe Him not.  Heed not that I am
an idol that can be handled; for I say unto you, that the sacred places
of your synagogue are more excellent. <span
id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250.md)   For though we are stones, the
priests have given us only the name of a god; and those priests who
serve the temple purify themselves, being afraid of the demons:  for if
they have had intercourse with women, they purify themselves seven days,
because of their fear; so that they do not come into the temple because
of us, because of the name which they have given us, that we are a god. 
But you, if you have committed fornication, take up the law of God, and
go into the synagogue of God, and purify, and read, and do not reverence
the glorious words of God.  Because of this, I say unto you, that the
holy things purify your synagogues, so that they also become churches of
His only begotten Son.  The sphinx having said this, ceased speaking.

<span id="vii.xxx-p34"></span>And we said to the chief priests, Now it
is fitting that you should believe, because even the stones have
convicted you.  And the Jews answered and said, By magic these stones
speak, and do not you think that it is a god?  For if you have tested
what has been said by the stone, you have ascertained its deception. 
For where did he find Abraham, or how did he see him?  For Abraham died
many years before he was born, and how does he know him?

<span id="vii.xxx-p35"></span>And Jesus, having again turned to the
image, said to it, Because these believe not that I have spoken with
Abraham, go away into the land of the Canaanites, and go away to the
double <span id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251.md) cave in the field of
Mamre, where the body of Abraham is, and cry outside of the tomb,
saying, Abraham, Abraham, whose body is in the tomb, and whose soul is
in paradise, thus speaks He who fashioned man, who made thee from the
beginning his friend, Rise up, thou and thy son Isaac, and the son of
thy son Jacob, and come to the temples of the Jebusites, that we may
convict the chief priests, in order that they may know that I am
acquainted with thee, and thou with me.  And when the sphinx heard these
words, immediately she walked about in the presence of us all, and set
out for the land of the Canaanites to the field of Mamre, and cried
outside of the tomb, as God had commanded her.  And straightway the
twelve patriarchs <span id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252.md) came forth
alive out of the tomb, and answered and said to her, To which of us hast
thou been sent?  And the sphinx answered and said, I have been sent to
the three patriarchs for testimony; but do ye go in, and rest until the
time of the resurrection.  And having heard, they went into the tomb and
fell asleep.  And the three patriarchs set out along with the sphinx to
Jesus, and convicted the chief priests.  And Jesus said to them, Go away
to your places; and they went away.  And He said also to the image, Go
up to thy place; and straightway she went up and stood in her place. 
And He did also many other miracles, and they did not believe Him; which
*miracles*, if I shall recount, thou wilt not be able to bear.  And
Jesus answered and said to him:  I can bear it; for I prudently listen
to profitable words.

<span id="vii.xxx-p38"></span>And when the boat was about to come near
the land, Jesus bent down His head upon one of His angels, and was
quiet.  And Andrew ceased speaking; and he also, reclining his head upon
one of his disciples, fell asleep.  And Jesus said to His angels: 
Spread your hands under him, and carry Andrew and his disciples, and go
and put them outside of the city of the man-eaters; and having laid them
on the ground, return to me.  And the angels did as Jesus commanded
them, and the angels returned to Jesus:  and He went up into the heavens
with His angels.

<span id="vii.xxx-p39"></span>And when it was morning, Andrew, having
awakened and looked up, found himself sitting on the ground; and having
looked, <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253.md) he saw his disciples
sleeping on the ground:  and he wakened them, and said to them:  Rise
up, my children, and know the great dispensation that has happened to
us, and learn that the Lord was with us in the boat, and we knew Him
not; for He transformed Himself as if He were a pilot in <span
id="page_521">p. 521</span> <span id="vii.xxx-Page_521"></span>the boat,
and humbled Himself, and appeared to us as a man, putting us to the
test.  And Andrew, recovering himself, said:  Lord, I recognised Thy
excellent words, but Thou didst not manifest Thyself to me, and because
of this I did not know Thee.  And his disciples answered and said to
him:  Father Andrew, do not think that we knew when thou wast speaking
with Him in the boat, for we were weighed down by a most heavy sleep;
and eagles came down out of the heavens, and lifted up our souls, and
took them away into the paradise in heaven, and we saw great wonders. 
For we beheld our Lord Jesus sitting on a throne of glory, and all the
angels round about Him.  We beheld also Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the saints; and David praised Him with a song upon his harp. 
And we beheld there you the twelve apostles standing by in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and outside of you twelve angels round about
you, and each angel standing behind each of you, and they were like you
in appearance.  And we heard the Lord saying to the angels, Listen to
the apostles in all things whatsoever they shall ask you.  These are the
things which we have seen, father Andrew, until thou didst awake us; and
angels, who appeared like eagles, brought our souls into our bodies.

<span id="vii.xxx-p41"></span>Then Andrew, having heard, rejoiced with
great joy that his disciples had been deemed worthy to behold these
wonderful things.  And Andrew looked up into heaven, and said:  Appear
to me, Lord Jesus Christ; for I know that Thou art not far from Thy
servants.  Pardon me, Lord, for what I have done; for I have beheld Thee
as a man in the boat, and I have conversed with Thee as with a man.  Now
therefore, Lord, manifest Thyself to me in this place.

<span id="vii.xxx-p42"></span>And when Andrew had said this, Jesus
appeared to him in the likeness of a most beautiful little child.  And
Jesus answered and said:  Hail, our Andrew!  And Andrew, having beheld
Him, worshipped Him, saying:  Pardon me, Lord Jesus Christ, for I saw
Thee like a man on the sea, and conversed with Thee.  What is there,
then, wherein I have sinned, my Lord Jesus, that Thou didst not manifest
Thyself to me on the sea?  And Jesus answered and said to Andrew:  Thou
hast not sinned, but I did this to thee because thou saidst, I shall not
be able to go to the city of the man-eaters in three days; and I have
showed thee that I am able to do all things, and to appear to every one
as I wish.  Now therefore rise up, go into the city to Matthias, and
bring him forth out of the prison, and all the strangers that are with
him.  For, behold, I show thee, Andrew, what thou must suffer before
going into this city.  They will heap upon thee tortures and insults,
and scatter thy flesh in the ways and the streets, and thy blood shall
flow to the ground, but they are not able to put thee to death; but
endure, just as thou sawest me beaten, insulted, and crucified:  for
there are those who are destined to believe in this city.  And having
said this, the Saviour went into the heavens.

<span id="vii.xxx-p43"></span>And Andrew went into the city along with
his disciples, and no one beheld him.  And when he came to the prison,
he saw seven warders standing at the gate guarding, and he prayed within
himself, and they fell down and expired; and he marked the gate with the
sign of the cross, and it opened of its own accord.  And having gone in
with his disciples, he found Matthias sitting and singing; and seeing
him, he stood up, and they saluted each other with a holy kiss; and he
said to Matthias:  Brother, how hast thou been found here?  For yet
three days, and they will bring thee out to be food for them.  Where are
the great mysteries which thou hast been taught, and the wonderful
things which we have believed?  And Matthias said to him:  Didst thou
not hear the Lord saying, I shall send you like sheep into the midst of
wolves? <span id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254.md)   They straightway
brought me into the prison, and I prayed to the Lord; and He said to me,
Remain here twenty-seven days, and I shall send thee Andrew, and he will
bring thee forth out of the prison.  And now, behold, it has come to
pass as the Lord said.

<span id="vii.xxx-p45"></span>Then Andrew, having looked, saw three men
shut up eating grass naked; and he beat his breast, and said:  Consider,
O Lord, what the men suffer; how have they made them like the irrational
brutes?  And he says to Satan:  Woe to thee, the devil, the enemy of
God, and to thine angels, because the strangers here have done nothing
to thee; and how hast thou brought upon them the punishment? how long
dost thou war against the human race?  Thou didst bring forth Adam out
of paradise, and didst cause men to be mixed up with transgression; and
the Lord was enraged, and brought on the deluge so as to sweep man
away.  And again hast thou made thy appearance in this city too, in
order that thou mayst make those who are here eat men, <span
id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255.md) that the end of them also may be in
execration and destruction, thinking in thyself that God will sweep away
the work of His hands.  Hast thou not heard that God said, I will not
bring a deluge upon the earth? <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256.md) but if there is any punishment
prepared, it is for the sake of taking vengeance upon thee.

<span id="vii.xxx-p48"></span>Then he stood up, and Andrew and Matthias
prayed; and after the prayer Andrew laid his hands upon the faces of the
blind men who were <span id="page_522">p. 522</span> <span
id="vii.xxx-Page_522"></span>in the prison, and straightway they all
received their sight.  And again he laid his hand upon their hearts, and
their minds were changed into human reason.  Then Andrew answered them: 
Rise up, and go into the lower parts of the city, and you shall find in
the way a great fig-tree, and sit under the fig-tree, and eat of its
fruit, until I come to you; but if I delay coming there, you will find
abundance of food for yourselves:  for the fruit shall not fail from the
fig-tree, but according as you eat it shall produce more fruit, and
nourish you, as the Lord has said.  And they answered and said to
Andrew:  Go along with us, O our master, lest perchance the wicked men
of this city again see us, and shut us up, and inflict upon us greater
and more dreadful tortures than they have inflicted upon us.  And Andrew
answered and said to them:  Go; for in truth I say to you, that as you
go, not a dog shall bark with his tongue against you.  And there were in
all two hundred and seventy men and forty-nine women <span
id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257.md) whom Andrew released from the
prison.  And the men went as the blessed Andrew said to them; and he
made Matthias go along with his disciples out of the eastern gate of the
city.  And Andrew commanded a cloud, and the cloud took up Matthias and
the disciples of Andrew; and the cloud set them down on the mountain
where Peter was teaching, <span id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258.md) and
they remained beside him.

<span id="vii.xxx-p51"></span>And Andrew, having gone forth from the
prison, walked about in the city; and having seen a brazen pillar, and a
statue standing upon it, he came and sat down behind that pillar until
he should see what should happen.  And it happened that the executioners
went to the prison to bring out the men for their food, <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259.md) according to the custom; and they
found the doors of the prison opened, and the guards that guarded it
lying dead upon the ground.  And straightway they went, and reported to
the rulers of the city, saying:  We found the prison opened, and having
gone inside we found nobody; <span id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260.md)
but we found the guards lying dead upon the ground.  And the rulers
having heard this, said among themselves:  What, then, has happened? 
You do not mean to say that some persons have gone into the prison of
the city, and have killed the warders, and taken away those that were
shut up?  And they spoke to the executioners, saying:  Go to the prison,
and bring the men that are dead, that we may eat them up to-day.  And
let us go to-morrow, and bring together all the old men of the city,
that they may cast lots upon themselves, until the seven lots come, and
we slay seven each day.  And they shall be to us for food until we may
choose young men, and put them in boats as sailors, that they may go
away to the countries round about, and attack them, and bring some men
here, that they may be for food to us.

<span id="vii.xxx-p54"></span>And the executioners went to the prison,
and brought the seven men that were dead; and there was an oven built in
the midst of the city, and there lay in the oven a large trough in which
they killed the men, and their blood ran down into the trough, and they
drew out of the blood and drank it.  And they brought the men, and. put
them into the trough.  And when the executioners were lifting their
hands against them, Andrew heard a voice, saying:  Behold, Andrew, what
is happening in this city.  And Andrew having beheld, prayed to the
Lord, saying:  Lord Jesus Christ, who didst order me to come into this
city, do not suffer those in this city to do any evil, but let the
knives go out of the hands of the wicked ones.  And straightway the
knives of the wicked men fell, and their hands were turned into stone. 
And the rulers, having seen what had happened, wept, saying:  Woe unto
us, for here are the magicians who have gone into the prison, and
brought out the men; for, behold, they have bewitched these also.  What,
then, shall we do?  Let us go now, and gather together the old men of
the city, seeing that we are hungry.

<span id="vii.xxx-p55"></span>And they went and gathered them together,
and found two hundred and seventeen; and they brought them to the
rulers, and they made them cast lots, and the lot came upon seven old
men.  And one of those taken by lot answered and said to the officers: 
I pray you, I have for myself one son; take him, and slay him instead of
me, and let me go.  And the officers answered and said to him:  We
cannot take thy son, unless we bring him first to our superiors.  And
the officers went and told the rulers.  And the rulers answered and said
to the officers:  If he give us his son instead of himself, let him go. 
And the officers went and told the old man.  And the old man answered
and said to them:  I have also a daughter along with my son; take them,
and kill them, only let me go.  And he gave his children to the
officers, that they might kill them.  And the children wept to each
other, and prayed the officers, saying:  We pray you do not kill us, as
we are of so small a size; but let us complete our size, and so kill
us.  For it was a custom in that city, and they did not bury their dead,
but ate them up.  And the officers did not hearken to the children, nor
take pity upon them, but carried them to the trough weeping and praying.

<span id="vii.xxx-p56"></span>And it happened, as they were leading them
away to kill them, that Andrew, having beheld what happened, shed tears;
and weeping, he looked up to heaven and said:  Lord Jesus <span
id="page_523">p. 523</span> <span id="vii.xxx-Page_523"></span>Christ,
as Thou didst hear me in the case of the dead men, and didst not suffer
them to be eaten up, so also now hear me, that the executioners may not
inflict death upon these children, but that the knives may be loosened
out of the hands of the executioners. <span
id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261.md)   And straightway the knives were
loosened, and fell out of the hands of the executioners.  And when this
came to pass, the executioners, having beheld what had happened, were
exceedingly afraid.  And Andrew, seeing what had happened, glorified the
Lord because He had listened to him in every work.

<span id="vii.xxx-p58"></span>And the rulers, having beheld what had
happened, wept with a great weeping, saying:  Woe unto us! what are we
to do?  And, behold, the devil appeared in the likeness of an old man,
and began to say in the midst of all:  Woe unto you! because you are now
dying, having no food; what can sheep and oxen do for you?  They will
not at all be enough for you.  But rise up, and make a search here for
one who has come to the city, a stranger named Andrew, and kill him; for
if you do not, he will not permit you to carry on this practice longer: 
for it was he who let loose the men out of the prison.  Assuredly the
man is in this city, and you have not seen <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262.md) him.  Now, therefore, rise and make
search for him, in order that henceforward you may be able to collect
your food.

<span id="vii.xxx-p60"></span>And Andrew saw the devil, how he was
talking to the multitudes; but the devil did not see the blessed
Andrew.  Then Andrew answered the devil, and said:  O Belial most
fiendish, who art the foe of every creature; <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263.md) but my Lord Jesus Christ will bring
thee down to the abyss.  And the devil, having heard this, said:  I hear
thy voice indeed, and I know thy voice, but where thou art standing I
know not.  And Andrew answered and said to the devil:  Why, then, hast
thou been called Amael? <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264.md) is it
not because thou art blind, not seeing all the saints?  And the devil,
having heard this, said to the citizens:  Look round now for him
speaking to me, for he is the man.  And the citizens, having run in
different directions, shut the gates of the city, and searched for the
blessed one, and did not see him. <span
id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265.md)   Then the Lord showed Himself to
Andrew, and said to him; Andrew, rise up and show thyself to them, that
they may learn my power, and the powerlessness of the devil working in
them.

<span id="vii.xxx-p64"></span>Then Andrew rose up, and said in presence
of all:  Behold, I am Andrew whom you seek.  And the multitudes ran upon
him, and laid hold of him, saying:  What thou hast done to us, we also
will do to thee.  And they reasoned among themselves, saying:  By what
death shall we kill him?  And they said to each other:  If we take off
his head, his death is not torture; and if we burn him, he will not be
for food to us.  Then one of them, the devil having entered into him,
answered and said to the multitudes:  As he has done to us, so let us
also do to him.  Let us rise up, then, and fasten a rope to his neck,
and drag him through all the streets and lanes of the city; and when he
is dead, we shall share his body.  And they did as he said to them; and
having fastened a rope round his neck, they dragged him through the
streets and lanes of the city, and the flesh of the blessed Andrew stuck
to the ground, and his blood flowed to the ground like water.  And when
it was evening they cast him into the prison, having bound his hands
behind him; and he was in sore distress.

<span id="vii.xxx-p65"></span>And in the morning again they brought him
out, and having fastened a rope round his neck, they dragged him about;
and again his flesh stuck to the ground, and his blood flowed.  And the
blessed one wept and prayed, saying:  Do not forsake me, my Lord Jesus
Christ; for I know that Thou art not far from Thy servants.  And as he
was praying, the devil walked behind, and said to the multitudes: 
Strike him on the mouth, that he may not speak. <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266.md)

<span id="vii.xxx-p67"></span>And when it was evening they took him
again to the prison, having bound his hands behind him, and left him
till the morrow again.  And the devil having taken with himself seven
demons <span id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267.md) whom the blessed one
had cast out of the countries round about, and having gone into the
prison, they stood before him, wishing to kill him.  And the demons
answered and said to Andrew:  Now hast thou fallen into our hands; where
is thy glory and thy exultation, thou that raisest thyself up against
us, and dishonourest us, and tellest our doings to the people in every
place and country, and hast made our workshops and our temples to become
desolate, in order that sacrifices may not be brought to them?  Because
of this, then, we shall also kill thee, like thy teacher called Jesus,
and John whom Herod beheaded. <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268.md)

<span id="vii.xxx-p70"></span>And they stood before Andrew, wishing to
kill him; and having beheld the seal upon his forehead which the Lord
gave him, they were afraid, and did not come near him, but fled.  And
the devil said to them:  Why have you fled from him, my children, and
not killed him?  And the de<span id="page_524">p. 524</span> <span
id="vii.xxx-Page_524"></span>mons answered and said to the devil:  We
cannot kill him, but kill him if thou art able; for we knew him before
he came into the distress of his humiliation.  Then one of the demons
answered and said:  We cannot kill him, but come let us mock him in the
distress of his humiliation.  And the demons came and stood before him,
and scoffed at him.  And the blessed one hearing, wept; and there came
to him a voice saying:  Andrew, why weepest thou?  And it was the voice
of the devil changed.  And Andrew answered and said:  I am weeping
because God commanded me, saying, Be patient toward them.  And the devil
said:  If thou canst do anything, do it.  And Andrew answered and said: 
Is it for this, then, that you do these things to me?  But forbid it
that I should disobey the commandment of my Lord; for if the Lord shall
make for me a charge <span id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269.md) in this
city, I shall chastise you as you deserve.  And having heard this, they
fled.

<span id="vii.xxx-p72"></span>And when it was morning they brought him
out again, and having fastened a rope about his neck, they dragged him;
and again his flesh stuck to the ground, and his blood flowed to the
ground like water.  And the blessed one, as he was being dragged along,
wept, saying:  Lord Jesus Christ, be not displeased with me; for Thou
knowest, Lord, what the fiend has inflicted upon me, along with his
demons.  These tortures are enough, my Lord; for, behold, I am dragged
about for three days.  But do Thou, Lord, remember that Thou wast three
hours upon the cross, and didst cry out to the Father, My Father, why
hast Thou forsaken me? <span id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270.md)  
Where are Thy words, Lord, which Thou spakest to us, confirming us, when
we walked about with Thee, saying to us, Ye shall not lose one
hair? <span id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271.md)   Consider, then, Lord,
what has become of my flesh, and the hairs of my head.  Then Jesus said
to Andrew:  O our Andrew, the heaven and the earth shall pass away, but
my words shall not pass away. <span id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272.md)
  Turn thyself then, Andrew, and behold thy flesh that has fallen, and
thy hair, what has become of them.  And Andrew turned, and saw great
trees springing up, bearing fruit; and he glorified God.

<span id="vii.xxx-p76"></span>And when it was evening they took him up
again, and cast him into the prison, having bound his hands behind him;
and he was exceedingly exhausted.  And the men of the city said among
themselves:  Perhaps he dies in the night, and we do not find him alive
on the following day; for he was languid, and his flesh was spent.

<span id="vii.xxx-p77"></span>And the Lord appeared in the prison, and
having stretched out His hand, said to Andrew:  Give me thy hand, and
rise up whole.  And Andrew, having beheld the Lord Jesus, gave Him his
hand, and rose up whole.  And falling down, he worshipped Him, and
said:  I thank Thee, my Lord Jesus Christ, that Thou hast speedily
brought help to me.  And Andrew, having looked into the middle of the
prison, saw a pillar standing, and upon the pillar there stood an
alabaster statue.  And Andrew, having gone up to the statue, unfolded
his hands seven times, and said to the pillar, and the statue upon it: 
Fear the sign of the cross, which the heaven and the earth dread; and
let the statue set upon the pillar bring up much water through its
mouth, until all who are in this city be punished.  And say not, I am
stone, and am not worthy to praise the Lord, for the Lord fashioned us
from the earth; but you are pure, because that out of you He gave the
tables of the law. <span id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273.md)   When the
blessed Andrew had said this, straightway the stone statue cast out of
its mouth water in abundance, as if out of a canal.  And the water stood
high upon the earth; and it was exceedingly acrid, eating into the flesh
of men.

<span id="vii.xxx-p79"></span>And when it was morning, the men of the
city saw it, and began to flee, saying in themselves:  Woe to us!
because we are now dying.  And the water killed their cattle and their
children; and they began to flee out of the city.  Then Andrew prayed,
saying:  Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I have hoped that this miracle
should come upon this city, forsake me not, but send Michael Thy
archangel in a cloud of fire, and be a wall round the city, that no one
may be able to escape out of the fire.  And straightway a cloud of fire
came down and encircled the city like a wall; and the water was as high
as the neck of those men, and it was eating them up exceedingly.  And
they wept, saying:  Woe to us! for all these things have come upon us
because of the stranger who is in the prison.  Let us go and release
him, lest perchance we die.

<span id="vii.xxx-p80"></span>And they went out, crying with a loud
voice:  God of the stranger, take away from us this water.  And the
apostle knew that they were in great affliction, and said to the
alabaster statue:  Stop the water, for they have repented.  And I say to
thee, that if the citizens of this city shall believe, I will build a
church, and place thee in it, because thou hast done me this service. 
And the statue ceased flowing, and no longer brought forth water.  And
the men of the city, having come out to the doors of the prison, cried
out, saying:  Have pity upon us, God of the stranger, and do not
according to our unbelief, and according to what we have done to this
man, but <span id="page_525">p. 525</span> <span
id="vii.xxx-Page_525"></span>take away from us this water.  And Andrew
came forth out of the prison; and the water ran this way and that from
the feet of the blessed Andrew.  Then all the multitude seeing him, all
cried out:  Have pity upon us.

<span id="vii.xxx-p81"></span>And the old man having come who gave up
his children that they should slay them instead of him, prayed at the
feet of the blessed Andrew, saying:  Have pity upon me.  And the holy
Andrew answered and said to the old man:  I wonder how thou sayest, Have
pity upon me; for thou hadst no pity upon thy children, but gavest them
up to be slain instead of thee.  Therefore I say unto thee, At what hour
this water goes away, into the abyss shalt thou go, with the
fourteen <span id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274.md) executioners who
slay the men every day.  And he came to the place of the trough, where
they used to slay the men.  And the blessed one, having looked up to
heaven, prayed before all the multitude; and the earth was opened, and
swallowed up the water, along with the old man.  He was carried down
into the abyss, with the executioners.  And the men, having seen what
had happened, were exceedingly afraid, and began to say:  Woe unto us
because this man is from God; and now he will kill us because of the
afflictions which we have caused him.  For, behold, what he said to the
executioners and the old man has befallen them.  Now, therefore, he will
command the fire, and it will burn us.  And Andrew, having heard, said
to them:  Fear not, children; for I shall not send these also to Hades;
but those have gone, that you may believe in our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.xxx-p83"></span>Then the holy Andrew ordered to be brought
up all who had died in the water.  And they were not able to bring them;
for there had died a great multitude both of men, and women, and
children, and cattle.

<span id="vii.xxx-p84"></span>Then Andrew prayed, and they all came to
life.  And after these things he drew a plan of a church, and he caused
the church to be built.  And he baptized them, and gave them the
ordinances of our Lord Jesus Christ, saying to them:  Stand by these, in
order that you may know the mysteries of our Lord Jesus Christ.  And
they all prayed him:  We pray thee, stay with us a few days, that we may
be filled with thy fountain, because we are newly planted. <span
id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275.md)   And he did not comply with their
request, but said to them:  I shall go first to my disciples.  And the
children followed after, weeping and praying, with the men; and they
cast ashes <span id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276.md) upon their heads. 
And he did not comply with them, but said:  I shall go to my disciples,
and after that I shall come again to you.  And he went his way.

<span id="vii.xxx-p87"></span>And the Lord Jesus Christ came down, being
like a comely little child, and met Andrew, and said:  Andrew, why hast
thou come out and left them without fruit, and hast not had compassion
upon the children that followed after thee, and the men entreating thee,
Stay with us a few days?  For the cry of them and the weeping has come
up to heaven.  Now therefore return, and go into the city, and remain
there seven days, until I shall confirm their souls in the faith; and
then thou shalt go away into the country of the barbarians, thou and thy
disciples.  And after going into this city, thou shalt proclaim my
Gospel, and bring up the men who are in the abyss.  And thou shalt do
what I command thee.

<span id="vii.xxx-p88"></span>Then Andrew turned and went into the city,
saying:  I thank Thee, my Lord Jesus Christ, who wishest to save every
soul, that Thou hast not allowed me to go forth out of this city in mine
anger.  And when he had come into the city, they, seeing him, rejoiced
with exceeding great joy.  And he stayed there seven days, teaching and
confirming them in the Lord Jesus Christ.  And the seven days having
been fulfilled, it came to pass, while the blessed Andrew was going out,
all came together to him, from the child even to the elder, and sent him
on his way, saying:  There is one God, *the God* of Andrew, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, who alone doeth wonders; to whom <span
id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277.md) be glory and strength for ever. 
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[517:2239](0081366.htm#fr_2238.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p2"></span> The oldest<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> has Matthias; the four or five
others have Matthew.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[517:2240](0081366.htm#fr_2239.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p8"></span> Lit., œconomy.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[517:2241](0081366.htm#fr_2240.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p10"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> inserts:  having given thanks to
God.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[518:2242](0081366.htm#fr_2241.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p12"></span> The winds from the four quarters of the
heavens.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[518:2243](0081366.htm#fr_2242.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p14"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p14.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  and the Lord prepared a small
boat, and put angels in it for sailors; and Jesus was, as it were, the
master of the boat.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[518:2244](0081366.htm#fr_2243.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p16"></span> [Matt.
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010.md), [Mark
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[519:2245](0081366.htm#fr_2244.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p19"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p19.1"></span>ms.</span> omits the negative.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[519:2246](0081366.htm#fr_2245.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p20"></span> Comp. [Matt. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[519:2247](0081366.htm#fr_2246.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p23"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p23.1"></span>ms.</span> inserts, besides women and
children.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[519:2248](0081366.htm#fr_2247.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p24"></span> [Mark vi.
37-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#037.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[519:2249](0081366.htm#fr_2248.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p29"></span> [Mark vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[519:2250](0081366.htm#fr_2249.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p31"></span> There seems to be something wrong here. 
One <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxx-p31.1"></span>ms.</span> has, the
structure of the temple, and omits the following clause.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[520:2251](0081366.htm#fr_2250.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p33"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p33.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  Do not say that I am a carved
stone, and that you alone have a name, and are called high priests.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[520:2252](0081366.htm#fr_2251.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p36"></span> [Gen.
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#009.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p36.1"></span>,
following the version of the LXX. and the older interpreters.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[520:2253](0081366.htm#fr_2252.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p37"></span> Not one of the twelve patriarchs was
buried in Machpelah.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[520:2254](0081366.htm#fr_2253.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p40"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p40.1"></span>ms.</span> inserts:  And he saw the gate of
that city.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[521:2255](0081366.htm#fr_2254.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p44"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[521:2256](0081366.htm#fr_2255.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p46"></span> Another<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p46.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  make men eat their like.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[521:2257](0081366.htm#fr_2256.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p47"></span> [Gen. ix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[522:2258](0081366.htm#fr_2257.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p49"></span> Two <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p49.1"></span>mss.</span> have:  two hundred and forty-nine
men.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[522:2259](0081366.htm#fr_2258.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p50"></span> Another reading is, praying.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[522:2260](0081366.htm#fr_2259.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p52"></span> i.e., to be eaten by them.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[522:2261](0081366.htm#fr_2260.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p53"></span> Comp. [Acts v.
20-25](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[523:2262](0081366.htm#fr_2261.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p57"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p57.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  like wax before fire.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[523:2263](0081366.htm#fr_2262.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p59"></span> Or, do not know.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[523:2264](0081366.htm#fr_2263.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p61"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p61.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  Thou art always warring
against the race of the Christians.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[523:2265](0081366.htm#fr_2264.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p62"></span> One of the<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p62.1"></span>mss.</span> has Samael.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[523:2266](0081366.htm#fr_2265.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p63"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p63.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  And Andrew answered and
said:  O Belial! foe of the whole creation, thou hast always been a
robber, warring against the race of men:  thou in the beginning didst
cause Adam to be cast out of paradise; thou didst cause the loaves upon
the table to be turned into stones; and again thou hast appeared in this
city, to cause the people here to eat up men.

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[523:2267](0081366.htm#fr_2266.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p66"></span> Comp. [Acts xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[523:2268](0081366.htm#fr_2267.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p68"></span> Comp. [Matt. xii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[523:2269](0081366.htm#fr_2268.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p69"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p69.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  And the devil answered and
said to the seven wicked demons, My children, kill him that dishonours
us.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[524:2270](0081366.htm#fr_2269.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p71"></span> Or, a bishopric.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[524:2271](0081366.htm#fr_2270.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p73"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[524:2272](0081366.htm#fr_2271.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p74"></span> Comp. [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[524:2273](0081366.htm#fr_2272.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p75"></span> [Matt. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.xxx-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[524:2274](0081366.htm#fr_2273.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p78"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p78.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  Yea, for assuredly you have
been honoured:  for God did not write the law for His people on plates
of gold or silver, but on plates of stone.  Now therefore, O statue, do
this that I require of thee.

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[525:2275](0081366.htm#fr_2274.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p81.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p82"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p82.1"></span>ms.</span> has, four.

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[525:2276](0081366.htm#fr_2275.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p85"></span> i.e., neophytes.

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[525:2277](0081366.htm#fr_2276.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p86"></span> Or, dust.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[525:2278](0081366.htm#fr_2277.md) <span
id="vii.xxx-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p89"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxx-p89.1"></span>ms.</span> adds:  With the Father, and the
Son, and the all-holy and good and life-giving and holy Spirit. 
Another<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxx-p89.2"></span>ms.</span> ends
thus:  Then the Apostle Andrew wished to go out again to preach.  And
they assembled from small to great of them, and said:  There is one God
and Father of all, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, which we have been
taught by our father Andrew, the first called in (or by) Christ Jesus or
Lord; to whom be glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of Peter and Andrew.](0081367.md)
