[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081088)  [Next](0081090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xx.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xx.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.—The Evidence from Dreams
Discussed.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx.xv-p2"></span>And Simon said:  “If you maintain that
apparitions do not always reveal the truth, yet for all that, visions
and dreams, being God-sent, do not speak falsely in regard to those
matters which they wish to tell.”  And Peter said:  “You were right in
saying that, being God-sent, they do not speak falsely.  But it is
uncertain if he who sees has seen a God-sent dream.”  And Simon said: 
“If he who has had the vision is just, he has seen a true vision.”  And
Peter said:  “You were right.  But who is just, if he stands in need of
a vision that he may learn what he ought to learn, and do what he ought
to do?”  And Simon said:  “Grant me this, that the just man alone can
see a true vision, and I shall then reply to that other point.  For I
have come to the conclusion that an impious man does not see a true
dream.”  And Peter said:  “This is false; and I can prove it both apart
from Scripture and by Scripture; but I do not undertake to persuade
you.  For the man who is inclined to fall in love with a bad woman, does
not change his mind so as to care for a lawful union with another woman
in every respect good; but sometimes they love the worse woman through
prepossessions, though they are conscious that there is another who is
more excellent.  And you are ignorant, in consequence of some such state
of mind.”  And Simon said:  “Dismiss this subject, and discuss the
matter on which you promised to speak.  For it seems to me impossible
that impious men should receive dreams from God in any way whatever.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](0081090)
