[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081390)  [Next](0081392.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.i"></span> <span id="page_609">p. 609</span> <span
id="viii.iii.i-Page_609"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="viii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>The Epistles of Zephyrinus. <span
id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694.md) </span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="viii.iii.i-p5"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="viii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>The First Epistle.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p6"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="viii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>To All the Bishops of Sicily.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p7"></span>Of the final decision of the trials of
bishops, and graver ecclesiastical cases in the seat of the apostles.

<span id="viii.iii.i-p8"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>Zephyrinus</span>, archbishop of the city of
Rome, to all the bishops settled in Sicily, in the Lord, greeting.

<span id="viii.iii.i-p9"></span>We ought to be mindful of the grace of
God to us, which in His own merciful regard has raised us for this
purpose to the summit of priestly honour, that, abiding by His
commandments, and appointed in a certain supervision of His priests, we
may prohibit things unlawful, and teach those that are to be followed. 
As night does not extinguish the stars of heaven, so the unrighteousness
of the world does not blind the minds of the faithful that hold by the
sure support of Scripture.  Therefore we ought to consider well and
attend carefully to the Scriptures, and the divine precepts which are
contained in these Scriptures, in order that we may show ourselves not
transgressors, but fulfillers of the law of God.

<span id="viii.iii.i-p10"></span>Now patriarchs and primates, in
investigating the case of an accused bishop, should not pronounce a
final decision until, supported by the authority of the apostles, they
find that the person either confesses himself guilty, or is proved so by
witnesses trustworthy and regularly examined, who should not be fewer in
number than were those disciples whom the Lord directed to be chosen for
the help of the apostles—that is, seventy-two.  Detractors also, who are
to be rooted out by divine authority, and the advisers of enemies
(*auctores inimicorum*), we do not admit in the indictment of bishops or
in evidence against them; nor should any one of superior rank be
indicted or condemned on the accusations of inferiors.  Nor in a
doubtful case should a decisive judgment be pronounced; nor should any
trial be held valid unless it has been conducted according to order.  No
one, moreover, should be judged in his absence, because both divine and
human laws forbid that.  The accusers of those persons should also be
free of all suspicion, because the Lord has chosen that His pillars
should stand firm, and not be shaken by any one who will.  For a
sentence should not bind any of them if it is not given by their proper
judge, because even the laws of the world ordain that that be done.  For
any accused bishop may, if it be necessary, choose twelve judges by whom
his case may be justly judged.  Nor should he be heard or excommunicated
or judged until these be chosen by him; and on his being regularly
summoned at first to a council of his own bishops, his case should be
justly heard by them, and investigated on sound principles.  The end of
his case, however, should be remitted to the seat of the apostles, that
it may be finally decided there.  Nor should it be finished, as has been
decreed of old by the apostles or their successors, until it is
sustained by its authority.  To it also all, and especially the
oppressed, should appeal and have recourse as to a mother, that they may
be nourished by her breasts, defended by her authority, and relieved of
their oppressions, because “a mother cannot,” and should not, “forget
her son.” <span id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695.md)   For the trials of
bishops and graver ecclesiastical cases, as the apostles and their holy
successors have decreed, are to be finally decided along with other
bishops <span id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696.md) by the seat of the
apostles, and by no other; because, although they may be transferred to
other bishops, it was yet to the blessed Apostle Peter these terms were
addressed:  “Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.” <span id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697.md)   And the other
privileges which have <span id="page_610">p. 610</span> <span
id="viii.iii.i-Page_610"></span>been granted to this holy seat alone are
found embodied both in the constitutions of the apostles <span
id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698.md) and their successors, and in very
many others in harmony with these.  For the apostles have prefixed
seventy <span id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699.md) decrees, together
with very many other bishops, and have appointed them to be kept.  For
to judge rashly of the secrets of another’s heart is sin; and it is
unjust to reprove him on suspicion whose works seem not other than good,
since God alone is Judge of those things which are unknown to men.  He,
however, “knoweth the secrets of the heart,” <span
id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700.md) and not another.  For unjust
judgments are to be guarded against by all, especially however by the
servants of God.  “And the servant of the Lord must not strive,” <span
id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701.md) nor harm any one.  For bishops are
to be borne by laity and clergy, and masters by servants, in order that,
under the exercise of endurance, things temporal may be maintained, and
things eternal hoped for.  For that increases the worth of virtue, which
does not violate the purpose of religion.  You should be earnestly
intent that none of your brothers be grievously injured or undone. 
Therefore you ought to succour the oppressed, and deliver them from the
hand of their persecutors, in order that with the blessed Job you may
say:  “The blessing of him that was ready to perish will come upon me,
and I consoled the widow’s heart.  I put on righteousness, and clothed
myself with a robe and a diadem, my judgment.  I was eye to the blind,
and foot to the lame.  I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I
knew not I searched out most carefully.  I brake the grinders of the
wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth;” <span
id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702.md) and so forth.  You, therefore, who
have been placed in eminence by God, ought with all your power to check
and repel those who prepare snares for brethren, or raise seditions and
offences against them.  For it is easy by word to deceive man, not
however God.  Therefore you ought to keep these off, and be on your
guard against them, until such darkness is done away utterly, and the
morning star shines upon them, and gladness arises, most holy brethren. 
Given on the 20th September, in the consulship of the most illustrious
Saturninus and Gallicanus. <span id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703.md)

<span id="viii.iii.i-p20"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[609:2695](0081391.htm#fr_2694.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p2"></span> The little that is known of Zephyrinus
is derived from Eusebius.  That historian states that Zephyrinus
succeeded Victor in the presidency of the Roman church “about the ninth
year of the reign of Severus” (<span class="c9"><span
id="viii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 201), and that he died in the
first year of the reign of Antoninus (Heliogabalus, <span
class="c9"><span id="viii.iii.i-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 218).  He is
several times alluded to in the fragments ascribed to Caius, or in
connection with them.

<span id="viii.iii.i-p3"></span>The two letters bearing his name are
forgeries.  They belong to the famous collection of False Decretals
forged in the ninth century.

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[609:2696](0081391.htm#fr_2695.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p11"></span> [Isa. xlix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015.md)<span id="viii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[609:2697](0081391.htm#fr_2696.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p12"></span> The word “bishops” is omitted in <span
class="c9"><span id="viii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[609:2698](0081391.htm#fr_2697.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p13"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019.md)<span id="viii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[610:2699](0081391.htm#fr_2698.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p14"></span> This means the seventy-third apostolic
canon, in which it is ordained that episcopal cases be not decided but
by superior bishops, councils, or the Roman pontiff.  \[See note 1, p.
612.\]

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[610:2700](0081391.htm#fr_2699.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p15"></span> Another reading has sixty, and another
fifty.  Whatever be the reading, it is true that by these decrees are
meant the apostolic canons:  and although their number was only fifty,
yet, because sometimes several decrees are comprehended in one canon,
there would be no inconsistency between the number of sixty or seventy
apostolic decrees and the number of fifty apostolic canons (Sev. Bin.).

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[610:2701](0081391.htm#fr_2700.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p16"></span> [Ps. xliv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021.md)<span id="viii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[610:2702](0081391.htm#fr_2701.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p17"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md)<span id="viii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[610:2703](0081391.htm#fr_2702.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p18"></span> [Job xxix.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>, according to the Vulgate version.

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[610:2704](0081391.htm#fr_2703.md) <span
id="viii.iii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.i-p19"></span> Or, Gallus.  But Saturninus and Gallus
were consuls in the year 198, while Victor was yet alive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle II](0081392.md)
