[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081420)  [Next](0081422.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.i"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_622">p. 622</span> <span
id="viii.vi.i-Page_622"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="viii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>The Epistles of Pope Pontianus. <span
id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778.md) </span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="viii.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="viii.vi.i-p4.1"></span>The First Epistle. <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779.md) </span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p6"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="viii.vi.i-p6.1"></span>To Felix Subscribonius.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p7"></span>On the honour to be bestowed on priests.

<span id="viii.vi.i-p8"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.vi.i-p8.1"></span>Pontianus</span>, bishop, to Felix
Subscribonius, greeting.

<span id="viii.vi.i-p9"></span>Our heart is exceedingly rejoiced with
your goodness, in that you strive by all means in your power to carry
out the practice of holy religion, and strengthen sad and destitute
brethren in faith and religion.  Wherefore we implore the mercy of our
Redeemer, that His grace may support us in all things, and that He may
grant us to carry out in effect what He has given us to aspire after. 
In this good thing, therefore, the benefits of recompense are multiplied
just in proportion as our zeal for the work increases.  And because in
all these things we need the assistance of divine grace, we implore with
constant prayers the clemency of Omnipotent God, that He may both grant
us the desire for these good works which should ever be wrought by us,
and give us power also to perform them, and direct us in that way, for
the fruit of well-doing—which *way* the Pastor of pastors declared
Himself to be—so that ye may be able to carry out through Him, without
whom nothing can be done, those good works which you have begun. 
Moreover, with respect to the priests of the Lord whom we have heard you
aid against the plots of wicked men, and whose cause you sustain, know
ye that in so doing ye please God greatly, who has called them to the
service of Himself, and has honoured them with so intimate a fellowship
with Him, that through them He accepts the oblations of others, and
pardons their sins, and reconciles them with Him.  They also make the
body of the Lord with their own mouth (*proprio ore corpus Domini
conficiunt*), and give it to the people.  For of them it is said:  He
that hurteth you, hurteth me; and he that doeth you an injury, shall
receive again that which he hath done unrighteously. <span
id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780.md)   And elsewhere:  He that heareth
you, heareth me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth me; and he that
despiseth me, despiseth Him that sent me. <span
id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781.md)   Hence they are not to be
molested, but honoured.  And in them the Lord Himself is honoured, whose
commission they execute.  They accordingly, if they happen to fall, are
to be raised up and sustained by the faithful.  And again, they are not
to be accused by the infamous, or the wicked, or the hostile, or by the
members of another sect or religion.  If they sin, they are to be
arraigned by the other priests; further, they are to be held in check
(*constringantur*) by the chief pontiffs, and they are not to be
arraigned or restrained by seculars or by men of evil life.  Not slight,
therefore, is our grief in hearing that you have to sorrow for your
brother’s passing away (*transitu*).  For which reason we beseech
Almighty God to console you by the breathing (*aspiratione*) of His
grace, and keep you with heavenly guardianship from evil spirits and
perverse men.  For if ye have to bear any turmoil of certain adversaries
after his disease, do not think it strange though ye, who seek to enjoy
good in your own country—that is, in the land of the living—have to bear
evil things at the hands of men in a strange country.  For the present
life is a sojourning; and to him who sighs after the true fatherland,
the place of his sojourning is a trial, however pleasant it may seem. 
And as to you who seek the fatherland, among the sighs which ye heave I
hear the groans also of human oppression rising.  And this happens by
the wonderful dispensation of Almighty God, in order that, while the
truth calls you in love, this present world may cast back your affection
from itself through the tribulations which it brings on, and that the
mind may be so much the more easily delivered from the love of this
world, as it is also impelled while it is called.  Therefore, as you
have begun, give heed to the duty of hospitality; labour most urgently
in prayer and tears; devote yourselves more liberally and freely <span
id="page_623">p. 623</span> <span id="viii.vi.i-Page_623"></span>now to
those almsgivings which you have ever loved, in order that in the
recompense the profit to you for your work may be greater in proportion
as your zeal for the labour has risen to higher degrees here.

<span id="viii.vi.i-p12"></span>Furthermore, hailing your goodness with
paternal pleasantness, we beg you not to fail in the good works which ye
have begun.  And may no one be able to turn you from them; but may the
clergy and servants of God, and all Christians who sojourn in those
parts, fully discover by the love of Christ and Saint Peter the
disposition of your charity in all things, and obtain the comforts of
your favour in every necessity that may arise; to the end that all may
be defended and helped by your aid, and that we, too, may owe you
thanks, and that our Lord Jesus Christ may make good *to you* eternal
glory, and that the blessed Apostle Peter, the chief of the apostles, in
whose cause you spend yourselves, may open the gate of that same
glory.—Given on the 10th day before the kalends of February (the 23d of
January), in the consulship of the most illustrious Severus and
Quintianus. <span id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782.md)

<span id="viii.vi.i-p14"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[622:2779](0081421.htm#fr_2778.md) <span
id="viii.vi.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p2"></span> Eusebius tells us that Pontianus was
bishop of the Roman church five or six years (230–235 <span
class="c9"><span id="viii.vi.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>).  He succeeded
Urbanus.  The letters are the forgeries of the pseudo-Isidorus.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[622:2780](0081421.htm#fr_2779.md) <span
id="viii.vi.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p5"></span> Mansi, *Concil. Collect*., i. 735.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[622:2781](0081421.htm#fr_2780.md) <span
id="viii.vi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p10"></span> Perhaps [Zech. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008.md)<span id="viii.vi.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[622:2782](0081421.htm#fr_2781.md) <span
id="viii.vi.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p11"></span> [Luke x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016.md)<span id="viii.vi.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[623:2783](0081421.htm#fr_2782.md) <span
id="viii.vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.i-p13"></span> In the year 235.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle 2](0081422.md)
