[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081357)  [Next](0081359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c6"><span
id="vii.xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>The Story of Perpetua.</span>

<span id="vii.xxv.ii-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> as Paul was being led away to be
beheaded at a place about three miles from the city, he was in irons. 
And there were three soldiers guarding him who were of a great family. 
And when they had gone out of the gate about the length of a bow-shot,
there met them a God-fearing woman; and she, seeing Paul dragged along
in irons, had compassion on him, and wept bitterly.  And the name of the
woman was called Perpetua; and she was one-eyed.  And Paul, seeing her
weeping, says to her:  Give me thy handkerchief, and when I turn back I
shall give it to thee.  And she, having taken the handkerchief, gave it
to him willingly.  And the soldiers laughed, and said to the woman:  Why
dost thou wish, woman, to lose thy handkerchief?  Knowest thou not that
he is going away to be beheaded?  And Perpetua said to them:  I adjure
you by the health of Cæsar to bind his eyes with this handkerchief when
you cut off his head.  Which also was done.  And they beheaded him at
the place called Aquæ Salviæ, near the pine tree. And as God had willed,
before the soldiers came back, the handkerchief, having on it drops of
blood, was restored to the woman.  And as she was carrying it,
straightway and immediately her eye was opened.

<span id="vii.xxv.ii-p3"></span><span id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span
id="vii.xxv.ii-Page_486"></span>And the three soldiers who had cut off
the head of Saint Paul, when after three hours they came on the same day
with the <span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxv.ii-p3.1"></span>Bulla</span>
bringing it to Nero, having met Perpetua, they said to her:  What is it,
woman?  Behold, by thy confidence thou hast lost thy handkerchief.  But
she said to them:  I have both got my handkerchief, and my eye has
recovered its sight.  And as the Lord, the God of Paul, liveth, I also
have entreated him that I may be deemed worthy to become the slave of
his Lord.  Then the soldiers who had the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxv.ii-p3.2"></span>Bulla</span>, recognising the handkerchief,
and seeing that her eye had been opened, cried out with a loud voice, as
if from one mouth, and said:  We too are the slaves of Paul’s master. 
Perpetua therefore having gone away, reported in the palace of the
Emperor Nero that the soldiers who had beheaded Paul said:  We shall no
longer go into the city, for we believe in Christ whom Paul preached,
and we are Christians.  Then Nero, filled with rage, ordered Perpetua,
who had informed him of the soldiers, to be kept fast in irons; and as
to the soldiers, he ordered one to be beheaded outside of the gate about
one mile from the city, another to be cut in two, and the third to be
stoned.  And Perpetua was in the prison; and in this prison there was
kept Potentiana, a noble maiden, because she had said:  I forsake my
parents and all the substance of my father, and I wish to become a
Christian.  She therefore joined herself to Perpetua, and ascertained
from her everything about Paul, and was in much anxiety about the faith
in Christ.  And the wife of Nero was Potentiana’s sister; and she
secretly informed her about Christ, that those who believe in Him see
everlasting joy, and that everything here is temporary, but there
eternal:  so that also she fled out of the palace, and some of the
senators’ wives with her.  Then Nero, having inflicted many tortures
upon Perpetua, at last tied a great stone to her neck, and ordered her
to be thrown over a precipice.  And her remains lie at the
Momentan <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) gate.  And
Potentiana also underwent many torments; and at last, having made a
furnace one day, they burned her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[486:2105](0081358.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="vii.xxv.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxv.ii-p4"></span> This is a slip for Nomentan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts of Paul and Thecla.](0081359)
