[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081081)  [Next](0081083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xx.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.iv.xx.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—God’s Figure:  Simon’s
Objection Therefrom Refuted.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx.viii-p2"></span>“But someone will say, If He has
shape, then He has figure also, and is in space; but if He is in space,
and is, as being less, enclosed by it, how is He great above
everything?  How can He be everywhere if He has figure?  The first
remark I have to make to him who urges these objections is this:  The
Scriptures persuade us to have such sentiments and to believe such
statements in regard to Him; and we know that their declarations are
true, for witness is borne to them by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whose
orders we are bound to afford proofs to you that such is the case.  But
first I shall speak of space.  The space of God is the non-existent, but
God is that which exists.  But that which is non-existent cannot be
compared with that which is existent.  For how can space be existent?
unless it be a second space, such as heaven, earth, water, air, and if
there is any other body that fills up the vacuity, which is called
vacuity on this account, that it is nothing.  For ‘nothing’ is its more
appropriate name.  For what is that which is called vacuity but as it
were a vessel which contains nothing, except the vessel itself?  But
being vacuity, it is not itself space; but space is that in which
vacuity itself is, if indeed it is the vessel.  For it must be the case
that that which exists is in that which does not exist.  But by this
which is non-existent I mean that which is called by some, space, which
is nothing.  But being nothing, how can it be compared with that which
is, except by expressing the contrary, and saying that it is that which
does not exist, and that that which does not exist is called space?  But
even if it were something, there are many examples which I have at hand,
but I shall content myself with one only, to show that that which
encloses is not unquestionably superior to that which is enclosed.  The
sun is a circular figure, and is entirely enclosed by air, yet it
lightens up the air, it warms it, it divides it; and if the sun be away
from it, it is enveloped in darkness; and from whatsoever part of it the
sun is removed, it becomes cold as if it were dead; but again it is
illuminated by its rising, and when it has been warmed up by it, it is
adorned with still greater beauty.  And it does this by giving a share
of itself, though it has its substance limited.  What, then, is there to
prevent God, as being the Framer and Lord of this and everything else,
from possessing figure and shape and beauty, and having the
communication of these qualities proceeding from Himself extended
infinitely?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](0081083)
