[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081197)  [Next](0081199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="vii.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.</span>

<span id="vii.v.xxi-p2"></span>And it came to pass on the third day of
their journey, while they were walking, that the blessed Mary was
fatigued by the excessive heat of the sun in the desert; and seeing a
palm tree, she said to Joseph:  Let me rest a little under the shade of
this tree.  Joseph therefore made haste, and led her to the palm, and
made her come down from her beast.  And as the blessed Mary was sitting
there, she looked up to the foliage of the palm, and saw it full of
fruit, and said to Joseph:  I wish it were possible to get some of the
fruit of this palm.  And Joseph said to her:  I wonder that thou sayest
this, when <span id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span
id="vii.v.xxi-Page_377"></span>thou seest how high the palm tree is; and
that thou thinkest of eating of its fruit.  I am thinking more of the
want of water, because the skins are now empty, and we have none
wherewith to refresh ourselves and our cattle.  Then the child Jesus,
with a joyful countenance, reposing in the bosom of His mother, said to
the palm:  O tree, bend thy branches, and refresh my mother with thy
fruit.  And immediately at these words the palm bent its top down to the
very feet of the blessed Mary; and they gathered from it fruit, with
which they were all refreshed.  And after they had gathered all its
fruit, it remained bent down, waiting the order to rise from Him who had
commanded it to stoop.  Then Jesus said to it:  Raise thyself, O palm
tree, and be strong, and be the companion of my trees, which are in the
paradise of my Father; and open from thy roots a vein of water which has
been hid in the earth, and let the waters flow, so that we may be
satisfied from thee.  And it rose up immediately, and at its root there
began to come forth a spring of water exceedingly clear and cool and
sparkling.  And when they saw the spring of water, they rejoiced with
great joy, and were satisfied, themselves and all their cattle and their
beasts.  Wherefore they gave thanks to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](0081199)
