[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081358)  [Next](0081360.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="vii.xxvi-Page_487"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Acts of Paul and Thecla.</span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxvi-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>As</span> Paul was going up to Iconium after
the flight from Antioch, his fellow-travellers were Demas and Ermogenes,
full of hypocrisy; and they were importunate with Paul, <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105.md) as if they loved him.  But Paul,
looking only to the goodness of Christ, did them no harm, but loved them
exceedingly, so that he made the oracles of the Lord sweet to them in
the teaching both of the birth and the resurrection of the Beloved; and
he gave them an account, word for word, of the great things of Christ,
how He <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106.md) had been revealed to
him.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p6"></span>And a certain man, by name Onesiphorus,
hearing that Paul had come to Iconium, went out to meet him with his
children Silas and Zeno, and his wife Lectra, in order that he might
entertain him:  for Titus had informed him what Paul was like in
appearance:  for he had not seen him in the flesh, but only in the
spirit.  And he went along the road to Lystra, and stood waiting for
him, and kept looking at the passers by according to the description of
Titus.  And he saw Paul coming, a man small in size, bald-headed,
bandy-legged, well-built, <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107.md)
with eyebrows meeting, rather long-nosed, full of grace.  For sometimes
he seemed like a man, and sometimes he had the countenance of an angel. 
And Paul, seeing Onesiphorus, smiled; and Onesiphorus said:  Hail, O
servant of the blessed God!  And he said:  Grace be with thee and thy
house.  And Demas and Ermogenes were jealous, and showed greater
hypocrisy; so that Demas said:  Are not we of the blessed God, that thou
hast not thus saluted us?  And Onesiphorus said:  I do not see in you
the fruit of righteousness; but if such you be, come you also into my
house and rest yourselves.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p8"></span>And Paul having gone into the house of
Onesiphorus, there was great joy, and bending of knees, and breaking of
bread, and the word of God about self-control and the resurrection; Paul
saying:  Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108.md)   blessed are they that have kept
the flesh chaste, for they shall become a temple of God: <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109.md)   blessed are they that control
themselves, for God shall speak with them:  blessed are they that have
kept aloof from this world, for they shall be called upright: <span
id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110.md)   blessed are they that have wives
as not having them, for they shall receive God for their portion: <span
id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111.md)   blessed are they that have the
fear of God, for they shall become angels of God: <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112.md)   blessed are they that have kept
the baptism, for they shall rest beside the Father and the Son:  blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113.md) and shall not see the bitter day of
judgment:  blessed are the bodies of the virgins, for they shall be well
pleasing to God, and shall not lose the reward of their chastity; for
the word of the Father shall become to them a work of salvation against
the day of His Son, and they shall have rest for ever and ever. <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114.md)

<span id="vii.xxvi-p16"></span>And while Paul was thus speaking in the
midst of the church in the house of Onesiphorus, a certain virgin
Thecla, the daughter of Theocleia, betrothed to a man *named* Thamyris,
sitting at the window close by, listened night and day to the discourse
of virginity and prayer, and did not look away from the window, but paid
earnest heed to the faith, rejoicing exceedingly.  And when she still
saw many women going in beside Paul, she also had an eager desire to be
deemed worthy to stand in the presence of Paul, and to hear the word of
Christ; for never had she seen his figure, but heard his word only.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p17"></span>And as she did not stand away from the
window, her mother sends to Thamyris; and he comes gladly, as if already
receiving her in marriage.  And Theocleia said:  I have a strange story
to tell thee, Thamyris; for assuredly for three days and three nights
Thecla does not rise from the window, neither to eat nor to drink; but
looking earnestly as if upon some pleasant sight, she is so devoted to a
foreigner teaching deceitful and artful discourses, that I wonder how a
virgin of such modesty is so painfully put about.  Thamyris, this man
will overturn the city of the Iconians, and thy Thecla too besides; for
<span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span
id="vii.xxvi-Page_488"></span>all the women and the young men go in
beside him, being taught to fear God and to live in chastity.  Moreover
also my daughter, tied to the window like a spider, lays hold of what is
said by Paul with a strange eagerness and awful emotion; for the virgin
looks eagerly at what is said by him, and has been captivated.  But do
thou go near and speak to her, for she has been betrothed to thee.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p18"></span>And Thamyris going near, and kissing her,
but at the same time also being afraid of her overpowering emotion,
said:  Thecla, my betrothed, why dost thou sit thus? and what sort of
feeling holds thee overpowered?  Turn round to thy Thamyris, and be
ashamed.  Moreover also her mother said the same things:  Why dost thou
sit thus looking down, my child, and answering nothing, but like a mad
woman?  And they wept fearfully, Thamyris indeed for the loss of a wife,
and Theocleia of a child, and the maidservants of a mistress:  there was
accordingly much confusion in the house of mourning. <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115.md)   And while these things were thus
going on, Thecla did not turn round, but kept attending earnestly to the
word of Paul.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p20"></span>And Thamyris starting up, went forth into
the street, and kept watching those going in to him and coming out.  And
he saw two men bitterly contending with each other; and he said:  Men,
tell me who this is among you, leading astray the souls of young men,
and deceiving virgins, so that they do not marry, but remain as they
are.  I promise, therefore, to give you money enough if you tell me
about him; for I am the first man <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116.md) of the city.  And Demas and
Ermogenes said to him:  Who this is, indeed, we do not know; but he
deprives young men of wives, and maidens of husbands, saying, There is
for you a resurrection in no other way, unless you remain chaste, and
pollute not the flesh, but keep it chaste.  And Thamyris said to them: 
Come into my house, and rest yourselves.  And they went to a sumptuous
dinner, and much wine, and great wealth, and a splendid table; and
Thamyris made them drink, from his love to Thecla, and his wish to get
her as his wife.  And Thamyris said during the dinner:  Ye men, what is
his teaching, tell me, that I also may know; for I am no little
distressed about Thecla, because she thus loves the stranger, and I am
prevented from marrying.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p22"></span>Demas and Ermogenes said:  Bring him
before the governor Castelios on the charge of persuading the multitudes
to embrace the new teaching of the Christians, and he will speedily
destroy him, and thou shalt have Thecla as thy wife.  And we shall teach
thee that the resurrection of which this man speaks has taken place,
because it has already taken place in the children which we have; <span
id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117.md) and we rose again when we came to
the knowledge of the true God.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p24"></span>And Thamyris, hearing these things, being
filled with anger and rage, rising up early, went to the house of
Onesiphorus with archons and public officers, and a great crowd with
batons, saying:  Thou hast corrupted the city of the Iconians, and her
that was betrothed to me, so that she will not have me:  let us go to
the governor Castelios.  And all the multitude said:  Away with the
magician; for he has corrupted all our wives, and the multitudes have
been persuaded *to change their opinions*.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p25"></span>And Thamyris, standing before the
tribunal, said with a great shout:  O proconsul, this man, who he is we
know not, who makes virgins averse to marriage; let him say before thee
on what <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118.md) account he teaches
these things.  And Demas and Ermogenes said to Thamyris:  Say that he is
a Christian, and thus thou wilt do away with him.  But the proconsul
stayed his intention, and called Paul, saying:  Who art thou, and what
dost thou teach? for they bring no small charges against thee.  And Paul
lifted up his voice, saying:  Since I am this day examined as to what I
teach, listen, O proconsul:  A living God, a God of retributions, a
jealous God, a God in need of nothing, consulting for the salvation of
men, has sent me that I may reclaim them from corruption and
uncleanness, and from all pleasure, and from death, that they may not
sin.  Wherefore God sent His own Son, whom I preach, and in whom I teach
men to rest their hope, who alone has had compassion upon a world led
astray, that they may be no longer under judgment, O proconsul, but may
have faith, and the fear of God, and the knowledge of holiness, and the
love of truth.  If, therefore, I teach what has been revealed to me by
God, wherein do I do wrong?  And the proconsul having heard, ordered
Paul to be bound, and sent to prison, until, said he, I, being at
leisure, shall hear him more attentively.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p27"></span>And Thecla by night having taken off her
bracelets, gave them to the gatekeeper; and the door having been opened
to her, she went into the prison; and having given the jailor a silver
mirror, she went in beside Paul, and, sitting at his feet, she heard the
great things of God.  And Paul was afraid of nothing, but ordered his
life in the confidence of God.  And her faith also was increased, and
she kissed his bonds.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p28"></span>And when Thecla was sought for by her
friends, and Thamyris, as if she had been lost, was running up and down
the streets, one of the gatekeeper’s fellow-slaves informed him that she
had gone out by night.  And having gone out, they examined <span
id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span id="vii.xxvi-Page_489"></span>the
gatekeeper; and he said to them:  She has gone to the foreigner into the
prison.  And having gone, they found her, as it were, enchained by
affection.  And having gone forth thence, they drew the multitudes
together, and informed the governor of the circumstance.  And he ordered
Paul to be brought to the tribunal; but Thecla was wallowing on the
ground <span id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119.md) in the place where he
sat and taught her in the prison; and he ordered her too to be brought
to the tribunal.  And she came, exulting with joy.  And the crowd, when
Paul had been brought, vehemently cried out:  He is a magician! away
with him!  But the proconsul gladly heard Paul upon the holy works of
Christ.  And having called a council, he summoned Thecla, and said to
her:  Why dost thou not obey Thamyris, according to the law of the
Iconians?  But she stood looking earnestly at Paul.  And when she gave
no answer, her mother cried out, saying:  Burn the wicked *wretch;* burn
in the midst of the theatre her that will not marry, in order that all
the women that have been taught by this man may be afraid.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p30"></span>And the governor was greatly moved; and
having scourged Paul, he cast him out of the city, and condemned Thecla
to be burned.  And immediately the governor went away to the theatre,
and all the crowd went forth to the spectacle of Thecla.  But as a lamb
in the wilderness looks round for the shepherd, so she kept searching
for Paul.  And having looked upon the crowd, she saw the Lord sitting in
the likeness of Paul, and said:  As I am unable to endure my lot, Paul
has come to see me.  And she gazed upon him with great earnestness, and
he went up into heaven.  But the maid-servants <span
id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120.md) and virgins brought the faggots, in
order that Thecla might be burned.  And when she came in naked, the
governor wept, and wondered at the power <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121.md) that was in her.  And the public
executioners arranged the faggots for her to go up on the pile.  And
she, having made the sign of the cross, went up on the faggots; and they
lighted them.  And though a great fire was blazing, it did not touch
her; for God, having compassion upon her, made an underground rumbling,
and a cloud overshadowed them from above, full of water and hail; and
all that was in the cavity of it was poured out, so that many were in
danger of death.  And the fire was put out, and Thecla saved.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p33"></span>And Paul was fasting with Onesiphorus and
his wife, and his children, in a new tomb, as they were going from
Iconium to Daphne.  And when many days were past, the fasting children
said to Paul:  We are hungry, and we cannot buy loaves; for Onesiphorus
had left the things of the world, and followed Paul, with all his
house.  And Paul, having taken off his cloak, said:  Go, my child, buy
more loaves, and bring them.  And when the child was buying, he saw
Thecla their neighbour, and was astonished, and said:  Thecla, whither
art thou going?  And she said:  I have been saved from the fire, and am
following Paul.  And the boy said:  Come, I shall take thee to him; for
he is distressed about thee, and is praying six days.  And she stood
beside the tomb where Paul was with bended knees, and praying, and
saying:  O Saviour Christ, let not the fire touch Thecla, but stand by
her, for she is Thine.  And she, standing behind him, cried out:  O
Father, who hast made the heaven and the earth, the Father of Thy holy
Son, I bless Thee that Thou hast saved me that I may see Paul.  And
Paul, rising up, saw her, and said:  O God, that knowest the heart, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I bless Thee that Thou, having heard
me, hast done quickly what I wished.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p34"></span>And they had five loaves, and herbs, and
water; and they rejoiced in the holy works of Christ.  And Thecla said
to Paul:  I shall cut my hair, and follow thee whithersoever thou mayst
go.  And he said:  It is a shameless age, and thou art beautiful.  I am
afraid lest another temptation come upon thee worse than the first, and
that thou withstand it not, but be cowardly.  And Thecla said:  Only
give me the seal <span id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122.md) in Christ,
and temptation shall not touch me.  And Paul said:  Thecla, wait with
patience, and thou shalt receive the water.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p36"></span>And Paul sent away Onesiphorus and all
his house to Iconium; and thus, having taken Thecla, he went into
Antioch.  And as they were going in, a certain Syriarch, Alexander by
name, seeing Thecla, became enamoured of her, and tried to gain over
Paul by gifts and presents.  But Paul said:  I know not the woman whom
thou speakest of, nor is she mine.  But he, being of great power,
himself embraced her in the street.  But she would not endure it, but
looked about for Paul.  And she cried out bitterly, saying:  Do not
force the stranger; do not force the servant of God.  I am one of the
chief persons of the Iconians; and because I would not have Thamyris, I
have been cast out of the city.  And taking hold of Alexander, she tore
his cloak, and pulled off his crown, and made him a laughing-stock.  And
he, at the same time loving her, and at the same time ashamed of what
had happened, led her before the governor; and when she had confessed
that she had done these things, he condemned her to the wild beasts. 
And the women were struck with astonishment, and cried <span
id="page_490">p. 490</span> <span id="vii.xxvi-Page_490"></span>out
beside the tribunal:  Evil judgment! impious judgment!  And she asked
the governor, that, said she, I may remain pure until I shall fight with
the wild beasts.  And a certain Tryphæna, <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123.md) whose daughter was dead, took her
into keeping, and had her for a consolation.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p38"></span>And when the beasts were exhibited, they
bound her to a fierce lioness; and Tryphæna accompanied her.  But the
lioness, with Thecla sitting upon her, licked her feet; and all the
multitude was astonished.  And the charge on her inscription was: 
Sacrilegious.  And the women cried out from above:  An impious sentence
has been passed in this city!  And after the exhibition, Tryphæna again
receives her.  For her daughter Falconilla had died, and said to her in
a dream:  Mother, thou shalt have this stranger Thecla in my place, in
order that she may pray concerning me, and that I may be transferred to
the place of the just.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p39"></span>And when, after the exhibition, Tryphæna
received her, at the same time indeed she grieved that she had to fight
with the wild beasts on the day following; and at the same time, loving
her as much as her daughter Falconilla, she said:  My second child
Thecla, come and pray for my child, that she may live for ever; for this
I saw in my sleep.  And she, nothing hesitating, lifted up her voice,
and said:  God most high, <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124.md)
grant to this woman according to her wish, that her daughter Falconilla
may live for ever.  And when Thecla had thus spoken, Tryphæna lamented,
considering so much beauty thrown to the wild beasts.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p41"></span>And when it was dawn, Alexander came to
take her, for it was he that gave the hunt, <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125.md) saying:  The governor is sitting,
and the crowd is in uproar against us.  Allow me to take away her that
is to fight with the wild beasts.  And Tryphæna cried aloud, so that he
even fled, saying:  A second mourning for my Falconilla has come upon my
house and there is no one to help; neither child, for she is dead, nor
kinsman, for I am a widow.  God of Thecla, help her!

<span id="vii.xxvi-p43"></span>And immediately the governor sends an
order that Thecla should be brought.  And Tryphæna, taking her by the
hand, said:  My daughter Falconilla, indeed, I took away to the tomb;
and thee, Thecla, I am taking to the wild-beast fight.  And Thecla wept
bitterly, saying:  O Lord, the God in whom I believe, to whom I have
fled for refuge, who deliveredst me from the fire, do Thou grant a
recompense to Tryphæna, who has had compassion on Thy servant, and
because she has kept me pure.  Then a tumult arose, and a cry of the
people, and the women sitting together, the one saying:  Away with the
sacrilegious person! the others saying:  Let the city be raised <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126.md) against this wickedness.  Take off
all of us, O proconsul!  Cruel sight! evil sentence!

<span id="vii.xxvi-p45"></span>And Thecla, having been taken out of the
hand of Tryphæna, was stripped, and received a girdle, <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127.md) and was thrown into the arena, and
lions and bears and a fierce lioness were let loose upon her; and the
lioness having run up to her feet, lay down; and the multitude of the
women cried aloud.  And a bear ran upon her; but the lioness, meeting
the bear, tore her to pieces.  And again a lion that had been trained
against men, which belonged to Alexander, ran upon her; and she, *the
lioness*, encountering the lion, was killed along with him.  And the
women made great lamentation, since also the lioness, her protector, was
dead.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p47"></span>Then they send in many wild beasts, she
standing and stretching forth her hands, and praying.  And when she had
finished her prayer, she turned and saw a ditch full of water, and
said:  Now it is time to wash myself.  And she threw herself in,
saying:  In the name of Jesus Christ I am baptized on my last day.  And
the women seeing, and the multitude, wept, saying:  Do not throw thyself
into the water; so that also the governor shed tears, because the seals
were going to devour such beauty.  She then threw herself *in* in the
name of Jesus Christ; but the seals having seen the glare of the fire of
lightning, floated about dead.  And there was round her, as she was
naked, a cloud of fire; so that neither could the wild beasts touch her,
nor could she be seen naked.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p48"></span>And the women, when other wild beasts
were being thrown in, wailed.  And some threw sweet-smelling herbs,
others nard, others cassia, others amomum, so that there was abundance
of perfumes.  And all the wild beasts that had been thrown in, as if
they had been withheld by sleep, did not touch her; so that Alexander
said to the governor:  I have bulls exceedingly terrible; let us bind to
them her that is to fight with the beasts.  And the governor, looking
gloomy, turned, and said:  Do what thou wilt.  And they bound her by the
feet between them, and put red-hot irons under the privy parts of the
bulls, so that they, being rendered more furious, might kill her.  They
rushed about, therefore; but the burning flame consumed the ropes, and
she was as if she had not been bound.  But Tryphæna fainted standing
beside the arena, so that the crowd said:  Queen Tryphæna is dead.  And
the governor put a stop to the games, and the city was in dismay.  And
Alexander entreated the governor, saying:  Have mercy both on me <span
id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span id="vii.xxvi-Page_491"></span>and the
city, and release this woman.  For if Cæsar hear of these things, he
will speedily destroy the city also along with us, because his kinswoman
Queen Tryphæna has died beside the <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p48.1"></span>Abaci</span>. <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128.md)

<span id="vii.xxvi-p50"></span>And the governor summoned Thecla out of
the midst of the wild beasts, and said to her:  Who art thou? and what
is there about thee, that not one of the wild beasts touches thee?  And
she said:  I indeed am a servant of the living God; and as to what there
is about me, I have believed in the Son of God, in whom He is well
pleased; wherefore not one of the beasts has touched me.  For He alone
is the end <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129.md) of salvation, and
the basis of immortal life; for He is a refuge to the tempest-tossed, a
solace to the afflicted, a shelter to the despairing; and, once for all,
whoever shall not believe on Him, shall not live for ever.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p52"></span>And the governor having heard this,
ordered her garments to be brought, and to be put on.  And Thecla said: 
He that clothed me naked among the wild beasts, will in the day of
judgment clothe thee with salvation.  And taking the garments, she put
them on.  The governor therefore immediately issued an edict, saying:  I
release to you the God-fearing Thecla, the servant of God.  And the
women shouted aloud, and with one mouth returned thanks to God, saying: 
There is one God, *the God* of Thecla; so that the foundations of the
theatre were shaken by their voice.  And Tryphæna having received the
good news, went to meet the holy Thecla, and said:  Now I believe that
the dead are raised:  now I believe that my child lives.  Come within,
and I shall assign to thee all that is mine.  She therefore went in
along with her, and rested eight days, having instructed her in the word
of God, so that most even of the maid-servants believed.  And there was
great joy in the house.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p53"></span>And Thecla kept seeking Paul; and it was
told her that he was in Myra of Lycia.  And taking young men and
maidens, she girded herself; and having sewed the tunic so as to make a
man’s cloak, she came to Myra, and found Paul speaking the word of God. 
And Paul was astonished at seeing her, and the crowd with her, thinking
that some new trial was coming upon her.  And when she saw him, she
said:  I have received the baptism, Paul; for He that wrought along with
thee for the Gospel has wrought in me also for baptism.  And Paul,
taking her, led her to the house of Hermæus, and hears everything from
her, so that those that heard greatly wondered, and were comforted, and
prayed over Tryphæna.  And she rose up, and said:  I am going to
Iconium.  And Paul said:  Go, and teach the word of God.  And Tryphæna
sent her much clothing and gold, so that she left to Paul many things
for the service of the poor.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p54"></span>And she went to Iconium.  And she goes
into the house of Onesiphorus, and fell upon the pavement where Paul
used to sit and teach her, and wept, saying:  God of myself and of this
house, where Thou didst make the light to shine upon me, O Christ Jesus,
the Son of the living God, my help in the fire, my help among the wild
beasts, Thou art glorified for ever.  Amen.  And she found Thamyris
dead, but her mother alive.  And having sent for her mother, she said: 
Theocleia, my mother, canst thou believe that the Lord liveth in the
heavens?  For whether thou desirest wealth, God gives it to thee through
me; or thy child, I am standing beside thee.  And having thus testified,
she departed to Seleucia, and dwelt in a cave seventy-two years, living
upon herbs and water.  And she enlightened many by the word of God.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p55"></span>And certain men of the city, being Greeks
by religion, and physicians by profession, sent to her insolent young
men to destroy <span id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130.md) her.  For they
said:  She is a virgin, and serves Artemis, and from this she has virtue
in healing.  And by the providence of God she entered into the rock
alive, and went under ground.  And she departed to Rome to see Paul, and
found that he had fallen asleep. <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131.md)   And after staying there no long
time, she rested in a glorious sleep; and she is buried about two or
three stadia from the tomb of her master Paul.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p58"></span>She was cast, then, into the fire when
seventeen years old, and among the wild beasts when eighteen.  And she
was an ascetic in the cave, as has been said, seventy-two years, so that
all the years of her life were ninety.  And having accomplished many
cures, she rests in the place of the saints, having fallen asleep on the
twenty-fourth of the month of September in Christ Jesus our Lord, to
whom be glory and strength for ever and ever.  Amen.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p59"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxvi-p60"></span>Instead of the last two sections, the
<span class="c9"><span id="vii.xxvi-p60.1"></span>ms.</span> which Dr.
Grabe used has the following:—

<span id="vii.xxvi-p61"></span>And a cloud of light guided her.  And
having come into Seleucia, she went forth outside of the city one
stadium.  And she was afraid of them also, for they worshipped idols. 
And it guided her to the mountain called Calamon or Rhodeon; and having
there found a cave, she went into it.  And she was there many years, and
underwent many and grievous trials by the devil, and bore them nobly,
being assisted by Christ.  And some of the well-born women, having
learned about the virgin Thecla, <span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="vii.xxvi-Page_492"></span>went to her, and learned the oracles of
God.  And many of them bade adieu to the world, and lived an ascetic
life with her.  And a good report was spread everywhere concerning her,
and cures were done by her.  All the city, therefore, and country round,
having known this, brought their sick to the mountain; and before they
came near the door they were speedily released from whatever disease
they were afflicted by; and the unclean spirits went out shrieking, and
all received their own in health, glorifying God, who had given such
grace to the virgin Thecla.  The physicians, therefore, of the city of
the Seleucians were thought nothing of, having lost their trade, and no
one any longer had regard to them; and being filled with envy and
hatred, they plotted against the servant of Christ, what they should do
to her.  The devil then suggests to them a wicked device; and one day,
being assembled, and having taken counsel, they consult with each other,
saying:  This virgin is a priestess of the great goddess Artemis; and if
she ask anything of her, she hears her as being a virgin, and all the
gods love her.  Come, then, let us take men of disorderly lives, and
make them drunk with much wine, and let us give them much gold, and say
to them, If you can corrupt and defile her, we shall give you even more
money.  The physicians therefore said to themselves, that if they should
be able to defile her, neither the gods nor Artemis would listen to her
in the case of the sick.  They therefore did so.  And the wicked men,
having gone to the mountain, and rushed upon the cave like lions,
knocked at the door.  And the holy martyr Thecla opened, emboldened by
the God in whom she believed; for she knew of their plot beforehand. 
And she says to them:  What do you want, my children?  And they said: 
Is there one here called Thecla?  And she said:  What do you want with
her?  They say to her:  We want to sleep with her.  The blessed Thecla
says to them:  I am a humble old woman, but the servant of my Lord Jesus
Christ; and even though you want to do something to me out of place, you
cannot.  They say to her:  It is impossible for us not to do to thee
what we want.  And having said this, they laid fast hold of her, and
wished to insult her.  And she says to them with mildness:  Wait, my
children, that you may see the glory of the Lord.  And being laid hold
of by them, she looked up into heaven, and said:  God, terrible and
incomparable, and glorious to Thine adversaries, who didst deliver me
out of the fire, who didst not give me up to Thamyris, who didst not
give me up to Alexander, who didst deliver me from the wild beasts, who
didst save me in the abyss, who hast everywhere worked with me, and
glorified Thy name in me, now also deliver me from these lawless men,
and let me not insult my virginity, which through Thy name I have
preserved till now, because I love Thee, and desire Thee, and adore
Thee, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost for ever.  Amen.  And
there came a voice out of the heaven, saying:  Fear not, Thecla, my true
servant, for I am with thee.  Look and see where an opening has been
made before thee, for there shall be for thee an everlasting house, and
there thou shalt obtain shelter.  And the blessed Thecla regarding it,
saw the rock opened as far as to allow a man to enter, and did according
to what had been said to her: and nobly fleeing from the lawless ones
entered into the rock; and the rock was straightway shut together, so
that not even a joining appeared.  And they, beholding the extraordinary
wonder, became as it were distracted; and they were not able to detain
the servant of God, but only caught hold of her veil, and were able to
tear off a certain part; and that by the permission of God for the faith
of those seeing the venerable place, and for a blessing in the
generations afterwards to those that believe in our Lord Jesus Christ
out of a pure heart.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p62"></span>Thus, then, suffered the first martyr of
God, and apostle, and virgin, Thecla, who came from Iconium at eighteen
years old; and with the journeying, and the going round, and the
retirement in the mountain, she lived other seventy-two years.  And when
the Lord took her, she was ninety years old.  And thus is her
consummation.  And her holy commemoration is on the twenty-fourth of the
month of September, to the glory of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[487:2106](0081359.htm#fr_2105.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p4"></span> Or, persisted in staying with Paul.

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[487:2107](0081359.htm#fr_2106.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p5"></span> Or, how they.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[487:2108](0081359.htm#fr_2107.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p7"></span> Or, healthy.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[487:2109](0081359.htm#fr_2108.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p9"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[487:2110](0081359.htm#fr_2109.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p10"></span> Comp. [1 Cor.
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[487:2111](0081359.htm#fr_2110.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p11"></span> Comp. [Rom. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[487:2112](0081359.htm#fr_2111.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p12"></span> Comp. [1 Cor. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[487:2113](0081359.htm#fr_2112.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p13"></span> Comp. [Luke xx.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[487:2114](0081359.htm#fr_2113.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p14"></span> [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[487:2115](0081359.htm#fr_2114.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p15"></span> Some <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>mss.</span> add the following beatitudes: 
Blessed are they that tremble at the words of God, for they shall be
comforted:  blessed are they that have received the wisdom of Jesus
Christ, for they shall be called the sons of the Most High:  blessed are
they that through love of Christ have come out from conformity with the
world, for they shall judge the angels, and shall be blessed at the
right hand of the Father.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[488:2116](0081359.htm#fr_2115.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p19"></span> Or, a great outpouring of lamentation in
the house.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[488:2117](0081359.htm#fr_2116.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p21"></span> Or, a chief man.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[488:2118](0081359.htm#fr_2117.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p23"></span> i.e., we rise again in our children.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[488:2119](0081359.htm#fr_2118.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p26"></span> Or, whose.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[489:2120](0081359.htm#fr_2119.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p29"></span> i.e., in sign of grief.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[489:2121](0081359.htm#fr_2120.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p31"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p31.1"></span>ms.</span> has, boys.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[489:2122](0081359.htm#fr_2121.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p32"></span> Or, virtue.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[489:2123](0081359.htm#fr_2122.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p35"></span> [2 Cor.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md), [Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md), [Eph.
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.xxvi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[490:2124](0081359.htm#fr_2123.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p37"></span> Some <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p37.1"></span>mss.</span> add:  A widow, very rich.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[490:2125](0081359.htm#fr_2124.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p40"></span> One <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p40.1"></span>ms.</span> has:  God of our fathers, Son of
the Most High.  Another:  O Lord God, who has made the heaven and the
earth, Son of the Most High, Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[490:2126](0081359.htm#fr_2125.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p42"></span> i.e., the exhibition of wild beasts.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[490:2127](0081359.htm#fr_2126.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p44"></span> Or, be taken off, i.e., put to death.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[490:2128](0081359.htm#fr_2127.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p46"></span> Or, drawers.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[491:2129](0081359.htm#fr_2128.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p49"></span> A part of the ancient theatres on or
near the stage.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[491:2130](0081359.htm#fr_2129.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p51"></span> Or, way.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[491:2131](0081359.htm#fr_2130.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p56"></span> Or, corrupt.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[491:2132](0081359.htm#fr_2131.md) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p57"></span> i.e., that he was dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Acts of Barnabus.](0081360.md)
