[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081314)  [Next](0081316) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv.xv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.</span>

<span id="vii.xv.xv-p2"></span>And Finees a certain priest, and Addas a
teacher, and Egias a Levite, coming down from Galilee to Jerusalem,
reported to the rulers of the synagogue, and the priests and the
Levites, how they had seen Jesus sitting, and his disciples with him, on
the Mount of Olivet, which is called Mambre or Malech.  And he said to
his disciples:  Go into all the world, and declare to every creature the
Gospel of the kingdom of God.  He who believeth and is baptized shall be
saved; but he who believeth not shall be condemned.  And these signs
shall follow them who believe:  In my name shall they cast out demons;
they shall speak in new tongues; they <span id="page_445">p. 445</span>
<span id="vii.xv.xv-Page_445"></span>shall take up serpents; and if they
have drunk any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay
hands upon the sick, and they shall be well.  And as Jesus was thus
speaking to his disciples, we saw him taken up into heaven. <span
id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965)

<span id="vii.xv.xv-p4"></span>The priests and the Levites and the
elders say to them:  Give glory to the God of Israel, and give
confession to Him, whether you have both heard and seen those things
which you have related.  Those who had made the report say:  As the Lord
God of our fathers liveth, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, we have heard and seen.  The Jews say to them:  Have
you come for this—to tell us? or have you come to give prayer to God? 
They said:  We have come to give prayer to God.  The elders and chief
priests and Levites say to them:  And if you have come to give prayer to
God, why have you murmured before all the people about that foolish
tale?  Finees the priest, and Addas the teacher, and Egias the Levite,
say to the rulers of the synagogue, and the priests and the Levites:  If
those words which we have spoken, which we have seen and heard, be sin,
behold, we are in your presence; do unto us according to that which is
good in your eyes.  And they, taking the law, adjured them to report the
words to no one thereafter.  And they gave them to eat and drink, and
put them outside of the city, giving them silver and pieces, and three
men with them, who should conduct them as far as Galilee.

<span id="vii.xv.xv-p5"></span>Then the Jews took counsel among
themselves when those men had gone up into Galilee; and the rulers of
the synagogue shut themselves in, and were cut up <span
id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966) with great fury, saying:  What sign
is this which hath come to pass in Israel?  And Annas and Caiaphas say: 
Why are your souls sorrowful?  Are we to believe the soldiers, that an
angel of the Lord came down from heaven, and rolled away the stone from
the door of the tomb?  *No;* but that his disciples have given much gold
to those who were guarding the sepulchre, and have taken Jesus away, and
have taught them thus to say:  Say ye that an angel of the Lord came
down from heaven, and rolled away the stone from the door of the tomb. 
Do you not know that it is unlawful for Jews to believe foreigners in a
single word, knowing that these same who received sufficient gold from
us have said as we taught them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[445:1966](0081315.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="vii.xv.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xv-p3"></span> \[Comp. [Mark xvi.
15-19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xv.xv-p3.1"></span>; from the disputed ending of that
Gospel.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[445:1967](0081315.htm#fr_1966) <span
id="vii.xv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv.xv-p6"></span> *Concidebantur*, a mistranslation from
considering <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv.xv-p6.1"></span>ἐκόπτοντο</span> as passive, *they were cut*,
instead of middle, *they beat their breasts*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](0081316)
