[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081337)  [Next](0081339) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6 (22).</span>

<span id="vii.xvii.vi-p2"></span>After that, another standing there,
pre-eminent as it were, with a certain mark of an emperor, David by
name, thus cried out, and said:  When I was upon earth, I made
revelations to the people of the mercy of God and His visitation,
prophesying future joys, saying through all ages, Let them make
confession to the Lord of His tender mercy and His wonderful works to
the sons of men, because He has shattered the gates of brass, and broken
the bars of iron.  Then the holy patriarchs and prophets began mutually
to recognise each other, and each to quote his prophecies.

<span id="vii.xvii.vi-p3"></span>Then holy Jeremias, examining his
prophecies, said to the patriarchs and prophets:  When I was upon earth,
I prophesied of the Son of God, that He was seen upon earth, and dwelt
with men.

<span id="vii.xvii.vi-p4"></span>Then all the saints, exulting in the
light of the Lord, and in the sight of father Adam, and in the answering
of all the patriarchs and prophets, cried out, saying:  Alleluia!
blessed is He who cometh in the name of the Lord; so that at their
crying out Satan trembled, and sought a way of escape.  And he could
not, because Hades and his satellites kept him bound in the lower
regions, and guarded at all points.  And they said to him:  Why dost
thou tremble?  We by no means allow thee to go forth hence.  But receive
this, as thou art worthy, from Him whom thou didst daily assail; but if
not, know that thou, bound by Him, shall be in my keeping.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](0081339)
