[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081347)  [Next](0081349) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p1"></span> <span id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span
id="vii.xxii-Page_466"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>The Death of Pilate, Who Condemned
Jesus.</span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.xxii-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>And</span> when Tiberius Cæsar, the emperor of
the Romans, was labouring under a grievous disease, and understanding
that there was at Jerusalem a certain physician, Jesus by name, who by a
single word cured all infirmities, he, not knowing that the Jews and
Pilate had put Him to death, ordered a certain friend of his named
Volusianus:  Go as quickly as possible across the seas; and thou shalt
tell Pilate, my servant and friend, to send me this physician, that he
may restore me to my former health.  And this Volusianus, having heard
the emperor’s command, immediately departed, and came to Pilate, as he
had been commanded.  And he related to the same Pilate what had been
entrusted to him by Tiberius Cæsar, saying:  Tiberius Cæsar, the emperor
of the Romans, thy master, having heard that in this city there is a
physician who by his word alone heals infirmities, begs thee earnestly
to send him to him for the curing of his infirmity.  Pilate, hearing
this, was very much afraid, knowing that through envy he had caused Him
to be put to death.  Pilate answered the same messenger thus, saying: 
This man was a malefactor, and a man who drew to himself all the people;
so a council of the wise men of the city was held, and I caused him to
be crucified.  And this messenger returning to his inn, met a certain
woman named Veronica, who had been a friend of Jesus; and he said:  O
woman, a certain physician who was in this city, who cured the sick by a
word alone, why have the Jews put him to death?  And she began to weep,
saying:  Ah me! my lord, my God and my Lord, whom Pilate for envy
delivered, condemned, and ordered to be crucified.  Then he, being
exceedingly grieved, said:  I am vehemently grieved that I am unable to
accomplish that for which my lord had sent me.  And Veronica said to
him:  When my Lord was going about preaching, and I, much against my
will, was deprived of His presence, I wished His picture to be painted
for me, in order that, while I was deprived of His presence, the figure
of His picture might at least afford me consolation.  And when I was
carrying the canvas to the painter to be painted, my Lord met me, and
asked whither I was going.  And when I had disclosed to Him the cause of
my journey, He asked of me the cloth, and gave it back to me impressed
with the image of His venerable face.  Therefore, if thy lord will
devoutly gaze upon His face, <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028)
he shall obtain forthwith the benefit of health.  And he said to her: 
Is a picture of such a sort procurable by gold or silver?  She said to
him:  No; but by the pious influence of devotion.  I shall therefore set
out with thee, and shall carry the picture to be seen by Cæsar, and
shall come back again.

<span id="vii.xxii-p5"></span>Volusianus therefore came with Veronica to
Rome, and said to Tiberius the emperor:  Jesus, whom thou hast been
longing for, Pilate and the Jews have delivered to an unjust death, and
have through envy affixed to the gibbet of the cross.  There has
therefore come with me a certain matron, bringing a picture of Jesus
himself; and if thou wilt devoutly look upon it, thou shalt immediately
obtain the benefit of thy health.  Cæsar therefore ordered the way to be
strewn with silk cloths, and the picture to be presented to him; and as
soon as he had looked upon it, he regained his former health.

<span id="vii.xxii-p6"></span>Pontius Pilate, therefore, by the command
of Cæsar, is taken and brought through to Rome.  Cæsar, hearing that
Pilate had arrived at Rome, was filled with exceeding fury against him,
and caused him to be brought to him.  But Pilate brought down with him
the seamless tunic of Jesus; and he wore it on him in presence of the
emperor.  And as soon as the emperor saw him, he laid aside all his
anger, and forthwith rose up to meet him.  Nor was he able to speak
harshly to him in anything; and he who seemed so terrible and fierce in
his absence, now in his presence is somehow found to be mild.  And when
he had sent him away, immediately he blazed out against him terribly,
crying out that he was a wretch, inasmuch as he had not at all shown him
the fury of his heart.  And immediately he made him be called back,
swearing and declaring that he was the son of death, and that it was
infamous that he should live upon the earth.  And as soon as he saw him,
he forthwith saluted him, <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span
id="vii.xxii-Page_467"></span>and threw away all the ferocity of his
mind.  All wondered; and he himself wondered that he should thus blaze
out against Pilate when he was absent, and that while he was present he
could say nothing to him roughly.  Then, by a divine impulse, or perhaps
by the advice of some Christian, <span
id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) he caused him to be stripped of
that tunic, and immediately resumed against him his former ferocity of
mind.  And when at this the emperor wondered very much, it was told him
that that tunic had belonged to the Lord Jesus.  Then the emperor
ordered him to be kept in prison, until he should deliberate in a
council of the wise men what ought to be done with him.  And a few days
after, sentence was therefore passed upon Pilate, that he should be
condemned to the most disgraceful death.  Pilate, hearing this, killed
himself with his own knife, and by such a death ended his life.

<span id="vii.xxii-p8"></span>When Cæsar knew of the death of Pilate, he
said:  Truly he has died by a most disgraceful death, whom his own hand
has not spared.  He is therefore bound to a great mass, and sunk into
the river Tiber.  But malignant and filthy spirits in his malignant and
filthy body, all rejoicing together, kept moving themselves in the
waters, and in a terrible manner brought lightnings and tempests,
thunders and hail-storms, in the air, so that all men were kept in
horrible fear.  Wherefore the Romans, drawing him out of the river
Tiber, in derision carried him down to Vienna, and sunk him in the river
Rhone.  For Vienna is called, as it were, *Via Gehennæ*, the way of
Gehenna, because it was then a place of cursing.  But there evil spirits
were present, working the same things in the same place.  Those men
therefore, not enduring such a visitation of demons, removed from
themselves that vessel of malediction, and sent him to be buried in the
territory of Losania. <span id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030)   And
they, seeing that they were troubled by the aforesaid visitations,
removed him from themselves, and sunk him in a certain pit surrounded by
mountains, where to this day, according to the account of some, certain
diabolical machinations are said to bubble up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[466:2029](0081348.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="vii.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p4"></span> Or, upon the sight of this.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[467:2030](0081348.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="vii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p7"></span> This is the first appearance of the word
Christian in these writings.

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[467:2031](0081348.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="vii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p9"></span> Losonium was the Roman name of Lausanne. 
For a discussion of this legend concerning Mont Pilate, near Lucerne,
see Smith’s *Dictionary of the Bible*, under Pilate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Narrative of Joseph.](0081349)
