[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0081170)  [Next](0081172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span> <span id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_349"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>to</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>Apocrypha of the New Testament.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>By Professor M. B. Riddle, D.D.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>The</span> translations which follow have been
made from the critical edition of Tischendorf (see Bibliography at close
of this volume).  The text varies greatly from that of Fabricius.  It
was found impossible to introduce the various readings and to cite the
manuscript evidence supporting them.  Those who are interested in such
study will have recourse to the volumes of Tischendorf.

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span>The general character of the writings here
grouped as “Apocrypha of the New Testament” will appear from even a
cursory perusal of them.  It did not require any great discernment to
distinguish between these and the canonical books of the New Testament. 
The negative internal evidence thus furnished in support of the
authority of the latter need not be emphasized.  But attention may well
be called to certain historical facts in regard to these apocryphal
writings:—

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>1.  No one of them ever obtained any general
recognition among Christians; still less, a place in the Canon of the
New Testament.  A few so-called Gospels are referred to by early
writers; some obtained local recognition; others, written for a purpose,
were pressed into notice by the advocates of the tendency they were
written to support:  but, as a rule, the books were soon rejected, and
never obtained extensive circulation.

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>2.  Though a few of the Apocryphal Gospels
are of comparatively early origin (see Translator’s Introduction), there
is no evidence that any Gospels purporting to be what our four Gospels
are, existed in the first century, or that any other than fragmentary
literature of this character existed even in the second century.  The
Canon of the New Testament was not formed out of a mass of writings
possessing some claim to recognition, though there is a popular
impression to this effect.

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span>3.  Here the character of the writings
comes in as confirmatory evidence.  Of the Apocryphal Gospels in
general, R. Hofmann <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) well
says:  “The method employed in these compositions is always the same,
whether the author intended simply to collect and arrange what was
floating in the general tradition, or whether he intended to produce a
definite dogmatical effect.  Rarely he threw himself on his own
invention; but generally he elaborated what was only hinted at in the
Canonical Gospels, or transcribed words of Jesus into action, or
described the literal fulfillment of some Jewish expectation concerning
the Messiah, or repeated the wonders of the Old Testament in an inhanced
form, etc.  The work done, he took care to conceal his own name, and
inscribed his book with the name of some apostle or disciple, in order
to give it authority.”  As a rule, therefore, the Apocryphal Gospels
give details regarding those periods of our Lord’s life about which the
New Testament is wisely silent.

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span><span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_350"></span>The genesis of much of the literature
resembles that of modern “Lives of Christ” written to present a view of
the Person of our Lord which is not in accordance with the obvious sense
of the New Testament.  Probably some of the Apocryphal Gospels and Acts
were not intended to be forgeries, but only novels with a purpose. <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548)

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span>4.  But while the early Church exercised
proper discernment, and the Canon of the New Testament was soon
definitely recognised and universally accepted, the apocryphal writings
were not without influence.  The sacred legends, the ecclesiastical
traditions, all too potent in their effect, are in many cases to be
traced to these writings.  Much that Rome inculcates is derived from
these books, which the Western Church constantly rejected.  It is,
therefore, not strange that modern Protestant scholarship has been most
active in the investigation of this literature.  The study of these
works furnishes not only a defense of the canonical books of the New
Testament, but an effective weapon against that “tradition” which would
overbear the authority of Holy Scripture.  No attempt has been made to
annotate the various works in illustration of the above positions,
although the temptation to do so was very great.  A few notes have been
appended, but it was felt that in most cases the intelligent reader
would not fail to draw the proper conclusions from the documents
themselves.  Those who desire to investigate further will find the best
helps indicated either in the Introduction of the translator or in the
Bibliography which closes this volume and series.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>It will be noticed that no Apocryphal
Epistles are included in the literature which follows.  Such forgeries
were less common, and the Apocryphal Acts furnished a more convenient
channel for heretical opinions and argument.  Of the few in existence,
some appear, in connection with other works, in the Acts of Thaddæus, in
the Pseudo-Ignatian Epistles, in the Clementine Homilies (Epistles of
Peter to James), and in Eusebius.  The forged letters of Paul, to the
Laodiceans and a third to the Corinthians, deserve little attention,
being made to supply the supposed loss suggested by [Col.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016), [1 Cor.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009)<span id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>. 
The correspondence of Paul and Seneca (six letters from the former and
eight from the latter) has a certain interest, but scarcely deserves a
place even among the apocryphal writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[349:1548](0081171.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> Schaff-Herzog, i. p. 105.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[350:1549](0081171.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span> In most cases the vocabulary of the books
furnishes positive evidence of the late origin.  A great number of terms
can be traced to a particular period of ecclesiastical development,
while the dogmatic tendencies which point to a given (and comparatively
late) period of controversy are frequent and obvious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translator's Introductory Notice.](0081172)
