[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0805)  [Next](t0807) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 8: Tract Sanhedrin*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

# CHAPTER III.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE QUALIFICATION OR DISQUALIFICATION
OF JUDGES AND WITNESSES WHO MAY DECIDE UPON STRICT LAW AND WHO IN
ARBITRATION. WHEN A REJECTION AGAINST JUDGES AND WITNESSES MAY OR MAY
NOT TAKE PLACE. OF RELATIVES THAT ARE DISQUALIFIED AND THOSE THAT ARE
NOT. HOW THE WITNESSES SHOULD BE EXAMINED IN CIVIL CASES. UNTIL WHAT
TIME NEW EVIDENCE MAY OR MAY NOT AFFECT A DECISION RENDERED.

MISHNA *I*.: Civil cases by three; one party may select one and so the
other, and both of them select one more; so is the decree of R. Meir.
The sages, however, maintain that the two judges may select the third
one. One party may reject the judge of his opponent, according to R.
Meir. The sages, however, say: This holds good only when the party
brings evidence that the judges selected by his opponent are relatives,
or they are unqualified for any other reason. If, however, they were
qualified, or they were recognized as judges from a higher court, no
rejection is to be considered. The same is the case with the witnesses
of each party, according to R. Meir, so that the rejection of each party
against the witnesses of its opponent may be taken into consideration.
The sages, however, say: Such holds good only in the cases said above
concerning the judges, but not otherwise.

GEMARA: How is to be understood the expression of the Mishna: One party
selects one, etc.? Does it mean one party may select one court of three
judges, and likewise the other; and then both the third court, which
would be altogether nine judges? Are, then, three not sufficient? It
means, if one party selects one judge its opponent may also do so, and
then both may select the third one. And what is the reason of such a
selection? It was said in Palestine in the name of R. Zera: Because each
party selects its own judge, and both agree in the selection of the
third one, the decision will be a just one.

"*The sages, however, say*," etc. Shall we assume that the point of
their difference is what was said by R. Jehudah in the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

name of Rabh: Witnesses may not sign a document unless they are aware
who will be the others; and so R. Meir does not hold this theory and the
rabbis do? Nay! All hold this theory, and the point of their difference
is thus: According to R. Meir, the consent of the parties is also
needed; but the rabbis hold that the consent of the judges, but not of
the parties, is needed.

The text reads: R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: Witnesses, etc.
There is also a Boraitha: Pure-minded people of Jerusalem used not to
sign a document unless they were aware who was the other who was to sign
it, and also would not sit down to judge unless they were aware who was
to be their colleague, and would also not go to a banquet unless they
were aware who were invited to it.

"*Each party may reject*," etc. Has, then, one the right to reject
judges? Said R. Johanan: It speaks of the little courts in Syria, where
there were Gentile judges who were not recognized by the higher court.
But if they were, no objection could be taken into consideration. But
does not the latter part state: "and the sages, however, say . . .
recognized by the court"? From which it is to be understood that their
opponent R. Meir speaks even of them who were recognized? They mean to
say: If not disqualified (on account of kinship or bad conduct) they are
to be considered as if they were authorized judges against whom no
rejection can take place.

Come and hear: The sages said to R. Mair: One cannot be trusted with any
right to protest against a judge who was appointed by the majority?
Read: One has no right to reject a judge who was appointed by the
majority. And so we have learned in the following Boraitha: One may
reject the selected judge of his opponent until he has selected a judge
who was recognized by a majority. So is the decree of R. Mair. But are
not witnesses considered as recognized judges, and nevertheless R. Mair.
said that one party may disqualify the witness of his opponent? Aye! But
was it not already said by Resh Lakish: How is it possible that a holy
mouth like R. Mair's should say such a thing? Therefore it must be
supposed that R. Meir did not say "witnesses," but "his witness"
(*i.e.*, a single witness). Let us see! What does he mean by one
witness? If concerning a civil case, the law itself disqualifies him;
and if concerning an oath, he is trusted by the law as if there were two
witnesses. It speaks of a civil case, and the case was that previously
the parties accepted him, saying that his testimony would be considered
as

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

if it were testified by two. But, after all, what news did he come to
teach us--that he may retract? This we have learned already in the
succeeding Mishna, which states that, according to R. Mair, he may
retract, to which R. Dimi b. R. Na'hman b. R. Joseph said that the
Mishna speaks of when he has accepted his father as a third judge (and
because biblically a father is not fit to judge in a case of his son),
he may retract even if he has previously accepted him. Why not say the
same in our case, because one is not fit for a civil case he may retract
although he had previously accepted him? Both cases were needed, as if
the case about his father only were stated one might say that because
the same is fit to be a judge in other cases, therefore the rabbis
maintain that no retraction is to be considered; but in the case of a
commoner, who is not fit to be a judge in any case whatsoever, the
retraction would hold good, even in accordance with the rabbis. And if
the case of a commoner were stated, one might say that only in that case
R. Meir permitted to retract. But in the other case he agrees with the
rabbis, therefore both are stated.

But how would the expression of the Mishna be understood? It speaks
about the judge in the singular (one may reject the *judge*, etc.), and
concerning witnesses, it speaks in the plural (one may reject the
*witnesses*, etc.). Hence we see that the Mishna is particular in its
expression. How, then, can you say that R. Mair maintains a single
witness? Said R. Elazar: It means that he-one of the parties, and also
another one who does not belong to this case--come to reject this
witness, as then they are two against one, and therefore the rejection
holds good. But, after all, why should one of the parties have a right
to reject? Is he not interested in this case, and there is a rule that
the testimony of such is not to be taken into consideration. Said R. Aha
b. R. Ika: The case was that he laid before the court the reason of his
protest, which can be examined.

Let us see what was the reason. If, *e.g.*, robbery, it must not be
listened to, as he is interested in this case. Therefore we must say
that the reason was the incompetence of his family--*e.g.*, that he or
his father was a bondsman, who was not as yet liberated. According to R.
Mair, he may be listened to, as his testimony is against the entire
family. The rabbis, however, maintain that even then he must not be
listened to because of his interest in this case, and the court has not
to consider his testimony at all.

When R. Dimi came from Palestine, he said in the name of

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Johanan that
the point of their difference is two parties of witnesses, *i.e.*,
*e.g.*, the borrower said: "I have two parties of witnesses who will
testify to my right," and brought one party of them against which the
lender protests. According to R. Mair, the protest holds good because
the opponent himself confessed that he had another party. Hence he may
bring the other party, against whom no protest would be considered (and
his reason is that a proof is needed to each claim, even if it is not so
important that it could injure the case); and according to the rabbis,
no protest must be listened to even in such a case, as they do not
desire a proof to each claim. But when there was only one party of
witnesses, all agree that no rejection is considered.

Said R. Ami and R. Assi to R. Johanan: How is it if the other party of
witnesses were found to be his relatives, or incompetent to be witnesses
for any other reason, should the testimony of the first party be
considered, or because of the incompetence of the other party, the first
party also loses credit? Said R. Ashi: The testimony of the first party
was already accepted, and therefore there is no basis to ignore their
testimony because of the incompetence of the other party. Shall we
assume that R. Mair and the rabbis differ the same as Rabbi and R.
Simeon b. Gamaliel. differ concerning one who claims that he has bought
a document and "hazakah" (Last Gate, p. 377), and in the discussion we
come to the conclusion that the point of their difference is, if one
must prove his words or not? Nay! According to R. Simeon b. Gamaliel,
they do not differ at all, and the point of their difference is
according to Rabbi's statement there. R. Mair holds with Rabbi. The
rabbis, however, maintain that Rabbi does so only in case of the claim
of hazakah, which is based upon the document; but in our case, where the
testimony of the witnesses is not based upon that of others, even Rabbi
admits that no proof is needed.

When Rabbin came from Palestine, he said in the name of R. Johanan that
the first part of our Mishna treats of incompetent witnesses but
competent judges, and because they reject the witnesses the judges are
also rejected; and the latter part speaks of the reverse--that the
judges were incompetent and not the witnesses, and the witnesses are
rejected because of the judges. Rabha opposed: It would be correct to
say that because of the incompetence of the witnesses one may reject the
judges, as the case can be brought before other judges. But how can the
witnesses be rejected because of the judges? Then the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

party would remain without witnesses at all. It speaks of when there was
another party of witnesses. But how would it be if there were no other
witnesses? Then no rejection is to be considered. Thus Rabbin said the
same that R. Dimi said? The theory of "because" is the point of their
difference. As to R. Dimi, the theory of because is not to be used at
all, while according to Rabbin it is.

The text says: Resh Lakish said: "The holy mouth of R. Mair should say
such a thing," etc. Is that so? Did not Ula say that he who saw Resh
Lakish in the college saw one uprooting hills and crushing them? (Hence
how could he say such a thing, which was objected to?)

Said Rabhina: Was it not said of R. Mair that he who saw him in the
college had seen one uprooting *mountains* and crushing them (and
nevertheless he was criticised by Resh Lakish). Therefore he (Ula) meant
thus: Come and see how the sages respected each other (though Resh
Lakish was such a genius, he nevertheless, in speaking of R. Mair, named
him holy mouth). <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

MISHNA *II*.: If one says, "I accept as a judge in this case your father
or my father," or, "I accept certain three pasturers to judge our case,"
according to R. Mair he may retract thereafter, and according to the
sages he must not. If one owes a note to a party, and the latter said to
him, "Swear to me by your life, and I will be satisfied," according to
R. Mair he may retract, and according to the sages he may not.

GEMARA: Said R. Dimi b. R. Na'hman b. R. Joseph: It speaks of when he
has accepted his father as a third judge. Even then he may retract,
according to R. Mair. Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: The Tanaim
of the Mishna differ in case the creditor said to the debtor: Your or my
father may judge this case, and if they should acquit you, I will
renounce my claim. But if the debtor said to the creditor: I trust your
father, and if they shall hold me liable, I will give you the money--all
agree that he may retract. R. Johanan, however,: said that they differ
in the latter case.

The schoolmen propounded a question: Does R. Johanan mean to say that
they differ only in the latter case, but in the former, "I will renounce
my claim," all agree that no retraction is to be considered; or, does he
mean to say that they differ in both cases? Come and hear what Rabha,
said: They differ only

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

if he said, "I will satisfy your claim," but in case of "I will renounce
my claim," all agree that he cannot retract. Now let us sec! If the
question of the schoolmen is to be resolved according to Rabha's
decision just mentioned, it is correct, as he is in accordance with R.
Johanan; but if the question should be resolved that they differ in case
of renouncing, etc., according to whom would be Rabha's opinion? Rabha
may differ with both, and declare his own opinion. R. Aha b. Tahlipa
objected to Rabha from the latter part of our Mishna's statement, that
if he told him to swear by his life, according to R. Mair he may
retract, etc. Does not the Mishna speak of one who is to be acquitted
with an oath, which is equal to "I renounce my claim"? Nay; it speaks of
them who ought to swear and collect, which is equal to "I will give
you." But this was stated already in the first part? The Mishna teaches
both cases, one in which he is dependent upon himself and one in which
he is dependent on the mind of others. And both are needed; as, if there
were stated the case when he is dependent upon others *e.g.*, "I trust
your father," etc.--one might say that only in such a case R. Mair
permits to retract, as he has not as yet made up his mind to pay,
thinking that probably he will be acquitted; but when he depends upon
himself--*e.g.*, "Swear by your life," etc.--R. Mair also admits that he
cannot retract. And if this case only were stated, one might say that in
such a case only the rabbis hold that he cannot retract; but in case he
depends upon others. they agree with R. Mair. Therefore both are needed.

Resh Lakish said: The Tanaim of the Mishna differ in case the decision
was not yet rendered; but after it was, all agree that no retraction can
take place. R. Johanan, however, maintains that they differ in the
latter case.

The schoolmen propounded a question: Does R. Johanan mean to state that
they differ in a case where the decision was rendered, but in case the
decision was not as yet rendered all agree that a retraction can take
place, or does he mean to say that they differ in both cases? Come and
hear what Rabha said: If one has accepted a relative or one who is
legally disqualified to be a judge, if before the decision, his
retraction holds good; but if after, no retraction is to be considered.
Now let us see! If the saying of R. Johanan is to be explained that they
differ when the retraction took place after the decision--but if before,
all agree that it holds good--Rabbi's decision is correct, as it is in
accordance with R. Johanan's explanation and in accordance

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

with the rabbis. But if it should be explained that they differ also in
case it was before the decision, according to whom would be Rabha's
decision just mentioned? Infer from this that they differ in the case
after the decision but before, all agree that a retraction holds good.

R. Na'hman b. R. Hisda sent a message to R. Na'hman b. to Jacob: Let the
master teach us in which case the Tanaim of our Mishna differ--after or
before the decision, and with whom the Halakha prevails. And the answer
was: After the decision, and the Halakha prevails with the sages. R.
Ashi, however, "I said that the question was: Do they differ in case he
said, "I will renounce my claim," or in case "I will satisfy your
claim"? And the answer was: They differ in the latter case: the Halakha
prevails with the sages. So was it taught in the College of Sura. In the
College of Pumbeditha, however, it was taught: R. Hanina b. Shlamiha
said it was a message from the college, to Samuel: Let the master teach
us how is the law if the retraction took place before the decision, but
they have made the ceremony of a sudarium? And the answer was that
nothing could be changed in such a case.

MISHNA *III*.: The following are disqualified to be witnesses: Gamblers
(habitual dice-players) and usurers, and those who play with flying
doves; and the merchants who do business with the growth of the Sabbatic
year. Said R Simeon: In the beginning they were named the gatherers of
Sabbatic fruit; *i.e.*, even those who had gathered the fruit, not for
business, were disqualified. However, since the demand of the government
to pay duties increased, the gatherers of the Sabbatic fruit were
absolved from the disqualification, and only those who did business with
same were disqualified. Said R. Jehudah: Then the merchants and all the
other persons named above were disqualified only when they had no other
business or trade than this; but if they had, they were qualified.

GEMARA: What crime is there in dice-playing? Said Rami b. Hama: Because
it is only an *asmachtha*, which does not give title. R. Shesheth,
however, maintains that such is not to be considered an *asmachtha*; but
they are disqualified because they do not occupy themselves with the
welfare of the world--and the difference between them is if they had
another business besides. As we have learned in our Mishna, according to
R. Jehudah, if they have some business besides, they are qualified.
Hence we see that the reason of the disqualification is because they do
not occupy

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

themselves with the welfare of the world--and this contradicts Rami b.
Hama's above statement? And lest one say that R. Jehudah's opinion is
only of an individual, as the rabbis differ with him, this is not so, as
Jehoshua b. Levi said that in every place where R. Jehudah says "this is
only," or if he says "provided," he comes only to explain the meaning of
the sages, but not to differ with them; and R. Johanan maintains that
when he says "this is only," he comes to explain, but when he says
"provided," he means to differ. And as in our Mishna he expresses
himself "this is only," all agree that he is only explaining.

Hence Rami is contradicted? Do you contradict one man with another man?
Each of them may have his opinion. Rami holds that they do differ, and
Shesheth that they do not.

Have we not learned in the following Boraitha that it does not matter if
he has another business besides; he is nevertheless disqualified? The
Boraitha is in accordance with R. Jehudah in the name of Tarphon of the
following Boraitha: R. Jehudah said in the name of R. Tarphon,
concerning a Nazarite (Tract Nazir, 34a), that wherever there is any
doubt he is not deemed a Nazarite. And the same is in our case, as the
gambler is not certain that he will win or lose, it cannot be considered
a real business, but robbery, and therefore he is disqualified even when
he has another business.

"*Usurers*." Said Rabha: One who borrows to pay usury is also
disqualified. But does not our Mishna state "usurers," which means the
lenders, and not the borrowers? It means to say a loan which is
usurious. There were two witnesses who testified against Bar Benetus.
One said: In my presence he has given money at usury; and the other
said.. He has loaned to me at usury. And Rabha disqualified b. Benetus
from being a witness. But how could Rabha take into consideration the
testimony of him who said: I have borrowed from him at usury? Did not
Rabha say that the borrower also is disqualified, because, as soon as he
has borrowed at usury, he is wicked; and the Torah says: Thou shalt not
bring a sinner as a witness. Rabha is in accordance with his theory
elsewhere, that one is not trusted to make himself wicked. (Hence his
testimony that he himself has bor. rowed at usury is not taken into
consideration, but that part, that Benetus has loaned to him at usury,
was.) There was a slaughterer who sold illegal meat in his business, and
R. Na'hman disqualified him . And he let his hair and nails grow as a
sign of repentance; and Na'hman was about to remove the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

disqualification. Said Rabha to him: Perhaps he is deceiving you. But
what remedy can he have? As R. Aidi b. Abin said elsewhere: For him who
is suspected of selling illegal meat there is no remedy, unless he goes
to a place where he is not known and returns a valuable lost thing, or
he recognizes the illegality of meat in his business, even if it is of
great value.

"*Flying doves*," etc. What does this mean? In this college it was
explained: If your dove should fly farther than mine (such and such a
distance), you shall take an amount of money. And Hama b. Oushia said
that it means an ἀρυω, one who uses his doves to entice to his cot doves
belonging to other cots--and this is robbery. But to him who maintains,
"If your dove shall fly farther," etc., is this not gambling? (Why,
then, is it repeated?) The Mishna teaches both cases--depending upon
himself and depending upon his dove; as if depending upon himself only
were stated, one might say that, because he was sure he would win, he
offered such an amount, and be has not made up his mind to pay the sum
willingly in case of a loss, and therefore it is considered an
*asmachtha*, which does not give title. But in the other case, where he
is dependent upon his dove, in which he is not sure, and has
nevertheless offered a sum of money, it is to be supposed that he made
up his mind to pay willingly in any event, and therefore it is not
considered an *asmachtha*. And if this latter case were stated, one
might say that he did so probably because the winning of the race
depends on the clapping, and he knew better how to clap (at the pigeon
race); but when he depends upon himself, it is different. Therefore both
are stated.

An objection was raised from the following: Gamblers are counted those
who play with dice; and not only dice, but even with the shells of nuts
or pomegranates. And when is their repentance to be considered? When
they break the dice and renounce this play entirely, so that they do not
play even for nothing. And usurers are counted both the lender and the
borrower, and their repentance is to be considered only then when they
destroy their documents and renounce this business entirely, so that
they do not take usury even from a heathen, from whom it is biblically
allowed. And among those who play with doves, those who train doves to
fly farther are counted; and not only doves, but even other animals; and
their renunciation is considered only when they destroy their snares and
renounce the business entirely, so that they do not catch birds even in

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

deserts. Among those who handle Sabbatic fruits are counted those who
buy or sell, and their renunciation is considered only when they cease
to do so in the next Sabbatic year. Said R. Na'hamia: It is not
sufficient that they cease to do so, but they must return the money
which they derived from the sale of the fruit. How if one say: I, so and
so, have obtained two hundred zuz from the Sabbatic fruit, and I present
them for charity? We see, then, that among those who play with doves,
those who do so with other animals are also counted; and this can be
correct only according to him who explains our Mishna: "If your dove
should fly farther than mine," as the same can be done with other
animals. But to him who says an ἀρυω, could this be done with other
animals? Aye, this can be done with a wild ox; and it is in accordance
with him who says that a wild ox may be counted among domesticated
animals.

There is a Boraitha: There was added to the disqualified witnesses
robbers and forcers (*i.e.*, those who take things by force, although
they pay the value for them). But is not a robber disqualified to be a
witness biblically? It means even those who do not return a found thing
which was lost by a deaf-mute or by minors (which according to the
strict law is not to be returned, but it was enacted that it should be
returned for the sake of peace--that there should be no quarrel with
their relatives), and as this does not occur frequently, they were not
counted among the disqualified. Thereafter, however, they were added,
as, after all, they take possession of money which does not belong to
them. And the same is the case with the forcers, who were not placed
among the disqualified, because this does not happen frequently.
Thereafter, however, as the rabbis saw that it became a habit, they
added them also.

There is another Boraitha: There was secondly added to that category,
pasturers, collectors of duty, and contractors of the government.
Pasturers were not put in this category previously, because, when it was
seen that they led their animals into strange pastures, it was only
occasionally; but later, when it was seen that they did it
intentionally, they were also added. And the same is the case with the
collectors of duty and the contractors, as at first it was thought that
they took only what belonged to them; but after investigation, when it
was found that they took much more than they ought, they were added.
Said Rabha: The pasturer in question--it matters not if he is a pasturer
of small cattle or of large ones. Did Rabha indeed say so? Did

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

he not say that a pasturer of small cattle is disqualified only in
Palestine, but not outside of it, and pasturers of large cattle even in
Palestine *are* qualified? This was taught of them who raise the cattle
for themselves; and if they are small cattle, they are disqualified
because it was forbidden to keep small cattle in Palestine, as explained
elsewhere. And so it seems to be as the previous Mishna expresses,
"three pasturers," and it is to be assumed for witnesses. Nay; it means
for judges, and this is to be understood from the number three. As if
for witnesses, for what purpose are three needed? But if for judges, why
does the Mishna express itself "pasturers"--let it state three laymen
who do not know the law? It means to say that even pasturers who spend
their time in uninhabited places are nevertheless qualified to judge of
the appointment of the parties.

R. Jehudah said: A pasturer of whom it is not heard that he leads his
cattle into strange pasture is nevertheless disqualified, but a duty
collector of whom it is not said that he takes more than he ought, is
qualified.

The father of R. Zera was a collector for thirteen years, and when the
governor would come to that city he used to say to the scholars: Go and
hide yourselves in the houses, so that the governor shall not see so
many people, or he will demand from the city more taxes. And also to the
other people, when he saw them crowded in the streets, he used to say:
The governor is coming, and he will kill the father in presence of the
son, and the son in presence of his father. And they also used to hide
themselves. And when the governor came, he used to say to him: You see
that there are very few people in this city. From whom, then, shall we
collect so much duty? When he departed, he said: There are thirteen maes
which are tied in the sheet of my bed; take and return them to so and
so, as I took it from him for duty and did not use it.

"*They were named gatherers of Sabbatic fruit*," etc. What does this
mean? Said R. Jehudah thus: Formerly it was said the gatherers of the
fruit were qualified, but the merchants were not. But when it was seen
that they used to pay the poor that they should gather the fruit for
them and bring it to their houses, it was enacted that the gatherers as
well as the merchants were disqualified. This explanation, however, was
a difficulty to the scholars of the city of Rehaba as to the expression
of our Mishna, "since the demand of the government," and according to
this explanation it ought to be, "since the increase of buyers,"

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and therefore they explain thus: Since the government has increased
their duties \[as R. Jani announced, "Go and sow in the Sabbatic year,
because of the duties"\], it was enacted that the gatherers were
qualified, but not the merchants.

Hyie b. Zarssuqi and Simeon b. Jehuzdack went to intercalate a year in
Essia, and Resh Lakish met them and said: I will go with them to see how
they practise. In the meantime he saw a man who was ploughing in the
Sabbatic year, and he said to them: Is this man a priest, who is
suspected of doing work in the Sabbatic year? And they answered:
Probably he is hired by a Gentile to do so. He saw again a man who was
collecting the fluid in a vineyard and putting it back into the bale.
And he said again: Is this man a priest, who is suspected, etc.? And
they answered: He who trims vines in the Sabbatic year may say: I need
the twigs to make a bale for the press. Rejoined Resh Lakish: The heart
knows whether it is done for "ekel" (a legitimate purpose) or out of
"akalkaloth" (perverseness). And they rejoined: He is a rebel. When they
came to their place, they ascended to the attic and moved the steps that
he (Resh Lakish) should not ascend with them. The latter then came to R.
Johanan and questioned him: Men who are suspected of transgressing the
Sabbatic year, are they fit to establish a leap year? After
deliberating, however, he said: It presents no difficulty to me, as they
may be compared with the three pasturers mentioned above (p. 46), and
the rabbis recommended them to do so, as so it should be according to
their reckoning.

Afterward, however, he said to himself: There is no similarity, as,
concerning the three pasturers mentioned thereafter, the rabbis selected
the right number needed for intercalation. Here, however, they
themselves did it, and they are only a society of wicked men who are not
at all qualified to intercalate. Said R. Johanan: I am distressed that
you called them wicked. When the above-mentioned rabbis came to R.
Johanan, complaining that Resh Lakish called them pasturers of cattle in
the presence of R. Johanan and he kept silent, he answered: If he were
to call you pasturers of sheep, what could I do to him?

 <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)Ula said: One's thought for his
maintenance injures him in his study of the law (*i.e.*, because of his
sorrow it remains not in his mind for a long time, and he forgets it
easily). As it is written \[Job, V., 12\]: "Who frustrateth the plans of
the crafty, so that

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

their hands cannot execute their well-devised counsel." Said Rabba,
however: If he occupies himself with the Torah for the sake of Heaven,
he is not injured. As it is written \[Prov. xix. 21\]: "There are many
thoughts in a man's heart; but the counsel of the Lord alone will stand
firm"--which is to be explained: A study which is for the sake of
Heaven, no matter in what circumstances one is, it remains
forever. <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

"*Only then*," etc. Said R. Abuhu in the name of R. Elazar: The Halakha
prevails with R. Jehudah. And the same said again in the name of the
same authority: All the persons mentioned in the Mishna and in the
Boraithas are disqualified only then when their crime was announced by
the court. However, concerning a pasturer, R. Aha and Rabhina differ.
According to one, even concerning him announcement is needed; and
according to the other, no announcement is needed for his
disqualification. (Says the Gemara:) It is correct, according to him who
holds that no announcement is needed, that which R. Jehudah said above,
that a pasturer is disqualified even if we are not aware of any crime;
but according to him who holds that even a pasturer must be announced,
why, then, Jehudah's decision? Because he holds that the court has to
announce of each pasturer, no matter what he is, that he is
disqualified. There was a document for a gift which was signed by two
robbers, and R. Papa b. Samuel was about to make it valid because they
were not announced by the court. Said Rabha to him: When to a robbery
which is only rabbinical an announcement is needed, should we say that
the same is needed to a biblical robbery

R. Na'hman said: They who accept charity from idolaters are disqualified
to be witnesses, provided they do so publicly, but not if privately; and
even publicly, they are disqualified only then when it was possible for
them to do same privately and they do not care to disgrace themselves
publicly; but if not, one is not disqualified, as he is compelled to get
a living. The same said again: He who is suspected of adultery is
qualified to be a witness. Said R. Shesheth to him: Master, answer me.
Should a man who has forty stripes on his shoulders <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) be qualified?

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Said Rabha: R.
Na'hman admits that concerning a woman he is disqualified to be a
witness. And Rabhina, according to others R. Papa, said: This is said
only concerning a divorce, but concerning bringing her into the house of
her husband, the suspicion does not matter. R. Na'hman said again: If
one has stolen in the month of Nissan at the harvest-time, and has
stolen again in the month of Tishri, he is not named a thief so that he
should be disqualified, provided he was a gardener and stole a thing of
little value, and if it was a thing which could be consumed without any
preparation. The gardener of R. Zebid stole a kab of barley, and R.
Zebid disqualified him. And also another one stole a bunch of dates, and
was also disqualified.

There were undertakers who had buried a corpse on the first day of
Pentecost, and R. Papa put them under the ban and disqualified them to
be witnesses. However, Huna b. R. Jehoshua qualified them, and to the
question of R. Papa: Are they not wicked? he answered: They thought they
were doing a meritorious act. But were they not put under the ban for
this transgression, and nevertheless did it again? They thought that the
putting under the ban was only a kind of atonement imposed by the rabbis
for violating the holiday. However, the burial act itself is
meritorious, though they will have to be under the ban for a few days
for violation of a holiday.

An apostate who eats illegal meat, which is identical with carcasses,
because it is cheaper, all agree that he is disqualified. But if he does
this not because it is cheaper, but for the purpose of angering his
former brothers in faith, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) according
to Abayi he is disqualified and according to Rabha he is not. The reason
of Abayi is because he is wicked, and the Scripture reads plainly: "Thou
shalt not bring a sinner as a witness." Rabha's reason, however, is that
it speaks of one wicked in money matters only. An objection was raised
from the following: "The meaning of the Scripture concerning the
testimony of a sinner means one who is wicked in money matters; as, for
instance, robbers and perjurers. No matter if the oath was a vain one
(*e.g.*, if one has sworn that a stone is a stone), or if the oath was a
false one concerning money matters." Hence we see that even a vain
swearer

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

is also disqualified? By the expression "vain swearer" is not meant as
explained, but that he has sworn in vain concerning money
matters--*e.g.*, A owes money to B, which was not necessary at all, as A
has never denied it. An objection was raised from the following: "Thou
shalt not bring a sinner as a witness," means one wicked in
robbery--namely, robbers and usurers. Hence this Boraitha contradicts
Abayi's statement. The objection remains.

Shall we assume that the above Amoraim differ in the same respect as the
Tanaim of the following: A collusive witness is disqualified in all law
cases. So is the decree of R. Mair. R. Jose, however, maintains:
Provided he was made collusive in a case of capital punishment; but if
in money matters, he is still qualified to be a witness in criminal
cases? Now, shall we say that Abayi holds with R. Mair, who maintains
that even from a lenient we disqualify to a rigorous one, and Rabha
holds with R. Jose, who maintains that only from a rigorous case we
disqualify, even to a lenient one, but from lenient to rigorous we do
not? Nay! In accordance with R. Jose's theory, they do not differ. But
the point of their difference is concerning R. Mair's theory, as Abayi
holds with him, and Rabha maintains that even R. Mair said so only
concerning a collusive witness in money matters, which is both wicked
against man and wicked against heaven; but in our case, where the
wickedness is in heavenly things only, even R. Mair admits that he is
qualified to be a witness in money matters. The Halakha, however,
prevails with Abayi. But was he not objected to? The Boraitha which
contradicts Abayi is in accordance with R. Jose. But even then, is it
not a rule, when R. Mair differs with R. Jose, that the Halakha.
prevails with the latter? In this case it was different, as the editor
of the Mishnayoth taught an anonymous Mishna in accordance with R.
Mair's opinion. And where is it? This was, explained in the following
case: Bar Hama had slain a man and the Exilarch told Aba b. Jacob to
investigate the case; and if he really slew the man, they should make
the murderer blind. (Since the Temple was destroyed, capital punishments
were abolished by Israel, and therefore to make a man blind was to make
him dead to the world.) And two witnesses came to testify that he surely
killed the man. The defendant, however, brought two witnesses who
testified against one of the witnesses. One of them said: In my presence
this man stole a kab of barley; and the other said: In my presence he
stole the handle of a borer.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the Exilarch
said to him: You wish to disqualify this man to be a witness because of
R. Mair's theory, but I know of the rule that the Halakha prevails with
R. Jose when he differs with R. Mair; and according to R. Jose, if one
was collusive in money matters, he is still qualified in criminal cases.
Said R. Papa to him: This is so in other cases; but in this case it is
different, as there is an anonymous Mishna in accordance with R. Mair.
But which Mishna is it? Shall we assume it to be that which stated that
he who is competent to judge criminal cases is competent for civil cases
also, which cannot be in accordance with R. Jose, as, according to his
theory, there is a witness who was made collusive in civil cases and is
still competent in criminal cases? Hence it is in accordance with R.
Mair. But perhaps the cited Mishna does not speak about collusive
witnesses, but of such as are incompetent to be witnesses because of
their family. Therefore we must say that he means our Mishna which
states the following are disqualified for witnesses: Players with dice,
etc.; and a Boraitha adds: And also slaves. This is the rule in all
cases in which women are not allowed to be witnesses--they also are
disqualified. And this cannot be in accordance with R. Jose, as he holds
that they are qualified to be witnesses in criminal cases, for which
women are disqualified. Hence it is in accordance with R. Mair. B. Hama
then arose and kissed him, and freed him from paying duties all his
life.

MISHNA *IV*.: The following are counted relatives who may not be
witnesses: Brothers, brothers of father or mother, brothers-in-law,
uncles by marriage from father's or mother's side, a stepfather, a
father-in-law, the husband of one's wife's sister, they and their sons
and their sons-in-law, and also a stepson himself--but the latter's
children are qualified. Said R. Jose: This Mishna was changed by R.
Aqiba. The ancient Mishna, however, was thus: One's uncle, one's
first-cousin, and all those who are competent to be one's heirs and also
all one's relatives at that time; but if they were relatives and
thereafter became estranged, they are qualified. R. Jehudah, however,
maintains that even if a daughter dies and leaves children, her husband
is still considered a relative. An intimate friend, as well as a
pronounced enemy, is also disqualified. Who is considered an intimate
friend? The groomsman. And who is considered a pronounced enemy? The one
who has not spoken to him for three days because of animosity. And the
sages answered R. Jehudah: The children of Israel are not suspected of
witnessing falsely because of animosity.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

GEMARA: Whence is this deduced? From that which the rabbis taught. It is
written \[Deut. xxiv. 16\]: "Fathers shall not be put to death for the
children . . . for his own sin," etc. To what end is this written? If
only to teach the meaning of it literally, it would not be necessary, as
the end of the verse reads, "for his own sin shall every man be put to
death." It must therefore be interpreted, fathers should not die by the
witnessing of their children, and *vice versa*. From this is deduced
fathers by sons, and *vice versa*; and so much the more fathers who are
brothers are incompetent to' testify for each other. But whence do we
know that grandsons (cousins) are also incompetent to testify for each
other? It should read, "parents shall not die because of their son." And
why "sons" in the plural? To teach that their sons are not competent to
testify for each other. But whence do we know that two relatives are not
qualified to testify in one case even for a stranger? It should read in
the singular, "and a son for his parents." And why in the plural, "and
sons"? To teach that two sons are incompetent to testify in one case,
even for a stranger. But from this is deduced the relatives from the.
father's side only. Whence, however, do we know that the same is the
case with the relatives from the mother's side? From the repetition of
the word "fathers" in the same verse. And as it was not necessary for
the relatives on the father's side, apply it to the relatives on the
mother's side. But this verse speaks of accusation. Whence do we know
that the same is the case concerning advantage? From the repetition of
the words, "shall not die," which were not necessary in the case of
accusation. Apply it, therefore, to cases of advantage. All this,
however, is said concerning criminal cases. But whence do we know that
it is the same with civil cases? Hence it reads \[Lev. xxiv. 22\]: "One
manner of judicial law," etc., meaning that all cases must be judged
equally.

Rabh said: My father's brother shall not witness in my cases; he, his
son, and his son-in-law. And similarly, I, for my part, will not witness
in his cases, neither my son nor my son-in-law. But why? Is not one's
son a grandnephew, who is a third to a father's brother, and our Mishna
teaches that only a cousin is not competent, who is second to the party,
but not a second-cousin, who is third to the party? The expression in
our Mishna, "his son-in-law," means the son-in-law of his son, who is
already a third. But if so, why does it not teach "the son of his son"
(grandson)? Incidentally, the Mishna teaches us that the husband

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

is equal to his wife. But if so, according to whom would be the
following Boraitha, taught by R. Hyya: Eight fathers, which counts
twenty-four, including their sons and sons-in-law (*i.e.*, father and
brother, two grandfathers, and four great-grand fathers--two from each
side--and eight sons and eight sons-in-law)? And if our Mishna means the
son's son-in-law, then it ought to be thirty-two, viz.: eight fathers,
eight sons, eight sons-in-law, and eight grandsons. Therefore we must
say that our Mishna means his son-in-law. And why does Rabh name him the
son-in-law of his son? Because he is not a descendant from him, but came
from strangers, he is considered not of the second generation but as of
the third. But, after all, according to Rabh's saying it is a third to a
second-cousin, and we are aware that Rabh holds that such is qualified
to be a witness? Therefore we must say that Rabh holds with R. Elazar,
who says in the following Boraitha: Even as my father's brother cannot
be a witness for me, neither his son nor his son-in-law, the same is the
case with the son of my father's brother and with his son and
son-in-law. Still, this cannot serve as an answer to the objection that
Rabh himself has qualified a third to a second-cousin? Say, Rabh holds
with R. Elazar only concerning his son, but differs with him concerning
the son of his father's brother. And the reason of Rabh's theory is
because it reads: "Fathers shall not die because of their sons; and
sons," etc.--which means the addition of one more generation. And the
reason of R. Elazar is: "For their children" means that the incompetence
of the fathers shall extend to their children also.

R. Na'hman said: The brother of my mother-in-law cannot be a witness for
me, and the same is the case with his son, and also with the son of the
sister of my mother-in-law. And there is also a Boraitha similar to
this, viz.: The husband of one's sister, also the husband of the sister
of one's father And the husband of the sister of one's mother, their
sons and their sons-in-law, are also excluded from being witnesses. Said
R. Ashi: While we were with Ula we questioned him: How is it concerning
the brother of one's father-in-law and his son, and also concerning the
son of the sister of his father-in-law? And he answered: This we have
learned in a Boraitha: One's brothers, the brother of one's father and
of one's mother, they, their sons and their sons-in-law--all are
incompetent.

It happened that Rabh was going to buy parchments, and he was
questioned: May one be a witness to his stepson's wife? The

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

answer to this question was, according to the College of Sura, that the
husband is the same as his wife; and according to the College of
Pumbeditha, the answer was that the wife is the same as her
husband--which means that he is considered as if he were really her
father-in-law. And as Huna in the name of Rabh said: Whence do we know
that the woman is considered to be the same, as her husband? From \[Lev.
xviii. 14\]: "She is thy aunt." Is she indeed his aunt? Is she not the
wife of his uncle only? We see, then, that the wife is considered the
same as her husband.

"*A stepfather . . . his son and son-in-law*." Is not his son a brother
of the: party from the mother's side? Said R. Jeremiah: It means the
brother of his brother--*e.g.*, the son of his stepfather from another
wife. R. Hisda, however, qualified such \~ a person. When he was
questioned: Was he not aware of Jeremiah's explanation of our Mishna
just mentioned? He answered I do not care for it. But if so, it is his
brother. The Mishna teaches concerning a brother from the father's side,
and also from the mother's side. R. Hisda said the father of the groom
and the father of the bride may be witnesses for each other, as their
relation is similar to the relation of a cork to a barrel only, which
cannot be counted relationship. Rabba b. b. Hana said: One may be a
witness for his betrothed, but not for his wife. Said Rabhina: Provided
he testified against her; but if his testimony is in her behalf, he is
not trusted. In reality, however, (says the Gemara,) there is no
difference: One is not trusted in any case, as the reason concerning
witnesses is that one is too near in mind to his relatives; and as she
is betrothed to him, he is not fit to be a witness in any case.

The rabbis taught: One's stepson only. R. Jose says: The husband of
one's wife's sister only. And there is another Boraitha: The husband of
one's wife's sister only. R. Jehudah says: One's stepson only. How is
this to be understood? Shall we assume that the Tana of the first
Boraitha has mentioned only the stepfather, but that the case is the
same with the husband of one's wife's sister? And R. Jose with his
statement also does not mean to differ, but he mentioned the latter, and
the same is it also with the former. Then our Mishna, which states, "the
husband of one's wife's sister, he, his son, and his son-in-law are
excluded, would be neither in accordance with R. Jedudah nor with R.
Jose. "Or does the Boraitha mean to say that regarding a stepfather only
is he excluded, but concerning the husband of the wife's sister, he,
with his sons, etc., is excluded; and R. Jose differs, as, according

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

to his opinion, the latter only is excluded, but not his sons, etc.; but
a stepfather, with his sons, etc., is excluded? Then the Boraitha of R.
Hyya, mentioned above, which states that there are twenty-four, would be
neither in accord with R. Jose nor with R. Jehudah. Therefore we must
say that the Boraitha is to be explained thus: The stepfather only is to
be excluded, but concerning the husband of his wife's sister, his
children are also excluded. And R. Jose came to teach that even
concerning the latter he only is excluded, but not his children, and so
much the more a stepfather. And then our Mishna is in accordance with R.
Jehudah and the Boraitha in accordance with R. Jose. Said R. Jehudah in
the name of Samuel: The Halakha prevails with R. Jose.

There was a deed of gift which was signed by two brothers-in
law--*i.e.*, two husbands of two sisters--and R. Joseph was about to
make it valid, based upon the decision of Samuel that the Halakha
prevails with R. Jose. Said Abayi to him: Whence do you know that Samuel
meant R. Jose of our Mishna, who qualified the husband of one's wife's
sister? Perhaps he meant R. Jose of the Boraitha who disqualified him.
This could not be supposed, as Samuel said, *e.g.*, I and Pinchas, who
are brothers and brothers-in-law--but if only brothers-in-law, they are
qualified. And Abayi rejoined: It is still uncertain, as perhaps Samuel
meant to say: Because Pinchas was the husband of his wife's sister.
Therefore said R. Joseph to the beneficiary: Acquire title to this gift
by the testimony of the witnesses who were present when the gift was
transferred to you, in accordance with R. Aba's decision. Said Abayi
again: But did not Aba admit that if there was a forgery in the deed
while writing, it is invalid even in the latter case? And R. Joseph said
to the beneficiary: Go! you see people do not allow me to transfer it to
you.

"*R. Jehudah said*," etc. Said Thn'hum in the name of Tabla in the name
of Bruna, quoting Rabha: The Halakha prevails with R. Jehudah. Rabha,
however, in the name of R. Na'hman, and also Rabba b. b. Hana in the
name of R. Johanan, said: The Halakha does not prevail with him: There
were some others who taught the saying of Rabba with regard to the
following: Thus lectured R. Jose the Galilean: It is written \[Deut.
xvii. 9\]: "And to the judge that may be in those days." Was it
necessary to state thus? Can it then be supposed that one should go to a
judge that is not in his days? Therefore it is to be explained that it
means that the judge was previously a relative of

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

his, and that thereafter he became estranged. And to this said Rabba,
etc., the Halakha prevails with R. Jose the Galilean.

The sons of Mar Uqba's father-in-law were relatives, and became
thereafter estranged. And they had a case, and came, with it to his
court. He, however, exclaimed: I am disqualified from being your judge.
They then rejoined: Is it because you hold with R. Jehudah? We will
bring you a letter from Palestine stating that the Halakha does not
prevail with him. Rejoined he: I myself know that I am not attached to
you with wax, and my saying that I am disqualified to judge you is
because I know that your custom is not to listen to my decision.

"*A friend is a groomsman*." But how long shall this friendship hold? R.
Aba in the name of R. Jeremiah, quoting Rabh, said: All the seven days
of the wedding. The rabbis, however, in the name of Rabha said that
after the first day the friendship is no longer considered, and he is
qualified.

"*An enemy*," etc. The rabbis taught: It reads \[Num. xxxv. 23\]: "He
was not his enemy and did not seek his harm"--which means, he who is not
one's enemy may be a witness and he who does not seek one's harm may be
his judge. This is concerning an enemy. And whence do we know that the
same is the case with a friend? Read, then, "and he is not his enemy and
not his friend"--and then he may be a witness; and if he does not seek
his harm and not his welfare, then he may be his judge. But is it, then,
written a friend? This is common sense. Why not an enemy? Because his
mind is far from doing any good to him; and the same is it with a
friend, whose mind is near to do all that he can in his behalf. The
rabbis, however, infer from this two things: one concerning a judge and
the other that which we have learned in the following Boraitha: R. Jose
b. R. Jehudah said: From the verse, "he is not his enemy and does not
seek his harm," is to be inferred that if two scholars have animosity
toward each other they must not judge in a case together.

MISHNA *V*.: How were the witnesses examined? They, were brought into
separate chambers and were frightened to tell the truth. And then all
except the eldest were told to go out, and he questioned: How do you
know that A owes money to B?, And if his answer was: "Because A himself
told me that he owes,. him," or, "C told me that such was the case," he
said nothing, unless he testified that, in the presence of myself and my
colleague, A confessed that he owed to B two hundred zuz: and then the
second witness is brought in and they examine him, and if both

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

testimonies correspond the court discusses about the case. If two of the
judges acquit and one makes him liable, he is acquitted; and if *vice
versa*, he is liable. If, however, one acquits and the other makes him
liable, and the third one says, "I don't know," then judges must be
added. And the same is the case if there were five, and two of them were
against two, while the fifth was doubtful. After the conclusion of the
judges is arrived at, they are told to enter, and the eldest of the
judges announces, "You, R, are acquitted," or, "You, A, are liable." And
whence do we know that one of the judges must not say: I was in favor of
the defendant, but my colleagues were against, and I could not help it,
as they were the majority. As to this it reads \[Lev. xix. 16\]: "Thou
shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people"; and it reads
also \[Prov. xi. 131 He that walketh about as a talebearer revealeth
secrets."

GEMARA: How were the witnesses frightened? Said R. Jehudah. Thus \[ibid.
xxv. 14\]: "Like clouds and wind without rain, so is a man that vaunteth
falsely of a gift" (*i.e.*, that because of false witnesses, even though
it is cloudy, the rain is withheld), Said Rabha: This is no frightening,
as they may think what people say, even seven years of famine do not
pass the gate of a specialist. "Therefore," said he, "it was said to
them \[ibid., ibid. 18\]: 'A battle-axe, and a sword, and a sharpened
arrow is a man that testifieth as a false witness against his
neighbor.'" And R. Ashi maintains that even this is not sufficient, as
they may think, even in time of a pest one does not die before his time.
Therefore said he: I was told by Nathan b. Mar Zutra that they were
frightened that false witnesses were disgraced even in the eyes of those
who hired them. As it reads \[I Kings, xxi. 10\]: "And set two men, sons
of Belial, opposite to him, and let them bear false witness against
him," etc.

"*'A' himself told me*," etc. This is a support to R. Jehudah, who said
in the name of Rabh: If one wants the case to be recognized by the
court, he must insist that the debtor shall say: Ye shall be my
witnesses. And so also was taught by Hyya b. Aba in the name of R.
Johanan. And there is also a Boraitha as follows: (A said to B:)"I have
a mana with you," and he answered, "Yea." On the morrow A asked him,
"Give it to me," and B said it was only a joke, he is free. And not this
only, but even if A has had two witnesses hidden under a fence (so that
B could not see them), and questioned him: "Have I a mana with you?" and
B answered, "Yea." And to the question, <span id="page_86">p. 86</span>
"Would you like to confess before witnesses?" B answers, "I am afraid,
if I do so, you will summon me to the court"; and on the morrow A asks B
to give him the mana, and his answer is, "It was only a joke," he is not
liable. However, one must not defend a seducer. A seducer! Who has
mentioned this term? The Boraitha is not complete, and should read thus:
If, however, B does not defend himself, the court must not question him;
perhaps it was a joke. But in criminal cases, a similar question must be
asked by the court, although he has not so defended himself, except in
the case of a seducer. And why? Said R. Hama b. Hanina: From the lecture
of R. Hyya b. Aba I understand that it is because it reads \[Deut. xiii.
9\]: "Nor shall thy eye look with pity on him, nor shalt thou conceal it
for him."

Said Abayi: All that is said above is, provided the defendant claims,
"It was a joke"; but if he claims, "I have never confessed," he must be
considered a liar and is liable. R. Papa b R. Aha b. Ada, however,
maintains: In the case of a joke, people do not remember their
confession, and therefore even such a claim must be investigated.

There was one who had hidden witnesses under the curtains of his bed,
and he said to his debtor, "Have I a mana with you?" and he answered,
"Yea." And he questioned him again, "May the people who are here
sleeping or awake be witnesses?" and he answered, "No." And when the
case came before R. Kahana, he said: He cannot be liable, as he said no.
A similar case happened with one who had hidden witnesses in a grave,
and to the question, "May the living and the dead be witnesses?" he
answered, "No." And when the case came before Resh Lakish, he acquitted
him. Rabhina, according to others R. Papi, said: The decision of R.
Jehudah that it must be said by the party, "Ye are my witnesses," is no
matter whether it is said by the lender in the presence of the borrower
and he keeps silent, or by the debtor himself. And this is inferred from
that which was said above, that the debtor had answered the question
with no; but if he should remain silent, he would be liable. There was
one who was named by the people "the man who has against him a whole kab
of promissory notes." And when he heard this, he exclaimed: Do I owe to
anyone but B and C? The latter then summoned him before the court of R.
Na'hman, and R. Na'hman decided that the above exclamation could not be
taken as evidence, as it might be that he said so for the purpose that
people should not think him too rich. There was another one who was

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

named "the mouse who lies on dinars," and at the time he was dying he
said: A and B are my creditors. After his death the creditors summoned
his heirs before R. Ismael b. R. Jose, and he made the heirs pay, for
the reason that, if he said so while in good health, it might be
supposed that he did so for the purpose mentioned above, but this could
not apply to a man who was dying. The heirs, however, only paid the
half, and were summoned for the other half in the court of R. Hyya, who
decided, as it is supposed that one may say so for the purpose that he
shall not appear too rich, so it may be said that the deceased did so
that his children should not appear too rich. The heirs then demanded
what they had already paid, to which R. Hyya answered: It was decided
long ago by a sage, and the decision must remain.

If one has confessed before two witnesses and they have made the
ceremony of a sudarium, they may write it down; but if there was no
sudarium, it must not be written. If he has, however, confessed before
three without a sudarium, according to Rabh it may, and according to R.
Assi it must not be written. However, there was such a case before Rabh,
and he took into consideration R. Assi's decision.

R. Ada b. Ahba said: Such a document of confession is dependent upon
circumstances. If the people were gathered by themselves and he
confessed before them, then it must not be written; but if he himself
caused the gathering, it may. Rabha, however, is of the opinion that
even in the latter case it must not be written unless he said to them,
"I accept you as my judges"; and Mar b. R. Ashi maintains that even then
a judgment is not to be written unless they appoint a place, and summon
him to the court.

It is certain, when one has confessed with the ceremony of a sudarium in
cases of movable property, that a judgment may be written, but not
otherwise. But how is it with real estate--without a sudarium? According
to Ameimar it may not, and according to Mar Zutra it may be written. And
so the Halakha prevails. It happened that Rabhina came to the city of
Damhariah, and R. Dimi b. R. Huna of the same city questioned him: How
is the law if the confession was for movable property which is still in
full possession of the parties? And he answered: Then it is considered
as real estate. R. Ashi, however, maintains that so long as the creditor
has not collected it, it is to be considered as money, because if the
possessor

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

would like to sell it, he could do so even after the confession, which
is not the case in real estate.

There was a document of confession in which it was not written: "He (the
debtor) has said to us, 'Write a document, sign it, and give it to him'
(the creditor)," and both Abayi and Rabha decided that this case was
similar to that of Resh Lakish, who decided that witnesses would not
sign a document unless they were aware that the person who told them to
sign was of age; the same is the case here, they would not sign it
unless he said to them, "Sign and give." R. Papi, according to others R.
Huna b. Joshua, opposed: Is there a thing of which we, the judges, are
not sure, and the scribes are? Therefore the scribes of Abayi and of
Rabha were questioned, and they were aware of the law, when it must be
written and when not. There was another document of confession in which
the memoranda, and all the versions which are needed thereto, were
written correctly, but. the words, "in the presence of us three," were
missing, and the document was signed by two only. And Rabhina was about
to say that this case was similar to that of Resh Lakish mentioned
above; but R. Nathan b. Ami said to him: Thus was it said in the name of
Rabha: In such a case it may be feared that it was an error by the
court--*i.e.*, they thought that such might be done by two. Said R.
Na'hman b. Itz'hak: If in the document was written, "we the Beth Din,"
although it was signed by two, it is valid without any investigation.
But perhaps it was written by an impudent Beth Din of two, of which,
according to Samuel, the decision is to be considered, but they are
named impudent (and the Halakha does not so prevail). The case was that
the document read, "the Beth Din appointed by R. Ashi." Still, perhaps
the same holds with Samuel. It means that it was written: Our master,
Ashi, thus said.

The rabbis taught: If one said I have seen your deceased father hide
money in a certain place, saying this belongs to so and so," or, "The
money is for second tithe," if this place is to be found in this house,
he said nothing. if, however, the place was in a field, where the
witness could take it without being prevented, his testimony is to be
considered, this being the rule in such a case. If he is able to take it
himself without notifying, his word is to be trusted, but not otherwise.
Moreover, if they themselves saw their father hide money in a chest, or
the like, and he said to them, "This money belongs to so and so," or,
"It is for second tithe," if it looks as if he told this as his last
will,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

he is to be trusted; but if it appears that he desires to deceive them,
then his words are not to be considered. The same is the case if one
became harassed, searching for the money which his father left for him,
and he dreamed that the sum was of such and such an amount and was
placed in a certain place, but it was for second tithe. Such a case
happened, and the sages decided that the caprices of dreams are not to
be taken into any consideration.

"If two of the judges acquit," etc. But how is the judgment to be
written? According to R. Johanan, "So and so is ac. quitted," and
according to Resh Lakish, "Such and such judges acquitted, and such hold
him liable." R. Elazar, however, says it should be written, "From the
discussion of the judges, the decision is that such is acquitted." And
what is the difference? The tale-bearing. According to R. Johanan it
must not be written who acquits and who holds liable, as this would
appear like tale-bearing; and according to Resh Lakish, it must be
written, as, if not, it would appear like a unanimous verdict, and it
would look as though they had lied; and R. Elazar's decision is: To
prevent vainglory it may be written, "From their discussion, the
decision is that the defendant is acquitted," in which there is no
tale-bearing and it does not appear unanimous.

"Are told to enter." Who? Shall we assume the parties? It is not stated
the parties, but the witnesses, must go out. You must then say that the
witnesses are told to enter, and this would not be in accordance with R.
Nathan of the following Boraitha: The testimony of the witnesses is not
to be conjoined unless both witnesses have seen the case together. R.
Jehoshua b. Karha, however, maintains that, even if they have seen one
after the other, their testimony is not to be approved by the court
unless they both testify together. R. Nathan, however, maintains that
the court may hear the testimony of one to-day, and on the morrow from
the other one, when he appears. Hence, according to him, both witnesses
may not be present? The Mishna means the parties, and it is in
accordance with R. Nehemiah, who said in the following Boraitha: So was
the custom of the pure-minded in Jerusalem. They let the parties enter,
listened to their claims, and thereafter let the witnesses enter,
listened to their testimony, and told all of them to go out, and then
discussed the matter.

The text says that their testimony is not conjoined, etc. What is the
point of their difference? If you wish, it may be said common sense. If,
for instance, one testifies that he has

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

seen A borrow a mana from B, and on the morrow the other witness
testifies that he has seen A borrow a mana from B, one may say, *e.g.*,
C has seen one mana and D has seen another mana. Hence their testimony
cannot be conjoined according to the first Tana of the Boraitha; but
according to R. Jehoshua b. Karha it may be conjoined, as both admit
that A owes a mana to B. This is common sense. And if you wish, they
differ in the meaning of the verse \[Lev. v. 1\]: "And he is a witness,"
etc. And there is a Boraitha: It reads \[Deut. xix. 15\]: "There shall
not rise up one single witness against." Why is it written "single"?
This is a rule for every case in which is mentioned "a witness," that it
means two, and the term single is expressed because their testimony is
to be considered only then when they saw it together. So is the
explanation of the first Tana. B. Karha, however, gives his attention to
the verse cited \[Lev. v.\]: "And he is a witness, since he either hath
seen or knoweth something." Hence it matters not whether they have seen
together or singly. And what is the point of difference between R.
Nathan and the first Tana? Also, if you wish, it is common sense; and if
you wish, in the explanation of the Scripture. "Common sense"--usually
one witness is brought not to make the defendant pay, but to make him
liable for an oath. Hence, if their testimony does not come together, it
cannot be conjoined to make the defendant pay. Such is the meaning of
the first Tana. But Nathan maintains: Even when they come together,
does, then, their testimony go out from one mouth? They testify one
after the other, and we conjoin them. The same is the case when they
come on two days. "In the explanation of the Scripture "\[ibid.,
ibid.\]: "If he do not tell it, and thus bear his iniquity." And both
the first Tana and Nathan hold with the opponents of B. Karha, that both
witnesses have to see the case together. And the point of their
difference is, if the testimony is to be similar to the seeing of the
case. One holds it is: hence it cannot be conjoined if not seen
together; and one holds it is not.

Simeon b. Alyaqim was anxious that the degree of Rabbi should be granted
to Jose b. Hanina, but the opportunity did not present itself. One day
they were sitting before R. Johanan, and the latter questioned: Is there
one here who knows if the Halakha prevails with B. Karha or not? And B.
Alyaqim pointed to Jose b. Hanina, saying: He knows. Johanan then said:
Then let him tell. But B. Alyaqim, however, rejoined: Let the master
give him the degree of Rabbi, and then he will tell. And he did so,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

and then said to him: My son, tell me just so as you have heard. And he
answered: I have heard that B. Karha yielded to R. Nathan. Rejoined R.
Johanan: Is that what it was necessary for me to know? Is it not
self-evident that B. Karha could not demand that they should testify
together, as he does not desire that the seeing shall be together?
Nevertheless, since you have already ascended to the degree of Rabbi, it
may remain with you. And R. Zera said: Infer from this act that if a
great man gives a degree, even conditionally, it remains forever.

Hyya b. Abin in the name of Rabh said: The Halakha prevails with
Jehoshua b. Karha concerning real estate, as well as movable property.
Ula, however, maintains: It prevails with him concerning real estate
only. Said Abayi to Hyya: You say that the Halakha prevails. Is there
one who differs with him? 'Did not Aba say in the name of R. Huna,
quoting Rabh: The sages yield to B. Karha concerning the testimony as to
real estate. And so also taught Idi b. Abin in the Section Damages,
taught by the College of Karna: The sages yield to B. Karha concerning
the testimony as to a first-born, as to real estate, as to hazakah, and
concerning the signs of maturity--for a male as well as for a female?
You contradict one person with another. People may hold different
opinions. Said R. Joseph: I say in the name of Ula that the Halakha
prevails with B. Karha concerning real estate, as well as movable
property. However, the rabbis who came from the city of Mehuza say in
the name of Zera, quoting Rabh: Concerning real estate, but not
concerning movable property. And Rabh is in accordance with his theory
elsewhere, that a confession after a confession, or a confession after a
loan, may be conjoined; but a loan after a loan, or a loan after a
confession, do not conjoin. (*I.e.*, if one says, "In my presence A
confessed on Monday that he owed a mana to B"; and the second witness
says, "In my presence A confessed on Tuesday that he owed a mana to B,"
they may be conjoined. And the same is the case if one says, "On Monday
A borrowed from B a mana in my presence," and the other witness
testifies, "In my presence A confessed on Tuesday that he owed a mana to
B." But if one testifies that in his presence A made a loan to B on
Monday, and the other testifies that the same was done on Tuesday, they
are not to be conjoined, as they may be two different manas. And the
same is the case if one testify that A confessed on Monday that he owed
a mana to B, and the other testified that B had made a loan to A on
Tuesday.)

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

Na'hman b. Itz'hak met Huna b. R. Jehoshua, and questioned him thus: Let
us see why the testimony of a loan after a loan is not to be conjoined.
Because the loan which one witness has seen may not be the same which
the other saw. Why, then, not say the same concerning a confession? Say,
the confession of Tuesday was not the same as that of Monday? The answer
was: He speaks of when he said to the last witness, "The mana which I
confess before you is the same as that which I confessed yesterday
before so and so." But even then, the second witness only knows this,
but not the first. It means that after he has confessed before the
second he goes again to the first witness, telling him, "The mana which
I confessed before you, I did so also before so and so." Rejoined
Na'hman: Let your mind be at rest, for you have set my mind at rest. And
Huna asked him: What was the trouble? Because I had heard that Rabha,
and according to others R. Shesheth, swung an axe at it (*i.e.*,
disproved the opinion), saying: Is this not similar to a confession
after a loan? Which means that he said in his confession, "I confess
before you that I owe a mana to so and so, which I borrowed yesterday in
the presence of so and so." Hence it was already said once by Rabh. Why,
then, the repetition? Rejoined Huna: This is what I have heard of your
people--when they tear out trees, they plant them again (*i.e.*, you
answer questions, and then object to them again). The sages of Nahardea,
however, say that, no matter if it is a confession after a confession, a
loan after a confession, or a loan after a loan, they are to be
conjoined, as they hold with B. Karha.

R. Jehudah said: Witnesses in civil cases who contradict one another in
unimportant investigations are to be considered. Said Rabha: It seems
that he meant that the contradiction was that one said the purse in
which the mana was given was a black one and the other said it was a
white one. But if one says that the loan was with old coins and the
other said it was with new ones, they are not to be conjoined. But is
such a contradiction not to be taken into consideration even in criminal
cases? Did not R. Hisda say that if one testifies that he killed him
with a sword and the other with an axe, it is not to be considered; but
if one says the murdered or the murderer was dressed in white, while the
other testifies that he was dressed in black, their testimony holds
good? And the answer was: Do you contradict one scholar with another?
Each may have his own opinion. The Nahardeans, however, maintain that
even if one testifies old coins

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

and the other new, they are nevertheless to be conjoined; and this is
because they hold with B. Karha. But have you then heard B. Karha say
that they may be conjoined even when they contradict each other?
Therefore we must say that the Nahardeans hold with the Tana of the
following Boraitha: R. Simeon b. Elazar said: The schools of Shamai and
Hillel do not differ, if there were two parties of witnesses. If one
party testifies that he owes him two hundred, and one party testifies
one hundred, the latter amount is to be collected, as in the testimony
of two hundred one hundred is certainly included. In what they do differ
is that, if among one party of witnesses was this contradiction (*i.e.*,
one says that he owes two and the other one hundred), according to the
school of Shamai the whole party must be disqualified, because one of
them is surely a liar; and according to the school of Hillel they are
not, as both admit that he owes one hundred (and so the Nahardeans, be
it old or new coins, both admit that he owes a mana). Suppose one
testifies that he borrowed a barrel of wine and the other of oil. Such a
case came before Ami, and he made him liable to pay the value of a
barrel of wine, as a barrel of oil amounts to twice as much as a barrel
of wine. But according to whom was his decision? Is it in accordance
with R. Simeon b. Elazar? He said so, because in the amount of two
hundred a hundred is surely included; but did he say so in such a case
as that of the barrels? The case was that they testified not for the
barrels themselves, but for the value (*i.e.*, one testified that he
owed him the amount of a barrel of wine and the other the amount of a
barrel of oil, which is twice as much).

Suppose one of the witnesses says the law was made in the first attic,
and the other says in the second attic. Said R. Hanina: Such a case came
before a rabbi, and he conjoined their testimony.

"*And whence do we know that one of the judges must not say?*" The
rabbis taught: Whence do we know that one of the judges, when he is
going out, must not say, "I was in favor of the defendant, but my
colleagues were against, and I could not help it, as they were the
majority"? To this it reads \[Lev. xix. 16\]: "Thou shalt not go up and
down as a talebearer among thy people"; and it reads also \[Prov. xi.
131 "He that walketh about as a talebearer revealeth secrets." There was
a disciple of whom there was a rumor that he told a secret thing which
was taught in the college, after twenty-two years, and R. Ami drove him
out of the college, saying: This man is telling secrets.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

MISHNA *VI*.: So long as the defendant brings evidence to'. his
advantage, the decision may be nullified by the court. If he was told:
"All the evidence which you have, you may bring before the court within
thirty days," if he found such within thirty days, it affects the
decision, but after that it does not. Exclaimed R. Simeon b. Gamaliel:
But what should the man do who could not find such within thirty days,
but found it after? If he was told to bring witnesses, and he said, "I
have none"; "Bring any other evidence," and he said, "I have none," and
after the time had elapsed he brought evidence and found also witnesses,
it is as nothing. And to this also R. Simeon b. Gamaliel exclaimed: What
should this defendant do if he was not aware that there were witnesses
and evidence? However, if, after he said "I have no witnesses," seeing
that he is about to be liable, he says, "Bring in so and so to testify
in this case," or he takes out from under his girdle a new evidence, it
counts nothing (even according to R. Simeon).

GEMARA: Said Rabba b. R. Hana: The Halakha prevails with R. Simeon. And
the same says again: The Halakha does not prevail with the sages. Is
this not self-evident? If it prevails with R. Simeon, it cannot prevail
with the sages? One might say the Halakha prevails with R. Simeon to
start with; but if some have done in accordance with the sages, it
should remain so. He comes to teach us that even if it was so done, it
must be changed.

"*If he was told to bring witnesses*," etc. Said Rabba b. R. Hana in the
name of R. Johanan: The Halakha prevails with the sages. And the same
said again: The Halakha does not prevail with R. Simeon b. Gamaliel. Is
this not self-evident--that if the Halakha prevails with the sages it
cannot prevail with R. Simeon? He comes to teach us that only in this
case the Halakha does not prevail with R. Simeon, but in all other cases
it does; and this is to deny what Rabba b. b. Hana said in the name, of
R. Johanan, that everywhere R. Simeon b. Gamaliel is mentioned in the
Mishnayoth the Halakha prevails with him, etc. (Last Gate, p. 388).
There was a young man who was summoned to the court before R. Na'hman,
and he asked him: "Have you no witnesses?" and he answered: "No." "Have
you some other evidence?" and he answered: "No." And R. Na'hman made him
liable. The young man went and wept; and some people heard him cry, and
said: We know something in your behalf in the case of your father. Said
R. Na'hman: "In such a case even

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the rabbis would admit that the young man was not acquainted with the
business of his father and therefore the new evidence is to be taken
into consideration." There was a woman with whom a document was
deposited and she gave it away to some one, saying: "I am aware that
this document is already paid," and R. Na'hman did not believe her. Said
Rabha to him: Why should she not be trusted? Should she desire to tell a
lie, she could burn it. And R. Na'hman answered: Inasmuch as it was
approved by the court and known that it was deposited with her, the
supposition that if she wanted to lie she could burn it does not apply.
And Rabha objected to R. Na'hman from the following: A receipt which was
signed by witnesses may be approved by its signer. If, however, there
were no witnesses, but he was coming out from a depository; or the
receipt was written on the document after the signature of the witness
(which was in the hands of the creditor), it is valid. Hence we see that
a depository is to be trusted. This objection remains. When R. Samuel b.
Jehudah came from Palestine, he said in the name of R. Johanan: The
defendant has always a right to bring evidence against the decision of
the court, unless all his claims are concluded and he himself confesses
that he has no more witnesses nor any other evidence. However, even
after this, if witnesses arrived from the sea countries, or the box of
documents of his father was deposited with a stranger who has returned
it after he was found liable, it may be taken into consideration to
change the first decision. When R. Dimi came from Palestine, he said in
the name of R. Johanan: If one is summoning a party who says, "I want my
case to be brought before the assembly of sages," while the plaintiff
says, "It is sufficient that it be tried in the court of this city," the
plaintiff may be compelled to follow the defendant to the assembly. Said
R. Elazar: Rabbi, is it right that, if the plaintiff claims one mana
from the defendant, he shall spend another mana to go with him to the
assembly? Therefore the reverse must be done: The defendant should be
compelled to bring the case before the court in that city. It was taught
also in the name of R. Saphra: If two men were cruel to one another, and
one of them insisted, "We shall try our case here," while the other
says, "Let us go to the assembly," the latter must be compelled to try
his case in that city. However, if there was a necessity to question the
assembly, they might write and send it in writing. And also, if the
defendant demands, "Write down the reason why you accused me, and give
it to me," he

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

may be listened to. In the case of a widow whose husband dies childless
and she has to marry his brother, she is obliged to go to that place
where the brother is to be found (that he should marry her or perform
the ceremony of Halitzah). And to what distance? Said R. Ami: Even from
Tiberias to Sephorius. Said R. Kahana: Whence is this deduced? From the
Scripture \[Deut. xxv. 8\]: "The elders of *his* city"; of his, but not
of hers. Said Ameimar: The Halakha prevails that one may be compelled to
go to the assembly (and there try his case). Said R. Ashi to him: But
did not R. Elazar say: He maybe compelled to try his case in that city?
This is when the borrower said thus to the lender; but if the lender
claims so, we apply to him \[Prov. xxii. 7\]: "The borrower is servant
to the man that lendeth."

A message was sent from Palestine to Mar Uqba: To him to whom the world
is light as to the son of Bathiah (it means to Moses), peace may be
granted. Uqban the Babylonian complained before us that Jeremiah his
brother destroyed his way (*i.e.*, he has treated me badly, through
which I have lost my money), and we have decided that he shall be
compelled to appear before us in the city of Tiberias. (How is this to
be understood? Thus:) They said to him: You may try him. If he will
listen to you, well and good; and if not, you must compel him to see us
in the city of Tiberias. Said R. Ashi: This was a case of fine, and in
Babylon they are not allowed to try cases of fine; and that which they
said to Mar Uqba, "You shall try him," etc., was only to honor him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[68:1](t0806.htm#fr_21) Here is a repetition
from Tract Sabbath, pp. 89-92, which is already translated.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[75:1](t0806.htm#fr_22) The Haggadic passage we
have transferred to the last chapter of this tract, which is all
Haggadah.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[76:1](t0806.htm#fr_23) Rashi gives also another
interpretation to this passage; viz., mental resolution frequently
fails, even if it is concerning the study of the Torah--*e.g.*, if one
made up his mind to finish such and such a tract in a certain time. And
to this came Rabba to say, if it was for the sake of Heaven, it would
not fail, etc.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[76:2](t0806.htm#fr_24) Rashi explains this,
that one is suspected of such an offence, but cannot be punished with
the prescribed punishment because there were no legal witnesses <span
id="page_77">p. 77</span> or he was not warned, has nevertheless been
punished with stripes, as so it is stated (Tract Kidushin, 81b).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[77:1](t0806.htm#fr_25) Our explanation in the
case of angering may be new, as we are not in accord with other
commentators. However, it seems to us that this is the correct
interpretation, as to which we challenge criticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](t0807)
