[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0806)  [Next](t0808.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 8: Tract Sanhedrin*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING EXAMINATIONS AND CROSS-EXAMINATIONS OF
WITNESSES IN CIVIL AND CRIMINAL CASES. THE DIFFERENCE IN JUDGING AND IN
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN CIVIL AND CRIMINAL CASES. HOW THE MEMBERS OF THE
SANHEDRIN WERE SEATED. HOW MANY RECORDING SCRIBES WERE NEEDED. HOW
JUDGES WERE ADDED IF NEEDED, AND FROM WHAT PEOPLE. HOW WITNESSES SHOULD
BE FRIGHTENED IN CRIMINAL CASES. THE REASON WHY ADAM THE FIRST WAS
CREATED SINGLY.

MISHNA *I*.: Cases coming before the court, be they civil or criminal,
the witnesses thereof must be examined and investigated. As it is
written \[Lev. iv. 22\]: "One manner of judicial law shall ye have." But
what difference is there between civil and criminal cases? It is the
following: (a) The former cases are to be tried by three, and the latter
by twenty-three judges. (b) In the former the discussion may commence
either with the accusation or with the defence, while the latter must
commence with the defence and not with the accusation. (c) In the former
case one voice suffices either to accuse or to acquit, and in the latter
he is acquitted by one voice, while to condemn two are needed. (d) In
the former the judge who proclaimed his view either to advantage or to
disadvantage may, after deliberating, announce his view to the contrary.
In the latter, however, he may do so only to acquit, but not to condemn.
(e) In civil cases the whole body of the court may defend or accuse,
while in criminal cases all of them may acquit, but the whole body must
not accuse. (f) The former may be discussed in the daytime and the
decision rendered at night, while in the latter the decision must be in
the daytime. But if they did not come to a conclusion on the same day,
they have to postpone it to the morrow. (g) The decision concerning the
former may be reached on the same day either to one's advantage or to
his disadvantage, while in the latter the decision may be rendered on
the same day to free him, but not to condemn him until the next day;
and, therefore, cases of capital punishment must not be begun on the eve
of Sabbath or of a legal holiday. In civil cases,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and regarding defilement and purity, they begin by asking the opinion of
the eldest, while in criminal cases they begin with those who are
sitting on the side.

All are qualified to judge civil cases, but not every one is qualified
to judge criminal cases; as to the latter--only priests, Levites, and
Israelites who may legally marry daughters of priests.

GEMARA: Are investigation and examination indeed needed in civil cases?
If so, there is a contradiction from the following Tosephta: A document
of which the date shows the first of Nissan in a Sabbatical year and
witnesses came, saying, "How can you testify in favor of this
document--were you not with us at the same date mentioned in the
document in such and such a place?" The document as well as the
witnesses are valid, as it is to be supposed that they might have
written the document after the date mentioned therein. Hence if
investigation and examination are needed, why should they be valid
because of the above reason? Would not the investigation show if it were
so or not. But according to this theory, how is to be understood the
following Mishna: Promissory notes which were written at an earlier date
are invalid. However, if they were written at a later date, they are.
Now, if an investigation in civil cases is needed, why should that which
was written at a later date be valid? (The investigation would show that
the witnesses who signed the document were not present when the loan was
made, as it was signed at an earlier date. Hence the loan which was made
earlier is to be considered a verbal loan, which does not collect from
encumbered estates, and the note should be considered a forgery?) This
presents no difficulty, the objection mentioned applying more to the
statement of the Boraitha, as it speaks of a Sabbatical year, in which
people do not usually lend money because of the law \[Deut. xv. 2\] of
that year, and nevertheless it makes valid that which was written in the
month of Nissan, because the above-mentioned law concerning promissory
notes applies only at the end of the year. However, the contradiction to
our Mishna remains!

R. Hanina said: Biblically there is no difference between civil and
criminal cases concerning investigations, as it reads, "One manner of
judicial law," etc. But why was it enacted that civil cases do not need
investigation? So as not to close the door to borrowers. (And our
Mishna, which states that it is needed, was taught *before the
enactment*; and the Boraitha cited *after the enactment*.) But if so,
let the judge who made an error in the

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

decision of the case not be responsible? If this should be enacted, so
much the more would the door be closed to borrowers. Rabha, however,
maintains that our Mishna treats of fine cases and the Boraitha of loan
cases. However, both were taught after the above-mentioned enactment.
And R. Papa maintains that both treat of loan cases. But our Mishna
speaks of a case which appears to the court unfair; and to such,
investigation is needed. The Boraitha speaks of non-suspicious cases.
And this is in accordance with Resh Lakish, who used to propound a
contradiction to the following: It reads \[Lev. xix. 15\]: "In
righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbor"; and Deut. xvi. 20 reads:
"Justice, only justice, shalt thou pursue," from which it is to be
understood that an investigation is needed? And he answered that the
first verse speaks of an ordinary case and the second of a suspicious
one. R. Ashi, however, maintains that the above answer of R. Papa,
concerning the contradiction from the Mishna, holds good. However, the
supposed contradiction of the verse is to be explained that the first
speaks of a strict law and the second of an arbitration, as the
following Boraitha states: "Justice, only justice," etc., one word means
strict law and the other means arbitration. How so? If, *e.g.*, two
boats are plying on a river and they meet each other, if both try to
pass where there is not room, both would be lost; but if one passes
after the other, both would be saved. And the same is the case with two
camels passing the steps of Beth Chorin, which met each other. If both
tried to pass together, both would fall; but if one after the other,
both would be saved. Then the strict law is that the unloaded one should
wait, and the loaded one pass; or, if one was near to the dangerous
place and the other far off, the nearer one has to pass; but if both
were loaded, or if both were at the same distance, then arbitration must
be used as to which one has to pay to the other for loss of time.

The rabbis taught: "Justice, only justice, shalt thou pursue," means
that one shall follow to the city of a celebrated judge, *e.g.*, at
Luda, after R. Elazar; at Brur-Heil, after Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai.
\[There is a Boraitha: (At the time the government had forbidden
circumcisions and weddings, they made use of handmills to announce a
circumcision.) Then, if one heard the sound of a handmill in the city of
Burni, he understood that there was a ceremony of circumcision in that
city; and if one saw many lights in Bene Heil, he understood that there
was a wedding banquet in that city\].

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

There is another Boraitha interpreting the cited verse thus: You should
always trouble yourself to follow after the sages in assembly, as, for
instance, after R. Elazar at Luda; after R Johanan b. Zakkai at
Brur-Heil; after Jehoshua at Pekiein; after Rabban Gamaliel at Jamnia;
after Aqiba at Bene Braq; after Matia at Rome; after Hanania b. Thrduin
at Sikhni; after Jose at Sephorius; after Jehudah b. Bathyra at Nzibin;
after Hanina, the nephew of Jehoshua, in exile; after Rabbi at Beth
Shearin; and (when the Temple was in existence) after the sages at their
assembly in the chamber of the Temple.

"*With the accusation or with the defence*." But what has the court
first to say to the advantage of the defence in criminal cases? Said R.
Jehudah: The court may ask the witness: "Whence do we know that it was
as you say?" But from such an interrogation the witness will become
dejected, and will refrain from saying anything. \[But let him be
dejected? Have we not learned in a Boraitha, R. Simon b. Eleazar said:
The witnesses may be transferred from one place to another that they
shall become dejected and retract from their statement if it was not
true? What comparison is this? There they become dejected by themselves;
but here, if you say to them, "Whence do we know that what you say is
true?" *you* cause them to be dejected.\] Therefore said Ula: The court
questioned the other party, "Have you other witnesses to make collusive
the witnesses of your opponents?" Said Rabba to him: Is this what you
call *beginning with the defence?* With this saying you begin by
accusing witnesses of the other party. Therefore said he: The court may
say to the other party, "Have you other witnesses who may contradict the
witnesses of your opponent?" R. Kahna says: The court may say, "From
your testimony it seems that the defendant may be acquitted"; and
thereafter they discuss the matter. Both Abayi and Rabha say: The court
may say to the defendant, "Do not fear; if you have not committed the
crime, nothing will be done to you." And R. Ashi said: The beginning
should be with the announcement of the court: Every one who knows of a
defence concerning the defendant may come to tell it before the court.
There is a Boraitha in accordance with Abayi and Rabha as follows: It
reads \[Num. v. 19\]: "If thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness behind
thy husband, then be thou free." Said Rabbi: Infer from this that in
criminal cases the beginning must be with the defence (as it is written
first, "then be thou free").

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

"*May after deliberating . . . announce to the contrary*." There is a
contradiction from the following: If one has tried a case and made
liable him who is not, or *vice versa*; has purified a thing which is
unclean, or *vice versa*, his decision holds good, but he has to pay for
his error from his own pocket. (Hence we see that he must not retract?)
Said R. Joseph: This presents no difficulty. A judge who was appointed
by the court, if he made an error, he must pay for it; but if he was
appointed by the parties only, he has not. But is there not a Boraitha:
If he was appointed by the court, he has not to pay? Said R. Na'hman:
The just cited Boraitha treats of when there was a superior judge to
him, who ignores his decision; therefore he is free from paying, as the
superior judge decides it properly. But if there is no superior and his
decision remains, then he must pay for his error. R. Shesheth, however,
maintains: It depends in what the error was made. If he erred in that
which is plainly taught in a Mishna, then he has not to pay, because his
decision will not be executed; but if he erred in his opinion, then he
has to suffer. So did he hear from R. Assi. Rabhina questioned R. Ashi:
Is it the same even if he has erred in that which was taught in the
Boraithas of R. Hyya and R. Oshia? And he answered: Yea. And how is it
if he erred in that which was said by Rabh and Samuel? And he answered:
Yea. And how is it if he erred in that which was said by you and me? And
he rejoined: What, then, are we? Are we splitting wood or gathering
splinters in the forest! How is to be understood, "erred in his
opinion"? (See the answer in Chapter I., page [9](t0804.htm#page_9.md),
line 21.)

R. Hamnuna objected to R. Shesheth from the following: It happened that
a cow of which the womb had been removed was brought before R. Tarphon,
and he made the owner give it to the dogs. However, a similar case came
before the sages in Jamnia, and they made it valid, because Tudus the
physician testified that not one cow or one swine was sent out from
Alexandria in Egypt of which the womb was not removed, Or the purpose
that they should not bring forth offspring. And R. Tarphon exclaimed
thus: O Tarphon, thy ass is gone! (*I.e.*, I have to sell my ass to pay
for the error.) Said R. Aqiba to him: You are free, as there is a rule
that a judge who is appointed by the majority h-as not to pay for his
error. Now, if an error in that which was taught in a Mishna does not
hold good and must be redecided, why does not Aqiba say: You have erred
against a

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

Mishna? R. Aqiba meant to say both--first: You have erred against a
Mishna; and secondly: Even if you erred in your own opinion you would
also be free, because you were chosen by the majority.

Said R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak to Rabha: How could R. Hamnuna object to
Shesheth from the case of the cow? Did not Tarphon give it to the dogs?
Hence the cow was no longer in existence, and it could not be redecided.
Hamnuna meant to say thus: If the decision should be that the case of
one who erred against a Mishna is not to be redecided, it is correct
that Tarphon was afraid that he must pay, and R. Aqiba told him that he
must not, because he was a recognized judge. But if the Halakha is that
in such a case it must be redecided, let Aqiba say to him: How would it
be if the cow were still in existence--your decision would not remain
and the cow would be declared valid? The same is the case even now that
it is not in existence, as you did not yourself give it to the dogs: You
had only decided that it was invalid, and as your decision does not
count, the owner of the cow, himself, has to suffer for his act.

R. Hisda, however, explains our Mishna that it means: If the judge
himself took from the one who was liable in his eyes and gave to his
opponent, only then must he pay from his pocket, but not otherwise. But
this would be correct in one case only--namely, if he had made liable
the just, then we could say that he took from the just and gave to his
opponent. But how could this be done in the second case, in which he has
acquitted the one who was liable, as he only said to him: You are not
liable? His decision, "You are free," is counted as if he would take
with his hand and give to him. But if so, how is to be understood the
following statement of the Mishna, that the judge may retract from this
view, no matter if it is concerning defence or accusation, as this can
be explained only in case he said to the just, "You are liable," but did
not collect from him, as then he may retract and say, "You are not
liable"? But in case he made liable a just man, how could such a case
take place, if not by the decision, "You are free"? And it is said above
that such a decision is considered as if he would take from one party
and give to the other: hence, after such, no retraction can take place.
Our Mishna, with its expression, "whether in defence or in accusation,"
means to say that with the acquittal of one party the other party is
accused; namely, a retraction may take place in behalf of one who was
erroneously made liable but it was not as yet collected,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

although it is a disadvantage to his opponent, but in case he has
acquitted the one who is liable he has to pay from his pocket. But if
so, then in criminal cases a retraction could take place only when it is
in behalf of the defendant. but at the same time his opponent is not
accused. And this can be said if the criminal case was a violation of
Sabbath or a case of adultery; but in case of murder, how can such be
found? But how, if there is a retraction that he is not guilty of
slaying a person, who is accused? It may be said the relatives of the
person murdered; as biblically, if the relatives of the person murdered
took revenge on the murderer and slew him, he is freed; and by the
retraction from guilty to not guilty, if the relative should put his
hand on the murderer, he would be accused. But could such a thing be
supposed? You mean to say, because perhaps the relative of the person
murdered will take revenge, therefore no retraction shall take place and
the defendant shall be put to death. And secondly, does not the Mishna
state, whether concerning defence or accusation? This difficulty
remains. Rabhina, however, says: Even in case he has acquitted the one
liable, it may also be found that the judge did it with his
hand--namely, in case he had a pledge and the judge took it away from
him and transferred it to the borrower.

"*Criminal cases*," etc. The rabbis taught: Whence do we know that if
one was found guilty by the court, and thereafter one came, saying: I
know a defence for him, that the case may be retried? Because it reads
\[Ex. xxiii. 7\]: "Him who hath been declared innocent and righteous,
thou shalt not slay." Read: Him who was declared innocent even by one
person, you shall not slay (without a reinvestigation). And whence do we
know concerning the one who was acquitted by the court, and thereafter
one says, "I know of a fact which will make him guilty," that he must
not be listened to? From the same cited verse: "Him who hath been
declared righteous, ye shall not slay." Said R. Shimi b. Ashi. And just
the reverse may be done with a seducer, as the Scripture reads \[Deut.
xiii. 9\]: "You shall not have any pity," etc. R. Kahana infers this
from \[ibid., ibid. 10\]: "You shall surely kill him," etc.

R. Zera questioned R. Shesheth: Whence do we know that the same law
applies to them who are to be punished with exile? And the answer was:
From an analogy of the expression "murder," which is to be found in both
cases. And whence do we know that the same is the case with them that
are to be punished

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

with stripes? From an analogy of the expression, "wicked," which, is to
be found in both cases. And so also is it plainly stated in a Boraitha.

"*But not to condemn*." Said Hyya b. Aba in the name of R. Johanan:
Provided he has erred in a thing which the Sadduceans oppose; but if
they admit, it must read so plainly in the Scripture. And such a
decision is not to be taken in consideration at all, as schoolchildren
are aware of it; it must be retried. The same Hyya questioned R.
Johanan: How is it we err in a case of adultery? And he answered: So
loner as the fire in the stove burns, cut off all that you want to
roast, and roast it. (*I.e.*, when you are studying a thing, consider it
thoroughly to prevent questions. You have heard from me that, a thing
which the Sadduceans admit, his decision is not counted. Is not adultery
one of these?)

"*All of them*," etc. Does the Mishna mean that even their witness who
had accused him may also thereafter defend him? Then our Mishna is in
accordance with R. Jose b. Jehudah, and,, not in accordance with the
rabbis of the following Boraitha: It is written \[Num. xxxv. 30\]: "But
one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die."
It means whether to defend or to accuse. Jose b. Jehudah, however,
maintains that he may testify to defend, but not to accuse. (Hence our
Mishna is not in accordance with him.) Said R. Papa: Our Mishna with its
expression *all*, means to add one of the disciples who sat in a row
before the judges, and such may make use of his opinion according to
all.

What is the reason of R. Jose's statement? Because it reads: "to cause
him to die," we infer that only to accuse he must not testify, but to
defend he may. But if so, why do the rabbis differ? Said Resh Lakish:
Because it appears that the witness is interested in this case. And what
do the rabbis infer from the words "to cause him to die"? They apply
this to one of the disciples, as we have learned in the following
Boraitha: If one of the witnesses says: "I have something to say in
defence. of the defendant," whence do we know that he must not be
listened to? From the verse cited: "One witness shall not testify." And
whence do we know, if one of the disciples say, "I have something to say
to the disadvantage of the defendant," that he must also not be listened
to? From the same: "One shall not testify to cause him to die."

"*Only to acquit, but not to condemn*." Said Rabh: This is

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

said only at the time they discuss this matter; but at the time of the
conclusion he may change his views from defence to accusation also. An
objection was raised from the following: "On the morrow they arise early
and come to the court. He who defended has to say: I defended yesterday
and am of the same opinion to-day. And he who accused has also to say: I
accused, and am of the same opinion to-day. However, he who had accused
may change his view to defence, while this is not allowed to him who
defended." Now, on the morrow it is time for the conclusion, and it
nevertheless states that the defendant may not change his view?
According to this theory, no discussion is to be prolonged on the
morrow; and this is certainly not so. Hence the Boraitha means that he
must not do so at the time of discussion.

Come and hear another objection: "All who take part in the discussion
may explain their reasons, until one of the accusers shall yield to one
of the defenders (and then the majority of one will suffice to acquit)."
Now, if you say that one may change his view from defence to accusation,
why does not the Boraitha state, "or to the contrary"? It is simply
because the Tana of the Boraitha does not care to repeat a matter of
accusation.

Come and hear another objection: "R. Jose b. Hanina said: If one of the
disciples has defended and dies at the time of the conclusion, his view
should be considered as if he were still alive." And why? Let it be said
that if he were alive he might retract from his view? This is no
objection, as in reality he did not retract. But how can you explain
that the decision of R. Jose b. Hanina may correspond with Rabh's
statement? Was not a message sent from Palestine as follows: R. Jose's
statement denies our master's (Rabh's) statement? Nay, the message was
just the contrary: R. Jose's statement does not deny the statement of
our master in Babylon.

"*Discussed in the daytime*," etc. Whence is this deduced? Said R. Aha
b. Papa: From \[Ex. xviii. 22\]: "And let them judge the people at all
times." But how is it to be inferred from this that the conclusion must
not be at night, and the discussion may? This is in accordance with
Rabha, who has propounded a contradiction from the just cited verse to
that of Deut. xxi. 16: "Then shall it be, *on the day* <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) when *he divideth* . . . what

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

he hath"--on the day, "but not at any time"? And the answer was that the
beginning of the trial must be in the daytime, but the conclusion may be
even at night-time in civil cases. Our Mishna is not in accordance with
R. Mair of the following Boraitha: It reads \[ibid., ibid. 5\]: "Every
controversy and every plague." <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) What
have plagues to do with controversies? The Scripture compares
controversies to plagues, in order to apply the law of the latter to the
former. As concerning plagues it must be in the daytime \[Lev. xiii.
14\]: "But on the day," etc., the same is the case with controversies.
And also as, concerning plagues, it cannot be judged by one who is
blind, as the priest must see the signs, the same is the case with
controversies. And also the law concerning controversies, which must not
be judged by relatives, applies to plagues--that the priest must not be
a relative of him who has the plague.

In the neighborhood of R. Johanan there was one who was blind who used
to judge cases, and R. Johanan did not protest. But could R. Johanan be
silent in such a matter? Is it not against his own decision? Did not he
himself declare that the Halakha always prevails with an anonymous
Mishna, and there is one which states: Every one who is qualified to
judge is also qualified to be a witness? However, there are some who are
qualified to witness, but not to judge; and the same R. Johanan has
declared that it means one who is blind of one eye, who is qualified to
witness, but not to judge. Hence one who is blind, who is disqualified
to be a witness because he cannot see, ought also to be disqualified to
judge? R. Johanan found another anonymous Mishna for his basis, namely:
"Civil cases may be discussed in the daytime and the conclusion at
night," which is the same as a case of one who is blind. But why does he
give preference to the latter Mishna, and not to the first? If you wish,
it may be said because the latter treats of a majority, while the first
treats of an individual. And if you wish, it is because the latter is
taught concerning the laws of trying cases.

"*If they did not come to a conclusion*," etc. Whence is this deduced?
Said Shini b. Hyya: From \[Num. xxv. 4\]: "Take all the heads of the
people and hang them up before the Lord in the face of the sun." If
people have sinned, wherein have the heads of the people sinned, that
they should be hanged? Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: Thus said
the Holy One, blessed be He, to Moses: "Take the heads of the people,
and set

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

them at separate places, that they shall judge the guilty ones and hang
them in the face of the sun (which means in the daytime)." And why in
separate places? Shall we assume, because two capital punishments must
not be decided on one and the same day? Did not R. Hisda say that this
is said only when capital punishments are of different kinds, but if of
one kind they may? Therefore it must be said: To hasten the execution of
the guilty, that the anger of Heaven shall cease.

"*They have to postpone it until the morrow*." Whence is this deduced?
Said R. Hanina: From \[Is. i. 21\]: "Righteousness lodged therein; but
now murderers"--which means, formerly they used to postpone the
condemnation for a night, and now that they are not doing so they are
considered murderers.

"*Must not be begun on the eve of Sabbath*," etc. Why so? Because it
could not be done otherwise; as, if they should begin and finish on the
eve of Sabbath, perhaps they would need to condemn him, and then they
would have to postpone it over night. And to conclude the case on
Sabbath and to execute on the same day, the execution does not violate
the Sabbath; and should it be executed at night, after Sabbath the law
requires, "in the face of the sun"; and should the conclusion be on
Sabbath and the execution on the following day, then it would be torture
for the guilty one, which is not allowed. Should they begin on the eve
of Sabbath and conclude on the day after Sabbath, then they are liable
to forget the reasons. Although there were two scribes who used to write
down the discussions--the defence as well as the accusation--they wrote
only what was said, but could not write the heart of the man. And,
therefore, it was impossible otherwise.

"*They used to ask the opinion*," etc. Said Rabh: I used to be among the
judges of the court of Rabbi, and they used to begin the question of
opinions with me. But does not the Mishna state that they have to begin
with the eldest? Said Rabba b. Rabba, according to others Hillel b.
Wals: It was different in the court of Rabbi, as in all cases they used
to begin from those who were sitting at the side. The same said again:
From the time of Moses until the time of Rabbi we do not find one man
who was unique in the possession of wisdom, riches, and glory. Is this
so? Was it not so with Jehoshua? Nay, there was Elazar the high-priest,
who was equal to him. But was not Pinchas such a man? Nay, there were
the elders who ruled with him. But was there not King Saul, of whom the
same could be

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

said? Nay, there was Samuel. But did not Samuel die before Saul? It
means, all the years of his life. But was not David such a man? There
was Era of Ja'ir. He also departed before him. It means, also, all the
years of his life. Was not King Solomon such a man? There was Shimi b.
Geara. But did not Samuel slay him? It means, all the years of his life.
Was there not Hezekiah? There was Shbna. Was there not Ezra? There was
Nehemiah. Said R. Ada b. Ahbah: I can add thus: From the time of Rabbi
until the time of R. Ashi there is also not to be found a man who was
unique in all that is said above. But was there not Huna b. Nathan? R.
Huna was under the influence of R. Ashi.

"Criminal cases they began from those sitting at the side." Whence is
this deduced? Said R. Aha b. Papa: It is written \[Ex. xxiii. 3\]:
"Neither shalt thou speak in a cause." (The term for "cause" is "rib,"
literally "quarrel," and "rab" means "great." ) Do not read "rib," but
"rab," which means: You shall not contradict one who is greater than
you. Rabba b. b. Hana in the name of R. Johanan said: This is inferred
from \[I Sam. xxv. 13\]: "Gird ye on every man his sword, and they
girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword." (We
see that first it was done by the people and afterwards by the master.)

Rabh said: One may teach his disciple, and at the same time may judge in
association with him in criminal cases. An objection was raised from the
following concerning purification and defilement. A father with his son,
or a master with his disciple, are counted as two voices. However, in
civil cases, in criminal cases concerning stripes, in consecration of
the month and in the, establishment of leap year, a father with his son,
or a master with his teacher, is counted as one voice only. (Hence we
see that the master with his disciple cannot judge together in criminal
cases, so that they should be counted two.) Rabh speaks of such
disciples as R. Kahana and R. Assi, who needed only Rabh's tradition,
but not his sagacity, to equalize things.

R. Abuhu said: In ten things civil cases differ from criminal cases.
However, all of them do not apply to the case of an ox which is to be
stoned, except as to the number of judges, twenty-three being needed,
similar to all other criminal cases. But whence is this deduced? Said R.
Aha b. Papa: From \[Ex. xxiii. 6\]: "Thou shalt not wrest the judgment
of thy poor in his cause"; *i.e.*, thou shalt not wrest the case of thy
poor, but thou

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

mayst wrest the case of the stoning of an ex. (And as this law does not
apply to the stoning of an ox, so do not apply the other laws except the
one of the twenty-three, judges mentioned above.) But are there not some
other things in which criminal cases differ from civil? Have we not
learned in a Boraitha that among the Sanhedrin must not be any one of
great seniority, a castrate, and those who have no children? R. Jehudah
also adds to these a cruel man.

"*All are competent to judge civil cases*." What does the Mishna mean by
the expression "*all*"? Said R. Jehudah. To add a bastard. But this was
taught already in the above-mentioned Boraitha, that all who are
competent to judge criminal cases are competent for civil cases.
However, there are those who are competent for civil cases but not for
criminal. And in our discussion we have debated: "What does it mean by
all who are competent?" The same R. Jehudah said: It means to add a
bastard. One means to add a proselyte and the other means to add a
bastard; and both cases are necessary to be stated. For if a proselyte
only were stated, one might say, it is because he is eligible to marry a
daughter of an Israelite; but a bastard, who is not allowed to do so, is
not competent. And if a bastard only were stated, one might say,
because, after all, he is a descendant of an Israelite; but a proselyte,
who is a descendant of a heathen, is not competent. Therefore both
statements are necessary.

"*But not all of them are competent to judge criminal cases*." What is
the reason? That which was taught by R. Joseph: As the court must be
select in its uprightness, so it must be select in all other
things--without any blemish. And R. Ameimar said: Where is there to be
found an allusion to this in the Scripture? In \[Solomon's Song, xiv.
7\]: "Thou art altogether beautiful, my beloved, and there is no blemish
on thee." But perhaps it means literally that the judges shall be
without any bodily blemish? Said R. Aha b. Jacob: It reads \[Num. xi.
16\]: "And they shall stand there *with thee*"--which means those who
are equal to thee (*i.e.*, in birth, but not a proselyte and a bastard).
But perhaps there is a difference, because of the glory of the Shekinah.
Therefore said R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak: This is inferred from \[Ex. xviii.
22\]: "When they shall bear with thee." This means they shall be equal
to thee in birth.

MISHNA *II.*: The Sanhedrin sat in a half-circle in order that they
could see each other. Two scribes of the judges stood before them, one
on the right and one on the left, and they wrote

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

down the reasons of the accuser and of the defender. According to R.
Jehudah there were three--one who wrote down the reasons of the accuser
and one the reasons of the defender, and one the reasons of both. And
before them sat three rows of scholars (disciples). To every one of them
his seat was known. If it was necessary to add a judge, one from the
first row was elevated, and one from the second came and took the
latter's place, and one from the third took the place of this one; and
for the place in the third row one of the standing people was selected,
but he did not take the same seat as the one departed occupied, but that
to which he was entitled.

GEMARA: Whence is this deduced? Said R. Aha b. Hanina: From \[Solomon's
Song, vii. 3\]: "Thy navel is like a round goblet which lacketh not the
mixed wine." By "navel" is meant the Sanhedrin. And why were they named
navel? Because they used to sit in the middle of the world (according to
the Talmud, Jerusalem was the middle of the world and the Temple was in
the centre of Jerusalem), and also protected the whole world. And why
were they named a "round goblet"? Because the Sanhedrin sat in a circle:
"Which lacketh not the mixed wine "--*i.e.*, if one wished to leave, it
must be seen that besides him twenty-three remained, and if there were
less, he must not. "Thy body is like a heap of wheat fenced about with
lilies," means that as from a heap of wheat all derive benefit, so all
were pleased to hear the reasons given by the Sanhedrin in their
discussions. "Fenced about with lilies" means that even a fence of
lilies was not broken by them to go out of it. This is what was said by
a certain Minn to R. Kahana: Your law permits a, man to stay alone with
his wife during the days of her menstruation. Is it possible that flax
and fire should be together and should not burn? And he answered: The
Torah has testified that we are such a kind of people that even a fence
of lilies is sufficient for us, and will never be broken. Resh Lakish
said: This is inferred from ibid. vi. 72, which means that even thy vain
fellows, are full of meritorious acts--like the pomegranate. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) R. Zera said: From \[Gen. xxvii. 27\]:
"And he smelled the smell of his garments," etc. Do not read "bgadov,"
which means dress, but "bagdov," which means his transgressor. There
were ὓβριον <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md)

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

(insolent fellows) in the neighborhood of R. Zera, who nevertheless
associated with them and showed them respect, to the end that they
should repent. The rabbis, however, were not satisfied with this. But
after the soul of R. Zera had gone to its resting-place the
above-mentioned people took this to heart, saying: Hitherto there was
the little man who prayed for us, but now who will do so? And they
repented and became good.

"*Three rows*," etc. Said Abayi: Infer from this that if one left his
place, all in the row had to change their places. But could one not
protest, saying: Hitherto I have sat in front, and now you place me in
the back? Said Abayi: To such a protest he was answered: There is a
parable that it is better for one to be the tail of a lion than the head
of a fox.

MISHNA *III*.: How were the witnesses awestruck in criminal cases? They
were brought in and warned: Perhaps your testimony is based only on a
supposition, or on hearsay, or on that of another witness, or you have
had it from a trustworthy man; or perhaps you are not aware that finally
we will investigate the matter by examination and cross-examination. You
may also be aware of the fact that there is no similarity between civil
and criminal cases. In civil cases one may repay the money damage and he
is atoned; but in criminal cases the blood of the person executed, and
of his descendants to the end of all generations, clings to the
originator of his execution. So do we find in the case of Cain, who slew
his brother. It reads \[Gen. iv. 10\]: "The voice of the 'bloods' of thy
brother are crying unto me from the ground." It does not read "blood,"
but "bloods," which means his blood and the blood of his descendants.
\[According to others it reads "bloods" in the plural, because his blood
was scattered all over the trees and stones.\] Therefore the man was
created singly, to teach that he who destroys one soul of a human being,
the Scripture considers him as if he should destroy a whole world, and
him who saves one soul of Israel, the Scripture considers him as if he
should save a whole world. And also because of peace among creatures, so
that one should not say: My grandfather was greater than yours; and also
that the heretic shall not say: There are many creators in heaven; and
also to proclaim the glory of the Holy One, blessed be He. For a human
being stamps many coins with one stamp, and all of them are alike; but
the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, has stamped
every man with the stamp of Adam the First, and nevertheless not one of
them is like the other. Therefore

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

every man may say: The world was created for my sake, hence I must be
upright, just, etc. Should you (witnesses) say: Why should we take so
much trouble upon ourselves? To this it is written \[Lev. v. 1\]: "And
he is a witness, since he hath seen or knoweth something; if he do not
tell it, and thus bear his iniquity." And should you say: After all, why
should the blood of this man cling to us? To this it is written \[Prov.
xi. 10\]: "When the wicked perish, there is joyful shouting."

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: What means a supposition? The court may say
to them: Although you saw that one ran after his companion to a ruin and
you ran after them, and found a sword in his hand from which the blood
dripped, and you also saw the one killed move convulsively, you saw
nothing (so long as he did not kill him in your presence).

There is a Boraitha: Simeon b. Shetha said: May I not live to see the
consolation of our people if I did not see one who ran after his
companion to a ruin, and I ran after him, and saw a sword in his hand
from which blood dripped, and the one killed moved convulsively, and I
said to him: You wicked one, who has slain this man--I or you? But what
can I do that your blood is not legally in my hands, as it reads \[Deut.
xvii. 6\]: "Upon the evidence of two . . . be put to death." But He who
knows the thoughts of man shall take revenge on this man who has slain
his companion. It was said that both (Simeon and the murderer) had not
moved before a snake came and stung the guilty one that he died.

But was this man liable to be killed by a snake? Did not R. Joseph say,
and so also taught the disciples of Hiskia: Since the Temple was
destroyed, although the court of the Sanhedrin existed no longer, the
punishment of the four kinds of death prescribed in the Scripture was
not abolished by Heaven--as, *e.g.*, he who is liable to be stoned finds
his death by falling from a roof or by being trodden down by a wild
beast; he who is liable to be burned finds his death by fire or by the
bite of a snake; he who is liable to be slain by the sword falls into
the hand of the government, which slays him, or he comes to death by the
sword of murderers; and he who ought to be hanged finds his death by
drowning in the river or by diphtheritis. (But the murderer is only to
be slain, and not burned?) This man was liable to be burned for another,
crime; and the master said elsewhere that he who is guilty of two crimes
is to be punished by the heavier death.

"*Supposition*." We see that a supposition does not hold good

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

in the case of crimes. Does it hold good in civil cases? And if yea, it
would be in accordance with R. Aha, who said in the "Last Gate" that if
there was a biting camel among camels and a killed camel was found at
its side, it might be taken for a certainty that it had killed him and
its owner was liable. But according to this theory, if there was a
witness who heard this by hearsay from another, which is not considered
in criminal cases, it should be considered in civil. Does not the Mishna
state that if he said, "The defendant has confessed to me that he owes,"
etc.; or, "So and so told me that he owes him," he said nothing? Hence
if such does not hold good in civil cases, why should this be repeated
concerning criminal cases? Therefore we must say that, notwithstanding
that such a testimony is not considered in civil cases, they
nevertheless warned them in criminal cases. The same is the case with
the above-mentioned case of supposition.

"*You shall be aware*," etc. R. Jehudah b. Ahia said: Infer from the
verse cited in the Mishna that Cain made wounds and gashes on the body
of his brother Abel, as he did not know by what member the soul departed
until he reached his neck. The same said again: From that time when the
earth opened its mouth to receive the blood of Abel, it has not again
opened. As it is written \[Is. xxiv. 16\]: "From the edge of the earth,"
etc. Hence it reads "from the edge," but not "from the mouth." Hiskia,
his brother, however, objected to him from \[Num. xvi. 32\]: "And the
earth opened her mouth," etc. And he answered it opened for
disadvantage, but not for advantage. The above said again in the name of
the same authority: Exile atones for only half of a sin, but not for all
of it, as it reads \[Gen. iv. 14\]: "And I shall be a fugitive and
vagabond on the earth," etc.; and \[ibid. 16\]: "And dwelt in the "land
of Nod" (vagabond). Hence half of his sin was atoned. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

"*Therefore after them man was created singly*." The rabbis taught: Adam
the first was created singly, and why? That disbelievers should not say
there were many Creators in Heaven. And another reason is because of the
upright and the wicked, that the upright should not say: We are
descendants of an upright man; and the wicked should not say: We are
descendants of a wicked one (hence we are not to be blamed). There is
another reason: Because of families, that they should not quarrel,
saying

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our parents were
better than yours. As we see that when only one man was created there
are quarrels of rank, how much the more if many original Adams had been
created. Still another reason: Because of robbers and forcers. As even
now, when he was created singly, there are robbers and forcers although
they are all from one father, how much the more would there be robbers
and forcers if they were from different parents.

"*To save the glory*," etc. The rabbis taught: To save the glory of the
King of the king of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he! A human being
stamps many coins and all are alike, but the Holy One, blessed be He,
has stamped every man with the stamp of Adam the First, and nevertheless
not One is like his neighbor. As it reads \[Job, xxxviii. 14\]: "She is
changed as the sealing-clay; and (all things) stand as though newly
clad." And why are not the faces of men alike? Because one might see a
nice dwelling or a handsome woman, and say: It is mine. As it reads
\[ibid. 15\]: "And from the wicked is their light withdrawn, and the
high-raised arm is broken."

There is a Boraitha: R. Mair used to say: In three things one is
different from his neighbor--in voice, in face, and in mind: in voice
and in face, because of adultery; and in mind, because of robbers.
(*I.e.*, if one were to know the mind of his neighbor, he would know of
all his treasures and mysteries and would rob him of them. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31).md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[105:1](t0807.htm#fr_26.md) In Leeser's version it
is not mentioned "on the day," notwithstanding that the text so reads,
which, according to the sense, may mean "the time." The Talmud, however,
takes it literally.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[106:1](t0807.htm#fr_27.md) Leeser's translation
does not correspond.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[110:1](t0807.htm#fr_28.md) It is useless to quote
the passage, as its translation does not correspond with the saying of
Resh Lakish at all.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[110:2](t0807.htm#fr_29.md) We have translated in
accordance with Schönhack's Dictionary, as it seems to us correct.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[113:1](t0807.htm#fr_30.md) Here come Haggadah,
which we have transferred to the Haggadic part of this tract.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[114:1](t0807.htm#fr_31.md) Here also are a few
pages of Haggadah, which we have transferred to the Haggadic chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](t0808.md)
