[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0800)  [Next](t0802.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 8: Tract Sanhedrin*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# A WORD TO THE READER.

MANY books have been written by the scientists of the last century, and
many lengthy articles have appeared in the various periodicals,
concerning the Jewish high court, and this tract, which, if extracts
were given, would make an entire bulky volume in itself. However, we
deem it best to give the reader the information where these are to be
found. The time during which the Sanhedrin were established is the main
topic of their discussions. Zunz, for instance, gives the time from King
Simeon of the Maccabees. Jost states that it was from the period of
Hyrcan. And an anonymous writer in "Israelitische Annalen," Vol. I., pp.
108-134, maintains that they were established at an exceedingly earlier
date, and that the Greek name "Sanhedrin" was changed during the time of
the second Temple. At all events, Schürer, in his "Jüdische Geschichte,"
wrote a lengthy article on this subject, in Vol II., from p. 188 to 240
(where there is to be found a bibliography of the subject), concluding
with his opinion that the *high court* began at an earlier time. Z.
Frankel, too, in his article, "Der gerichtliche Beweis," Berlin, 1848,
claims that the establishment of the jury in the entire civilized world
was taken from the Sanhedrin. All this was written in Germany. An
English book by Rabbi Mendelsohn also treats upon this topic. We, too,
will have something to say concerning this in our forthcoming "History
of the Talmud." We are inclined, in many respects, however, to accept
the opinion of Reifmann, given in his Hebrew book, "Sanhedrin," Warsaw,
1888. He says that courts were even established in the days of Noah, the
judges of which were Shem, Abraham, Isaac, and Amram, continuing until
Moses. He, in turn, established a court of seventy judges, and from that
time the Supreme High Court was of that number (seventy-one, including
Moses), and thereafter supreme courts of twenty-three, and courts of
three, were established at all times, and wherever the Jews resided; the
sages of the second Temple naming these courts "great" and "small"
Sanhedrin. Reifmann's reasons are gathered from the post-biblical
literature, and are based upon the Bible. According to him, the three
judges had to decide civil cases only, the twenty-three, criminals

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

and capital punishments, and the seventy-one were a political body, who
were to decide also the great events; as, for instance, an entire tribe,
or the princes and heads of tribes. We, however, would say that the
court of three had also to decide criminal cases to which capital
punishment did not apply. So it seems to us, from this tract, p. 212 of
the Talmud, that a stubborn and rebellious son was punished with stripes
by a court of three, before being finally sentenced to death by the
court of twenty-three.

Reifmann also quotes from "Midrash Aggada," that before prophesying a
prophet was obliged to get permission from the Sanhedrin, who previously
tried him whether he was a true prophet or not We may here add that this
contradicts the Talmud, for it says that to recognize a true prophet was
by demanding a sign, p. 260, and if the prophet would have been obliged
to get the permission of the Sanhedrin, this would certainly be
mentioned in the Talmud instead.

This is as much as we have to say in regard to the time and name, and
that the Sanhedrin ceased about forty years previous to the destruction
of the Temple. At the same time we would call the attention of the
readers to the fact that this tract distinguishes itself from all others
in Halakha as well as in Haggada. Aside from the many strange
explanations of the verses of Scripture, which are not used in other
extracts, it says plainly that there are numerous laws written in the
Pentateuch which have never occurred, and never will occur, but that
they were written merely for study. The Haggada also distinguishes in
taking the power to judge upon the Bible personages if they are to have
a share in the world to come, and also in criticism of their acts, even
of the most holy of them. This is self-evident that the later
commentaries, and especially the cabbalists, interpreted the Haggada
after their ways. We, however, have translated it almost literally, with
an effort to make it in some respects intelligible to the general
reader, and have also added footnotes, where we deemed it necessary. And
we may say that the real student will find much pleasure if he will
devote his special attention to this tract.

For this purpose we have made from this celebrated tract a double
volume, as we deem it will please the readers and the students, and will
also equalize the size of the volumes.

M. L. R.

September 16, 1902.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](t0802.md)
