[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0802)  [Next](t0804) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 8: Tract Sanhedrin*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

## OF

## TRACT SANHEDRIN (SUPREME COUNCIL).

CHAPTER I.

MISHNA *I*. To which cases judges are needed to decide, and to which
commoners; which three, five, twenty-three, and seventy-one. The Great
Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one, and the Small of twenty-three. How
many a city should contain, that it should be fit for a supreme council.
If one were known to the majority of the people as an expert, he alone
might decide civil cases. A permission from the Exilarch holds good for
the whole country (of Babylon and also for Palestine); from the Prince
in Palestine, for the whole of Palestine and Syria only: he may teach
the law, decide civil cases, and may also decide upon the blemishes of
first-born animals. He (a priest) saw a divorced woman and married her,
and with this he annulled his priesthood. He erred in his
opinion--*e.g.*, there were two, Tanaim and two Amoraim who differed in
a case, and he decided the case according to one. There are three Tanaim
who differ concerning arbitration. When the decision is already given in
accordance with the strict law, an arbitration cannot take place. May or
may not a judge say, "I do not want to decide this case"? and under what
circumstances? Is mediation a meritorious act, or is it only permitted?
There were many who used to say maxims of morality, and Samuel found
that they were only repetitions of verses in the Scriptures. "Say unto
wisdom, Thou art my sister," means, if the thing is certain to you as
that it is prohibited for you to marry your sister, then you may say it;
but not otherwise. If one appoints a judge who is not fit to be such, he
is considered as if he were to plant a grove in Israel. The court shall
not listen to the claims of one party in the absence of the other (in
civil cases). "You shall judge righteously" means, you shall deliberate
the case carefully, and make it just in your mind, and only thereafter
may you give your decision: "For the judgment belongeth to God." The
Holy One, blessed be He, said: "It is the least for the wicked to take
away money from one and give it to another illegally," etc. Is warning
needed to a scholar? Where is the hint that collusive witnesses are to
be punished with stripes? Punishment of stripes is not applied to those
who do no manual labor. The numbers three, five, and seven--to what have
they a similarity?

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A year must not be
intercalated with one month, except by them who are invited for it by
the Nashi. Since the death of the last prophets--Haggai, Zechariah, and
Malachi--the Holy Spirit has left Israel, etc. A leap year should not be
made because of the kids, lambs, etc. For the following three things a
leap year is made: Because of the late arrival of Spring, etc. A leap
year must not be made in the years of famine, The year must not be
intercalary before Rosh Hashana. A leap year must not be made in one
year for the next. No appointment of a leap year must be because of
defilement. If not for Ben Baba, the law of fines would be forgotten
from Israel. The legend how Jehudah b. Baba supplied the degree of Rabbi
to five (six) elders, and by this act he caused the oral law not to be
forgotten from Israel. The custom of giving degrees must not be used out
of Palestine. What is to be considered second tithe, of which the value
is not known? Rotten fruit, etc. "Every great matter," means the matter
of a great man. By the whole tribe, is meant the head of it. The legend
how a battle was decided by King David. Whence do we know that it is a
duty to appoint judges to each tribe? etc. The legend of Eldad and
Medad, and what their prophecy was. How Moses selected the seventy
elders from each tribe, and also the payment of the first-born who were
not redeemed by Levites. Sentence of guilt must be by a majority of two.
If all persons of a Sanhedrin are accusing, the defendant becomes free.
How so? In a city in which the following ten things do not exist it is
not advisable for a scholar to reside. and they are, etc. Of rulers of
thousands were six hundred; of hundreds, six thousand; of fifties,
twelve thousand; of tens, sixty thousand--hence the total number of the
officers in Israel was seventy-eight thousand and six hundred.
[1](t0804.htm#page_1)-[42](t0804.htm#page_42)

CHAPTER II.

MISHNAS *I*. AND *II*. The high-priest may judge and be a witness; be
judged and witnessed against. A king must not judge, and is not judged;
must not be a witness, nor witnessed against. There are cases from which
one may withdraw himself, and there are others from which he may not.
How so? A king must not be a member of the Sanhedrin; nor he and a
high-priest engage in discussion about a leap year. The legends of three
pasturers who had a discussion about the month Adar, which the rabbis
took as a support to establish a leap year. When he (high-priest) goes
in the row to condole with others, his vice and the ex-high-priest are
placed at his right, etc. Formerly the custom was for the mourners to
stand, and the people to pass by, etc. A row is not less than ten
persons, not counting the mourners. All agree that if a king has
relinquished his honor, it is not relinquished. How could David marry
two sisters while they were both living? The strength of Joseph was
moderation on the part of Boas, and the strength of the latter was
moderation on the part of Palti, etc., etc. If a death occurs in the
house of the king, he must not leave the gate of the palace,
[43](t0805.htm#page_43)-[52](t0805.htm#page_52)

MISHNAS *III*. TO *VI*. Three positive commandments was Israel commanded
when they entered Palestine, viz., they should appoint a king, etc. The
treasures of kings which are plundered in time of war belong to the
king, only. He (the king) must not marry more than eighteen wives. Even
one

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

wife, should she be liable to turn his heart away, he must not marry
her. The number eighteen mentioned in the Mishna--whence is it deduced?
Four hundred children were born to David by the handsome women whom he
took captive (*i.e.*, those mentioned in Deut. xxi. 11). Only a son may
stay alone with his mother, but it is not allowed for any one besides to
stay alone with a married woman. He (the king) must not acquire many
horses, neither more gold and silver than to pay the military. He shall
not acquire many horses, and lest one say, "Even those which are needed
for his chariots," etc. He shall not acquire much gold and silver--lest
one say, "Not even sufficient for paying the military," etc. Why does
not the Scripture explain the reason of its law? Because in two verses
it was so done, and the greatest men of a generation stumbled because of
them, etc. Ezra was wrothy that the Torah should be given through him,
if Moses had not preceded him. In the very beginning the Torah was given
to Israel in Assyrian characters, etc. (see footnote,
[1](t0805.htm#fn_17)). One must not ride on his--the king's--horse, etc.
Come and see how hard is divorce in the eyes of the sages! He who
divorces his first wife, even the altar sheds tears on account of him.
The king must cut his hair every day, a high-priest every eve of
Sabbath, and a commoner priest every thirty days,
[52](t0805.htm#page_52)-[63](t0805.htm#page_63)

CHAPTER III.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *III*. Civil cases by three: one party may select one,
and so the other, and both one more. Pure-minded people of Jerusalem
used not to sign a document unless, they were aware who was the other
who was to sign it, and also would not sit down to judge unless they
were aware who was to be their colleague, etc. One has no right to
reject a judge who was appointed by the majority. There is a rule that
the testimony of one who is interested in a case is not to be taken into
consideration. Proof is needed to each claim, even if it is not so
important that it could injure the case. He who saw Resh Lakish in the
college saw one uprooting hills and crushing them, and he who saw R.
Mair saw one uprooting mountains and crushing them. Gamblers (habitual
dice-players) and usurers, and those who play with flying doves, are
disqualified to be witnesses. What crime is there in dice-playing?
Because they do not occupy themselves with the welfare of the world. One
who borrows to pay usurers is also disqualified. Gamblers are counted
those who play with dice; and not only with dice, but even with the
shells of nuts or pomegranates. Among those who play with doves--other
animals are also meant. There was added to the disqualified witnesses
robbers and forcers (*i.e.*, those who take things by force, although
they pay the value for them). There was secondly added to that category,
collectors of duty and contractors of the government. The father of R.
Zera was a collector for thirteen years, etc. One's thought for his
maintenance injures him in his study of the law, etc. They who accept
charity from idolaters are disqualified to be witnesses, provided they
do so publicly, etc. One who is wicked in money matters only is
disqualified to witness, but not one wicked in heavenly matters. Bar
Hama had slain a man, and the Exilarch told Aba b. Jacob to investigate
the case; and if he really slew the man they should make the murderers
blind, etc., [64](t0806.htm#page_64)-[79](t0806.htm#page_79)

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

MISHNAS *IV*. TO *VI*. The following are counted relatives who may not
be witnesses: Brothers, brothers of father or mother, brothers-in-law,
etc. "My father's brother shall not witness in my cases; he, his son,
and his son-in law." "The brother of my mother-in-law cannot be a
witness for me." The husband of one's sister, also the husband of the
sister of one's father and the husband of the sister of one's mother,
their sons and their sons-in-law, are also excluded from being
witnesses. A stepfather . . . his son-in-law, etc. There was a deed of
gift which was signed by two brothers-in -law--*i.e.*, two husbands of
two sisters, etc. How were the witnesses examined? They were brought
into separate chambers, etc. How were the witnesses frightened? There
was one who had hidden witnesses under the curtains of his bed, and he
said to his debtor: "Have I a mana with you?" etc. There was one who was
named by the people "the man who has against him a whole kab of
promissory notes." There was another who was named "the mouse who lies
on dinars," etc. There was a document of confession in which it was not
written: "He (the debtor) has said to us, 'Write a document, sign, and
give it him' (the creditor)," etc. "I have seen your deceased father
hide money in a certain place, saying, 'This belongs to so-and so,'"
etc. How is the judgment to be written? So was the custom of the
pure-minded in Jerusalem. They let parties enter, listened to their
claims, and thereafter let the witnesses enter, listened to their
testimony, then told all of them to go out, etc. This is a rule for
every case in which is mentioned "a witness," that it means two. Simeon
b. Alyaqim was anxious that the degree of Rabbi should be granted to
Jose b. Hanina, etc., etc. A confession after a confession, or a
confession after a loan, may be conjoined; but a loan after a loan, or a
loan after a confession, do not join ([p. 91](t0806.htm#page_91)).
Witnesses in civil cases who contradict one another in unimportant
investigations are to be considered. So long as the defendant brings
evidence to his advantage, the decision may be nullified by the court.
However, if after he had said, "I have no witnesses," etc. What happened
to R. Na'hman with a young man whom he made liable. If one who is
summoning a party who says, "I want my case brought before the assembly
of sages," etc., he maybe compelled to try his case in that city. In
Babylon they are not allowed to try cases of fine,
[79](t0806.htm#page_79)-[96](t0806.htm#page_96)

CHAPTER IV.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *III*. Cases coming before the court, the witnesses
thereof must be examined and investigated. What difference is there
between civil and criminal? The following from (a) to (g). Biblically
there is no difference between civil and criminal cases concerning
investigations. But why is it enacted that civil cases do not need
investigation? "Justice, only justice, shalt thou pursue," means that
one shall follow to the city of a celebrated judge, etc. What has the
court first to say to the advantage of the defense in criminal cases? If
one has tried a case, and made liable him who is not, or *vice versa*,
etc. Tudus the physician testified that not one cow or one swine was
sent from Alexandria in Egypt of which the womb was not removed. If one
was found guilty by the court, and thereafter one come, saving: "I know
a defense for him, etc, So long as the fire in the

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

stove burns, cut off all that you want to roast, and roast it. (*i.e.*,
when you are studying a thing, consider it thoroughly to prevent
questions.) All who take part in the discussion may explain their
reasons, until one of the accusers shall yield to one of the defenders.
In the neighborhood of R. Johanan there was one who was blind who used
to judge cases, etc. From the time of Moses until the time of Rabbi, we
do not find one man who was unique in the possession of wisdom, riches,
and glory, etc. One may teach his disciple, and at the same time may
judge in association with him in criminal cases. In ten things civil
cases differ from criminal cases. All are competent to judge civil
cases. But not all of them are competent to judge criminal cases. The
Sanhedrin sat in a half-circle in order that they could see each other,
etc. The Torah has testified that we are such a kind of people that even
a fence of lilies is sufficient for us, and will never be broken. How
were the witnesses awestruck in criminal cases? A human being stamps
many coins with one stamp, and all of them are alike; but the Holy One,
blessed be He, has stamped every man with the stamp of Adam the first,
and, nevertheless, not one of them is like the other, Although the court
of the Sanhedrin existed no longer, the punishment of the four kinds of
death prescribed in the Scripture was not abolished by Heaven. Adam the
first was created singly, and why? That disbelievers should not say
there were many Creators in heaven, etc. In three things one is
different from his neighbor--in voice, etc.,
[97](t0807.htm#page_97)-[114](t0807.htm#page_114)

CHAPTER V.

MISHNA *I*. The court used to examine the witnesses with seven
inquiries, etc. Should one of the witnesses say, "I have something to
say in behalf of the defendant," or one of the disciples, I have
something to say to the disadvantage of the defendant," the court
silences him. Why not say that eight queries are necessary in the
examination? Viz., how many minutes are there in the hour? Do you
recognize this man as the murderer of him who was slain? Was he a
heathen or an Israelite? Have you warned him? Did he accept the warning?
etc. Whence do we deduce that the warning is prescribed biblically?
Witnesses who testified in case of a betrothed woman, if they be found
collusive, are not to be put to death. What is the difference between
examination? etc. Until what time may the benediction of the moon be
pronounced? If Israel should have only the meritorious act of receiving
the glory of their heavenly Father once a month, it would be sufficient.
They do not drink wine. And why not? In civil cases the court may say:
The case becomes old, etc.,
[115](t0808.htm#page_115)-[125](t0808.htm#page_125)

CHAPTER VI.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *IV*. If the conclusion was to condemn, the guilty one
was taken out immediately to be stoned. A herald goes before him,
heralding: So and so, etc. One stands with a flag. I doubt who had to
bear the cost of the flag and horse mentioned in the Mishna, etc. If one
of the disciples said, "I have something to say in behalf of the
defendant," and thereafter he became dumb? He who is modest, the verse
considers him as if he should

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

sacrifice all the sacrifices mentioned in the Scripture. When he (the
guilty) was far from the place of execution--a distance of ten ells--he
was told to confess. Why are the words "unto us and to our children,"
and the Ayin of the "ad" pointed? The Lord said to Joshua: Thou thyself
hast caused all the evils, because thou didst excommunicate the goods of
Jericho. One should always proceed with prayer before trouble comes. It
happened with one who was going to be executed, that he said: If I am
guilty of this crime, my death shall not atone for all my sins. See
footnote, [1](t0809.htm#fn_40), concerning the legend of Simeon b. S. of
the eighty witches hung by him. A male was stoned while naked, but not a
female. The stoning place was two heights of a man, etc. If before the
execution the hands of the witnesses were cut off, he becomes free from
death. "The avenger of the blood himself shall slay." Infer from this
that it is a meritorious act for the avenger to do so himself,
[126](t0809.htm#page_126)-[139](t0809.htm#page_139)

MISHNAS *V*. AND *VI*. All who are stoned are also hanged. A male, but
not a female. Two must not be judged on the same day, provided there are
two kinds of death. How was one hanged? The beam was put in the earth,
etc. King Sabur questioned R. Hama: Whence do you deduce from the Torah
that one must be buried? etc. Is the burying because the corpse shall
become disgraced if not buried, or is it because of atonement? Is the
lamentation an honor for the living or for the deceased? And what is the
difference? etc. A wicked person must not be buried with an upright one.
All the curses with which David cursed Joab fell on the descendants of
David. They were \[II Sam. iii. 29\], etc. If not for Joab, David would
not have been able to occupy himself with the law, etc.,
[139](t0809.htm#page_139)-[148](t0809.htm#page_148)

CHAPTER VII.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *V*. Four kinds of capital punishment are prescribed to
the court by the Scriptures. According to R. Simeon, burning is more
rigorous than stoning. With her father, burning applies; with her
father-in-law, stoning applies. How is this to be understood? Do you
come to teach a Halakha which will be used only then when the Messiah
will appear? The prescribed punishment of burning was this: The sinner
was placed in waste knee-deep. Then placing a twisted scarf of coarse
material within a soft one, etc. But why should burning not be inferred
from the offerings of the bullocks, which were burned bodily? Nadob said
to Abihu: When will the two old men die, and you and I be leaders of
Israel? The prescribed punishment of slaying was thus: He was
decapitated, etc. The prescribed punishment of choking was thus: The
sinner was placed in waste knee-deep, etc. To the following sinners
stoning applies: viz., one who had connection with his mother, etc. "A
man" means to exclude a minor. \[Lev. xxii.\]: "That lieth with his
father's wife" means, that there is no difference whether she is his
mother or not, [150](t0810.htm#page_150)-[164](t0810.htm#page_164)

MISHNAS *VI*. TO *VII*. One who had connection with a human male, or
with an animal, and also a human female who uncovers herself before a
male animal, are punished with stoning. "With an animal" makes no
difference whether it was a large or a small one. A blasphemer is not
guilty, unless he mentioned the proper name of God (Jehovah). "Any man
whatsoever,"

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

etc., meaning to include the heathen, who are warned of blasphemy. Ten
commandments were commanded to Israel in Marah; seven of them are those
which were accepted by the descendants of Noah. For transgression of
these commandments a descendant of Noah is put to death, viz., adultery,
bloodshed, and blasphemy. A descendant of Noah may be put to death by
the decision of one judge, by the testimony of one witness, etc. Every
relationship for which the punishment of the courts of Israel is death,
a descendant of Noah is warned of it; but all other relationships, the
punishment of which is not death, are permissible to them. He who raises
his hand to his neighbor, although he has not as yet struck him, is
called wicked. "Flesh in which its life is, which is its blood, shall ye
not eat," \[Gen. ix. 4\] means any member of the animal, while it is
still alive. We do not find any case where what is forbidden to the
descendants of Noah should be allowed to the Israelites. An unclean
thing never came from heaven. There is no difference if one hears it
from the blasphemer himself or from the witness who heard it from the
blasphemer--he must rend his garments
[164](t0810.htm#page_164)-[187](t0810.htm#page_187)

MISHNAS *VIII*. TO *XII*. One is considered an idolater who worships it
with its proper worship; and even if he only sacrifices, smokes incense,
or pours wine, etc. Why not say that from bowing "all kinds of
worshipping" is to be inferred? In our Mishna it is stated: "He who
worships idols." There is another Mishna, farther on, which states: He
who says: "I will worship," is always considered an idolater, etc. If
one worship an idol because he loves it, or because he fears it, etc.
Concerning Sabbath it is more rigorous than all the other commandments
in one respect, and all other commandments are more rigorous in another
respect, etc. There is a tradition: He who conjoins the name of Heaven
with something else is to be destroyed. It happened to a female heathen
who was very sick an vowed that if she recovered she would worship all
the idols which were to be found, etc. If one gives one of his children
to Molech, he is not guilty unless he has transferred him to the
servants, etc. One is not guilty unless he let him pass in the usual
manner. What was that? A row of bricks were placed for passing, etc.
Baal ob (mentioned in the Scripture) is the python that makes the dead
speak from his armpit, and Yidoñi means one that makes the dead speak
from his mouth. Is not he who queries an "ob" the same who inquires of
the dead? Nay! etc. An observer of times is, according to R. Aqiba, he
who reckons times and hours, saying: This day is good to go on the road,
etc. He who curses his father or mother is not punished with a capital
punishment, unless he curse them by the proper name of God,
[187](t0810.htm#page_187)-[194](t0810.htm#page_194)

MISHNAS *XIII*. TO *XIV*. He who sins with a betrothed damsel is not
guilty to be stoned, unless she was a maiden betrothed and still in her
father's house. A seducer means one who is himself a commoner--*e.g.*,
he says: There is an idol in such and such a place which so and so eats,
etc. Concerning all who are liable to capital punishment biblically, it
is not allowed to hide witnesses except in this case, etc. A conjurer is
liable to be stoned only when he did an act, but not if he dazzled the
eyes. The Halakhas of witchcraft are similar to the Halakhas of Sabbath.
There are some to which stoning applies, etc. I have seen a rider of a
camel who took his sword, cut off the head of the camel, and thereafter
rung a bell, and the camel stood up. It was only a dazzling of the eyes.
The legend of R. Eliezer with

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

his disciple, "Thou shalt not learn to do," means: "Thou must not learn
to do, but thou mayest learn it to understand it for the purposes of
deciding cases, [194](t0810.htm#page_194)-[200](t0810.htm#page_200)

CHAPTER VIII.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *VIII*. A stubborn and rebellious son--at what age may
he be considered as such? From the time he brings forth two hairs, etc.;
but the sages used to speak with delicacy. A minor of nine years and one
day is fit to have connection with a woman, and in a case of adultery it
is considered. Whence do we know that the first generation produced
children at the age of eight? A daughter should be more open to the
charges of stubbornness and rebelliousness, etc. But so is the decree of
the Scripture--"a son, and not a daughter." He cannot be condemned as a
stubborn and rebellious son, unless he eats meat and drinks wine. You
shall not look for wine which makes red the faces of the wicked in this
world, and makes them pale in the world to come. Thirteen ways are
enumerated in the Scripture concerning wine, as in Genesis ix., from 20
to 25. If he has stolen from his father and consumed on *his* premises,
etc., he is not charged as a stubborn and rebellious son unless he stole
from his *mother* and father. If the father is willing to transfer the
case of the son in question to the court, and the mother is not willing,
or *vice versa*, etc. Such a thing neither occurred nor ever will be,
and the same is with the case of a misled town, and also with a house of
leprosy, and was written only for study. If one hand of his father or
mother is missing, or they limp, or are dumb, etc. If he runs away
before the decision of condemnation is rendered, etc. The Scripture
prefers that be should die innocent, and not be put to death because of
his sins. For the death of the wicked is both a benefit to them and a
benefit to the world, etc. In the case of "breaking in" (Ex. xii., 1\],
for which there is no liability if one is killed by a detector, one is
also punished because of his future crimes, etc. A burglar who broke in
and succeeded in taking some utensils and escaped is free from paying.
Because he acquired title to them by his blood. It happened that rams
were stolen from Rabha by burglary and thereafter they were returned to
him; he would not accept them because the above decision came from the
mouth of Rabh, etc., [201](t0811.htm#page_201)-[216](t0811.htm#page_216)

MISHNA *IX*. The following may be killed for self-protection: He who
pursues one to kill him, and he who pursueth a betrothed damsel, etc.
According to the rabbis the Scripture cares for the violation of her
honor, and as she also cares for it, though without life-sacrifice, she
must be saved even by killing her pursuers, etc. One who intends to
worship idols may be killed (if there is an impossibility of preventing
his crime otherwise.) "In the city of Luda it was voted and resolved
that if one were compelled, under threat of being killed, to commit any
one of all the crimes which are mentioned in the Torah, he might commit
it and not be killed, except idolatry, adultery, and bloodshed. Is a
descendant of Noah commanded to sanctify, the Holy Name, or not? It
happened to one that he saw a woman and became sick through his
infatuation, etc,. [216](t0811.htm#page_216)-[221](t0811.htm#page_221)

CHAPTER IX.

MISHNAS I. TO VI. Punishment of burning applies to one man who has
intercourse with a woman and her daughter, and to a daughter of a
priest,

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

etc. Punishment with the sword applies to a murderer and to the men of a
misled town. If one pressed down a person while he is in water, or in
fire, preventing him from coming out, he is guilty, etc. If one bound a
person, and he died thereafter of hunger, he is not guilty of a capital
crime. If, however, he put him in a sunny place, and he died because of
the sun, he is guilty. Ball-players--if one threw a ball with the
intention of killing some one, he is to be put to death, and if it was
unintentional, he is to be exiled, etc. All agree that if one kills a
person whose windpipe and larynx (gullet) are cut or whose skull is
fractured, he is free (for it is considered as if he attacked a dead
man). If one strikes a person with a stone or with his fists, and he was
diagnosed (by the physicians of the court) to die, and thereafter he
improved, etc. Capital punishment does not apply to one who intended to
kill an animal and killed a man, an idolater and killed an Israelite,
etc.; but it does apply to one who intended to strike a person on the
loins with an article which was sufficient for this purpose, and he
strikes him to death on his heart, etc. A murderer mixed up among
others--all of them are free, etc. If it happen that the persons
sentenced to deaths of different kinds, and are so mixed that it is not
known who comes under this kind of death and who under another, all of
them must be executed with the more lenient death. If one committed a
crime which deserves two kinds of death, he must be tried for the more
rigorous one. Ezek. xviii. must not be taken literally, but "the
mountains he eateth not" means that he does not live upon the reward of
the meritorious acts done by his parents; "his eyes he lifteth not up to
the idols" means that he never walked overbearingly, etc.,
[222](t0812.htm#page_222)-[238](t0812.htm#page_238)

MISHNAS *VII*. TO *IX*. He who receives stripes, and relaxes into the
same crime, the court takes him to the kyphos. He who kills a person not
in the presence of witnesses is taken to the kyphos and is fed on scant
bread and water. If one steals a kisvah, or one curses his neighbor,
invoking God as a "carver," zealous people (like Pinchas) have a right
to strike him when caught in the act. What is this punishment if there
were no zealous men? Answer to this, it happened that it was read before
R. Kahan in a dream, etc. In a case where there is a violation of the
Holy Name the honor of the master must not be considered. "If a priest
performs the service while he is defiled," etc. "If a common Israelite
served in the Temple," etc.,
[238](t0812.htm#page_238)-[244](t0812.htm#page_244)

CHAPTER X.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *VI*. Choking applies to him who strikes his father or
mother, to him who steals a living soul, etc. A son is not guilty of a
capital crime unless he wounds his father by striking him. Cursing is in
one respect more rigorous than striking, as he is guilty even if he did
it after his lather's death. If one steals a person, he is not guilty of
a capital crime unless he brings him upon his own premises. There is no
difference whether he stole a male or a female, a proselyte, or a
bondsman, or a minor, etc. R. Jehudah says that there is no disgrace for
slaves. "Thou shalt not steal," in the third commandment, means human
beings. \[Lev. xix., ii\]: "Ye shalt not steal," meaning money. A judge
rebelling against the Great Sanhedrin. There were in Jerusalem three
courts, etc. In case a judge in the country had a dispute with his
colleagues, they came to the first court. If this court were able to
decide it traditionally they rendered their decision; and if not, all of
them came to the Great Sanhedrin, which was in the Temple

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

treasury, etc. A disciple who is not a judge who decides for practice
against the Great Sanhedrin, is not culpable. A rebelling judge is not
guilty unless he gave his decision in a matter to which, if done
intentionally, korath applies, etc. The punishment of him who
transgresses the decision of the scribes is more rigorous than for that
which is plainly written in the Scriptures. The judge in question was
not put to death by the court of his own city, etc., but was brought to
the Supreme Council, in Jerusalem, etc. A false prophet who is to be
sentenced by the court is only he who prophesies what he (personally)
has not heard and what he was not told at all, etc. He who prophesied in
the name of an idol, saying, "So and so was said by such an idol,"
although it corresponds exactly with the Hebrew law, he is punished by
choking. See all illustrations, pp. 258-260. In every case mentioned in
the Torah, if a true prophet commands you to transgress, you may listen,
except as to idolatry,
[245](t0813.htm#page_245)-[261](t0813.htm#page_261)

CHAPTER XI.

MISHNA *I*. All Israel has a share in the world to come. The following
have no share in the world to come: He who says, etc. Three kings and
four commoners have no share in the world to come etc. Is he who does
not believe that the resurrection is hinted at in the Torah such a
criminal that he loses his share in the world to come? Where is the
resurrection hinted at in the Torah? etc. From the Pentateuch, Prophets,
and Hagiographa. See [267](t0814.htm#page_267), also footnote. Queen
Cleopatra questioned R. Mair thus: When they shall be restored, will
they be naked. or dressed? Cæsar questioned Rabbon Gamaliel: You say
that the dead will be restored. Does not the corpse become dust? etc.
The living die--should the dead come to life? That which has not existed
at all comes to life--shall those who had life once not come to life
again? The legend of Gebiah b. Pessisa who advocated Israel before
Alexander of Macedonia, etc. (Pp. [268](t0814.htm#page_268),
[270](t0814.htm#page_270).) Antoninus said to Rabbi: The body and soul
of a human may free themselves on the Day of judgment by Heaven. How so?
Why does the sun rise in the east and set in the west? At what time does
the soul come into the body? At what time does the evil spirit reach
man? Lest one say that the verse just cited means, I make one die and
another, one shall I bring to life, therefore it reads, "I wound and I
cure." As wounding and curing apply to one person only, etc. He who
hesitates in declaring a Halakha to a disciple, even the embryos in the
entrails of their mothers denounce him. Great is wisdom, as it was
placed between two divine names. Exiles atone for everything. The
upright who will be restored in the future will never return to dust.
"What will they do at the time the Holy One, blessed be He, shall renew
His world?" etc. Concerning the dead whom Ezekiel restored, the
different opinions of Tannaim and Amoriam, if it was a reality or a
parable only. ([p. 278](t0814.htm#page_278).) Six miracles occurred on
the day Nebuchadnezzar threw Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah into the
caldron. Even at the time of danger one shall not change the dress
belonging to his dignity. Where was Daniel at the time that they were
thrown into the caldron? The legend of Achab and Zedkiyahu with the
daughter of Nebuchadnezzar. According to the advice of three, Daniel
went away before the affair of Chananyah, etc, Concerning the six
barleys which Boaz gave to Ruth. All that is written in the book of Ezra
was said by Nehemiah b. Chackhalyah. Why then was

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

it not named after him? The angel who rules the souls after their
departure from this world is named Dumah. Hiskiah, who has eight names,
shall take revenge on Sanherib, who also has eight names. Hiskiah's
(king of Judah) whole meal consisted of a litter of herbs. Pharaoh, who
personally blasphemed, was also punished by Heaven. Sanherib, who
blasphemed through a messenger, was also punished through a messenger.
Ten trips had the wicked made on that day, etc., as it reads \[II Kings,
x. 28 to 32\]. There was one day more appointed for the punishment of
the iniquity of Nob. And the astrologers told Sanherib, etc. If the
judgment is postponed over one night there is hope that it will be
abolished entirely. The legend how Abishai saved King David from
Yishbi's hand at Nob. Sanherib, when he came to attack, brought with him
forty-five thousand princes with their concubines in golden carriages,
etc. See pages [293](t0814.htm#page_293)-[296](t0814.htm#page_296), the
many legends concerning Sanherib. Be careful with the children of the
Gentiles, as it happens very often wisdom emanates from them. That the
day on which Achaz died consisted of only two hours. And when Heskiah
became sick and thereafter recovered, the Holy One returned the ten
hours to that day, etc. Three hundred mules loaded with iron saws which
cut iron were given to Nebusaradan by Nebuchadnezzar while going to
attack Jerusalem. Nebusaradan was a true proselyte, from the descendants
of Sissera were such who studied the law in Jerusalem, and from the
descendants of Sanherib were such who taught the Torah among a majority
of Israelites, etc. Have you heard when the fallen son will come? etc.
In his Sabbatic period when the son of David will appear in the first
year there will be fulfilled, etc. The generation in which the son of
David will come, young men will make pale the faces of the old, etc. The
world will continue for six thousand years, the first two thousand of
which was a chaos, etc. There are no less than thirty-six upright in
every generation who receive the appearance of the Shekinah. All the
appointed times for the appearance of the Messiah have already ceased.
And it depends only on repentance and good deeds. Jerusalem will not be
redeemed but by charity. What the Messiah told to Jehoshua ben Levi: Ben
David will not arrive until Rome shall have dominated, etc. Discussion
concerning the name of the Messiah. The cock said to the bat, I look out
for the light because the light is mine (I see it), but for what purpose
do you wait for it? The days of the Messiah will be as from the day of
creation until now. "He hath despised the word of God," means he who
learned the Torah but does not teach it. He who learned the Torah and
does not repeat it is similar to him who sows but does not harvest, etc.
Has not Moses written something better than: And Lotan's sister was
Thimna, etc.? Who is meant by the term epicurian? What good have the
rabbis done for us? They have never permitted us to eat a crow, and they
have not prohibited us to eat a dove, etc. The measure with which man
measures will be measured out to him--*i.e.*, as a man deals he will be
dealt with. A good woman is a good gift; she may be given to one who
fears God. A bad woman is leprosy to her husband, etc. One may ask the
fortune tellers who tell fortunes by certain oils or eggs. But it is not
advisable to do so, because they often lie. Support me, and I will bear
the statement of Aqiba, my disciple, who says: "Pleased are
chastisements," etc. Three men (biblical personages) came with
indirectness, etc. What means, "and he lifted up his hands"? He took off
his phylacteries in his presence. (See footnote, page
[1](t0814.htm#fn_100).) The legends concerning Jeroboam,

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

pp. [322](t0814.htm#page_322)-[325](t0814.htm#page_325). King Menashe
appears to R. Ashi in a dream. R. Abuhu used to lecture about the three
kings and became sick, etc. Why was Achab rewarded by the prolongation
of his kingdom for twenty-two years? Because he was liberal with his
money and assisted many scholars from his estate; half his sins were
atoned. Four sects will not receive the glory of the Shekhina, viz.,
scorners, liars, hypocrites, and slanderers. Achaz abolished the worship
and sealed the Torah, etc. The angels wanted to put Michah aside, but
the Lord, however, said leave him alone because his house is open for
travellers. Great are entertainments, for its refusal estranged two
tribes from Israel, etc. Why does not the Mishna count Achaz and Amon
among those who have no share? etc. Explanation to verses of
Lamentation, pp. [334](t0814.htm#page_334) to [337](t0814.htm#page_337).
The Scripture is particular that if any one tells his troubles to his
neighbor, he should add: "May it not happen to you." The interpreters of
notes said that all of them have a share in the world to come, etc. "A
perpetual backsliding." Said Rabh: A victorious answer has the assembly
of Israel given to the prophets, etc. Concerning Bil'am, the elders of
Moab, and Midian, [265](t0814.htm#page_265)-[340](t0814.htm#page_340)

One shall always occupy himself with the Torah and divine commandments,
even not for the sake of Heaven, as finally He will come to do so for
His own sake, etc. The caution that Achiyah, the Shilonite, gave to
Israel is better for them than the blessings that Bil'am has given to
them. "And Israel dwelt in Shittim." Everywhere such an expression is to
be found it brings infliction, etc. I saw the record of Bil'am, and it
was written therein thirty-three years was Bil'am when he was killed by
Pinchas, the murderer. One shall not bring himself into temptation, as
David, king of Israel, placed himself in the power of a trial and
stumbled. Six months was David afflicted with leprosy; the Shekhina left
him, and the Sanhedrin separated themselves from him. Exclusion shall
always be with the left hand, and inclusion with the right hand--*i.e.*,
if one is compelled to repudiate some one, he shall do it easy as with
his left hand, etc. Concerning David's sin with Bath Sheba,
[340](t0814.htm#page_340)-[350](t0814.htm#page_350)

MISHNA *II*. The generation of the flood have no share in the world to
come, and are also not judged, etc. Concerning the generation of
dispersion, men of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc., pp.
[350](t0814.htm#page_350)-[355](t0814.htm#page_355): "Noah was just, a
perfect man in his generation;" in his generation, but not in others.
According to Resh Lakish: In his generation which was wicked, so much
the more in other generations. Eliezar, the servant of Abraham,
questioned Shem the great, etc. Shem the great questioned Eliezar, etc.
"The generation of dispersion." What had they done? What were the crimes
of the Sodomites? Concerning the congregation of Korah. One must do all
he can not to strengthen a quarrel, etc. "And all . . . on their feet,"
means the money which makes one stand on his feet. "The generation of
the desert has no share," etc, Eliezar, however, said, they have, etc.,
[350](t0814.htm#page_350)-[362](t0814.htm#page_362)

MISHNAS *III*. TO *IV*. The ten tribes who were exiled will not be
returned, etc., (pp.
[362](t0814.htm#page_362)-[363](t0814.htm#page_363)). From what age has
a minor a share in the world to come? Your saying is not satisfactory to
their creator. Say the reverse, even he who has studied but one law does
not belong to the Gehenna. It happened once that I was in Alexandria of
Egypt, and I found a certain old Gentile who said to me: Come, and I
will show you what my great-grandfathers have done to yours, etc.
Concerning Shebna and his society, ref. Isaiah, viii-12. Adam was
created on the eve of Sabbath. And why?

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

The Minnim shall not say, etc. At the time the Lord was about to create
a man, He created a *cœtus* of angels, etc. Every place where the Minnim
gave their wrong interpretation the answer of annulling it is to be
found in the same place--*e.g.*, [p. 370](t0814.htm#page_370). The
discussion with R. Gamaliel and other rabbis, pp.
[372](t0814.htm#page_372)-[376](t0814.htm#page_376). "My creatures are
sinking into the sea, and ye want to sing?" It reads \[Ob. i. 1\]: "The
vision of the Lord . . . concerning Edom." Obadiah was an
Edomite-proselyte. And this is what people say that the handle of the
hatchet to cut the forest is taken from the wood of the same forest.
\[Gen. xxii. 1\]: "After these things." After what? After the words of
the Satan, etc. According to Levi, after the exchange of the words
between Ishmael and Isaac, etc.,
[362](t0814.htm#page_362)-[378](t0814.htm#page_378)

MISHNA IV. The men of a misled town have no share in the world to come
(the Halakhas in detail,
[378](t0814.htm#page_378)-[383](t0814.htm#page_383)). Concerning the key
of rain, which is one of the three keys which are not to be transferred
to a messenger, Elijah, too, in the days of Achab, etc.,
[378](t0814.htm#page_378)-[385](t0814.htm#page_385)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](t0804)
