<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1304) 
 [Next](sbe1306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7"></span>p. 7

## SA*M*GHÂDISESÂ DHAMMÂ.

> RULES WHICH REQUIRE, AS WELL IN THEIR EARLIER AS IN THEIR LATER
> STAGES, FORMAL MEETINGS OF THE ORDER<span
> id="page_7_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
> class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_7_note_1).

   Here, venerable Sirs, the thirteen matters, which, as well in their
earlier as in their later stages, require formal meetings of the Order,
come into recitation.

   <span id="1"></span>1. The emission of semen by design, except by a
person sleeping, is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="2"></span>2. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being degraded<span
id="page_7_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_7_note_2), shall, with
perverted<span id="page_7_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_7_note_3) mind, come into bodily
contact with a woman, by taking hold of her hand, or by taking hold
ofher hair, or by touching any part of her body--that is a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="3"></span>3. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being degraded, shall,
with perverted mind, address a woman with wicked words, exciting to
passion as those of a young man to a maid--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa<span
id="page_7_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_7_note_4).

<span id="page_8"></span>p. 8

   <span id="4"></span>4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being degraded, shall,
with perverted mind, magnify, in the hearing of a woman, ministration to
himself<span id="page_8_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_8_note_1) (by saying), 'This, Sister
would be the noblest of ministrations, that to so righteous and exalted
a religious person as myself you should ministrate by that act,'
(meaning) sexual intercourse--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="5"></span>5. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall act as a go-between
for a woman to a man, or for a man to a woman, or for a wife, or for a
paramour, or even for a harlot--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="6"></span>6. A Bhikkhu who, begging (the materials)
together, is having a hut put up for his own use, to belong to no one
(else), must have it made of due measurement. And herein this is the
measurement--in length twelve spans according to the accepted span<span
id="page_8_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_8_note_2), in breadth seven spans
(measured) inside. <span id="page_9"></span>p. 9 The Bhikkhus must be
brought to the place to approve the site; and those Bhikkhus shall
approve a site free from danger<span id="page_9_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_9_note_1), and with an open space
around it<span id="page_9_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_9_note_2). If a Bhikku shall, at his
own request, have a hut put up on a dangerous site, without the open
space around it, or shall not bring the Bhikkus to approve the site, or
shall exceed the (due) measure--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="7"></span>7. A Bhikkhu who is having a large<span
id="page_9_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_9_note_3) residence made for his own
use, and to belong (also) to others, shall bring the Bhikkhus to the
place to approve the site; and those Bhikkhus shall approve a site free
from danger, and with an open space around it. If a Bhikkhu shall have a
large residence made on a dangerous site, without the open space around
it, or shall not bring the Bhikkhus to the place to approve the
site--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="8"></span>8. Whatsoever Bhikkhu<span
id="page_9_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_9_note_4), in harshness, malice, or
anger, shall harass (another) Bhikkhu by a groundless (charge of having
committed) a Pârâ*g*ika offence, thinking to himself, 'Perchance I may
(thus) get him to fall from this religious life<span
id="page_9_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_9_note_5):--and then at some later
time, either when he is pressed, or without his being pressed, the case
turns out to be groundless, <span id="page_10"></span>p. 10 and the
Bhikkhu confesses his malice<span id="page_10_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_10_note_1)--that is a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="9"></span>9. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, in harshness, malice, or
anger, shall harass another Bhikkhu by a groundless charge of having
committed a Pârâ*g*ika offence, supporting himself by some point or
other of no importance in a case that really rests on something of a
different kind; thinking to himself, 'Perchance I may thus get him to
fall from this religious life'--and then at .some later time, either
when he is pressed, or without his being pressed, the case turns out to
rest on something of a different kind, and that Bhikkhu confesses his
malice-that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa<span
id="page_10_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_10_note_2).

   <span id="10"></span>10. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall go about to cause
division in a community<span id="page_10_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_10_note_3) that is at union, or
shall persist in calling attention to some matter calculated to cause
division, that Bhikkhu should thus be addressed by the Bhikkhus: 'Sir,
go not about to cause division in a community that is at union,' or,
'Persist not in calling attention to a matter calculated to cause
division;' 'Be, Sir, at one with the community, for the community, being
at unity, in harmony, without dispute, dwells pleasantly under <span
id="page_11"></span>p. 11 one authority<span
id="page_11_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_11_note_1).'If that Bhikkhu, when he
has thus been spoken to by the Bhikkhus, should persist as before, then
let that Bhikkhu be (formally) admonished about it by the Bhikkhus as a
body<span id="page_11_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_11_note_2), even to the third time,
to the intent that he abandon that course. If, while being so admonished
up to the third time, he abandon that course, it is well: if he abandon
it not--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="11"></span>11. Now if other Bhikkhus, one, or two, or
three, become adherents of that Bhikkhu, and raise their voices on his
side; if they should say thus: 'Say not, Sirs, anything against. that
Bhikkhu! That Bhikkhu both speaks according to the Dhamma, and he speaks
according to the Vinaya; it is our wish, too, and desire, that he
adopts, and gives expression to; and he speaks, knowing that what he
says appears to us also to be right:'--then let those Bhikkhus be
addressed by the Bhikkhus thus: 'Say not so, Sirs! That Bhikkhu speaks
not according to the Dhamma, neither does he speak according to the
Vinaya. Let not, Sirs, the causing of division in the community be
pleasing to you! Be, Sirs, at one with the community! for the community,
being at unity, in harmony, without dispute, dwells pleasantly under one
discipline.' If those Bhikkhus, when they have thus been spoken to by
the Bhikkhus, should persist as before, those Bhikkhus should be <span
id="page_12"></span>p. 12 (formally) adjured by the Bhikkhus, as a body,
even to the third time, to the end that they abandon that course. If,
while being so adjured, up to the third time, they abandon that course,
it is well: if they abandon it not--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="12"></span>12. Should a Bhikkhu refuse to listen to what is
said to him<span id="page_12_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_12_note_1); and when spoken to by
the Bhikkhus, in accordance with the Dhamma<span
id="page_12_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_12_note_2), touching the precepts
handed clown in the body of recited law<span
id="page_12_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_12_note_3), will allow nothing to be
said to him (objecting), 'Say nothing to me, Sirs, either good or bad:
and I will say nothing, either good or bad, to you. Be good enough,
Sirs, to refrain from speaking to me!'--then let that Bhikkhu be
addressed by the Bhikkhus thus: 'Do not, Sir, make yourself a person who
cannot be spoken to: make yourself rather, Sir, a person to whom we can
speak. Speak to the Bhikkhus, Sir, in accordance with the Dhamma; and
the Bhlkkhus, Sir, will speak in accordance with the Dhamma to you. For
thus has the church<span id="page_12_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_12_note_4) of the Blessed One grown
large; that is to say, by mutual converse, and by mutual help<span
id="page_12_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_12_note_5).' If that Bhikkhu, when
he has thus been spoken to by the Bhikkhus, should persist as before,
then let that Bhikkhu be <span id="page_13"></span>p. 13 (formally)
adjured by the Bhikkhus as a body, even to the third time, to the end
that he abandon that course. If, while being so adjured, up to the third
time, he abandon that course, it is well: if he abandon it not--that is
a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

   <span id="13"></span>13. Should a Bhikkhu dwell near a certain
village or town, leading a life hurtful to the laity, and devoted to
evil, (so that) his evil deeds are seen and heard, and the families led
astray by him are seen and heard, let that Bhikkhu be spoken to by the
Bhikkhus thus: 'Your life, Sir, is hurtful to the laity, and evil; your
evil deeds, Sir, are seen and heard; and families are seen and heard to
be led astray by you. Be so good, Sir, as to depart from this residence;
you have dwelt here, Sir, long enough.' If, when that Bhikkhu is thus
addressed by the Bhikkhus he should answer the Bhikkhus thus: 'The
Bhikkhus are walking in longing, the Bhikkhus are walking in malice, the
Bhikkhus are walking in delusion, the Bhikkhus are walking in fear; and,
for a fault of a like nature, they send some away, and some they send
not away<span id="page_13_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_13_note_1):'--then that Bhikkhu
should be spoken to by the Bhikkhus thus: 'Say not so, Sir! The Bhikkhus
walk not in longing, the Bhikkhus walk not in malice, the Bhikkhus walk
not in delusion, the Bhikkhus walk not in fear; and they send not some
away, for a fault of a like nature, while they send others not away.
Your life, Sir, is hurtful to the laity, and evil; your evil deeds, Sir,
are seen and heard, and families are seen and heard, Sir, to be led
astray by you. Be so good, Sir, as to depart from this residence; you
have dwelt <span id="page_14"></span>p. 14 here, Sir, long enough.' If
that Bhikkhu, when thus spoken to by the Bhikkhus should persist as
before, that Bhikkhu should be (formally) adjured by the Bhikkhus as a
body, even to the third time, to the end that he abandon that course.
If, while beîng so adjured, up to the third time, he abandon that
course, it is well: if he abandon it not--that is a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Venerable Sirs, the thirteen matters which require, as well in their
earlier as in their later stages, formal meetings of the Order, have
been recited; nine which become offences at once, and four which are not
completed until the third admonition.

   If a Bhikkhu have committed either one or other of these<span
id="page_14_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_14_note_1), for as many days as he
knowingly conceals his sin, for so many days must that Bhikkhu, even
against his will, remain in probation<span
id="page_14_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_14_note_2). When the probation is
over, that Bhikkhu must, for six further days, undergo the Mânatta
discipline<span id="page_14_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_14_note_3) (Penance). When the
Penance has been removed, that Bhikkhu must be reinstated in some place
where the community of the Bhikkhus forms a body of twenty. If a
community of Bhikkhus forming a body of less than twenty, even by one,
should reinstate that Bhikkhu, he is not reinstated, and that community
is blameworthy. This is the proper course in that case.

<span id="page_15"></span>p. 15

   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A second time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A third time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Here endeth the recitation of the Sa*m*ghâdisesas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Aniyatâ Dhammâ](sbe1306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_7"></span>p. 7

<span id="page_7_note_1"></span>[1](#page_7_fr_1) The expression is
curious, but the authorites given (sub voce) are decisive as to its
meaning. Whereas the Pârâ*g*ika offences were dealt with in one meeting
of the Order, these thirteen offences gave rise to the various
Sa*m*ghakammas (formai resolutions or proceedings at meetings of the
Order), which are explained in detail in the third Khandhaka of the
*K*ullavagga.

The text of, and the ancient commentary on this portion of the
Pâtimokkha will be round in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga in the Book on the
Sa*m*ghâdisesas.

<span id="page_7_note_2"></span>[2](#page_7_fr_2) Oti*nn*o, literally,
'having gone down,' which the old commentator in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga
explains as 'lustfully, or with a mind bound by desire.' Our word
'degraded' has often a very similar connotation.

<span id="page_7_note_3"></span>[3](#page_7_fr_3) Vipari*n*atena,
literally, 'changed;' here 'changed for the worse.' Compare
Mahâ-sudassana Sut ta II, 39, and the Old Com- ment at Minayeff, p. 64.

<span id="page_7_note_4"></span>[4](#page_7_fr_4) Compare the second
Aniyata.

<span id="footnotes_page_8"></span>p. 8

<span id="page_8_note_1"></span>[1](#page_8_fr_1) Attakâmapâri*k*ariyâ,
perhaps 'to his lusts;' but we follow the old commentator.

<span id="page_8_note_2"></span>[2](#page_8_fr_2) Sugata-vidatthiyâ.
Dickson translates 'of the span of Buddha,' Sugata being one of the many
epithets applied to the Buddha in poetry, or poetical prose. Mr. James
D'Alwis in the Ceylon Asiatic Society's Journal for 1874 has a long
article to show that this cannot be the correct meaning of the word
'Sugata' in this connection; and we think he is right, though his
discussion as to what it does mean (evidently more than a simple span)
seems to lead to no certain conclusion. The older Ceylon commentators
take the expression as being equal to one and a half carpenter's cubits,
a 'carpenter's cubit' (Si*m*halese Wa*d*u-riyana) being two ordinary
cubits, so that 'the Buddha's span' (as they translate it) would be four
feet and a half! But the Bhikkhus of the present day in Ceylon take it
to be equal to the length of the supposed foot-print of the Buddha on
Adam's Peak; that is, four ordinary cubits, or six feet. See Dickson's
note; and compare Nissaggiya 15, and Pâ*k*ittiya 87-92.

There is no comment on the phrase in the Old Commentary, which is
especially curious if the word Sugata meant 'the Buddha's,' that is to
say, the Buddha's span, when that work was composed.

<span id="footnotes_page_9"></span>p. 9

<span id="page_9_note_1"></span>[1](#page_9_fr_1) That is, either to
living creatures (birds, ants, and so on) by clearing the site; or to
the future resident after it is built. See the old commentator's note on
Sârambha at Minayeff, p. 71.

<span id="page_9_note_2"></span>[2](#page_9_fr_2) 'Sufficient for a cart
drawn by a yoke of oxen to pass round it,' according to the old
commentator.

<span id="page_9_note_3"></span>[3](#page_9_fr_3) Mahallaka. Compare
*K*ullavagga VI, 11, 1.

<span id="page_9_note_4"></span>[4](#page_9_fr_4) In the text read, of
course, Bhikkhu, not Bhikkhû.

<span id="page_9_note_5"></span>[5](#page_9_fr_5) I. e. to throw off the
robes, to leave the Order.

<span id="footnotes_page_10"></span>p. 10

<span id="page_10_note_1"></span>[1](#page_10_fr_1) Dosa*m* was probably
meant here to refer to the doso at the beginning of the rule.

<span id="page_10_note_2"></span>[2](#page_10_fr_2) For instance, the
Bhikkhu has seen that A, who is a Khattiya, has committed some offence.
He says either that he has seen a Khattiya commit that offence, and thus
harasses an innocent person; or he says that A has committed a
Pârâ*g*ika offence, whereas the offence is of a lesser nature.

For *k*aveyyan in the text read *k*âveyyan.

<span id="page_10_note_3"></span>[3](#page_10_fr_3) Sa*m*gha; that is,
the company of the Brethren dwelling in one place, or in one district.

<span id="footnotes_page_11"></span>p. 11

<span id="page_11_note_1"></span>[1](#page_11_fr_1) Ekuddeso; that is,
the authority of the rules recited in the Pâtimokkha.

<span id="page_11_note_2"></span>[2](#page_11_fr_2) Samanubhâsitabbo. We
think 'admonish' is not too strong a rendering of this term; and not
inconsistent with the equality of the fraternity, as the admonition
comes from the united body. The preposition sam need not imply a
Sa*m*ghakamma, which appears to have been necessary only after the
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence had been completed. We occasionally render the
word by 'adjure.'

<span id="footnotes_page_12"></span>p. 12

<span id="page_12_note_1"></span>[1](#page_12_fr_1) Dubbako is not
'unruly,' as Dickson has, following Childers, who gives 'abusive,
unruly, violent.' It means rather 'difficult to reason with, averse to
instruction.' Compare *G*âtaka I, 151, 152.

<span id="page_12_note_2"></span>[2](#page_12_fr_2) Sahadhammika*m*,
which is here adverbial; and where the Dhamma refers to the Rules, as is
pointed out in the Introduction.

<span id="page_12_note_3"></span>[3](#page_12_fr_3)
Uddesa-pariyâpannesu; uddesa being here practically the same as
Pâtimokkha.

<span id="page_12_note_4"></span>[4](#page_12_fr_4) Parisâ, 'the
retinue, the followers, the adherents,' referring here to the Sa*m*gha
only.

<span id="page_12_note_5"></span>[5](#page_12_fr_5) In the text read
vu*tth*âpanena.

<span id="footnotes_page_13"></span>p. 13

<span id="page_13_note_1"></span>[1](#page_13_fr_1) On the use of
Pabbâ*g*eti in this sense comp. the 2nd Pâr.

<span id="footnotes_page_14"></span>p. 14

<span id="page_14_note_1"></span>[1](#page_14_fr_1) Literally, 'of
which.' In the text there should be no full stop after yâvatatiyakâ.

<span id="page_14_note_2"></span>[2](#page_14_fr_2) On the regulations
respecting Parivâsa (Probation), see *K*ullavagga II, 1-3.

<span id="page_14_note_3"></span>[3](#page_14_fr_3) On the regulations
respecting Mânatta (Penance), see *K*ullavagga II, 6-8.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
