<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1313) 
 [Next](sbe1315)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

## THIRD KHANDHAKA.

(RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON, VASSA.)

### <span id="1"></span>1.

   <span id="1:1"></span>1. At that time the Blessed One dwelt at
Râ*g*agaha, in the Ve*l*uvana, in the Kalandakanivâpa<span
id="page_298_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_298_note_1). At that time the
retreat during the rainy season had not yet been instituted by the
Blessed One for the Bhikkhus. Thus the Bhikkhus went on their travels
alike during winter, summer, and the rainy season.

   <span id="1:2"></span>2. People were annoyed, murmured, and became
angry, saying, 'How can the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as go on their travels
alike during winter, summer, and the rainy season? They crush the green
herbs, they hurt vegetable life<span
id="page_298_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_298_note_2), they destroy the life
of many small living things. Shall the ascetics who belong to Titthiya
schools, whose doctrine is ill preached, retire during the rainy season
and arrange places for themselves to live in<span
id="page_298_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_298_note_3)? shall the birds make
their nests on the summits of the trees, and retire during <span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> the rainy season, and arrange themselves
places to live in; and yet the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as go on their
travels alike during winter, summer, and the rainy season, crushing the
green herbs, hurting vegetable life, and destroying the life of many
small things?'

   <span id="1:3"></span>3. Now some Bhikkhus heard those people that
were annoyed, murmured, and had become angry. These Bhikkhus told this
thing to the Blessed One. In consequence of that and on this occasion
the Blessed One, after having delivered a religious discourse, thus
addressed the Bhikkhus: 'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you enter upon
Vassa<span id="page_299_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_299_note_1).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="2"></span>2.

   <span id="2:1"></span>1. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'When are we to
enter upon Vassa?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you enter upon Vassa in the rainy
season.'

   <span id="2:2"></span>2. Then the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many periods
are there for entering upon Vassa?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'There are two periods, O Bhikkhus, for entering upon Vassa, the
earlier and the later. The earlier time for entering (upon Vassa) is the
day after the <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> full moon of Âsâ*lh*a
(June-July); the later, a month after the full moon of Âsâ*lh*a<span
id="page_300_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_300_note_1). These, O Bhikkhus, are
the two periods for entering upon Vassa..'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="3"></span>3.

   <span id="3:1"></span>1. At that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus,
having entered upon Vassa, went on their travels during the period of
Vassa. People were annoyed, murmured, and became angry (saying), 'How
can the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as go on their travels alike during winter,
summer, and the rainy season, . . . (&c., as in chap. 1. 2, down to:)
and destroy the life of many small living things?'

   <span id="3:2"></span>2. Now some Bhikkhus heard those people that
were annoyed, murmured, and had become angry. The moderate Bhikkhus were
annoyed, murmured, and became angry (saying), 'How can the *Kh*abbaggiya
Bhikkhus, having entered upon Vassa, go on their travels during the
period of Vassa?'

   These Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

   In consequence of that and on this occasion the Blessed One, after
having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed the Bhikkhus:

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, who has entered upon Vassa, go on his
travels before he has kept Vassa during the earlier or during the later
three months. He who does so, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="4"></span>4.

   <span id="4:1"></span>1. At that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus were
not willing to enter upon Vassâ.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, forbear to enter upon Vassa. He who does not
enter upon Vassa, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="4:2"></span>2. At that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus, who
were not willing to enter upon Vassa on the prescribed day, purposely
left the district (where they were living).

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, purposely leave the district (where he is
living), because he is not willing to enter upon Vassa on the prescribed
day. He who does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="4:3"></span>3. At that time the Magadha king Seniya
Bimbisâra, who wished that the Vassa period might be postponed, sent a
messenger to the Bhikkhus: 'What if their reverences were to enter upon
Vassa on the next full moon day?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you obey kings.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

### <span id="5"></span>5.

   <span id="5:1"></span>1. And the Blessed One, after having resided at
Râ*g*agaha as long as he thought fit, went forth to Sâvatthi. Wandering
from place to place he came to Sâvatthi. There, at Sâvatthi, the Blessed
One dwelt in the *G*etavana, the garden of Anâthapi*nd*ika.

   At that time an upâsaka (lay devotee) named Udena, in the Kosala
country, had a Vihâra built for the Sa*m*gha. He sent a messenger to the
Bhikkhus (saying), 'Might their reverences come hither; I desire to
bestow gifts (on the Sa*m*gha) and to hear the Dhamma and to see the
Bhikkhus.'

   <span id="5:2"></span>2. The Bhikkhus replied: 'The Blessed One has
prescribed, friend, that no one who has entered upon Vassa, may go on a
journey before he has kept Vassa during the earlier or during the later
three months. Let the upâsaka Udena wait so long as the Bhikkhus keep
their Vassa residence; when they have finished Vassa, they will go. But
if there is any urgent necessity, let him dedicate the Vihâra in
presence of the Bhikkhus who reside there.'

   <span id="5:3"></span>3. The upâsaka Udena was annoyed, murmured, and
became angry (saying), 'How can their reverences, when I send for them,
refuse to come? I am a giver and a doer (of good works), and do service
to the fraternity.' Some Bhikkhus heard the upâsaka Udena, who was
annoyed, &c.

   These Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.

   <span id="5:4"></span>4. In consequence of that the Blessed One,
after having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed the
Bhikkhus:

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go (even during <span id="page_303">p.
303</span> the rainy season), if the affair for which you go can be
accomplished in seven days, and if you are sent for, but not if you are
not sent for, by a person of one of the following seven classes:
Bhikkhus, Bhikkhunîs, sikkharnânâs<span
id="page_303_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_303_note_1). sâma*n*eras,
sâma*n*erîs, lay devotees, female lay devotees. I allow you, O Bhikkhus,
to go, if the thing (you go for) can be accomplished in seven days, and
if you are sent for, but not if you are not sent for, by a person of one
of these seven classes. Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="5:5"></span>5. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, an upâsaka has built a
Vihâra for the Sa*m*gha. If he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus
(saying), "Might their reverences come hither; I desire to bestow gifts
(on them) and to hear the Dhamma and to see the Bhikkhus," you ought to
go, O Bhikkhus, if the affair for which you go can be accomplished in
seven days, and if he sends for you, but not if he does not send for
you. Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="5:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, an upâsaka has built
for the Sa*m*gha an a*ddh*ayoga<span
id="page_303_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_303_note_2). has built a storied
house, has built an attic, has constructed a cave, a cell, a store-room,
a refectory, a fire-room, a warehouse<span
id="page_303_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_303_note_3), a privy, a place to
walk in, a house to walk in, a well, a well house, a *g*antâghara<span
id="page_303_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_303_note_4), a *g*antâghara
room<span id="page_303_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_303_note_5), a lotus-pond, a
pavilion, a park, or <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> has prepared the
site for a park. If he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus, . . . . (&c.,
as in § 5, down to the end of the section).

   <span id="5:7"></span>7. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, an upâsaka has built
for a number of Bhikkhus an a*ddh*ayoga . . . . (&c., as in § 6 to the
end of the section), . . . . for one Bhikkhu a Vihâra, an a*ddh*ayoga, a
storied bouse. . . . (&c., as in § 6 to the end).

   <span id="5:8"></span>8. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, an upâsaka has built
for the sisterhood of Bhikkhunîs, &c., for a number of Bhikkhunîs, for
one Bhikkhunî, for a number of sikkhamânâs, for one sikkhamânâ, for a
number of sâma*n*eras, for one sâma*n*era, for a number of sâma*n*erîs,
for one sâma*n*erî a Vihâra, &c.<span
id="page_304_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_304_note_1) If he sends a messenger
to the Bhikkhus, &c.

   <span id="5:9"></span>9. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, an upâsaka has built
for his own use a residence, a sleeping room, a stable<span
id="page_304_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_304_note_2), a tower, a one-peaked
building<span id="page_304_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_304_note_3), a shop, a boutique, a
storied house, an attic, a cave, a cell, a store-room, a refectory, a
fire-room, a kitchen, a privy, a place to waIk in, a house to walk in, a
well, a well house, a *g*antâghara, a *g*antâghara room, a lotus-pond, a
pavilion, a park, or has prepared the site for a park; or that his son
is to choose a consort; or that his daughter is to choose a consort; or
that he is sick; or that he knows how <span id="page_305">p. 305</span>
to recite a celebrated suttanta. If he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus
(saying), "Might their reverences come and learn this suttanta;
otherwise this suttanta will fall into oblivion;"--or if he has any
other business or any work to be done; and if he sends a messenger to
the Bhikkhus (saying), "Might their reverences come hither" (&c.) then
you ought to go (&c., as in § 5, down to:) you ought to return.

   <span id="5:10"></span><span id="5:11"></span><span
id="5:12"></span>10-12. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, an upâsikâ has built a
Vihâra for the Sa*m*gha (&c., as in §§ 5-9<span
id="page_305_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_305_note_1)).

   <span id="5:13"></span>13. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has built,
&c., a Bhikkhunî, a sikkharnânâ, a sâma*n*era, a sâma*n*erî has built
for the Sa*m*gha, for a number of Bhikkhus, for one Bhikkhu, for the
sisterhood of Bhikkhunîs, for one sâma*n*erî, for his own use, a Vihâra
(&c., as in § 8).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="6"></span>6.

   <span id="6:1"></span>1. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick. He
sent a messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying), 'I am sick; might the
Bhikkhus come to me; I long for the Bhikkhus' coming.'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go (even during the rainy season), if
the affair for which you go can be accomplished in seven days, even if
you are not sent for, and much more if you are sent for, by a <span
id="page_306">p. 306</span> person of one of the following five classes:
Bhikkhus, Bhikkhunîs, sikkhamânâs, sâma*n*eras, and sâma*n*erîs. I allow
you, O Bhikkhus, to go, if the affair for which you go can be
accomplished in seven days, even if you are not sent for, and much more
if you are sent for, by a person of one of these five classes. Within
seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:2"></span>2. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu is sick. If
he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying), "I am sick; might the
Bhikkhus come to me; I long for the Bhikkhus' coming," you ought to go,
O Bhikkhus, if the thing can be accomplished in seven days, even if he
had not sent for you, much more when he has sent (saying to yourselves):
"I will try to get food for the sick, or food for the tender of the
sick, or medicine for the sick, or I will ask him (questions referring
to the Dhamma), or nurse him." Within seven days you ought to retum.

   <span id="6:3"></span>3. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, inward struggles have
befallen a Bhikkhu. If he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus: "Inward
struggles have befallen me; might the Bhikkhus come to me; I long for
the Bhikkhus' coming," you ought to go . . . . (&c., as in § 2, down
to); (saying to yourselves): "I will try to appease those struggles, or
cause them to be appeased (by another), or compose him by religious
conversation." Within seven days you ought to retum.

   <span id="6:4"></span>4. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu in whose
mind doubts of conscience have arisen sends . . . . (&c., as in § 3,
down to): (saying to yourselves): "I will try to dispel those doubts, or
cause <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> them to be dispelled) or compose
him by religious conversation." Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:5"></span>5. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu takes to a
false doctrine. If he sends . . . . (&c., down to): (saying to
yourselves): "I will discuss that false doctrine, or cause another to
discuss it, or compose (that Bhikkhu) by religious conversation." Within
seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu is guilty of
a grave offence and ought to be sentenced to parivâsa discipline. If he
sends . . . . (&c., down to): (saying to yourselves): "I will take care
that he may be sentenced to parivâsa discipline, or I will propose the
resolution (to the assembly), or I will help to complete the quorum
(required for passing the sentence of parivâsa):' Within seven days you
ought to return.

   <span id="6:7"></span>7. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu ought to be
sentenced to recommence penal discipline. If he sends . . . . (&c., as
in § 6, down to the end of the section ).

   <span id="6:8"></span>8. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu ought to
have the mânatta discipline imposed upon him. If he sends . . . . (&c.)
as in § 6, down to the end of the section).

   <span id="6:9"></span>9. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu (having duly
undergone penal discipline) ought to be rehabilitated. If he sends . . .
. (&c., as in § 6).

   <span id="6:10"></span>10. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Sa*m*gha is
going to proceed against a Bhikkhu by the ta*gg*aniyakamma, or the
nissaya, or the pabbâ*g*aniyakamma) or the pa*t*isâra*n*iyakamma, or the
ukkhepaniyakamma. If that Bhikkhu sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus
(saying), "The Sa*m*gha <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> is going to
proceed against me; might the Bhikkhus come to me; I long for the
Bhikkhus' coming," you ought to go . . . . (&c., as in § 2, down to):
(saying to yourselves): "What can be done in order that the Sa*m*gha may
not proceed (against that Bhikkhu) or may mitigate the proceeding?"
Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:11"></span>11. 'Or the Sa*m*gha has instituted a
proceeding against him, the ta*gg*aniyakamma . . . . (&c., down to): . .
. . or the ukkhepaniyakamma; if he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus:
"The Sa*m*gha has instituted a proceeding against me; might the Bhikkhus
come to me; I long for the Bhikkhus' coming," you ought to go . . . .
(&c., as in § 3, down to): (saying to yourselves): "What can be done in
order that this Bhikkhu may behave himself properly, live modestly, and
aspire to get clear of his penance, and that the Sa*m*gha may revoke its
sentence?" Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:12"></span><span id="6:13"></span><span
id="6:14"></span><span id="6:15"></span>12-15. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhunî is sick, &c.<span id="page_308_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_308_note_1)

   <span id="6:16"></span>16. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhunî is
guilty of a grave offence and ought to be sentenced to mânatta
discipline<span id="page_308_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_308_note_2). If she sends . . . .
(as in § 3, down to): . . . . (saying to yourselves): "I will take care
that she may be sentenced to mânatta discipline<span
id="page_308_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_308_note_3)." Within seven days you
ought to return.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

   <span id="6:17"></span>17. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhunî ought to
be sentenced to recommence penal discipline . . . . (&c., as in § 7).

   <span id="6:18"></span>18. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhunî who is
to be rehabilitated . . . . (&c., as in § 9).

   <span id="6:19"></span>19. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Sa*m*gha is
going to proceed against a Bhikkhunî by the ta*gg*aniyakamma . . . .
(&c., as in § 10).

   <span id="6:20"></span>20. 'Or the Sa*m*gha has instituted a
proceeding against her . . . . (&c. , as in § 11).

   <span id="6:21"></span><span id="6:22"></span>21, 22. 'In case, O
Bhikkhus, a sikkhamânâ is sick . . . . (&c., see §§ 2-5).

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a sikkhamânâ has violated<span
id="page_309_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_309_note_1) the precepts (in which
she is trained). If she sends . . . . (&c., as in § 3, down to): (saying
to yourselves): "I will take care that she may take upon herself the
precepts (again)." Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:23"></span>23. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a sikkhamânâ desires
to receive the upasampadâ ordination. If she sends, &c., . . . . you
ought to go (saying to yourselves): "I will take care that she may
receive the upasampadâ ordination, or I will proclaim the formula (of
ordination before the assembly), or I will help to complete the quorum."
Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:24"></span><span id="6:25"></span>24, 25. 'In case, O
Bhikkhus, a sâma*n*era is sick (&c., as in §§ 2-5) . . . . , a
sâma*n*era desires <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> to ask concerning
Vassa<span id="page_310_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_310_note_1). If he sends . . . .
(saying to yourselves): "I will ask him or I will tell it to him."
Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="6:26"></span>26. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a sâma*n*era who
desires to receive the upasampadâ ordination (&c., see § 23).

   <span id="6:27"></span><span id="6:28"></span>27, 28. 'In case, O
Bhikkhus, a sâma*n*erî is sick (&c., see §§ 24-25).

   <span id="6:29"></span>29. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a sâma*n*erî desires
to take upon herself the precepts. If she sends . . . . &c., you should
go (saying to yourselves): "I will take care that she may take upon
herself the precepts." Within seven days you ought to return.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="7"></span>7.

   <span id="7:1"></span>1. At that time the mother of a Bhikkhu was
sick. She sent a messenger to her son (saying), 'I am sick; might my son
come to me; I long for my son's coming.' Now that Bhikkhu thought: 'The
Blessed One has allowed (a Bhikkhu) to go, if the affair for which he
goes can be accomplished within seven days, and if he is sent for, but
not if he is not sent for, by a person of any one of the seven classes;
(and he has also allowed to go), if the thing he goes for can be
accomplished within seven days, even if he is not sent for, and much
more if he is sent for, by a person of any one of the five classes. Now
my mother is sick; she is not a lay-devotee (upasikâ). What am I,
therefore, to do?'

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   <span id="7:2"></span>2. 'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go (even during
the rainy season), if the thing you go for can be accomplished within
seven days, even if you are not sent for, and much more if you are sent
for, by a person of any one of the following seven classes: Bhikkhus,
Bhikkhunîs, sikkhamânâs, sâma*n*eras, sâma*n*erîs, the mother, and the
father. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go, if the thing you go for can be
accomplished within seven days, even if you are not sent for, and much
more if you are sent for, by a person of any one of these seven classes.
Within seven days you ought to return.

   <span id="7:3"></span>3. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu's mother is
sick. If she sends a messenger to her son (saying), "I am sick; might my
son come to me; I long for my son's coming (&c., see chap. 6. 2)."

   <span id="7:4"></span>4. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu's father is
sick . . . . (&c., as in § 3).

   <span id="7:5"></span>5. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu's brother is
sick. If he sends a messenger to his brother (saying), "I am sick; might
my brother come to me; I long for my brother's coming," he ought to go,
O Bhikkhus, if the affair can be accomplished within seven days, and if
he sends for him, but not if he does not send for him. Within seven days
he ought to return.

   <span id="7:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu's sister is
sick . . . . (&c., see § 5).

   <span id="7:7"></span>7. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a relation of a
Bhikkhu is sick. If he sends a messenger to that Bhikkhu (saying), "I am
sick; might his reverence come to me" . . . . ( &c., as in § 5).

   <span id="7:8"></span>8. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a person that used to
<span id="page_312">p. 312</span> live with the Bhikkhus<span
id="page_312_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_312_note_1) is sick. If he sends a
messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying), "I am sick; might the Bhikkhus come
to me" . . . . ( &c.. as in § 5).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="8"></span>8.

   At that time a Vihâra belonging to the Sa*m*gha went to ruin. A
certain upâsaka had a quantity of wood cut in the forest. He sent a
messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying), 'If their reverences will fetch that
wood, I will give it to them.'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go out on the Sa*m*gha's business.
Within seven days you ought to return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the first Bhâ*n*avâra about the Vassa residence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="9"></span>9.

   <span id="9:1"></span>1. At that time the Bhikkhus of a certain
district in the Kosala country who had entered upon Vassal were
troubled<span id="page_312_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_312_note_2) by beasts of prey; the
beasts carried them off and killed them.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, are
troubled by beasts of prey, and the beasts carry them off and kill them:
this is <span id="page_313">p. 313</span> to be considered as a case of
danger, and they ought to leave that residence. They are not guilty of
interruption of Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, are
infested by snakes; they bite them and kill them. This is to be
considered as a case of danger, . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . . .
. Vassa.

   <span id="9:2"></span>2. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are troubled by robbers; the robbers plunder them
and beat them. This is to be considered . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down
to) . . . . Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, are
troubled by demons; the demons enter into them and take their power from
them. This is to be considered . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . . . .
Vassa.

   <span id="9:3"></span>3. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the village near which
the Bhikkhus have entered upon Vassa, is destroyed by fire; the Bhikkhus
suffer from want of food. This is to be considered . . . . ( &c., as in
§ 1 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the places of rest of the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are destroyed by fire; the Bhikkhus suffer from
having no place of rest. This is to be considered . . . . ( &c., as in §
1 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="9:4"></span>4. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the village near which
the Bhikkhus have entered upon Vassa, is destroyed by water; the
Bhikkhus suffer from want of food, . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . .
. . Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the places of rest of the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are destroyed by water; the Bhikkhus suffer from
having no place of rest, . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . . . .
Vassa.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

### <span id="10"></span>10.

   At that time the village near which the Bhikkhus of a certain
district had entered upon Vassa, was transferred to another place
through (fear of) robbers.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe. O Bhikkhus, that you go where the village is.'

   The village (people) divided themselves in two parts.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you go where the greater part is.

   The greater part were unbelieving, unconverted people.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you go where the believing, converted
people are.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="11"></span>11.

   <span id="11:1"></span>1. At that time the Bhikkhus of a certain
district in the Kosala countly who had entered upon Vassa, could get
(there) neither coarse nor fine food sufficiently as required.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, can
get neither coarse nor fine food sufficiently as required. This is to be
considered as a case of danger, and theyought to leave that residence.
They are not guilty of interruption of Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, get
food coarse or fine sufficiently <span id="page_315">p. 315</span> as
required, but they cannot get sustaining food. This is to be considered
. . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="11:2"></span>2. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, get food coarse or fine sufficiently as required,
they get sustaining food, but they cannot get proper medicine. This is
to be considered . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus . . . . (&c., as § 1, down to) . .
. . sustaining food, and they can get profitable medicine, but they
cannot find suitable laymen to do service to them. This is to be
considered . . . . ( &c., as in § 1 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="11:3"></span>3. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, to a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, a woman makes an offer (in these words): "Come,
venerable Sir, I give you gold, or I give you bullion<span
id="page_315_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_315_note_1), or I give you a field,
or I give you a site (for a house or a garden), or I give you an ox, or
I give you a cow, or I give you a slave, or I give you a female slave,
or I give you my daughter as your wife, or I will be your wife, or I get
another wife for you." In that case, if the Bhikkhu thinks: "The Blessed
One has said that the mind of men is easily changeable; danger might
arise to the purity of my life," he ought to go away from that place. He
is not guilty of interruption of Vassa.

   <span id="11:4"></span>4. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, to a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, a harlot makes an offer, &c., an adult girl makes an
offer, &c., a eunuch makes an offer, &c., relations make an offer, &c.,
kings make <span id="page_316">p. 316</span> an offer, &c., robbers make
an offer, &c., rascals make an offer (in these words): "Come, venerable
Sir, we give you gold, . . . . (&c., down to) . . . . or we give you our
daughter as your wife, or we get another wife for you." In that case, .
. . . (&c., as in § 3 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has entered upon Vassa, finds an
ownerless treasure. In that case, . . . . ( &c., as in § 3 down to) . .
. . Vassa.

   <span id="11:5"></span>5. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, sees a number of Bhikkhus who strive to cause
divisions in the Sa*m*gha. In that case, if that Bhikkhu thinks: "The
Blessed One has said that it is a grievous sin to cause divisions in the
Sa*m*gha; may no divsion arise in the Sa*m*gha in my presence," let him
go away. He is not guilty of interruption of Vassa.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has entered upon Vassa, hears: "A
number of Bhikkhus are striving to cause divisions in the Sa*m*gha." In
that case, . . . . ( &c., as in § 5 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="11:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears: "In such and such a district a number of
Bhikkhus are striving to cause divisions in the Sa*m*gha." If that
Bhikkhu thinks: "Those Bhikkhus are friends of mine; I will say to them:
'The Blessed One, my friends, has said that it is a grievous sin to
cause divisions in the Sa*m*gha; let not divisions in the Sa*m*gha
please you, Sirs;' then they will do what I say, they will obey me and
give ear," in that case let him go (to that place). He is not guilty of
interruption of Vassa.

   <span id="11:7"></span>7. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears: "In such and such a <span id="page_317">p.
317</span> district a number of Bhikkhus are striving to cause divisions
in the Sa*m*gha." If that Bhikkhu thinks: "Those Bhikkhus are not
friends of mine, but their friends are friends of mine; to these I will
say, and they will say to their friends: 'The Blessed One, . . . . (
&c., as in § 6 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="11:8"></span>8. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears: "In such and such a district divisions in the
Sa*m*gha have been caused by a number of Bhikkhus." If that Bhikkhu . .
. . ( &c., as in § 6 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="11:9"></span>9. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears: "In such and such a district divisions in the
Sa*m*gha have been caused by a number of Bhikkhus." If that Bhikkhu . .
. . (&c., as in § 7 down to) . . . . Vassa.

   <span id="11:10"></span><span id="11:11"></span><span
id="11:12"></span><span id="11:13"></span>10-13. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu who has entered upon Vassa, hears: "In such and such a district
a number of Bhikkhunîs strive to cause divisions in the Sa*m*gha . . . .
(&c.<span id="page_317_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_317_note_1))"'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="12"></span>12.

   <span id="12:1"></span>1. At that time a Bhikkhu desired to enter
upon Vassa in a cattle-pen.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enter upon Vassa in a cattle-pen: The
cattle-pen was moved from its place.

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go with the cattle-pen.'

   <span id="12:2"></span>2. At that time a Bhikkhu, when the time for
entering upon Vassa approached, desired to go on a journey with a
caravan.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enter upon Vassa in a caravan.'

   At that time a Bhikkhu, when the time for entering upon Vassa
approached desired to go on a journey in a ship.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enter upon Vassa in a ship.'

   <span id="12:3"></span>3. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa in a hollow tree. People were annoyed, murmured, and became angry:
'(These Bhikkhus behave) like goblins<span
id="page_318_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_318_note_1).'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa in a hollow tree. He who
does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="12:4"></span>4. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa on a branch of a tree. People were annoyed, &c.: '(These Bhikkhus
behave) like huntsmen.'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa on a branch of a tree. He
who does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="12:5"></span>5. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa in the open air. When it began to rain, <span id="page_319">p.
319</span> they ran up to the foot of a tree, or to the hollow of a
Nimba tree.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa in the open air. He who
does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="12:6"></span>6. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa without having a place of rest. They suffered from coldness and
heat.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa without having a place of
rest. He who does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="12:7"></span>7. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa in a house for keeping dead bodies in. People were annoyed, &c.:
'(These Bhikkhus are) like those who burn corpses.'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa in a house for keeping dead
bodies. He who does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="12:8"></span>8: At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa under a sun-shade. People were annoyed, &c.: 'Like cowherds.'

   They told this thilig to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa under a sun-shade. He who
does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

   <span id="12:9"></span>9. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa under an earthenware vessel. People were annoyed, &c.: 'Like
Titthiyas.'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa under an earthenware
vessel. He who does, commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

### <span id="13"></span>13.

   <span id="13:1"></span>1. At that time the Sa*m*gha at Sâvatthi had
made an agreement that nobody should receive the pabba*gg*â ordination
during the rainy season. A grandson of Visâkhâ Migâramâtâ<span
id="page_320_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_320_note_1) went to the Bhikkhus and
asked them for the pabba*gg*â ordination. The Bhikkhus said to him: 'The
Sa*m*gha, friend, has made an agreement that nobody shall receive the
pabba*gg*â ordination during the rainy season. Wait, friend, as long as
the Bhikkhus keep Vassa; when they have concluded the Vassa residence,
they will confer on you the pabba*gg*â ordination.

   When those Bhikkhus had concluded the Vassa residence, they said to
the grandson of Visâkhâ Migâramâtâ: 'Come now, friend, you may receive
the pabba*gg*â ordination.' He replied: 'If I had received the
pabba*gg*â ordination before, reverend Sirs, I should remain (in the
religious life), but now, reverend Sirs, I will not receive the
pabba*gg*â ordination.'

   <span id="13:2"></span>2. Visâkhâ Migâramâtâ was annoyed, murmured,
and became angry (saying), 'How can the noble ones make such an
agreement. that nobody shall receive the pabba*gg*â ordination during
the rainy season? At what time ought the duties of the Dhamma not to be
performed?'

   Some Bhikkhus heard Visâkhâ Migâramâtâ, who was annoyed, murmured,
and had become angry.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

   Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One. 'Such an agreement,
O Bhikkhus, ought not to be made--that nobody shall receive the
pabba*gg*â ordination during the rainy season. He who makes (an
agreement like this), commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="14"></span>14.

   <span id="14:1"></span>1. At that time the venerable Upananda
Sakyaputta had promised to king Pasenadi of Kosala to take up his Vassa
residence (with him) at the earlier period<span
id="page_321_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_321_note_1). When he was going to
the district (where he had consented to go to), he saw on his way two
districts in which there were plenty of robes, and he thought: 'What if
I were to keep Vassa in these two districts; thus shall I obtain many
robes.' And he kept Vassa in those two districts. King Pasenadi of
Kosala was annoyed, murmured, and became angry (saying), 'How can the
noble, Upananda Sakyaputta, after he has promised us to take up his
Vassa residence (with us), break his word? Has not falsehood been
reproved, and abstinence from falsehood been praised by the Blessed One
in many ways?'

   <span id="14:2"></span>2. Some Bhikkhus heard king Pasenadi of
Kosala. who was annoyed, &c. The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed,
murmured, and became angry (saying). 'How can the venerable Upananda
Sakyaputta, after he has promised to king Pasenadi of Kosala, &c.? Has
not falsehood . . . . (&c., as in § I)?'

   <span id="14:3"></span>3. Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the
Blessed One.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

   In consequence of that, the Blessed One, after having ordered the
fraternity of Bhikkhus to assemble, asked the venerable Upananda
Sakyaputta: 'Is it true, Upananda, that you have broken your word,
having promised to king Pasenadi of Kosala to take up your Vassa
residence (with him)?'

   'It is true, Lord?'

   Then the blessed Buddha rebuked him: 'How can you, O foolish one,
break your word, having promised, &c.? Has not falsehood, O foolish one,
been reproved, and abstinence from falsehood been praised by me in many
ways? This will not do, O foolish one, for converting the unconverted,
and for augmenting the number of the converted, but it will result, O
foolish one, in the unconverted being repulsed (from the faith) and many
of the converted being estranged.'

   Having reproved him and delivered a religious discourse, he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus:

   <span id="14:4"></span>4. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has
promised (to a lay-devotee) to take up his Vassa residence (with him) at
the earlier period, and when he goes to that district, he sees on his
way two districts in which there are plenty of robes, and he thinks:
"What if I were to keep Vassa in these two districts; thus shall I
obtain many robes;" and he keeps Vassa in those two districts. This
Bhikkhu's (entering upon Vassa), O Bhikkhus, (at the) earlier period is
not valid, and as to his promise he has committed a dukka*t*a offence.

   <span id="14:5"></span>5. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has
promised (to a lay-devotee) to take up his Vassa residence (with him) at
the earlier period, and when going to that district, he holds Uposatha
outside (on the last <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> day of the half
month), and on the first day (of the next half month) he goes to the
Vihâra, prepares himself a place of rest, gets (water to) drink and
food, sweeps the cell, and goes away that. same day without having any
business. This Bhikkhu's (entering upon Vassa) . . . . (&c., as in § 4,
down to) . . . . offence.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised (&c., as in the
preceding case, down to:) and goes away that same day, having business.
This Bhikkhu's (entering upon Vassa) . . . . (&c., as in § 4, down to)
offence.

   <span id="14:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has
promised, &c., and having resided there two or three days, he goes away
without having any business, &c.; he goes away having business. This
Bhikkhu's (entering upon Vassa) . . . . (&c, as in § 4, down to) . . . .
offence.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised, &c., and having resided
there two or three days, he goes away having a business which can be
accomplished within seven days<span
id="page_323_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_323_note_1); he is absent above
those seven days. This Bhikkhu's (entering upon Vassa) . . . . (&c, as
in § 4, down to) . . . . offence.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, &c., he returns within those seven days. This
Bhikkhu's (entering upon Vassa), O Bhikkhus, (at the) earlier period is
valid, and as to his promise he has committed no offence.

   <span id="14:7"></span>7. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has
promised, &c., and goes away seven days before the Pavâra*n*â<span
id="page_323_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_323_note_2) having business. No
matter, O Bhikkhus, whether that Bhikkhu comes back to that district or
<span id="page_324">p. 324</span> does not come batk, this Bhikkhu's
entering, &c., is valid, and as to his promise he has committed no
offence.

   <span id="14:8"></span><span id="14:9"></span><span
id="14:10"></span>8-10. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised,
&c., and having gone to that district, he holds Uposatha there (on the
last day of the half month), and on the first day (of the next half
month) he goes to the Vihâra, &c.<span
id="page_324_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_324_note_1)

   <span id="14:11"></span>11. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has
promised (to a lay-devotee) to take up his Vassa residence (with him) at
the later period, and when going to that district, he holds Uposatha
outside, &c.<span id="page_324_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_324_note_2)'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the third Khandhaka, which treats of entering upon Vassa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mahâvagga - Fourth Khandaka](sbe1315)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_298">p. 298</span>

<span id="page_298_note_1"></span>[1](#page_298_fr_1) See the note on I,
22, 17. About the name of Kalandakanivâpa (seeds of Kalandaka? feeding
ground for squirrels?), see the story related in Beal, Romantic Legend,
&c., p. 315, where this place is said to be the gift of a merchant named
Kalandaka. A different account is given by Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 194.

<span id="page_298_note_2"></span>[2](#page_298_fr_2) Literally, living
creatures which have but one organ of sense; that is, which have only
the organ of feeling, viz. the outward form (kâya).

<span id="page_298_note_3"></span>[3](#page_298_fr_3) Sa*m*kâpayissanti
= sa*m*kappafissanti? Buddhaghosa: appossukka-nibaddha-vâsa*m*
vasissanti.

<span id="footnotes_page_299">p. 299</span>

<span id="page_299_note_1"></span>[1](#page_299_fr_1) I.e. enter upon
the retreat prescribed for the rainy season. Buddhaghosa: 'They are to
look after their Vihâra (if it is in a proper state), to provide food
and water for themselves, to fulfil all due ceremonies, such as paying
reverence to sacred shrines, &c., and to say loudly once, or twice, or
thrice: "I enter upon Vassa in this Vihâra for these three months." Thus
they are to enter upon Vassa.'

<span id="footnotes_page_300">p. 300</span>

<span id="page_300_note_1"></span>[1](#page_300_fr_1) Very probably this
double period stands in connection with the double period prescribed in
the Brâhmanas and Sûtras for most of the Vedic festivals. Thus the
sacrifice of the varu*n*apraghâsâs, with which the Brahmans began the
rainy season, was to be held either on the full moon day of Âshâ*dh*a or
on the full moon day of the following month, *S*râva*n*a, quite in
accordance with the Buddhistical rules about the vassupanâyikâ. The
Brâhma*n*a texts begin the year with the full moon day of the (uttarâ)
Phâlgunî; the Sûtras mention, besides the Phâlguni, another new-year's
day, the *K*aitri paur*n*amâsî, which falls one month later. It was in
connection with this dislocation of the beginning of the year that the
annual festivals could be postponed accordingly. See Weber, Die
vedischen Nachrichten von den Naxatra, II, p. 329 seq.

<span id="footnotes_page_303">p. 303</span>

<span id="page_303_note_1"></span>[1](#page_303_fr_1) See the note on
II, 36, I.

<span id="page_303_note_2"></span>[2](#page_303_fr_2) See the note on I,
30, 4.

<span id="page_303_note_3"></span>[3](#page_303_fr_3) This translation
of kappiyaku*t*i is merely conjectural; comp. kappiyabhûmî VI, 33.

<span id="page_303_note_4"></span>[4](#page_303_fr_4) See the note on I,
25, 12.

<span id="page_303_note_5"></span>[5](#page_303_fr_5) See *K*ullavagga
V, 16, I.

<span id="footnotes_page_304">p. 304</span>

<span id="page_304_note_1"></span>[1](#page_304_fr_1) The enumeration of
edifices is identical with that given in § 6, but in the cases beginning
with that of the sisterhood of Bhikkhunîs (according to Buddhaghosa; we
believe that the two cases referring to sâma*n*eras ought to be
excepted) three of the edifices are left out, viz. the privy, the
*g*antâghara, and the *g*antâghara room, the' use of which is forbidden
to nuns; see *K*ullavagga X, 27, 3, 4.

<span id="page_304_note_2"></span>[2](#page_304_fr_2) See Abhidhânapp.
v. 213, and compare assabha*nd*a, hatthibhanda (Mahâvagga I, 61, I).

<span id="page_304_note_3"></span>[3](#page_304_fr_3) See Abhidhânapp.
v. 309.

<span id="footnotes_page_305">p. 305</span>

<span id="page_305_note_1"></span>[1](#page_305_fr_1) Only it is said
here of the Bhikkhus, ayyâ, 'the noble ones,' instead of bhaddantâ,
'their reverences.'

<span id="footnotes_page_308">p. 308</span>

<span id="page_308_note_1"></span>[1](#page_308_fr_1) See §§ 2-5. Read
here and in all cases where the messenger is sent by a woman: 'Might the
noble ones (ayyâ) come to me; I long for the noble ones' coming.'

<span id="page_308_note_2"></span>[2](#page_308_fr_2) There is no
parivâsa discipline for the Bhikkhunîs. When a Bhikkhunî has committed a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, no matter whether she has concealed it or not,
she is sentenced to mânatta discipline for a fortnight. See *K*ullavagga
X, I, 4; 25, 3.

<span id="page_308_note_3"></span>[3](#page_308_fr_3) The phrases, 'Or I
will propose the resolution to the assembly, or I will help to complete
the quorum' (see § 6 seq.), of course are omitted here, because, if the
proceeding is directed against a Bhikkhunî, this is to be done by a
Bhikkhunî and not by a Bhikkhu. See *K*ullavagga X, 6, 3.

<span id="footnotes_page_309">p. 309</span>

<span id="page_309_note_1"></span>[1](#page_309_fr_1) This translation
of sikkhi kupitâ hoti is merely conjectural; Buddhaghosa has no note
here. Comp. kuppa and akuppa.

<span id="footnotes_page_310">p. 310</span>

<span id="page_310_note_1"></span>[1](#page_310_fr_1) The technical
meaning of vassa*m* pu*kkh*itu*m* (to ask after Vassa?) is unknown to
us.

<span id="footnotes_page_312">p. 312</span>

<span id="page_312_note_1"></span>[1](#page_312_fr_1) Buddhaghosa:
bhikkhugatika is a person that dwells in the same Vihâra with the
Bhikkhus.

<span id="page_312_note_2"></span>[2](#page_312_fr_2) Compare *G*âtaka
I, 300.

<span id="footnotes_page_315">p. 315</span>

<span id="page_315_note_1"></span>[1](#page_315_fr_1) See Rh. D.'s
'Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon,' p. 5 ('Numismata Orientalia,'
vol. i).

<span id="footnotes_page_317">p. 317</span>

<span id="page_317_note_1"></span>[1](#page_317_fr_1) See §§ 6-9.
lnstead of 'A number of Bhikkhus' in these paragraphs, the subject is 'A
number of Bhikkhunîs.' Instead of 'Friends ' or 'Sirs,' the address is
'Sisters.' In §§ 11, 13 read: 'Those Bhikkhunîs are not friends of mine,
but their (female) friends are friends of mine, &c.'

<span id="footnotes_page_318">p. 318</span>

<span id="page_318_note_1"></span>[1](#page_318_fr_1) This must be about
the sense of pisâ*k*illika (comp. *K*ullavagga V, 10, 2; 27, 5),
although we are nat sure how -illika ought to be explained.

<span id="footnotes_page_320">p. 320</span>

<span id="page_320_note_1"></span>[1](#page_320_fr_1) Visâkhâ was the
most distinguished among the upâsikâs, and occupied a place among them
similar to that which Anâthapi*nd*ika, with whom she is frequently
mentioned together, did among the upâsakas. See Dhammapada A*tth*ak. p.
78, &c.

<span id="footnotes_page_321">p. 321</span>

<span id="page_321_note_1"></span>[1](#page_321_fr_1) See chap. 2, § 2.

<span id="footnotes_page_323">p. 323</span>

<span id="page_323_note_1"></span>[1](#page_323_fr_1) See chap. 5 seq.

<span id="page_323_note_2"></span>[2](#page_323_fr_2) I.e.. before the
concluding ceremony of Vassa; see IV, 1, 13.

<span id="footnotes_page_324">p. 324</span>

<span id="page_324_note_1"></span>[1](#page_324_fr_1) Here follows an
exact repetition of alI the cases given in §§ 5-7; the only difference
is, that in the former cases it was said: 'When going to that district,
he holds Uposatha outside,' instead of which it is said now: 'Having
gone to that district, he holds Uposatha there.'

<span id="page_324_note_2"></span>[2](#page_324_fr_2) The cases given in
§§ 5-10 are repeated here; instead of 'Earlier period,' it is said here
'Later period;' instead of 'Before the Pavâra*n*â' (§7), 'Before the
komudi *k*âtumâsini.' The komudi *k*âtumâsini is the full moon day in
the month Kattika, which is frequently called Kaumuda in the Epic
literature; the epithet *k*âtumâsini refers to the Vedic *K*âturmâsra
festival, which falls upon that day (Kâtrâyana, *S*rautasûtra V, 6, I).
For those who entered upon Vassa at the later period (in the *S*râvana
month), the end of Vassa fell on the Komudî day.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
