<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1302) 
 [Next](sbe1304)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE PÂTIMOKKHA.

## THE WORDS OF DISBURDENMENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### REVERENCE TO THE BLESSED ONE, THE HOLY ONE, THE FULLY ENLIGHTENED ONE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## NIDANA<span id="page_1_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_1_note_1).

INTRODUCTION.

   May the Chapter<span id="page_1_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_1_note_2), reverend Sirs, hear me!

   To-day is the sacred day (of the full, or new, moon), the fifteenth
day of the half-month<span id="page_1_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_1_note_3). If it be convenient to
the Chapter, let the Chapter hold Uposatha, let it repeat the
Pâtimokkha. How is it with respect to the necessary preliminaries to a
meeting of the Order? Let the reverend brethren announce their
purity<span id="page_1_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_1_note_4), and I will rehearse the
Pâtimokkha! We all gladly give ear and do attend<span
id="page_1_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_1_note_5)!

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

   Whosoever have incurred a fault, let him declare it! If no fault have
been incurred it is meet to keep silence!

   Now, venerable Sirs, it is by your silence, that I shall know whether
you are pure. As to each one question put there must be an answer, so,
in such a meeting as this, each question is put<span
id="page_2_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_2_note_1) as many as three times.
Then if any Bhikkhu, when it has been three times put, knowingly omit to
declare a fault incurred, he is guilty of uttering a conscious lie.
Venerable Sirs, the uttering of a deliberate lie has been declared by
the Blessed One to be a condition hurtful (to spiritual progress)<span
id="page_2_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_2_note_2). Therefore a fault, if
there be one, should be declared by that Bhikkhu who remembers it, and
desires to be cleansed therefrom. For a fault, when declared, shall be
light to him.

   Venerable Sirs, the Introduction is now recited.

   Thus do I question you, venerable Sirs, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A second time do I question you, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   A third time do I question you, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Here endeth the recitation of the Introduction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Pârâ*g*ikâ Dhammâ](sbe1304)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

p\. 1

<span id="page_1_note_1"></span>[1](#page_1_fr_1) The whole of this
Introduction, with the ancient commentary upon it (referred to above, in
the Introduction), recurs in the Mahâvagga II, 3, where further notes
will be found. The previous chapter in Dickson entitled the
Pu*kkh*âvissa*gg*ana is not part of the ancient text of the Pâtimokkha.

<span id="page_1_note_2"></span>[2](#page_1_fr_2) Sa*m*gho: of course
not the whole Order, but those members then present, spoken of
collectively.

<span id="page_1_note_3"></span>[3](#page_1_fr_3) Uposatho pa*nn*araso.
See below, Mahâvagga, Book II, and especially chap. 14.

<span id="page_1_note_4"></span>[4](#page_1_fr_4) That is, their freedom
from any of those disabilities which are declared below, Book II, to
incapacitate a member of the Order from assembling at a formal meeting
on the Uposatha day.

<span id="page_1_note_5"></span>[5](#page_1_fr_5) On sabbe 'va santâ
compare ubho 'va santâ in the ninth Nissaggiya, and the Old Commentary
loc. cit.

p\. 2

<span id="page_2_note_1"></span>[1](#page_2_fr_1) The spelling of the
Pâli word in the text should be anussâvita*m*, and so below,
anussâviramâne. By 'the text' we refer throughout to Mr. Dickson's very
careful edition, all the necessary corrections in which--they are mostly
only misprints--will be noticed in the following notes.

<span id="page_2_note_2"></span>[2](#page_2_fr_2) See Mahâvagga II, 3,
7.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
