<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1303) 
 [Next](sbe1305)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3"></span>p. 3

## PÂRÂ*G*IKÂ DHAMMÂ.

THE PÂRÂGIKA RULES<span id="page_3_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_3_note_1).

   Here these four Rules, concerning those acts which bring about
Defeat<span id="page_3_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_3_note_2), come into recitation.

   <span id="1"></span>1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu who has taken upon <span
id="page_4"></span>p. 4 himself the Bhikkhus' system of self-training
and rule of life, and has not thereafter withdrawn from the training, or
declared his weakness, shall have carnal knowledge of any one, down even
to an animal, he has fallen into defeat, he is no longer in
communion<span id="page_4_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_4_note_1).

   <span id="2"></span>2. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take, from village or
from wood, anything not given--what men call 'theft<span
id="page_4_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_4_note_2)'--in such manner of taking
as kings would seize the thief for, and slay, or bind, or banish him,
saying, 'Thou art a thief, thou art stupid, thou art a fool, thou art
dishonest,'--the Bhikkhu who in that manner takes the thing not given,
he, too, has fallen into defeat, he is no longer in communion.

   <span id="3"></span>3. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall knowingly deprive of
life a human being, or shall seek out an assassin against a human being,
or shall utter the praises of death, or incite another to
self-destruction, saying, 'Ho! my friend! what good do you get from this
sinful, wretched life? death is better to thee than life!'--if, so
thinking, and with such an aim, he, by various argument, utter the
praises of death or incite another to self-destruction--he, too, is
fallen into defeat, he is no longer in communion<span
id="page_4_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_4_note_3).

<span id="page_5"></span>p. 5

   <span id="4"></span>4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, without being clearly
conscious of extraordinary qualities, shall give out regarding himself
that insight into the knowledge of the noble ones has been accomplished,
saying, 'Thus do I know,' 'Thus do I perceive:' and at some subsequent
time whether on being pressed, or without being pressed, he, feeling
guilty, shall be desirous of being cleansed from his fault, and shall
say, 'Brethren! when I knew not, I said that I knew; when I saw not, I
said that I saw--telling a fruitless falsehood;' then, unless he so
spake through undue confidence he, too, has fallen into defeat, he is no
longer in communion<span id="page_5_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_5_note_1).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Venerable Sirs, the four Conditions of Defeat have been recited, of
which when a Bhikkhu has fallen into one or other, he is no longer
allowed to be in co-residence with the Bhikkhus. As before, so
afterwards, he is defeated, he is not in communion<span
id="page_5_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_5_note_2).

<span id="page_6"></span>p. 6

   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A second time I ask, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   A third time I ask, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Here endeth the recitation of the Pârâgikas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Sa*m*ghâdisesâ Dhammâ](sbe1305)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_3"></span>p. 3

<span id="page_3_note_1"></span>[1](#page_3_fr_1) The whole of the
following portion of the Pâtimokkha, together with the ancient
commentary upon it, is contained in the first book of the
Vibha<u>n</u>ga, also called the Pârâ*g*ikam.

Dickson translates throughout Dhammâ by 'offences.' He is no doubt right
in taking the word, not in its ordinary sense of condition or quality,
but in a more strictly technical, legal, sense. 'Offences' is however
not the right direction in which to limit the general sense. Dhammâ must
here be 'Rules,' in accordance with the passages quoted in our
Introduction, pp. xxviii-xxx.

<span id="page_3_note_2"></span>[2](#page_3_fr_2) Childers (sub voce)
follows Burnouf (Introduction, &c., p. 301) in deriving the word
Pârâ*g*ika from A*G* with parâ prefixed, taking that compound in the
sense of 'to expel.' Dickson's translation 'deadly sin' rests upon the
same basis. The Buddhist commentators refer the word to the passive of
*G*I with parâ. prefixed, in the sense of 'to suffer defeat.' So the
Samanta-Pâsâ.dikâ: Pârâ*g*iko hoîti parâ*g*ito parâ*g*aya*m* âpanno. Now
the root A*G* belongs to the Vedic dialect only, and is not met with in
any Buddhist expressions, and even in the Vedas it does not occur with
parâ prefixed. The Buddhist forms of speech have quite different and
settled terms with which to convey the idea of expulsion. On the other
hand, there was a considerable group of words in use in the Buddhist
community with which pârâ*g*ika stands in close connection: parâ*g*i,
'to suffer defeat;' parâ*g*ita, 'defeated;' parâ*g*aya, 'defeat.' We
cannot therefore but think that the native commentators are right in
associating pârâ*g*ika also with this group, and that the word really
means 'involving defeat.' This may mean specifically defeat in the
struggle with Mâra the Evil One; but more probably defeat in the
struggle against evil generally, defeat in the effort to accomplish the
object for which the Bhikkhu entered the Order, in the effort to reach
the 'supreme goal' of Arahatship.

<span id="footnotes_page_4"></span>p. 4

<span id="page_4_note_1"></span>[1](#page_4_fr_1) 'Declared his
weakness' refers to the permission (on the ground that it was better to
leave the Order than to burn) for a Bhikkhu to acknowledge himself unfit
for the discipline, and throw off the robe. 'Withdrawn from the
training' is the formal expression for thus throwing off the Robes. See
below, Mahâvagga II, 22, 3.

On sikkhâsâ*g*îva*m*, which is by no means only 'Rules of the Order,'
see the Vibhanga (Pâr. I, 8, 1).

<span id="page_4_note_2"></span>[2](#page_4_fr_2) The Vibhanga (Pâr. II,
3) takes theyya-sa*m*khâta*m* as meaning 'with dishonest intent.'

<span id="page_4_note_3"></span>[3](#page_4_fr_3) The deviations here
from Mr, Dickson's version will, we hope, justify themselves. There is
no commentary on hâraka, though the Vibha<u>n</u>ga (Pâr. III, 3, 1)
explains the different kinds of Sattha. Pâpaka must be 'sinful,' not
merely 'poor;' the suggestion is: 'by destroying your life you will
escape from the possibility of sinning.'

<span id="footnotes_page_5"></span>p. 5

<span id="page_5_note_1"></span>[1](#page_5_fr_1) The extraordinary
qualities (literally, 'superhuman qualities') are defined to be the
Vimokkhas, Samâdhis, the Samâpattis, the Ñâ*n*adassana, the having
experienced the Noble Path, and having realised the Fruit thereof; that
is to say, Arahatship and the highest forms of spiritual emotion and
intelligence which can accompany Arahatship. They are in fact,
therefore, superhuman only in the sense of extraordinary; as it is
precisely human beings, and only human beings, who were supposed to be
able to acquire these qualities.

Uddha*kk*a, 'Self-righteousness,' is also the last but one of the ten
Sa*m*yo*g*anas, or 'Fetters,' which the Arahat has to break.

<span id="page_5_note_2"></span>[2](#page_5_fr_2) The sentences which
follow in the text, but are not here translated, and in which it is
declared that all the following portions of the Pâtimokkha have already
been heard, do not occur in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga. They are not part of
the Pâtimokkha; but only the form to be used, when the Pâtimokkha cannot
be recited in full, and all the remaining Rules are to be omitted.
According to Mahâvagga II, 15, 1, 4 this abridged recital may be used in
certain cases of danger.

On Yathâ pure tatha pa*kkh*â there is no explanation in the Old
Commentary. The phrase probably means that the Bhikkhu is irrevocably
defeated. He must remain for ever in the condition (of permanent
exclusion from the Order) into which he has brought himself.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
