<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1306) 
 [Next](sbe1308)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

## NISSAGGIYÂ PA*K*ITTIYÂ DHAMMÂ.

PÂ*K*ITTIYA RULES INVOLVING FORFEITURE.

   Here, venerable Sirs, the thirty Pâ*k*ittiya Rules involving
forfeiture come into recitation.

   <span id="1"></span>1. When the robes have been settled,when the
Ka*th*ina has been taken up by the Bhikkhu, an extra robe may be kept up
to the end of a period of ten days. To him who goes beyond that there is
a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture<span
id="page_18_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_18_note_1).

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

   <span id="2"></span>2. When the robes have been settled, after the
taking up of the Ka*th*ina by the Bhikkhu, if a Bhikkhu be without his
three robes, even for a single night, unless with the permission of the
Bhikkhus--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture<span
id="page_19_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_19_note_1).

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

   <span id="3"></span>3. When the robes have been settled, when the
Ka*th*ina has been taken up by the Bhikkhu, if a set of robes should be
offered to a Bhikkhu out of season, it may be accepted by that Bhikkhu,
should he so wish. But when he has accepted it, it must be made up at
once; and if it be not sufficient for him, it may be kept up to the end
of a month by that Bhikkhu should he have any hope that the deficiency
may be supplied. If he keep it beyond that time, even if there be hope
of (the deficiency) being supplied--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence
requiring forfeiture.

   <span id="4"></span>4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have his soiled
robe<span id="page_20_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_20_note_1) washed, or dyed, or
beaten by a Bhikkhuni (sister)<span id="page_20_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_20_note_2) who is not related to
him--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involvirig forfeiture<span
id="page_20_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_20_note_3).

   <span id="5"></span>5. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall receive a robe from
the hands of a Bhikkhuni not related to him, except in exchange--that is
a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="6"></span>6. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall ask a householder or
a householder's wife<span id="page_20_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_20_note_4), not being related to
him, <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> for a robe, except at the right
season--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   Here the right season means when the Bhikkhu has been robbed of his
robe, or when his robe has been destroyed. This is the right season in
this connection.

   <span id="7"></span>7. If the householder, or the householder's wife,
should offer him a choice<span id="page_21_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_21_note_1) from (the materials for)
many robes, that Bhikkhu may have robes made out of it up to the (due
portion of) inner and outer robes. If he has robes made beyond this
limit--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="8"></span>8. In case the value in barter of a set of robes
has been laid by, for a particular Bhikkhu, by a householder who is not
a relative of his, or a householder's lady, with the intention 'I will
get a set of robes in exchange for this robe-fund, and so provide a
dress for such and such a Bhikkhu:'--in that case, <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> if that Bhikkhu, before the offer has been made to him, go and
give directions as to the make of the robe, saying, 'It would be well,
Sir, to get in exchange such and such a sort of robe with that robe-fund
to clothe me with;' desiring something fine--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya
offence involving forfeiture<span id="page_22_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_22_note_1).

   <span id="9"></span>9. In case two persons, householders or
householders' ladies, have each laid by for a particular Bhikkhu the
value in barter of a set of robes, with the intention, 'We will each get
a set of robes in exchange for this robe-fund, and so provide a dress
for such and such a Bhikkhu:--in that case, if that Bhikkhu, before the
offer has been made to him, go and give directions as to the make of the
robe, saying, 'It would be well, Sirs, to get in exchange, with the
value in barter you have each laid by, such and such a sort of robe to
clothe me with, the two becoming one;' desiring something fine--that is
a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeitute.

   <span id="10"></span>10. In case a Râ*g*a, or a Khattiya, or a
Brâhman, or a Gahapati should send by messenger, for a particular
Bhikkhu, the value in barter of a set of robes, saying 'Get a set of
robes in exchange for this robe-fund, and provide a dress for such and
such a Bhikkhu!' if then that messenger should go to that Bhikkhu and
say, 'I have brought, Sir, this robe-fund for your reverence. May your
reverence <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> accept the robe-fund!' let
then that monk answer that messenger thus: 'We do not, my friend, accept
the value in barter for a set of robes: but we may accept a set of
robes, at the right time, and of the suitable kind.' If then that
messenger shan answer that Bhikkhu thus: 'Has then your reverence a
person who attends (to such matters for you)?' then, Bhikkhus<span
id="page_23_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_23_note_1), let the Bhikkhu, to whom
the robes are to belong, point out, as his agent, the man who keeps the
ârâma in order<span id="page_23_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_23_note_2), or some believer,
saying, 'This man, my friend, is the Bhikkhus' agent.' If then that
messenger, when he has made an appointment with that agent, shall come
to that Bhikkhu, and say, 'I have made an appointment, Sir, with that
agent whom your reverence pointed out. Let your reverence come, and he
will clothe you with the set of robes betimesl' then, Bhikkhus<span
id="page_23_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_23_note_1), let that Bhikkhu, to
whom the set of robes is to belong, go to the agent and warn him and
remind him two or three times, saying, ' Sir, I have need of a set of
robesl' If, while so warning and reminding<span
id="page_23_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_23_note_3) two or three times, he
should succeed in obtaining <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> the robes,
it is well. Should he not succeed in obtaining them, let him up to the
fourth, fifth, or sixth time go and stand silently on that matter<span
id="page_24_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_24_note_1). If, while so standing
silently on that matter up to the fourth, fifth, or sixth time, he
should succeed in obtaining the set of robes, it is well. Should he not
succeed in obtaining them (so), and then, exerting himself beyond that
point succeed in obtaining them--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving
forfeiture. (But) if he should not succeed in obtaining them, let him
either go himself, or send a messenger (to the place) whence the
robe-fund was brought to him, and say, 'The robe-fund which your
reverences sent for a Bhikkhu, that has in no wise advantaged that
Bhikkhu. Take heed, your reverences, of your own, that your own go not
to ruin!' This is the proper course in that case<span
id="page_24_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_24_note_2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the first section, the 'Robe-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="11"></span>11. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a rug or mat
made with silk in it--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving
forfeiture<span id="page_24_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_24_note_3).

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

   <span id="12"></span>12. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a rug or mat
made of pure black wool of goats' hair<span
id="page_25_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_25_note_1)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="13"></span>13. In case a Bhikkhu is having a new rug made,
two parts should be taken of pure black wool of goats' hair, the third
part of white wool, and the fourth of the colour of oxen (reddish
brown). If a Bhikkhu should have a new rug made without taking two parts
of pure black wool, the third of white, and the fourth of tawny--that is
a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture<span
id="page_25_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_25_note_2).

   <span id="14"></span>14. When a Bhikkhu has had a new rug made, he
should use it for six years. If he should have another new rug made
within the six years, whether he has got rid, or has not got rid of the
former one, unless with the permission of the Bhikkhus<span
id="page_25_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_25_note_3)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="15"></span>15. When a Bhikkhu is having a new rug made to
sit upon, a piece of the breadth of the accepted span<span
id="page_25_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_25_note_4) must be taken from all
round the old one in <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> order to disfigure
it. If a Bhikkhu should have a new seat-rug made without taking a span's
width from all round the old one--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence
involving forfeiture.

   <span id="16"></span>16. In case a Bhikkhu should get some goats'
wool whilst he is on a journey<span id="page_26_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_26_note_1), let him accept it, if he
likes; and when he has accepted it, he may carry it in his own hand, if
there are no porters, for the distance of three leagues<span
id="page_26_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_26_note_2). Should he carry it
further than that, even if there are no porters--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="17"></span>17. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall get goats' wool
washed, or dyed or combed out by a Bhikkhuni who is not related to
him--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture<span
id="page_26_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_26_note_3).

   <span id="18"></span>18. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall receive gold or
silver, or get some one to receive it for him, or allow it to be kept in
deposit for him<span id="page_26_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_26_note_4)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

   <span id="19"></span>19. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall engage in any one
of the various transactions in which silver is used--that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="20"></span>20. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall engage in any one
of the various kinds of buying and selling--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the second section, the 'Silk-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="21"></span>21. A spare bowl may be kept up to the limit of
ten days. To him who exceeds that there is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence
involving forfeiture.

   <span id="22"></span>22. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall get another new
bowl in exchange for an (old) one broken in less than five places--that
is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   That bowl must be forfeited by that Bhikkhu to the company of
Bhikkhus; and whichever in that company of Bhikkhus shall be the worst
bowl, that shall be given to that Bhikkhu with the words, 'This,
Bhikkhu, is thy bowl; it must be kept until it breaks.' this is the
right course in that case.

   <span id="23"></span>23. Now those medicines which may be used by the
sick Bhikkhus--to wit, ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses--when they
have received them, they may enjoy them, storing them up to the seventh
day. To him who exceeds that there is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving
forfeiture.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

   <span id="24"></span>24. When he sees that a month of the hot days
has yet to run, let a Bhikkhu provide himself with the materials for
robes for the rainy season: when he sees that half a month of the hot
days has yet to run, let him make them, and wear them. Should he provide
himself with the materials for robes for the rainy season when more than
a month of the hot days has yet to run; or should he make them, and wear
them, when more than half a month of the hot days has yet to run--that
is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="25"></span>25. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he has himself
given a set of robes to another Bhikkhu, shall thereafter, being angry
or displeased with him, take them away, or get them taken away--that is
a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="26"></span>26. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall himself ask for
yarn, and have it woven up by weavers into cloth for a set of
robes--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="27"></span>27. In case a householder, who is not related to
him, or a householder's lady, shall have the cloth for a set of robes
woven for a particular Bhikkhu by weavers; in that case, if that
Bhikkhu, before the offer has been made to him, shall go to the weavers,
and give directions as to the make of the robe, saying, 'This
robe-cloth, my friends, is being woven for me. Make it long and broad,
and make it thick, and well woven, and evenly woven<span
id="page_28_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_28_note_1), and with even lines, and
well carded. If you do so, ourselves will <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> make it up to you, friends, in some way or other!' If that
Bhikkhu<span id="page_29_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_29_note_1), having thus spoken,
should make it up<span id="page_29_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_29_note_2) to them in any way, even
by the contents of a begging bowl--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence
involving forfeiture.

   <span id="28"></span>28. In case a robe should fall to the lot of a
Bhikkhu, as a special gift<span id="page_29_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_29_note_3), ten days before the
Kattika-temâsa<span id="page_29_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_29_note_3) full moon, that Bhikkhu
may take it, considering it as a special gift: and when he has it, he
may keep it up till the robe time<span
id="page_29_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_29_note_3). <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> Should he keep it beyond that--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence
involving forfeiture.

   <span id="29"></span>29. When vassa is completed up to the full moon
in Kattika<span id="page_30_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_30_note_1) in case a Bhikkhu, who is
dwelling in a place belonging to the class of those forest dwellings
which are held to be insecure and dangerous, should, desire to do so, he
may leave one or other of his three robes in a hut inside a village, and
if there is any ground for that Bhikkhu being separated from that robe,
he may be separated from it up to the sixth night. Should he separate
himself from it more than that, except by permission from the
Bhikkhus--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

   <span id="30"></span>30. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall cause to be
diverted to himself any benefit already dedicated to the Sa*m*gha--that
is a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the third section, the 'Bowl-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Venerable Sirs, the thirty Pâ*k*ittiya Rules involving forfeiture
have been recited.

   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

   A second time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A third time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Here ends the recitation of the Nissaggiyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pa*k*ittiyâ Dhammâ](sbe1308)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_18">p. 18</span>

<span id="page_18_note_1"></span>[1](#page_18_fr_1) The following Rules,
most of which have long ago fallen into abeyance, depend in great
measure upon communistic customs of the ancient Fraternity, which are
now somewhat difficult to understand. The following explanation of this
rule, and more especially of the first few words of it, is therefore
submitted with diffidence. At the end of the Vassa period (see below,
Mahâvagga, Books III and VII) the Sa*m*gha, or community of brethren in
any place, was accustomed to give over to some one of the Bhikkhus such
store of robes (Ka*th*ina-dussa) as it possessed; and it should here be
observed that no Bhikkhu had a separate personal ownership over his
robes, though nominally given to him for his own use, and really his own
subject to the rules, they were, technically speaking, the property of
the whole Sa*m*gha (that is, here, of the Order as a whole, not of the
community residing together at that place). The Bhikkhu above referred
to then spread the store of robes out to dry (suriye attharati); and
afterwards satisfied out of it the wants of any brother whose robes,
through the dampness of the season or other causes, had become spoiled.
Meanwhile, each of the Bhikkhus had, of course, to wear something--it
being one of the points most frequently insisted upon that a Bhikkhu
should be decently clad, in direct contradiction to certain then popular
views as to the sanctity of nakedness--but, during the interval, some of
the rules about the robes were temporarily relaxed.

Now the Mahâvagga (VII, 1, 7) gives eight reasons by which the Ka*th*ina
license would be extinguished for any one particular Bhikkhu alone--as
it would be for the community at that place by the formal taking up of
the store of robes' (Ka*th*inuddhâra or Ka*th*inassa ubbhâra);--and with
it that Bhikkhu's claim to a share in the common store. These eight
reasons are merely eight ways in which that particular Bhikkhu's wants
are already amply supplied; and the necessity, in his case, for a
relaxation of the rules no longer exists.

One of these reasons is that his set of robes is settled or done for
(*k*îvaram ni*tth*ita*m*); which, according to the old commentator on
our rule here, means that his set has been made, or spoiled, or
destroyed, or burnt, or that his hope of receiving one from the laity
has been disappointed (ni*tth*ita*k*îvarasmin ti *k*îvara*m* kata*m* vâ
hoti na*tth*a*m* vâ vina*tth*a*m* vâ da*ddh*a*m* vâ *k*îvarâsâ vâ
upa*kkh*innâ, according to which the Scholion in Dickson's note must be
corrected). In each of these cases his wants are already supplied by the
set of robes he has retained for wear during the process of drying: only
the case of those Bhikkhus remains to be settled who have not had new
robes made, and whose old ones were still good enough to wear during
tbat process.

After the Ka*th*inuddhâra, either particular or general, no Bhikkhu can
retain for his own use an atireka-*k*îvara, a spare robe. He must give
it up to any brother who has need of it.

As to the 'ten days,' the Sutta Vibba<u>n</u>ga has the following story.
Ânanda, after the Ka*th*inuddhâra, has a spare robe. He wants to give it
to Sâriputta; but the latter is in Sâketa, and is not expected back till
the ninth or tenth day. So the Buddha, to meet such cases, establishes
the rule that the spare robe may be kept up to the tenth day.

The words 'a Pâ*k*ittiya offence involving forfeiture,' repeated at the
end of each of the Nissaggiyas, are intended to mean that that offence
involves, firstly, all that a Pâ*k*kittiya involves; and secondly,
forfeiture.

<span id="footnotes_page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="page_19_note_1"></span>[1](#page_19_fr_1) To this Rule there
is the following story in the Sutta Vibba<u>n</u>ga. Certain Bhikkhus
left their robes in charge of the other Bhikkhus, and went on a journey.
The robes, being laid by for a long time, became spoilt. The Buddha
thereupon forbad a Bhikkhu, under the circumstances stated in this Rule,
to separate himself from his robes (ti-*k*îvara).

As regards the permission we have the story that a sick Bhikkhu was
invited home that his friends might nurse him. He answers, 'The Blessed
One has forbidden us to separate ourselves from our robes. I am sick,
and unable to travel in my robes.' Then the Blessed One allows a sick
brother to obtain leave to dispense with the Rule.

<span id="footnotes_page_20">p. 20</span>

<span id="page_20_note_1"></span>[1](#page_20_fr_1) Literally, 'an old
robe,' which the Vibha<u>n</u>ga (Nissaggiya IV, 2, 1) explains as one
that has been once worn.

<span id="page_20_note_2"></span>[2](#page_20_fr_2) And so, frequently,
below.

<span id="page_20_note_3"></span>[3](#page_20_fr_3) Compare the 17th
Nissaggiya.

<span id="page_20_note_4"></span>[4](#page_20_fr_4) Householder is here
gahapati; that is, pater familias. See Rh. D.'s note on Mahâ-sudassna
Sutta I, 41.

<span id="footnotes_page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="page_21_note_1"></span>[1](#page_21_fr_1) One MS. of the
Vibha<u>n</u>ga reads abhiha*t*u*m*; but another reads abhiha*tth*u*m*,
as does Minayeff; while the Samanta-Pâsâdikâ makes it equal to
abhiharitum. The right reading is probably abhiha*tth*u*m*. In any case,
the unusual form and grammatical construction throw some doubt on the
exact meaning of the phrase. The Samanta-Pâsâdikâ, which explains it
philologically as just mentioned, goes on in the next words to explain
it syntactically as abhiharitvâ, which it refers to the subject of
pavâreyya, and states could be done either actually, or by words.
Dickson's rendering, 'arrange to supply him,' does not accurately convey
the force of pavâreyya; but the right rendering may be 'should offer to
bring forth for him (whatever he chose) from (amongst the material for)
many robes.' The only possible alternative is 'should make him an offer
to take whatever he chose from amongst the material for many robes.'
Compare the 34th Pâ*k*ittiya.

Santar-uttara-parama*m* is meant, according to the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, to
imply 'to the extent of one inner, and one outer robe;' but we preserve
the ambiguity of the text.

<span id="footnotes_page_22">p. 22</span>

<span id="page_22_note_1"></span>[1](#page_22_fr_1) Both Dickson and
Childers have gone too far in rendering *k*etâpetvâ by 'purchase.' The
Samanta-Pâsâdikâ (Minayeff, 78) explains it by parivattetvâ. So Rh. D.,
'Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon,' p. 6.

In the text read *K*etâpana*m* (compare Ka*kk*âyana, p.322 of Senart's
edition); and it should not be rendered 'money;' see Rh. D., loc. cit.
The 'Robe-fund' consisted of things for barter.

In the text the vâ after a*ññ*âtakassa should be omitted.

<span id="footnotes_page_23">p. 23</span>

<span id="page_23_note_1"></span>[1](#page_23_fr_1) This word of address
is most noteworthy as standing quite isolated in the Pâtimokkha. ' It
must be meant as an address by the Buddha himself to the Brethren; for,
if it were the address of the Bhikkhu reciting the Pâtimokkha, the
expression used would necessarily be âyasmanto, as in the closing words
of each chapter, or other words to that effect. That it should have been
left in is a striking proof of the faithfulness with which the
Pâtimokkha has been preserved. Is it a survival of some form of words
older even than the Pâtimokkha? or is it merely an ancient blunder?

<span id="page_23_note_2"></span>[2](#page_23_fr_2) The ârâma is,
literally, the grove or pleasure-ground in which the monks' residence
stood; but it had probably before this already come to include the
residence, or vihâra, itself.

<span id="page_23_note_3"></span>[3](#page_23_fr_3) In the text read
*k*odayamâno, sârayamâno; the medial participle with active sense, as
often.

<span id="footnotes_page_24">p. 24</span>

<span id="page_24_note_1"></span>[1](#page_24_fr_1) In the text read
*kh*akkhattuparama*m*. This silent standing is the only mode of asking
for food permitted to a Bhikkhu.

<span id="page_24_note_2"></span>[2](#page_24_fr_2) Both here, and in
the Conclusion of the Sa*m*ghâdisesa, and further below in the 22nd
Nissaggiya, where the same phrase occurs, Mr. Dickson takes it to mean,
'This is the way to Nirvâna.' We are unable to see any foundation for
such a rendering.

<span id="page_24_note_3"></span>[3](#page_24_fr_3) The following rules
were for use in a tropical climate, and refer not to bed coverings, but
to materials spread over a hard seat or couch. The word translated 'rug
or mat' is a more general term, meaning, a thing spread; but there is no
corresponding word in English, as 'coverlet' or 'counterpane' would
imply a different state of things.

<span id="footnotes_page_25">p. 25</span>

l The Sutta Vibha<u>n</u>ga says that kâ*l*aka is of two kinds, either
*g*âtiyâ kâ*l*aka or ra*g*ana-kâ*l*aka; that is, that the wool is either
naturally black, or dyed of that colour. Elaka is a goat, not a sheep.

<span id="page_25_note_2"></span>[2](#page_25_fr_2) This is deliberately
chosen as an ugly mixture, which would lessen the commercial value of
the rug, by making it unfashionable.

<span id="page_25_note_3"></span>[3](#page_25_fr_3) Regarding this
permission the Vibha<u>n</u>ga gives the following story. A sick monk
was asked by his relatives to come home, that they might nurse him. He
answered that he was too ill to carry his rug, could not get on without
one, and could not have a new one made within six years. Then the
Blessed One established this exception to the general Rule.

<span id="page_25_note_4"></span>[4](#page_25_fr_4) See the note on the
6th Samghâdisesa.

<span id="footnotes_page_26">p. 26</span>

<span id="page_26_note_1"></span>[1](#page_26_fr_1)
Addhâna-magga-pa*t*ipanno; which the Ka<u>n</u>khâ Vitara*n*î (Minayeff,
p. 80) explains as being on a long road, called addhâna (high-road). But
one may be on a high-road without going a long journey.

<span id="page_26_note_2"></span>[2](#page_26_fr_2) Yo*g*anas; a
yo*g*ana being a trifle under eight miles. See Rh. D., 'Ancient Coins
and Measures' &c., pp. 16, 17.

<span id="page_26_note_3"></span>[3](#page_26_fr_3) Compare the 4th
Nissaggiya.

<span id="page_26_note_4"></span>[4](#page_26_fr_4) Upanikkhitta*m* vâ
sâdiyeyya; which cannot possibly mean 'if he thinks to appropriate money
entrusted to him,' as Mr. Dickson translates. See Rh. D., ' Ancient
Coins ' &c., p. 7.

The method of procedure on a breach of this rule, or of the next, is
thus described in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga. The guilty Bhikkhu has to give up
the gold or silver to the community (Sa*m*gha, not here, as elsewhere in
sentences concerning forfeiture, 'or to a ga*n*a or to a puggala'). Then
when an ârâmika or an upâsaka comes, it is to be given to him, to buy
ghee or oil with it for the Sa*m*gha; and whatever is bought is the
common property of all the Sa*m*gha, save the guilty Bhikkhu. Should the
layman object to undertake the spending of the gold or silver, he is to
be asked to throw it away. Or, if this cannot be managed, then, as a
last resource, some Bhikkhu is to be formally appointed
'Bullion-remover' (Rûpiya-*kkh*a*dd*aka), and he is to go and throw it
away somewhere, 'animitta*m* katvâ,' (without making any mark at the
place!)

<span id="footnotes_page_28">p. 28</span>

<span id="page_28_note_1"></span>[1](#page_28_fr_1) Suppavâyita*m*,
literally, 'well woven forth.' We follow the Samanta-Pâsâdikâ in its
explanation of this word, but with considerable hesitation. Compare the
relation between Sanskrit ota and prota; and between English 'web' and
'woof.'

<span id="footnotes_page_29">p. 29</span>

<span id="page_29_note_1"></span>[1](#page_29_fr_1) In the text read
Eva*ñ* *k*a so bhikkhu.

<span id="page_29_note_2"></span>[2](#page_29_fr_2) Anupada*gg*eyya is a
double potential. Da*gg*âma would be equal to Sanskrit dadyâma; and to
that a second potential termination has been added.

<span id="page_29_note_3"></span>[3](#page_29_fr_3) The expression in
the Pâli is literally 'should a special robe come to a Bhikkhu,' &c.;
where 'special robe' is a*kk*eka-*k*îvara*m*, explained in the
Samanta-Pâsâdikâ (Minayeff, 83) as equal to a*kk*âyika-kîvara*m*. The
Vibha<u>n</u>ga says, 'If a man wants to join the army or to emigrate,
or if a man has fallen sick, or a woman is with child, or an unbeliever
has come to believe, or a believer is edified (pasâdo uppanno hoti);
then, if such a one send a messenger to the Bhikkhus, saying, "Let their
reverences come hither, I will give a gift for the rainy season"
(vassâvâsika*m*; perhaps, "such a gift as the laity are wont to give to
the Bhikkhus who have spent the vassa among them")--that is an
a*kk*eka-kîvara*m*' (Minayeff, 82, 83). A*kk*aya is an immediate,
threatening, danger: compare the expression 'donatio mortis causâ.'
'Special robe' is, no doubt, an inadequate rendering; but we have chosen
it in reference to the special circumstances under which the donation is
made, and in default of a better translation. Compare the 85th
Pâ*k*ittiya.

The Kattika-temâsi-pu*nn*amâ is, according to the Vibha<u>n</u>ga
(Minayeff, p. 82), the close of the Pavâra*n*â, the ceremony at the end
of Vassa (see below, Book IV).

The robe time is the time when the robes were settled. The
Vibha<u>n</u>ga says, ' Robe time is, if the robes have not been laid
out to dry (see the note to the first rule in this division of the
Pâtimokkha), the last month of the rains; if they have, it is five
months.'

<span id="footnotes_page_30">p. 30</span>

<span id="page_30_note_1"></span>[1](#page_30_fr_1) This is a different
date from that mentioned in the last rule, and one month later. The
Vibha<u>n</u>ga explains the date here as Kattika-*k*âtumâsinî, whereas
the date in Rule 28 is temâsinî, and is called by the Samanta-Pâsâdikâ
(Minayeff, p. 82) pa*th*ama-kattika-punnamâ.

The same distinction is evident, from Mahâvagga IV, 14, 7-11, between
Pavâra*n*â and the *K*âtumâsini. But how both these full moons came to
be called Kattika is not clear.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
