[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Angel of the Prairies](aoftp) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Being curious on the authenticity and subject of the *Angel of the
Prairies* document I contacted the Scholarly & Historical Information
Exchange for Latter-Day Saints or SHEILDS at their website
[https://www.shields-research.org/index.htm](https://www.shields-research.org/index)
.

SHEILDS is run by individuals with experience in some of the rarer
documents dealing with the early history of The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-Day Saints and I therefore expected their answers to my
questions to have a sound basis in fact.

****

The following is the discussion I had via email with some of the
individuals at SHEILDS:

----- Original Message -----

From: Stan Barker

To: Hollin Parrott

Cc: Malin Jacobs

Sent: Wednesday, January 14, 2004 1:37 PM

Subject: Re: SHIELDS Correspondence form

Hollin Parrott wrote:  

First of all I enjoy you site very much. I'm LDS and stumbled upon the
following while surfing the net:

[https://ith.oarc.science/mor/aoftp/aoftp.htm](https://ith.oarc.science/mor/aoftp/aoftp)

I was wondering if this was actually written by Parley P. Pratt and if
so how is it received as a document by the church. I mean the preface
writes:

'While purporting to be written under the similitude of a dream or
vision, we will state that no such dream or vision was had by the
writer, the whole manuscript having been written at Nauvoo, in the
Winter of 1843-4.'

Stan Barker replied: From all that I have been able to understand, this
is not a real dream and was just a made up story.  I am cc:ing this to
one of my colleagues who I believe knows more about this issue than I
do.  

Hollin Parrott wrote:

And also:

'This manuscript was read in Nauvoo, in a Council of the Church, in the
presence of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but never appeared in print until
last Spring, in the Northern Light, when it became at once the
admiration of all the Saints who had the privilege of its perusal.'

I just want to know where I catalog this in my head...along with The
White Horse Prophecy as conjecture or as a teaching tool of some kind.

Stan Barker Replied:

I'd probably "head" it in the direction of fiction.  

Hollin Parrott concluded:

Thank you and keep up the good work!

Hollin Parrott

After having contacted his colleague Marlin Jacobs I received the
following answer from Mr. Jacobs to Stan Barker on January
14<sup>th</sup> 2004:

Stan,

 

"Angel of the Prairies" was a piece of fiction written by Pratt in
Nauvoo.  It was transformed into a speech given by Pratt by anti-Mormon
lawyer Theodore Schroeder in his defense of the Spaulding Manuscript
Theory in the American Historical Magazine, which B. H. Roberts
responded to in the same magazine (which changed its name to
Americana).  We have this series (both Schroeder and Roberts) on the web
site.

 

According to Roberts, Pratt did write "Angel of the Prairies," but only
as fiction.

 

Malin

******

Conclusion: The document ‘Angel of the Prairies’ is a fictitious story
written by Parley P. Pratt and is in no way connected with the theology
or revelations of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.
