[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lasi14)  [Next](lasi16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GHBUI6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Legends and Stories of Ireland*, by Samuel Lover, \[1831, 1834\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Paddy the Piper

THE only introduction I shall attempt to the following *"extravaganza"*
is to request the reader to suppose it to be delivered by a frolicking
Irish peasant In the richest brogue and most dramatic manner.

"I'll tell you, sir, a mighty quare story, and it's as thrue as I'm
standin' here, and that's no lie.

"It was in the time of the *'ruction,* whin the long summer days, like
many a fine fellow's precious life, was out short by raison of the
martial law, that wouldn't let a dacent boy be out in the evenin', good
or bad; for whin the day's work was over, divil a one of us dar go to
meet a frind over a glass, or a girl at the dance, but must go home and
shut ourselves up, and never budge, nor rise latch; nor dhraw boult,
antil the morning kem agin.

"Well, to come to my story. 'Twas afther night-fall, and we wor sittin'
round the fire, and the praties wor boilin', and the noggins of
butthermilk was standin' ready for our suppers, whin a knock kem to the
door.

"'Whisht!' says my father. 'Here's the sojers come upon us now,' says
he. 'Bad luck to thim, the villians! I'm afeared they seen a glimmer of
the fire through the crack in the door,' says he.

"'No,' says my mother, 'for I'm afther hangin' an ould sack and my new
petticoat agin it a while ago.'

"'Well, whisht, anyhow,' says my father, 'for there's a knock agin,' and
we all held our tongues till another thump kem to the door.

"'Oh, it's a folly to purtind any more,' says my father; 'they're too
cute to be put off that-a-way,' says he. 'Go, Shamus,' says he to me,
'and see who's in it.'

"'How can I see who's in it in the dark?' says I.

"'Well,' says he, 'light the candle, thin, and see who's in it, but
don't open the door, for your life, barrin' they brake it in,' says he,
'exceptin' to the sojers, and spake thim fair, if it's thim.'

"So with that I wint to the door, and there was another knock.

"'Who's there?' says I.

"'It's me,' says he.

"'Who are you?' says I.

"'A frind,' says he.

"'*Baithershin!'* says I--' who are you, at all?'

"'Arrah! don't you know me?' says he.

"'Divil a taste,' says I.

"'Sure I'm Paddy the Piper,' says he.

"'Oh, thunder an' turf,' says I, 'is it you, Paddy, that's in it?'

"'Sorra one else,' says he.

"'And what brought you at this hour?' says I.

"'By gar,' says he, 'I didn't like goin' the roun' by the road,' says
he, 'and so I kem the short cut, and that's what delayed me,' says he.

"'Oh, bloody wars!' says I. 'Paddy, I wouldn't be in your shoes for the
king's ransom,' says I; 'for you know yourself it's a hangin' matther to
be cotched out these times,' says I.

"'Sure, I know that,' says he, 'God help me; and that's what I kem to
you for,' says he; 'and let me in for ould acquaintance sake,' says poor
Paddy.

"'Oh, by this and that,' says I, 'I darn't open the door for the wide
world; and sure you know it; and throth, if the Husshians or the Yeos
ketches you,' says I, 'they'll murther you, as sure as your name's
Paddy.'

"'Many thanks to you,' says he, 'for your good intintions; but, plaze
the pigs, I hope it's not the likes o' that is in store for me, anyhow.'

"'Faix, then,' says I, 'you had betther lose no time in hidin'
yourself,' says I; 'for throth, I tell you, It's a short thrial and a
long rope the Husshians would be afther givin' you--for they've no
justice and less marcy, the villians!'

"'Faith, thin, more's the raison you should let me in, Shamus,' says
poor Paddy.

"'It's a folly to talk,' says I. 'I darn't open the door.'

"'Oh, then, millia murther?' says Paddy, 'what'll become of me, at all,
at all?' says he.

"'Go aff into the shed,' says I, 'behin' the house, where the cow is,
and there there's an iligant lock o' straw that you may go sleep
in,'saya I, 'and a fine bed it id be for a lord, let alone a piper.'

"So off Paddy set to hide in the shed, and throth, it wint to our hearts
to refuse him, and turn him away from the door, more by token when the
praties was ready--for sure, the bit and the sup Is always welkim to the
poor thraveller. Well, we all wint to bed, and Paddy hid himself in the
cow-house; and now I must tell you how it was with Paddy:

"You see, afther sleeping for some time, Paddy wakened up thinkin' It
was mornin', but it wasn't mornin' at all, but only the light o' the
moon that deceaved him; but at all evints, he wanted to be stirrin'
airly, bekase he was goin' off to the town hard by, it bein' fair day,
to pick up a few ha'pence with his pipes--for the divil a betther piper
was in all the counthry round nor Paddy; and everyone gave it up to
Paddy that he was iligant an the pipes, and played 'Jinny bang'd the
Weaver' beyant tellin', and the 'Hare in the Corn,' that you'd think the
very dogs was in it and the horsemen ridin' like mad.

"Well, as I was sayin', he set off to go to the fair, and he wint
meandherin' along through the fields, but he didn't go far, antil
climbin' up through a hedge, when he was comin' out at t'other side, his
head kem plump agin somethin' that made the fire flash out iv his eyes.
So with that he looks up--and what do you think it was, Lord be merciful
to us! but a corpse hangin' out of a branch of a three.

"'Oh, the top o' the mornin' to you, sir,' says Paddy, 'and is that the
way with you, my poor fellow? Throth, you tuk a start out o' me,' says
poor Paddy; and 'twas thrue for him, for it would make the heart of a
stouter man nor Paddy jump to see the like, and to think of a Chrishthan
crathur being hanged up, all as one as a dog.

"Now, 'twas the rebels that hanged this chap--bekase, you see, the
corpse had got clothes an him, and that's the raison that one might know
It was the rebels--by raison that the Husshians and the Orangemen never
hanged anybody wid good clothes an him, but only the poor and
definceless crathurs like us; so, as I said before, Paddy knew well it
was the *boys* that done it; 'and,' says Paddy, eyin' the corpse, 'by my
sowl, thin, but you have a beautiful pair o' boots an you,' says he,
'and it's what I'm thinkin' you won't have any great use for thim no
more; and sure, it's a shame to the likes o' me,' says he, 'the best
piper in the sivin counties, to be trampin' wid a pair of ould brogues
not worth three *traneeens*, and a corpse with such an iligant pair o'
boots, that wants someone to wear thim. So, with that, Paddy lays hould
of him by the boots, and began a-pullin' at thim, but they wor mighty
stiff; and whether it wis by raison of their bein' so tight, or the
branch of the three a-jiggin' up an' down, all as one as a weighdee
buckettee, an' not lettin' Paddy cotch any right hoult o' thim--he could
get no *advantage* o' thim at all--and at last he gev it up, and was
goin' away, whin lookin' behind him agin, the sight of the iligant fine
boots was too much for him, and he turned back, determined to have the
boots, anyhow, by fair means or foul; and I'm loath to tell you now how
he got thim--for indeed it was a dirty turn, and throth, it was the only
dirty turn l ever knew Paddy to be guilty av; and you see it was this
a-way; 'pon my sowl, he pulled out a big knife, and by the same token,
it was a knife with a fine buck-handle and a murtherin' big blade, that
an uncle o' mine, that was a gardener at the lord's, made Paddy a
prisint av; and more by token, it was not the first mischief that knife
done, for it cut love between thim, that was the best of finds before;
and sure, 'twas the wondher of everyone, that two knowledgable men, that
ought to know betther, would do the likes, and give and take sharp steel
in frindship; but I'm forgettin'--well, he outs with his knife, and what
does he do, but be cuts off the legs of the corpse; 'and,' says he, 'I
can take off the boots at my convaynience;' and throth, it was, as I
said before, a dirty turn.

"Well, air, he tuck'd the legs undher his arms, and at that minit the
moon peeped out from behind a cloud--'Oh! is it there you are?' says be
to the moon, for he was an impidint chap--and thin, seein' that he made
a mistake, and that the moonlight deceaved him, and that It wasn't the
airly dawn, as he conceaved; and bein' friken'd for fear himself might
be cotched and trated like the poor corpse he was afther a malthreating,
if *he* was found walking the counthry at that time--by gar, he turned
about, and walked back agin to the cow-house, and hidin' the corpse's
legs in the sthraw, Paddy wint to sleep agin. But what do you think? the
divil a long Paddy was there, antil the sojers came in airnest, and by
the powers, they carried off Paddy--and faith, it was only sarvin' him
right for what he done to the poor corpse.

"Well, whin the mornin' kem, my father says to me: 'Go, Shamus,' says
he, 'to the shed, and bid poor Paddy come in, and take share o' the
praties, for I go bail, he's ready for his breakquest by this, anyhow!'

"Well, out I wint to the cow-house, and called out 'Paddy!' and afther
callin' three or four times, and gettin' no answer, I wint in, and
called agin, and divil an answer I got still.

"Blood-au-agers!' says I 'Paddy, where are you, at all, at all?' and so,
castin' my eyes about the shed, I seen two feet stickin' out from undher
the hape o' straw--' Musha! thin,' says I, 'bad luck to you, Paddy, but
you're fond of a warm corner, and maybe you haven't made yourself as
snug as a flay in a blanket? but I'll disturb your dhrames, I'm
thinkin',' says I, and with that I laid hould of his heels (as I
thought, God help me!), and givin' a good pull to waken him, as I
intinded, away I wint, head over heels, and my brains was a'most knocked
out agin' the wall.

"Well, whin I recovered myself, there I was, an the broad o' my back,
and two things stickin' out o' my hands like a pair o' Husshian's
horse-pist'ls--and I thought the sight 'id lave, my eyes when I seen
they wor' two mortial legs.

"My jew'l, I threw them down like a hot pratie, and jumpin' up, I roared
out millia murther. 'Oh, you murtherin' villian,' says I, shakin' my
fist at the cow; 'oh, you unnath'ral *baste,'* says I, 'you've ate poor
Paddy, you thievin' cannible; you're worse than a neygar,' says I; 'and
bad luck to you, how dainty you are, that nothin' 'id serve you for your
supper but the best piper In Ireland. *Weirasthru! weirasthru!* what'll
the whole counthry say to such an unnath'ral murther? And you lookin' as
innocent there as a lamb, and atin' your hay as quite as if nothin'
happened.' With that I run out--for throth, I didn't like to be near
her--and goin' into the house, I tould them all about It.

"'Arrah! be aisy,' says my father.

"'Bad luck to the lie I tell you,' says I.

"'Is it ate, Paddy?' says they.

"'Divil a doubt of it,' says I.

"'Are you sure, Shamus?' says my mother.

"'I wish I was as sure of a new pair o' brogues,' says I. 'Bad luck to
the bit she has left iv him but his two legs.'

"'And do you tell me she ate the pipes too?' says my father.

"'By gor, I b'lieve so,'says l.

"'Oh, the divil fly away wid her,' says he. 'What a cruel taste she has
for music!'

"'Arrah!' says my mother, 'don't be cursin' the cow that gives the milk
to the childher.'

"'Yis, I will,' says my father. 'Why shouldn't I curse sich an
unnath'ral baste?'

"'You oughtn't to curse any livin' thing that's undher your roof,' says
my mother.

"'By my sowl, thin,' says my father, 'she shan't be undber my roof any
more; for I'll sind her to the fair this minit,' says he, 'and sell her
for whatever she'll bring. Go aff' says he, 'Shamus, the minit you've
ate your breakquest, and dhrive her to the fair.'

"'Throth, I don't like to dhrive her,' says I.

"'Arrah don't be <u>makin</u>' a gommagh of yourself,' says he.

"'Faith, I don't,' says I.

"'Well, like or no like,' says he, 'you must dhrlve her.'

"'Sure, father,' says I, 'you could take more care iv her yourself.'

"'That's mighty good,' says he, 'to keep a dog and, bark myself;' and
faith, I rec'llected the sayin' from that hour. 'Let me have no more
words about it,' says he, 'but be aff wid you.'

"So aff I wint--and it's no lie 'I'm tellin' whin I say it was sore agin
my will I had anything to do with sich a villian of a baste. But
howsomever, I cut a brave long wattle, that I might dhrive the manather
iv a thief, as she was, without bein' near her, at all, at all.

"Well, away we wint along the road, and mighty throng it wus wid the
boys and the girls--and in short, all sorts, rich and poor, high and
low, crowdin' to the fair.

"'God save you,' says one to me.

"'God save you, kindly,' says I.

"'That's a fine baste you're dhrivin',' says he.

"'Throth, she is," says I; though God knows it wint agin my heart to say
a good word for the likes of her.

"'It's to the fair you're goin', I suppose,' says he, 'with the baste?'
(He was a snug-lookin' farmer, ridin' a purty little grey hack.)

"'Faith, thin, you're right enough,' says I, 'It is to the fair I'm
goin'.'

"'What do you expec' for her?' says he.

"'Faith, thin, myself doesn't know,' says I--and that was thrue enough,
you see, bekase I was bewildhered like about the baste entirely.

"'That's a quare way to be goin' to market,' says he; 'and not to know
what you expec' for your baste.'

"'Och,' says I--not likin' to let him suspict there was anything wrong
wid her--' och,' says I, in a careless sort of a way, 'sure, no one can
tell what a baste 'ill bring, antil they come to the fair,' says I, 'and
see what price is goin'.'

"'Indeed, that's nath'ral enough,' says he. 'But if you wor bid a fair
price before you come to the fair, sure you might as well take it,' says
he.

"'Oh I've, no objection in life,' says I.

"'Well, thin, what 'ill you ax for her?' says he.

"'Why, thin, I wouldn't like to be onraisonable,' says I--(for the
thruth was, you know, I wanted to get rid iv her)--'and so I'll take
four pounds for her,' says I, 'and

no less.'

"'No less!' says he.

"'Why, sure, that's chape enough,' says I.

"'Throth; it is,' says he; 'and I'm thinkin' It's *too* chape it is,'
says he; 'for if there wasn't somethin' the matter, it's not for that
you'd be sellin' the fine milch cow, as she is to all appearance.'

"'Indeed, thin,' says I, 'upon my conscience, she *is* a flue milch
cow.'

"'Maybe,' says he, 'she's gone off her milk, in regard that she doesn't
feed well?'

"'Och, by this and that,' says I, 'In regard of feedin' there's not the
likes of her in Ireland. So make your mind aisy; and if you like her for
the money, you may have her.'

"'Why, Indeed, I'm not in a hurry,' says he, 'and I'll wait to see how
they go in the fair.'

"'With all my heart,' says I, purtendin' to be no ways consarned--but in
throth, I began to be afeard that the people was seein' somethin'
unnath'ral about her, and that we'd never get rid of her, at all, at
all. At last we kem to the fair, and a great sight o' people was in
it--throth, you'd think the whole world was there, let alone the
standin's o' gingerbread and iligant ribbins, and makin's o' beautiful
gownds, and pitch-and-toss, and merry go-rouns, and tints with the best
av dhrink in thim, and the fiddles playin' up t' incourage the boys and
girls; but I never minded thim at all, but detarmint to sell the
thievin' rogue av a cow afore l'd mind any divarsh in life; so an I
dhriv her into the thick av the fair, whin all of a suddint, as I kem to
the door av a tint, up sthruck the pipes to the tune av 'Tattberin' Jack
Welsh,' and, my jew'l, in a minit the cow cock'd her ears, and was
makin' a dart at the tint.

"'Oh,'murther!' says I, to the boys standin' by, 'hould her, says I,
'hould her--she ate one piper already, the vagabone, and bad luck to
her, she wants another.'

"'Is it a cow for to ate a piper?' says one o' thim.

"'Divil a bit o' lie in it, for I seen his corpse myself, and nothin'
left but the two legs,' says I; 'and it's a folly to be sthrivin' to
hide it, for I *see* she'll never lave it aff--as poor Paddy Grogan
knows to his cost, Lord be marciful to him!'

"'Who's that takin' my name in vain?' says a voice in the crowd; and
with that, shovin' the throng a one side, who the divil should I see but
Paddy Grogan, to all appearance.

"'Oh, hould him too,' says I. 'Keep him av me, for it's not himself at
all, but his ghost,' says I; 'for he was kilt last night to my sartin
knowledge, every inch av him, all to his legs.'

"Well, sir, with that, Paddy--for it *was* Paddy himself, as it kem out
afther--fell a laughin', that you'd think his sides 'ud split; and whin
he kem to himself, he ups and he tould us howit was, as I tould you
already; and the likes av the fun they made av me was beyant tellin' for
wrongfully misdoubtin' the poor cow, and layin' the blame iv atin' a
piper an her. So we all wint into a tint to have it explained, and by
gor, it tuk a full gallon o' sper'ts t' explain it; and we dhrank health
and long life to Paddy and the cow, and Paddy played that day beyant all
tellin', and many a one said the likes was never heerd before or sence,
even from Paddy himself--and av coorse, the poor slandhered cow was
dhruv home agin, and many a quite day she had wid us afther that; and
whin she died, throth, my father had sitch a regard for the poor thing,
that he had her skinned, and an iligant pair of breeches made out iv her
hide, and it's in the fam'ly to this day; and isn't it mighty remarkable
it is, what I'm goin' to tell you now, but it's as thrue as I'm here,
and from that out, anyone that has them breeches an, the minit a pair o'
pipes sthrikes up, they can't rest, but goes jiggin' and jiggin' in
their sate, and never stops as long as the pipes is pIayin'--and there,"
said he, slapping the garment in question that covered his sinewy limb,
with a spank of his brawny hand that might have startled nerves more
tender than mine--" there, there is the very breeches that's an me now
and a fine pair they are this minit."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Priest's Ghost](lasi16)
