[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lasi21)  [Next](lasi23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GHBUI6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Legends and Stories of Ireland*, by Samuel Lover, \[1831, 1834\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Curse of Kishogue

I Do not mean to say that cursing is either moral or polite, but I
certainly *do* think that if a man curse at all, he has a right to curse
after what fashion he chooses. Now, I am not going to curse, nor swear
either, but to write concerning the very superior curse as above-named,
and I have premised the foregoing conditions, seeing that, entertaining
such an opinion on the subject, no moralist can find fault with me for
the minor offence of introducing a curse to my own taste. Let not the
polite world either startle at the word "Introduction." I do not intend
to force cursing into their notice or their company; I mean the word
"introduction" purely in a literary' sense; and lastly, therefore, to
the literary I would say a few words on the matter.

There has been already known to the literary world a celebrated curse,
called "The Curse of Kehama," and I hope I may not be considered too
presumptuous in the intention of putting forward a curse to their
notice, as its "Companion." Something of the sort, I think, has been
wanted, and should I win the distinction of being considered the person
who has supplied the deficiency, I hope Doctor Southey will allow me the
further happiness of dedicating the story to him. There are sufficient
points of difference in the two curses to make a variety for the
reader's entertainment, and yet one point of curious coincidence between
them--the drinking of a cup. Now, as regards the variety, Kehama's curse
was that he could not die; while poor Kishogue's was that he did. As to
the coincidence, Kehama and Kishogue have their interest materially
involved in the drinking of a cup; yet in the very coincidence there is
a charming want of similitude, for Kehama in not having the cup to
drink, and Kishogue in having it to drink, and refusing it, produce such
different consequences that it is like the same note being sounded by
two voices, whose qualities are so unlike that no one could believe the
note to be the same. But lest I should anticipate my story, I will close
my observations on the rival merits of the two epics, and request the
reader, in pursuance of my desire of being permitted to tell my story
according to my own fancy, to step in with me for a few minutes into
what is no genteeler place than a shebeen house.

I had been wandering over a wild district, and thought myself fortunate,
in default of better quarters, to alight upon a shebeen house, the
*auberge* of Ireland. It had been raining heavily; I was wet, and there
was a good turf fire to dry me. From many hours of exercise, I was
hungry; and there was a good rasher of bacon and a fresh egg to satisfy
the cravings of nature; and to secure me from cold, as a consequence of
the soaking I had experienced, there was a glass of pure "mountain dew"
at my service--so pure that its rustic simplicity had never been
contaminated by such a worldly knowledge as the king's duty. What more,
then, might a reasonable man want than a shebeen house under such
circumstances?

Ah! we who are used to the refinements of life can never imagine how
very little may sufflce, upon occasion, to satisfy our *natural* wants,
until we have been reduced by circumstances to the knowledge. The
earthen floor of the shebeen never for an instant suggested the want of
a carpet; the absence of a steel grate did not render the genial heat of
the blithely blazing fire less agreeable. There was no vagrant hankering
after a haunch of venison as I despatched my rasher of bacon, which
hunger rendered so palatable; and I believe "poteen," under the
immediate circumstances in which I was placed, was more acceptable than
the best flask of

Chateau Margaux.

When I arrived at the house, the appearance of a well-dressed stranger
seeking its hospitality created quite a "sensation"; the bare-legged
girl, who acted in the capacity of waiter, was sent driving about in all
directions; and I could overhear the orders issued to her by "the
misthriss" from time to time, while I was drying myself before the fire.

"Judy, here--come here, Judy, I tell you. See!" Then, in an undertone:
"Get ready the quol'ty room--hurry it up soon." Then away trotted Judy;
but before she had gone many steps there was another call.

"And, Judy!"

"Well, ma'am."

"Put a candle in the tin sconce."

"Sure, Terry Regan has the sconce within there;" pointing to an
adjoining apartment where some peasants were very busy in making merry.

"Well, no matter for that; scoop out a pratie, and that'll do well
enough for Terry--sure, he knows no better--and take the sconce for the
gintleman."

I interrupted her here, to beg she would not put herself to any
inconvenience on my account, for I was very comfortable where I was,
before her good fire.

"Oh, as for the fire, your honour, Judy shall put some live turf an the
hearth, and you'll be as snug as you plaze."

"Yes; but I should be very lonesome, sitting there all night by myself,
and I would much rather stay where I am. This fire is so pleasant,
you'll hardly make another as good tonight, and I like to see people
about me."

"Indeed, an' no wonder, sir, and that's thrue; but I'm afeard you'll
find *them* men dhrinkin' within there throublesome; they're laughin'
like mad."

"So much the better," said I. "I like to see people happy."

"Indeed, and your honour's mighty agreeable; but that's always the way
with a gintleman--it make no differ in life to the *rale* quol'ty."

"Say no more about It," said I, "I beg of you. I can enjoy myself here
by this good fire, and never mind the sconce, nor anything else that
might inconvenience you; but let me have the rasher as soon as you can,
and some more of that good stuff you have just given me, to make some
punch, and I will be as happy as a king."

"Throth, thin, you're aisely satisfied, sir; but sure, as I said before,
a rale gintleman takes everything as it comes."

Accordingly, the rasher was dressed on the fire before which I sat, and
it was not long before I did honour to the simple fare; and being
supplied by the materials for making punch, I became my own brewer on
the occasion.

In the meantime, the mirth grew louder in the adjoining compartment of
the house, and Terry Regan, before alluded to, seemed to be a capital
master of the revels; and while I enjoyed my own tipple beside the
lively fire, I had all the advantage of overhearing the conversation of
Terry and his party. This was of a very motley description. The
forthcoming sporting events on a neighbouring race-course, the last
execution at the county jail, and an approaching fair, were matters of
discussion for some time, but these gave place at last to the politics
of the day.

It was the period when the final downfall of Napoleon had created such a
sensation, and it was a long time before the peasantry of Ireland could
believe that the hero of France was so utterly discomfited. He had long
been a sort of idol to them, and the brilliancy of his successes for
years had led them into the belief that he was invincible. There is,
perhaps, in the lower orders in general, a tendency to admire military
heroes, but this is peculiarly the case amongst the Irish, and Alexander
and Julius Caesar are names more familiar to them than a stranger could
well believe. But their love of Buonaparte, and their exultation in his
triumphs, had a deeper motive than mere admiration as a warrior. What
that motive was, it would be foreign to my pages to touch upon,
therefore let me resume.

The conversation amongst these peasant politicians turned upon
Buonaparte's imprisonment at St. Helena, and some of the party,
unwilling to believe it, doubted the affair altogether.

"By the powdhers' o' war," said one, "I'll never b'live that he's 'a
presoner. Tut--who could take him prisoner? There's none o' them aiqual
to it."

"Oh, I'm afeard it's too thrue it is," said another.

"An' you b'live it, thin?" said a third.

"Faix, I do. Sure, Masther Frank--the captain, I mane--said he seen him
there himself."

"Tare-au-onus, did he see him in airnest?"

"Sure enough, faith, with his own two eyes."

"And was he in chains, like a *rale* presoner?"

"Oh, no, man alive! Sure, they wouldn't go for to put a chain an *him*,
like any other housebraker, or the like o' that."

"Well, sure, I heard them makin' spaches about it at the meetin' was
beyant in the town last summer; and a gintleman out o' Dublin, *that kem
down an purpose,* had the *hoith* o' fine language all about it, and I
remember well he said these very words: 'They will never blot the stain
from their *annuals;* and when he *dies* it will be a *livin'* disgrace
to them; for what can he do but die,' says he, *'non compossed* as be is
by the wide oceant, chained, undher a burnin' *climax,* to that
*salutary* rock? Oh! think o' that!' So you see, he was chained,
accordin' to his account."

"But Masther Frank, I tell you, says he *seen* him; and there's no chain
an him, at all; but he says he is *there* for sartin."

"Oh, murther, murther! Well, if he's there, sure, he's a pres'ner, and
that'll brake his heart."

"Oh, thrue for you! Think o' Bonyparty bein' a prisoner like any other
man*,* and him that was able to go over the whole world wherever he
plazed, bein' obleeged to live an a rock."

"Aye," said the repeater of the *spache;* "and the villians to have him
undher that burnin' climax. I wondher what is it?"

"I didn't hear Masther Frank say a word about that. Oh, what will my
poor Bony do, at all, at all!"

"By dad, it is hard for to say."

"By gor!" said Terry Regan, who had been hitherto a silent listener. "I
dunna what the dlvil he'll do wid himself now,

barrin' he takes to dhrink."

"Faix, an' there is great comfort in the sup, sure enougb," said one of
his companions.

"To be sure there is," said Terry. "Musha, thin, Phil," said he to one
of the party, "give us 'The Jug o' Punch,' the sorra betther song you
have than that same, and sure, it's just the very thing that will be
*nate and opprobrious* at this present, as they say in the spatches at
the char'ty dinners."

"Well, I'll do my endeavour, if it's plazin' to the company," said Phil.

"That's your sort," said Terry. "Rise it, your sowl!"

Phil then proceeded to sing, after some preliminary hums and hahs and
coughing to clear his voice, the following old ballad:

THE JUG OF PUNCH

As I was sitting In my room,  
One pleasant evening in the month of June,  
I heard a thrush singing in a bush,  
And, the tune he sung was a jug o' punch.

Too ra loo! too ra loo! too ra loo! too ra loo!  
A jug o' punch! a jug o' punch!  
The tune he sung was a jug o' punch.

What more divarshin might a man desire  
Than to be seated by a nate turf fire,  
And by his side a purty wench,  
And on the table a jug o' punch?

Tooraloo, etc.

The Muses twelve and Apollio famed,  
In *Castilian* pride dhrinks *pernicious* sthrames;  
But I would not grudge them tin times as much,  
As long as I had a jug o' punch.

Tooraloo, etc.

Then the mortial gods dhrinks their necthar wine,  
And they tell me claret is very fine;  
But I'd give them all, just in a bunch,  
For one jolly pull at a jug o' punch.

Tooraloo, etc.

The docthor falls, with all his art,  
To cure an imprisson an the heart;  
But if life was gone--within an inch--  
What would bring it back like a jug o' punch?

Tooraloo, etc.

But when I am dead and in my grave,  
No costly tombstone will I crave;  
But I'll dig a grave both wide and deep,  
With a jug o' punch at my head and feet.

Too ra loo! too ra loo! too ra loo! too ra loo!  
A jug o' punch! a jug o' punch!  
Oh! more power to your elbow, my jug o' punch!

Most uproarious applause followed this brilliant lyric, and the thumping
of fists and the pewter pot on the table testified the admiration the
company entertained for their minstrel.

"My sowl, Phil!" said Terry Regan, "it's betther and betther you're
growing every night I hear you; and the real choice sperit is in you
that improves with age."

"Faith, an' there's no choicer sperit than this same Mrs. Muldoody has
in her house," said one of the party, on whom the liquor had begun to
operate, and who did not *take* Terry Regan's allusion.

"Well, fill your glass again with it," said Terry, doing the honours,
and then, resuming the conversation and addressing Phil again, he said:
"Why, thin, Phil, you have a terrible fine voice."

"Troth, an' you have, Phil," said another of the party. "It's a pity
your mother hadn't more of yez--oh, that I may see the woman that
deserves you, and that I may dance at your weddin'!"

"Faix an' I'd rather sing at my own wake," said Phil.

"Och that you may be able!" said Terry Regan; "but I'm afeard there'll
be a man hanged the day you die."

"Pray for yourself, Terry, if you plaze," said Phil.

"Well, sing us another song, thin."

"Not a one more I remimber," said Phil.

"Remimber!" said Terry. "Bad cess to me, but you know more songs than
would make the fortune of a ballad singer."

"Throth, I can't think of one."

"Ah, don't think at all, man, but let the song out of you. Sure, it'll
come of itself if you're willin'."

"Bad cess to me if I remimber one."

"Oh, I'll jog your memory," said Terry. "Sing us the song you deludhered
ould Roony's daughter with."

"What's that?" said Phil.

"Oh, you purtind not to know, you desaiver."

"Throth, an' I don't," said Phil.

"Why, bad fortune to you, you know it well--sure, the poor girl was
never the same since she heerd it, you kem over her so, with the
tindherness."

"Well, what was it; can't you tell me?"

"It was the 'Pig that was in Aughrim.'"

"Oh, that's a beautiful song, sure enough, and it's too thrue, it is.
Oh, *them* vagabone staymers that's goin' evermore to England, the divil
a pig they'll lave in the counthry, at all."

"Faix, I'm afeard so--but that's no rule why you should not sing the
song. Out with it, Phil, my boy."

"Well, here goes," said Phil, and he commenced singing in a most doleful
strain the following ballad:

  
THE PIG THAT WAS IN AUGHRIM.

The pig that was in Aughrim was dhruv to foreign parts,  
And when he was goin' an the road it bruk the ould sows heart.  
"Oh," says she, "my counthry's ruin'd and deserted now by all,  
And the rise of pigs in England will ensure the counthry's fall,  
For the landlords and the pigs are all goin' hand in hand--"

"Oh, stop, Phil jewel," said the fellow who had been doing so much
honour to Mrs. Muldoody's liquor--" stop, Phil, my darlin'!" and here he
began to cry in a fit of drunken tenderness. "Oh, stop, Phil--that's too
much for me--oh, I can't stand it at all. Murther, murther but it's
heart-breakin', so it is."

After some trouble on the part of his companions, this tenderhearted
youth was reconciled to hearing the "Pig that was in Aughrim" concluded,
though I would not vouch for so much on the part of my readers, and
therefore I will quote no more of it. But he was not the only person who
began to be influenced by the potent beverage that had been circulating,
and the party became louder in their mirth and more diffuse in their
conversation, which occasionally was conducted on the good old plan of a
Dutch concert, where every man plays his own tune. At last, one of the
revellers, who had just sufficient sense left to know it was time to go,
yet not sufficient resolution to put his notion in practice, got up and
said: "Good-night, boys!"

"Who's that sayin' good-night?" called out Terry Regan, in a tone of
indignation.

"Oh, it's only me, and it's time for me to go, you know yourself,
Terry," said the deserter; "and the wife will be as mad as a hatter if I
stay out longer."

"By the powers o' Moll Kelly, if you had three wives you mustn't go
yet," said the president.

"By dad, I must, Terry."

"Ah, thin, why?"

"Bekase I must."

"That's so good a raison, Barny, that I'll say no more--only, mark my
words, you'll be sorry."

"Will be sorry," said Barny. "Faix, an' it's sorry enough *I am*--and
small blame to me; for the company's pleasant and the dhrink's good."

"And why won't you stay, thin?"

"Bekase I must go, as I tould you before."

"Well, be off wid you at wanst, and don't be spylin' good company, if
you won't stay. Be off wid you, I tell you, and don't be standin' there
with your hat in your hand like an ass betune two bundles o' hay, as you
are, but go if you're goin'--and the Curse of Kishogue an you!"

"Well, good-night, boys!" said the departing reveller.

"Faix, you shall have no good-night from us. You're a bad fellow, Barny
Corrigan--so the Curse o' Kishogue an you!"

"Oh, tare-an-ouns," said Barny, pausing at the door, "don't put the
curse an a man that is goin' the road, and has to pass by the Rath,
\[fairies are supposed to haunt all old mounds of earth, such as raths,
tumuli, etc., etc. \] more betoken, and no knowin' where the fairies
would be."

"Throth, thin, and I will," said Terry Regan, increasing in energy, as
he saw Barny was irresolute--" and may the Curse o' Kishogue light on
you again and again!"

"Oh, do you bear this!!!" exclaimed Barny, in a most comical state of
distress.

"Aye!" shouted the whole party, almost at a breath; "the Curse o'
Kishogue an you--and *your health to wear it!*"

"Why, thin, what the dickens do you mane by *that* curse?" said Barny.
"I thought I knew all the curses out, but I never heerd of the Curse o'
Kishogue before."

"Oh, you poor, ignorant craythur," said Terry: "Where were you born and
bred, at all, at all? Oh, signs on it, you were always in a hurry to
brake up good company, or it's not askin' you'd be for the maynin' of
the Curse o' Kishogue."

"Why, thin, what *does* it mane?" said Barny, thoroughly posed.

"Pull off your cubeen and sit down forninst me there, and tackle to the
dhrink like a man, and it is I that will enlighten your benighted
undherstandin', and a beautiful warnin' it will be to you all the days
o' your life, and all <u>snakin'</u> chaps like you, that would be in a
hurry to take to the road and lave a snug house like this, while there
was the froth an the pot or the bead an the naggin."

So Barny sat down again, amidst the shouts and laughter of his
companions, and after the liquor had passed merrily round the table for
some time, Terry, in accordance with his promise, commenced his
explanation of the malediction that had brought Barny Corrigan back to
his seat; but before he began, he filled a fresh glass, and profiting by
the example, I will proceed with the narrative:--

You see, there was wanst a mighty dacent boy, called Kishogue--and not a
complater chap was in the siven parishes nor himself--and for dhrinkin,'
or 'coortin' (and by the same token he was a darlint among the girls, be
was so bowld), or cudgellin', or runnin', or wrastlin', or the like o'
that, none could come near him; and at patthern, or fair, or the dance,
or the wake, Kishogue was the flower o' the flock.

Well, to be sure, the gintlemen iv the counthry did not belove him so
well as his own sort--that in, the *eldherly* gintlemen, for as to the
young 'squires, by gor, they loved him like one of themselves, and
betther a'most, for they knew well that Kishogue was the boy to put them
up to all sorts and sizes of divilment and divarshin, and that was all
they wanted--but the ould, studdy \[steady\] gintlemen--the responsible
people like, didn't give in to his ways at all--and in throth, they used
to be thinkin' that if Kishogue was out of the counthry, body and bones,
that the counthry would not be the worse iv it, in the laste, and that
the deer and the hares and the pattheridges wouldn't be scarcer in the
laste, and that the throut and the salmon would lade an aisier life; but
they could get no howlt of him, good or bad, for he was an cute as a
fox, and there was no sitch thing as getting him at an amplush, at all,
for he was like a weasel a'most--

asleep wid his eyes open.

Well, that's the way it was for many a long day, and Kishogue was as
happy as the day was long, antil, as bad luck id have it, he made a
mistake one night, as the story goes, and by dad, how he could make the
same mistake was never cleared up yet, barrin' that the night was dark,
or that Kishogue had a dhrop o' dhrink in; but the mistake *was* made,
and *this* was the mistake, you see: that he consaived he seen his own
mare threspasain' an the man's field by the roadside, and so, with that
he cotched the mare--that is, the mare to all appearance, but it was not
his own mare, but the Squire's horse, which be tuk for his own mare--all
in a mistake, and he thought that she had sthrayed away, and not likin'
to see *his* baste threspassin' an another man's field, what does be do,
but be dhrives home the horse *in a mistake,* you see, and how he could
do the like is hard to say, excep'n that the night was dark, as I said
before, or that he had a dhrop too much in; but howsomever, the mistake
was made, and a sore mistake it was for poor Kishogue, for he never
persaived it at all, antil three days afther, when the polisman kem to
him and tould him he should go along with him.

"For what?" says Kishogue.

"Oh, you're mighty innocent," says the polisman.

"Thrue for you, sir," says Kishogue, as quite \[quiet\] as a child. "And
where are you goin' to take me, may I make bowld to ax, sir?" says he.

"To jail," says the peeler.

"For what?" says Kishogue.

"For staalin' the Squire's horse," says the peeler.

"It's the first I heerd of it," says Kishogue.

"Throth, thin, 'twon't be the last you'll hear of it," says the other.
"Why, tare-an-ouns, sure, it's no housebrakin' for a man to dhrive home
his own mare," says Kishogue.

"No," says the peeler; "but it is *burglaarious* to sarcumvint another
man's horse," says he.

"But supposin' 'twas a mistake," says Kishogue.

"By gor, it'll be the *dear* mistake to you," says the polisman.

"That's a *poor* case," says Kishogue.

But there was no use in talkin'. He might as well have been whistlin'
jigs to a milestone as sthrivin' to invaigle the polisman, and the ind
of it was, that he was obleeged to march off to jail, and there he lay
in lavendher, like Paddy Ward's pig, antil the 'sizes kem an, and
Kishogue, you see, bein' of a high sperrit, did not like the iday at all
of bein' undher a complimint to the king for his lodgin'. Besides, to a
chap like him, that was used all his life to goin' round the world for
sport, the thoughts o' confinement was altogether contagious, though,
indeed, his friends endayvoured for to make it as agreeable as they
could to him, for he was mightily beloved in the oounthry, and they wor
goin' to see him mornin', noon, and night--throth, they led the turnkey
a busy life lettin' them in and out, for they wor comin' and goin'
evermore, like Mulligan's blanket.

Well, at last the 'sizes kem an, and down kem the sheriffs and the
judge, and the jury and the witnesses, all book-sworn to tell nothin'
but the born thruth; and with that, Kishogue was the first that was put
an his thrial for not knowin' the differ betune his own mare and another
man's horse, for they wished to give an example to the counthry, and he
was bid' to hould up his hand at the bar (and a fine big fist be had of
his own, by the same token)--and up be held it--no ways danted at all,
but as bowld as a ram. Well, thin, a chap in a black coat and a frizzled
wig and spectacles gets up, and he reads and reads, and you'd think he'd
never have done readin'; and it was all about Kishogue--as we heard'
afther--but could not make out at the time--and no wondher; and in
throth, Kishogue never done the half of what the dirty little ottomy was
readin' about him--barrin' he knew lies iv him; and Kishogue himself,
poor fellow, got frekened at last, when he heard him goin' an at that
rate about him, but afther a bit, he tuk heart and said:

"By this and by that, I never done the half o' that, anyhow."

"Silence in the coort!" says the crier--puttin' him down that-a-way. Oh,
there's no justice for a poor boy, at all!

"Oh, murther!" says Kishogue, "is a man's life to be sworn away afther
this manner, and mustn't spake a word?"

"Hould your tongue!" says my lord the judge. And so, afther some more
jabberin' and gibberish, the little man in the spectacles threw down the
paper and asked Kishogue if he was guilty or not guilty.

"I never done it, my lord," says Kishogue.

"Answer as you are bid, sir," says the spectacle man.

"I'm innocent, my lord I" says Kishogue.

"Bad cess to you, can't you say what you're bid," says my lord the
judge. *"Guilty* or *not* guilty."

"Not guilty," says Kishogue.

"I don't believe you," says the judge.

"Small blame to you," says Kishogue. "You're ped for hangin' people, and
you must do something for your wages."

'You've too much prate, sir," says my lord.

"Faix, thin, I'm thinking' it's yourself and your friend, the hangman,
will cure me o' that vary soon," says Kishogue.

And thrue for him, faith, he wasn't far out in sayin' that same, for
they murthered him intirely. They brought a terrible sight o' witnesses
agin him, that swore away his life an the cross-examination; and indeed,
sure enough, it' *was* the crossest examination altogether I ever seen.
Oh, they wor the bowld witnesses, that would *sware a hole in an iron
pot* any day in the year. Not but that Kishogue's friends done their
duty by him. Oh, they stud to him like men, and swore a power for him,
and sthrove to make out a *lullaby* for him--maynin,' by that same, that
he was asleep in another place at the time--but it wouldn't do, they
could not make it *plazin'* to the judge and the jury; and my poor
Kishogue was condimned for to die; and the judge put an his black
cap--and indeed, it is not becomin'--and discoorsed the hoighth of fine
language, and gev Kishogue a power o' good advice, that it was a mortial
pity Kishogue didn't get sooner; and the last words the judge said was:
"The Lord have marcy an your sowl!"

"Thank'ee, my lord," says Kishogue; "though, indeed, it is few has luck
or grace afther your prayers."

And sure enough, faith; for the next Sathurday Kishogue was ordhered out
to be hanged, and the sthreets through which he was to pass was mighty
throng; for in them days, you see, the people used to be hanged outside
o' the town, not all as one, as now, when we're hanged genteelly out o'
the front o' the jail; but in them days they did not attind to the
comforts o' the people at all, but put them into a cart, all as one a
conthrairy pig goin' to market, and stravaiged them through the town to
the gallows, that was full half a mile beyant it; but to be sure, whin
they kem to the corner of the crass streets, where the Widdy Houlaghan's
public, house was then, afore them dirty swaddlers knocked it down and
built a meetin'-house there--bad cess to them, sure, they're spylin'
divarshin wherever they go--when they kem there, as I was tellin' you,
the purcesshin was always stopped, and they had a fiddler and mulled
wine for the divarahin of the presoner, for to rise his heart for what
he was to go through; for, by all accounts, it is not plazin' to be
goin' to be hanged, supposin' you die in a good cause itself, as my
Uncle Jim tould me whin he suffer'd for killin' the gauger.

Well, you see, they always stopped tin minutes at the public-house, not
to hurry a man with his dhrink, and besides, to give the presoner an
opportunity for sayin' an odd word or so to a frind in the crowd, to say
nothin' of its bein' mighty improvin to the throng, to see the man
lookin' pale at the thoughts o' death, and maybe an idification and
warnin' to thim that was inclined to sthray. But however, it happened,
and the like never happened afore nor sence; but as bad luck would have
it, that day the divil a fiddler was there whin Kishogue dhruv up in the
cart, no ways danted, at all; but the minit the cart stopped rowlin' he
called out as stout as a ram: "Sind me out Tim Riley here "--Tim Riley
was the fiddler's name--" sind me out Tim Riley here," says he, "that he
may rise my heart wid 'The Rakes o' Mallow'; " for be was a Mallow man,
by all accounts, and mighty proud of his town. Well, av coorse, the tune
was not to be had, bekase Tim Riley was not there, but was lyin' dhrunk
in a ditch at the same time comin' home from confission; and when poor
Kishogue heerd that be could not have his favourite tune, it wint to his
heart to that degree that he'd hear of no comfort in life, and he bid
them dhrive him an, and put him out o' pain at wanst.

"Oh, take the dhrink anyhow, aroon," says the Widdy Houlaghan, who was
mighty tindher-hearted, and always attinded the man that was goin' to be
hanged with the dhrink herself, if he was ever so grate a sthranger; but
if he was a frind of her own, she'd go every fut to the gallows wid him
and see him suffer. Oh, she was a darlint! Well--"Take the dhrink,
Kishogue, my jewel," says she, handin' him up a brave big mug o' mulled
wine, fit for a lord--but he wouldn't touch it. "Take it out o' my
sight," says he, "for my heart is low because Tim Riley desaived me,
whin I expected to die game, like one of the Rakes o' Mallow! Take it
out o' my sight," says he, puttin' it away wid his hand, and sure, 'twas
the first time Kishogue was ever known to refuse the dhrop o' dbrink,
and many remarked that it was *the change before death* was comin' over
him.

Well, away they rowled, to the gallows, where there was no delay in life
for the presoner, and the sheriff asked him if he had anything to say to
him before he suffered; but Kishogue hadn't a word to throw to a dog,
and av coorse, he said nothin' to the sheriff, and wouldn't say a word
that might be improvin', even to the crowd, by way of an idification;
and indeed, a sore disappointment it was to the throng, for they thought
be would make an iligant dyin' speech; and the prenthers there, and the
ballad-singers, all ready for to take it down complate, and thought it
was a dirty turn of Kishogue to chate them out o' their honest penny,
like; but they owed him no spite, for all that, for they considhered his
heart was low an account of the disappointment, and he was lookin'
mighty pale while they wor makin matthers tidy for him; and indeed, the
last words he said himself was:

"Put me out o' pain at wanst, for my heart is low bekase Tim Riley
desaived me, whin I thought be would rise it, that I might die like a
rale Rake o' Mallow!" And so, to make a long story short, my jewel, they
done the business for him--it was soon over wid him; it was just one
step wid him, aff o' the laddher into glory; and to do him justice,
though he was lookin pale, he died bowld, and put his best leg foremost.

Well, what would you think, but just as all was over wid him, there was
a shout o' the crowd, and a shilloo 'that you'd think would split the
sky; and what should we see gallopin' up to the gallows, but a man
covered with dust an a white horse, to all appearance, but it wasn't a
white horse but a black horse, only white wid the foam, he was dhruv to
that degree; and the man hadn't a breath to dhraw, and couldn't spake,
but dhrew a piece o' paper out of the breast of his coat and handed it
up to the sheriff; and, my jewel, the sheriff grown as white as the
paper itself, when he clapt his eyes an it; and says he:

"Cut him down--cut him down this minute!" says he; and the dhragoons
made a slash at the messenger, but he ducked his head and sarcumvinted
them. And then the sheriff shouted out: "Stop, you villians, and bad
luck to yiz, you murtherin' vagabones," says he to the sojers; "is it
goin' to murther the man you wor? It isn't him at all I mane, but the
man that's hangin'. Cut *him* down," says he; and they cut him down; but
it was no use. It was all over wid poor Kishogue; he was as dead as
small-beer, and as stiff as a crutch.

"Oh, tare-an-ouns," says the sheriff, tarin' the hair aff his head at
the same time, with the fair rage. "Isn't it a poor case that he's dead,
and here is a reprieve that is come for him; but, bad cess to him," says
be, "it's his own fault, he wouldn't take it aisy."

"Oh, millia murther! millia murther!" cried out the Widdy Houlaghan, in
the crowd. "Oh, Kishogue, my darlint, why did you refuse my mull'd wine?
Oh, if you stopped wid me to take your dhrop o' dhrink, you'd be alive
and merry now!"

So that is the maynin' of the Curse o' Kishogue; for, you see, Kishogue
was hanged

for lavin' his liquor behind him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Finder](lasi23.md)
