[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lasi06)  [Next](lasi08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GHBUI6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Legends and Stories of Ireland*, by Samuel Lover, \[1831, 1834\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Battle of the Berrins;

##### or,

### The Double Funeral

I was sitting alone in the desolate churchyard of--, intent upon my
"silent art," lifting up my eyes from my portfolio only to direct them
to the interesting ruin I was sketching, when the deathlike stillness
that prevailed was broken by a faint and wild sound, unlike anything I
had ever heard in my life. I confess I was startled. I paused in my
occupation, and listened in breathless expectation. Again this seemingly
unearthly sound vibrated through the still air of evening, more audibly
than at first, and partaking of the vibratory quality of' tone I have
noticed in so great a degree as to resemble the remote sound of the
ringing of many glasses crowded together.

I arose and looked around. No being was near me, and again this
heart-chilling sound struck upon my ear, its wild and wailing intonation
reminding me of the Aeolian harp. Another burst was wafted up the bill;
and then It became discernible that the sound proceeded from many voices
raised in lamentation.

It waa the *ulican.* I had hitherto known it only by report. For the
first time now, its wild and appalling cadence had ever been heard, and
it will not be wondered at by those acquainted with it that I was
startled on hearing it under such circumstances.

I could now perceive a crowd of peasants of both sexes winding along a
hollow way that led to the churchyard where I was standing, bearing
amongst them the coffin of the departed; and ever and anon a wild burst
of the *ulican* would arise from the throng, and ring in wild and
startling *unison* up the hill, until, by a gradual and plaintive
descent through an *octave,* it dropped into a subdued wail; and they
bore the body onward the while, not in the measured and solemn step that
custom (at least our custom) deems decent, but in a rapid and irregular
manner, as if the violence of their grief hurried them on and disdained
all form.

The effect was certainly more impressive than that of any other funeral
I bad ever witnessed, however much the "pride, pomp, and circumstance"
of such arrays had been called upon to produce a studied solemnity; for
no hearse with sable plumes, nor chief mourners, nor pallbearers, ever
equalled in *poetry* or *picturesque* these poor people, bearing along
on their shoulders in the stillness of evening the body of their
departed friend to its "long home "--the women raising their arms above
their heads in the untaught action of grief their dark and ample cloaks,
waving wildly about, agitated by the varied motions of their wearers,
and their wild cry raised in lament

"Most musical, most melancholy."

At length they reached the cemetery, and the coffin was borne into the
interior of the ruin, where the women still continued to wail for the
dead, while half-a-dozen athletic young men immediately proceeded to
prepare a grave. And seldom have I seen finer fellows, or men more full
of activity; their action, indeed, bespoke so much life and vigour as to
induce an involuntary and melancholy contrast with the object on which
that action was bestowed.

Scarcely had the spade upturned the green sod of the burial-ground, when
the wild peal of the *ulican* again was heard at a distance. The young
men paused in their work, and turned their heads, as did all the
bystanders, towards the point-whence the sound proceeded.

We soon perceived another funeral procession wind round the foot of the
hill, and immediately the grave-makers renewed their work with redoubled
activity, while exclamations of anxiety on their part for the completion
of their work, and of encouragement from the lookers-on, resounded on
all sides; and such ejaculations as "Hurry, boys, hurry I"--" Stir
yourself, Paddy!"--"That's your sort, Mike! "--"Rouse your sowl!" etc.,
etc., resounded on all sides. At the same time, the second funeral party
that was advancing no sooner perceived the churchyard already occupied,
than they directly quickened their pace, as the wail rose more loudly
and wildly from the train; and a detachment bearing pick and spade
forthwith sallied from the main body, and dashed with headlong speed up
the hill. In the meantime, an old woman, with streaming eyes and
dishevelled hair, rushed wildly from the ruin where the first party had
borne their coffin, towards the young athletes I have already described
as working with "might and main," and addressing them with all the
passionate intensity of her country, she exclaimed: "Sure you wouldn't
let them have the advantage of us, that-a-way, and lave my darlin' boy
wanderhin' about, dark an' 'lone in the long nights. Work, 'boys! work!
for the bare life, and the mother's blessin' be an you, and let my poor
Paudeen have rest."

I thought the poor woman was crazed, as indeed her appearance and
vehemence of manner, as well as the (to me) unintelligible address she
had uttered, might well induce me to believe, and I questioned one of
the bystanders accordingly.

"An' is it why she's goin' wild about it, you're axin'? " said the
person I addressed, in evident wonder at my question. "Sure then I
thought all the world knew that, let alone a gintleman like you, that
ought to be knowledgable. And sure she doesn't want the poor boy to be
walkin', as of coorse he must, barrin' they're smart."

"What do you mean?" said I. "I don't understand you."

"Whisht! whisht!" said he; "here they come, by the powers, and the
Gallaghers at the head of them," as be looked towards the new-comers'
advanced-guard, who had now gained the summit of the hill, and, leaping
over the boundary-ditch of the cemetery, advanced towards the group that
surrounded the grave, with rapid strides and a resolute air.

"Give over there, I bid you," said a tall and ably-built man of the
party to those employed in opening the ground, who still plied their
implements with energy.

"Give over, or it'll be worse for yon. Didn't you hear me, Rooney?" said
he, as he laid his muscular band on the arm of one of the party he
addressed, and arrested him in his occupation.

"I did hear you," said Rooney; "but I didn't heed you."

"I'd have you keep a civil tongue in your head," said the former. '

"You're mighty ready to give advice that you want yourself," rejoined
the latter, as he again plunged the spade into the earth.

"Lave, off, I tell you!" said our Hercules, in a higher tone, "or, by
this and that, I'll make you sorry!"

"Arrah! what brings you here at all," said another of the grave-makers,
"breedin' a disturbance?"

"What brings him here but mischief?" said a grey-haired man, who
undertook, with national peculiarity, to answer one interrogatory by
making another. "There's always a quarrel whenever there's a Gallagher."
For it was indeed one of "the Gallaghers" that the peasant I spoke to
noticed as being "at the head of them," who was assuming so bold a tone.

"You may thank your grey hair, that I don't make you repent of your
words," said Gallagher, and his brow darkened as he spoke.

"Time was," said the old man, "when I had something surer than grey
hairs to make such as you respect me;" and he drew himself up with an
air of patriarchal dignity, and displayed in his still expansive chest
and commanding height the remains of a noble figure, that bore testimony
to the truth of what he had just uttered. The old man's, eye kindled as
he spoke--but 'twas only for a moment; and the expression of pride and
defiance was succeeded by that of coldness and contempt.

"I'd have beat you blind the best day ever you seen," said Gallagher,
with an impudent swagger.

"Troth you wouldn't, Gallagher!" said a contemporary of the old man;
"but your consait bates the world!"

"That's thrue," said Rooney. "He's a great man intirely, in his own
opinion. I'd make a power of money if I could *buy* Gallagher at *my*
price and sell him at his

own."

A low and jeering laugh followed this hit of my friend Rooney; and
Gallagher assumed an aspect so lowering that a peasant, standing near
me, turned to his companion and said significantly:

"By gor, Ned, there'll be wigs an the green afore long!"

And he was quite right.

The far-off speck on the horizon, whence the prophetic eye of a sailor
can foretell the coming storm, is not more nicely discriminated by the
mariner than the symptoms of an approaching fray by an Irishman; and
scarcely had the foregoing words been uttered, than I saw the men
tucking up their long frieze coats in a sort of jacket fashion--thus
getting rid of their tails, like game-cocks before a battle. A more
menacing grip was taken by the bearer of each stick (a usual appendage
of Hibernians); and a general closing-in of the bystanders round the
nucleus of dissatisfaction made it perfectly apparent that hostilities
must soon commence.

I was not long left in suspense about such a catastrophe, for a general
outbreaking soon took place, commencing in the centre with the
principals already noticed, and radiating throughout the whole circle,
until a general action ensued, and the belligerents were dispersed in
various hostile groups over the churchyard.

I was a spectator from the topmost step of a stile leading into the
burial-ground, deeming it imprudent to linger within the precincts, of
the scene of action, when my attention was attracted by the appearance
of a horseman, who galloped up the little stony road, and was no sooner
at my side than he dismounted, exclaiming at the top of his voice: "Oh,
you reprobates! *lave* off, I tell you, you heathens! Are you Christians
at all?"

I must here pause a moment to describe the person of the horseman in
question. He was a tall, thin, pale man, having a hat which, from
exposure to bad weather, had its broad, slouching brim crimped into many
fantastic involutions, its crown somewhat depressed in the middle, and
the edges of 'the same exhibiting a napless paleness, very far removed
from its original black; no shirt-collar sheltered his angular
jawbone--a narrow white cravat was drawn tightly round his spare neck; a
single-breasted coat of rusty black, with standing collar, was tightly
buttoned nearly up to his chin, and a nether garment of the same, with
large silver knee-buckles, meeting a square-cut and buckram-like pair of
black leather boots, with heavy, plated spurs, that had seen the best of
their days, completed the picture. His horse was a small, well-built
hack, whose long, rough coat would have been white, but that soiled
litter had stained it to a dirty yellow; and taking advantage of the
liberty which the abandoned rein afforded, he very quietly turned him to
the little fringe of grass which bordered each side of the path, to make
as much profit of his time as he might, before his rider should resume
his seat in the old high-pommelled saddle which be had vacated in
uttering the ejaculations I have recorded.

This person, then, hastily mounting the stile on which I stood, with
rustic politeness said:

"By your leave, sir," as he pushed by main haste, and jumping from the
top of the wall, proceeded with long and rapid stride, towards the
combatants, and brandishing a heavy thong whip which he carried, he
began to lay about him with equal vigour and impartiality on each and
every of the peace - breakers, both parties sharing in the castigation
thus bestowed, with the most even, and, I might add, *heavy*-handed
justice.

My surprise was great on finding that all the blows inflicted by this
new belligerent, instead of being resented by the assaulted parties,
seemed taken as if resistance against this potent chastiser were vain,
and in a short time they all fled before him, like, so many frightened
school-boys before an incensed pedagogue, and huddled themselves
together in a crowd, which at once became pacified at his presence.

Seeing this result, I descended from my perch and ran, towards the scene
that excited my surprise in no ordinary degree. I found this new-comer
delivering to the multitude he had quelled a severe reproof of their
"unchristian doings," as be termed them and it became evident that he
was the pastor of the flock, and it must be acknowledged a very
turbulent flock he seemed to have of it.

This admonition was soon ended. It was certainly impressive, and well
calculated for the audience to whom it was delivered, as well from the
simplicity of its language as the solemnity of its manner, which was
much enhanced by the deep and somewhat sepulchral voice of the speaker.
"And now," added the pastor, "let me ask you for what you were fighting
like so many wild Indians? for surely your conduct is liker to savage
creatures than men that have been bred up in the hearing of Gods word."

A pause of a few seconds followed this question; and at length someone
ventured to answer from amongst the crowd that it was "in regard of the
berrin."

"And is not so solemn a sight," asked the priest, "as the burial of the
departed enough to keep down the evil passions of your hearts?"

"Troth then, and plaze your Riverince, it was nothin' ill nathured in
life, but only a good-nathured turn we wor doin for poor Paudeen Mooney
that's departed; and sure it's to your Riverince we'll be goin'
immadiantly for the masses for the poor boy's sowl." Thus making
interest in the offended quarter with an address for which the Irish
peasant is pre-eminently distinguished.

"Tut! tut!" rapidly answered the priest, anxious, perhaps, to silence
this very palpable appeal to his own interest. "Don't talk to me about
doing a good-natured turn. Not," added he, in a subdued undertone, "but
that prayers for the souls of the departed faithful are enjoined by the
Church; but what has that to do with your scandalous and lawless doings
that I witnessed this minute, and you yourself," said he, addressing the
last speaker, "one of the busiest with your alpeen? I'm afraid you're
rather fractious, Rooney. Take care that I don't speak to you from the
altar."

"Oh, God forbid that your Riverince id have to do the like!" said the
mother of the deceased, already noticed, in an imploring tone, and with
the big teardrops chasing each other down her cheeks; "and sure it was
only they wanted to put my poor boy in the ground first, and no wondher
sure, as your Riverince *knows,* and not to have my poor Paudeen--"

"Tut, tut! woman!" interrupted the priest, waving his hand rather
impatiently, "don't let me hear any folly."

"I ax your Riverince's pardon, and sure it's myself that id be sorry to
offind my clergy--God's blessin' be an them night and day! But I was
only going to put in a word for Mikee Rooney, and sure it wasn't him at
all, nor wouldn't be any of us, only for Shan Gallagher, that wouldn't
lave us in peace."

"Gallagher!" said the priest, in a deeply reproachful tone. "Where Is
he?"

Gallagher came not forward, but the crowd drew back, and left him
revealed to the priest. His aspect was that of sullen indifference, and
he seemed to be the only person present totally uninfluenced by the
presence of his pastor, who now advanced towards him; and extending his
attenuated hand in the attitude of denunciation towards the offender,
said very solemnly:

"I have already spoken to you in the house of worship, and now, once
more, I warn you to beware. Riot and battle are found wherever you go,
and if you do not speedily reform your course of life, I shall expel you
from the pale of the Church, and pronounce sentence of excommunication
upon you from the altar."

Everyone appeared awed by the solemnity and severity of this address
from the onset, but when the word "excommunication" was uttered, a
thrill of horror seemed to run through the assembled multitude; and Even
Gallagher himself, I thought, betrayed some emotion on hearing the
terrible word. Yet he evinced it but for a moment, and turning on his
heel, he retired from the ground with something of the swagger with
which he entered it. The crowd opened to let him pass, and opened
widely, as if they sought to avoid contact with one so fearfully
denounced.

"You have two coffins here," said the clergyman; "proceed, therefore,
immediately to make two graves, and let the bodies be interred at the
same time, and I will read the service for the dead."

No very great time was consumed in making the necessary preparation. The
'"narrow beds" were made, and as their tenants were consigned to their
last long sleep, the solemn voice of the' priest was raised in the "De
Profundis "; and when he had concluded the short and beautiful psalm,
the friends of the deceased closed the graves, and covered them neatly
with fresh cut sods, which is what *Paddy* very metaphorically calls

"Putting the daisy quilt over him."

The clergyman retired from the churchyard, and I followed his footsteps
for the purpose of introducing myself to "his reverence," and seeking
from him an explanation of what was still a most unfathomable mystery to
me*,* namely, the cause of the quarrel, which, from, certain passages in
his address to the people, I saw he understood, though so slightly
glanced at. Accordingly, I overtook the priest, and as the old Irish
song has it,

"To him I obnoxiously made my approaches"

He received me with courtesy, which, though not savouring much of
intercourse with polished circles, seemed. to spring whence all true
politeness emanates--from a good heart.

I begged to assure him It was not an impertinent curiosity which made me
desirous of becoming acquainted with the cause of the fray which I had,
witnessed, and he had put a stop to in so summary a manner, and hoped he
would not consider it an intrusion if I applied to him for that purpose.

"No intrusion in life, sir," answered the priest very frankly, and with
a rich *brogue,* whose intonation was singularly expressive of good
nature. It was the specimen of brogue I have never met but in one class,
the Irish gentleman of the last century--an accent which, though it
posesses all the characteristic traits of "the brogue," was at the same
time divested of the slightest trace of vulgarity. This is not to be met
with now, or at least very rarely. An attempt has been made by those who
fancy it genteel to graft the English accent, upon, the Broguish
stem--and a very bad fruit it has produced. The truth is, the accents of
the two countries could never be happily blended; and far from making a
pleasing amalgamation, it conveys the Idea that the speaker is
endeavouring to escape from his own accent for what he considers a
superior one; and it is this attempt to be fine which so particularly
allies the idea of vulgarity with the tone of brogue so often heard in
the present day.

Such, I have said, was *not* the brogue of the Rev. Phelim Roach, or
Father Roach, as the peasants called him; and his voice, which I have
earlier noticed as almost sepulchral, I found derived that character
from the feeling of the speaker when engaged in an admonitory address;
for when employed on colloquial occasions, it was no more thin what
might be called a rich and deep manly voice. So much for Father Roach,
who forthwith proceeded to enlighten me on the subject of the funeral,
and the quarrel arising therefrom.

"The truth is, sir, these poor people are possessed of many foolish
superstitions; and however we may*,* as *men,* pardon them, looking upon
them as fictions originating in a warm imagination, and finding a ready
admission into the minds of an unlettered and susceptible peasantry, we
cannot, as pastors of the flock, admit their belief to the poor people
committed to our care."

This was quite new to me--to find a clergyman of the religion I had
hitherto heard of as being *par excellence* abounding in superstition
denouncing the very article in question. But let me not interrupt Father
Roach.

"The superstition I speak of," continued he, "is one of the many these
warm-hearted people indulge in, and is certainly very poetical in its
texture."

"But, sir," interrupted my newly-made acquaintance, pulling forth a
richly chased gold watch of antique workmanship, that at once suggested,
ideas of the *"bon vieux temps,"* "I must ask your pardon--I have an
engagement to keep at the little hut I call my home, which obliges me to
proceed there forthwith. If you have so much time to spare as will
enable you to walk with me to the end of this little road, it will
suffice to make you acquainted with the nature of the superstition in
question."

I gladly assented; and the priest, disturbing the nibbling occupation of
his hack, threw the rein over his arm, and the docile little beast,
following him on one side as quietly as I did on the other, he gave, me
the following account of the cause of all the previous riot, as we wound
down the little stony path that led to the main road.

"There is a belief among the peasantry in this particular district that
the ghost of the last person interred in the churchyard is obliged to
traverse, unceasingly, the road between this earth and purgatory,
carrying water to slake the burning thirst of those confined in that
'limbo large'; and that the ghost is thus obliged to walk

'Through the dead waste and middle of the night,'

until some fresh arrival of a tenant to the 'narrow house' supplies a
fresh ghost to 'relieve guard,' if I may be allowed so military an
expression; and thus the supply of water to the sufferers in purgatory
is kept up unceasingly."

Hence it was that the fray had arisen, and the poor mother's invocation,
"that her darling boy should not be left to wander about the churchyard
dark and lone in the long nights," became at once intelligible. Father
Roach gave me some curious illustrations of the different ways in which
this superstition influenced his "poor people," as he constantly called
them. But I suppose my readers have had quite enough of the subject, and
I shall therefore say no more of other "cases in point," contented with
having given them one example, and recording the existence of a
superstition which, however wild, undoubtedly owes its existence to an
affectionate heart and a poetic imagination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Father Roach](lasi08.md)
