[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](glg00)  [Next](glg02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3WHK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gateless Gate*, by Ekai, called Mu-mon, tr. Nyogen Senzaki and Paul
Reps \[1934\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Joshu's Dog

A monk asked Joshu, a Chinese Zen master: "Has a dog Buddha-nature or
not?"

Joshu answered: "Mu." \[Mu is the negative symbol in Chinese, meaning
"No thing" or "Nay."\]

 

*Mumon's comment:* To realize Zen one has to pass through the barrier of
the patriarchs. Enlightenment always comes after the road of thinking is
blocked. If you do not pass the barrier of the patriarchs or if your
thinking road is not blocked, whatever you think, whatever you do, is
like a tangling ghost. You may ask: What is a barrier of a patriarch?
This one word, Mu, is it.

This is the barrier of Zen. If you pass through it you will see Joshu
face to face. Then you can work hand in hand with the whole line of
patriarchs. Is this not a pleasant thing to do?

If you want to pass this barrier, you must work through every bone in
your body, through every pore of your skin, filled with this question:
What is Mu? and carry it day and night. Do not believe it is the common
negative symbol meaning nothing. It is not nothingness, the opposite of
existence. If you really want to pass this barrier, you should feel like
drinking a hot iron ball that you can neither swallow nor spit out.

Then your previous lesser knowledge disappears. As a fruit ripening in
season, your subjectivity and objectivity naturally become one. It is
like a dumb man who has had a dream. He knows about it but he cannot
tell it.

When he enters this condition his ego-shell is crushed and he can shake
the heaven and move the earth. He is like a great warrior with a sharp
sword. If a Buddha stands in his way, he will cut him down; if a
patriarch offers him any obstacle, he will kill him; and he will be free
in his way of birth and death. He can enter any world as if it were his
own playground. I will tell you how to do this with this koan:

Just concentrate your whole energy into this Mu, and do not allow any
discontinuation. When you enter this Mu and there is no discontinuation,
your attainment will be as a candle burning and illuminating the whole
universe.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Has a dog Buddha-nature?  
This is the most serious question of all.  
If you say yes or no,  
You lose your own Buddha-nature*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Hyakujo's Fox](glg02.md)
