[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](glg48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3WHK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gateless Gate*, by Ekai, called Mu-mon, tr. Nyogen Senzaki and Paul
Reps \[1934\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 49. Amban's Addition

Amban, a layman Zen student, said: "Mu-mon has just published
forty-eight koans and called the book *Gateless Gate*. He criticizes the
old patriarchs’ words and actions. I think he is very mischievous. He is
like an old doughnut seller trying to catch a passerby to force his
doughnuts down his mouth. The customer can neither swallow nor spit out
the doughnuts, and this causes suffering. Mu-mon has annoyed everyone
enough, so I think I shall add one more as a bargain. I wonder if he
himself can eat this bargain. If he can, and digest it well, it will be
fine, but if not, we will have to put it back into the frying pan with
his forty-eight also and cook them again. Mu-mon, you eat first, before
someone else does:

"Buddha, according to a sutra, once said: 'Stop, stop. Do not speak. The
ultimate truth is not even to think.'"

 

*Amban's comment:* Where did that so-called teaching come from? How is
it that one could not even think it? Suppose someone spoke about it then
what became of it? Buddha himself was a great chatterbox and in this
sutra spoke contrarily. Because of this, persons like Mu-mon appear
afterwards in China and make useless doughnuts, annoying people. What
shall we do after all? I will show you.

Then Amban put his palms together, folded his hands, and said: "Stop,
stop. Do not speak. The ultimate truth is not even to think. And now I
will make a little circle on the sutra with my finger and add that five
thousand other sutras and Vimalakirti's gateless gate all are here!"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*If anyone tells you fire is light,  
Pay no attention.  
When two thieves meet they need no introduction:  
They recognize each other without question*.

</div>

 

 

 

 

 
