[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga00)  [Next](ga02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Dedication

To the Right Honourable and Mighty Lord, THOMAS EARLE OF SUSSEX,
Viscount Fitzwalter, Lord of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter, Iustice of the forrests and Chases from Trent
Southward; Captain of the Gentleman Pensioners of the House of the
QUEENE our Soveraigne Lady.

After that I had taken upon me (right Honourable) in manner of that
unlearned and foolish Poet, Cherillus, who rashly and unadvisedly
wrought a big volume in verses, of the valiant prowesse of Alexander the
Great, to translate this present booke, contayning the Metamorphosis of
Lucius Apuleius; being mooved thereunto by the right pleasant pastime
and delectable matter therein; I eftsoones consulted with myself, to
whom I might best offer so pleasant and worthy a work, devised by the
author, it being now barbarously and simply framed in our English
tongue. And after long deliberation had, your honourable lordship came
to my remembrance, a man much more worthy, than to whom so homely and
rude a translation should be presented. But when I again remembred the
jesting and sportfull matter of the booke, unfit to be offered to any
man of gravity and wisdome, I was wholly determined to make no Epistle
Dedicatory at all; till as now of late perswaded thereunto by my
friends, I have boldly enterprised to offer the same to your Lordship,
who as I trust wil accept the same, than if it did entreat of some
serious and lofty matter, light and merry, yet the effect thereof
tendeth to a good and vertuous moral, as in the following Epistle to the
reader may be declared. For so have all writers in times past employed
their travell and labours, that their posterity might receive some
fruitfull profit by the same. And therfore the poets feined not their
fables in vain, considering that children in time of their first
studies, are very much allured thereby to proceed to more grave and
deepe studies and disciplines, whereas their mindes would quickly loath
the wise and prudent workes of learned men, wherein in such unripe years
they take no spark of delectation at all. And not only that profit
ariseth to children by such feined fables, but also the vertues of men
are covertly thereby commended, and their vices discommended and
abhorred. For by the fable of Actaeon, where it is feigned that he saw
Diana washing her selfe in a well, hee was immediately turned into an
Hart, and so was slain of his own Dogs; may bee meant, That when a man
casteth his eyes on the vain and soone fading beauty of the world,
consenting thereto in his minde, hee seemeth to bee turned into a brute
beast, and so to be slain by the inordinate desire of his owne affects.
By Tantalus that stands in the midst of the floud Eridan, having before
him a tree laden with pleasant apples, he being neverthelesse always
thirsty and hungry, betokeneth the insatiable desires of covetous
persons. The fables of Atreus, Thiestes, Tereus and Progne signifieth
the wicked and abhominable facts wrought and attempted by mortall men.
The fall of Icarus is an example to proud and arrogant persons, that
weeneth to climb up to the heavens. By Mydas, who obtained of Bacchus,
that all things which he touched might be gold, is carped the foul sin
of avarice. By Phaeton, that unskilfully took in hand to rule the
chariot of the Sunne, are represented those persons which attempt things
passing their power and capacity. By Castor and Pollux, turned into a
signe in heaven called Gemini, is signified, that vertuous and godly
persons shall be rewarded after life with perpetuall blisse. And in this
feined jest of Lucius Apuleius is comprehended a figure of mans life,
ministring most sweet and delectable matter, to such as shall be
desirous to reade the same. The which if your honourable lordship shall
accept ant take in good part, I shall not onely thinke my small travell
and labour well employed, but also receive a further comfort to attempt
some more serious matter, which may be more acceptable to your Lordship:
desiring the same to excuse my rash and bold enterprise at this time, as
I nothing doubt of your Lordships goodnesse. To whome I beseech Almighty
God to impart long life, with encrease of much honour.

From Vniversity Colledge in Oxenforde, the xviij. of September, 1566.

Your Honours most bounden,

WIL. ADLINGTON.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Life Of Lucius Apuleius Briefly Described](ga02.md)
