[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga01)  [Next](ga03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Life of Lucius Apuleius Briefly Described

LUCIUS APULEIUS African, an excellent follower of Plato his sect, born
in Madaura, a Countrey sometime inhabited by the Romans, and under the
jurisdiction of Syphax, scituate and lying on the borders of Numidia and
Getulia, whereby he calleth himself half a Numidian and half a Getulian:
and Sidonius named him the Platonian Madaurence: his father called
Theseus had passed all offices of dignity in his countrey with much
honour. His mother named Salvia was of such excellent vertue, that she
passed all the Dames of her time, borne of an ancient house, and
descended from the philosopher Plutarch, and Sextus his nephew. His wife
called Prudentila was endowed with as much vertue and riches as any
woman might be. Hee himselfe was of an high and comely stature, gray
eyed, his haire yellow, and a beautiful personage. He flourished in
Carthage in the time of Iolianus Avitus and Cl. Maximus Proconsuls,
where he spent his youth in learning the liberall sciences, and much
profited under his masters there, whereby not without cause hee calleth
himself the Nource of Carthage, and the celestial Muse and venerable
mistresse of Africke. Soone after, at Athens (where in times past the
well of all doctrine flourished) he tasted many of the cups of the
muses, he learned the Poetry, Geometry, Musicke, Logicke, and the
universall knowledge of Philosophy, and studied not in vaine the nine
Muses, that is to say, the nine noble and royal disciplines.

Immediately after he went to Rome, and studied there the Latine tongue,
with such labour and continuall study, that he achieved to great
eloquence, and was known and approved to be excellently learned, whereby
he might worthily be called Polyhistor, that is to say, one that knoweth
much or many things.

And being thus no lesse endued with eloquence, than with singular
learning, he wrote many books for them that should come after: whereof
part by negligence of times be now intercepted and part now extant, doe
sufficiently declare, with how much wisdome and doctrine hee flourished,
and with how much vertue hee excelled amongst the rude and barbarous
people. The like was Anacharsis amongst the most luskish Scythes. But
amongst the Bookes of Lucius Apuleius, which are perished and prevented,
howbeit greatly desired as now adayes, one was intituled Banquetting
questions, another entreating of the nature of fish, another of the
generation of beasts, another containing his Epigrams, another called
'Hermagoras': but such as are now extant are the foure books named
'Floridorum', wherein is contained a flourishing stile, and a savory
kind of learning, which delighteth, holdeth, and rejoiceth the reader
marvellously; wherein you shall find a great variety of things, as
leaping one from another: One excellent and copious Oration, containing
all the grace and vertue of the art Oratory, where he cleareth himself
of the crime of art Magick, which was slanderously objected against him
by his Adversaries, wherein is contained such force of eloquence and
doctrine, as he seemeth to passe and excell himselfe. There is another
booke of the god of the spirit of Socrates, whereof St. Augustine maketh
mention in his booke of the definition of spirits, and description of
men. Two other books of the opinion of Plato, wherein is briefly
contained that which before was largely expressed. One booke of
Cosmography, comprising many things of Aristotles Meteors. The Dialogue
of Trismegistus, translated by him out of Greeke into Latine, so fine,
that it rather seemeth with more eloquence turned into Latine, than it
was before written in Greeke. But principally these eleven Bookes of the
'Golden Asse', are enriched with such pleasant matter, with such
excellency and variety of flourishing tales, that nothing may be more
sweet and delectable, whereby worthily they may be intituled The Bookes
of the 'Golden Asse', for the passing stile and matter therein. For what
can be more acceptable than this Asse of Gold indeed. Howbeit there be
many who would rather intitule it 'Metamorphosis', that is to say, a
transfiguration or transformation, by reason of the argument and matter
within.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Preface Of The Author To His Sonne, Faustinus And Unto The
Readers of this Book](ga03)
