[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga03)  [Next](ga05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FIRST BOOKE

# THE FIRST CHAPTER

How Apuleius riding in Thessaly, fortuned to fall into company with two
strangers, that reasoned together of the mighty power of Witches.

As I fortuned to take my voyage into Thessaly, about certaine affaires
which I had to doe ( for there myne auncestry by my mothers side
inhabiteth, descended of the line of that most excellent person
Plutarch, and of Sextus the Philosopher his Nephew, which is to us a
great honour) and after that by much travell and great paine I had
passed over the high mountaines and slipperie vallies, and had ridden
through the cloggy fallowed fields; perceiving that my horse did wax
somewhat slow, and to the intent likewise that I might repose and
strengthen my self (being weary with riding) I lighted off my horse, and
wiping the sweat from every part of his body, I unbrideled him, and
walked him softly in my hand, to the end he might pisse, and ease
himself of his weariness and travell: and while he went grazing freshly
in the field (casting his head sometimes aside, as a token of rejoycing
and gladnesse) I perceived a little before me two companions riding, and
so I overtaking them made a third. And while I listened to heare their
communication, the one of them laughed and mocked his fellow, saying,
Leave off I pray thee and speak no more, for I cannot abide to heare
thee tell such absurd and incredible lies; which when I heard, I desired
to heare some newes, and said, I pray you masters make me partaker of
your talk, that am not so curious as desirous to know all your
communication: so shall we shorten our journey, and easily passe this
high hill before us, by merry and pleasant talke.

But he that laughed before at his fellow, said againe, Verily this tale
is as true, as if a man would say that by sorcery and inchantment the
floods might be inforced to run against their course, the seas to be
immovable, the aire to lacke the blowing of windes, the Sunne to be
restrained from his naturall race, the Moone to purge his skimme upon
herbes and trees to serve for sorceries: the starres to be pulled from
heaven, the day to be darkened and the dark night to continue still.
Then I being more desirous to heare his talke than his companions, sayd,
I pray you, that began to tell your tale even now, leave not off so, but
tell the residue. And turning to the other I sayd, You perhappes that
are of an obstinate minde and grosse eares, mocke and contemme those
things which are reported for truth, know you not that it is accounted
untrue by the depraved opinion of men, which either is rarely seene,
seldome heard, or passeth the capacitie of mans reason, which if it be
more narrowly scanned, you shall not onely finde it evident and plaine,
but also very easy to be brought to passe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Chapter](ga05.md)
