[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga18)  [Next](ga20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER

How Fotis brought Apuleius to see her Mistresse enchant.

On a day Fotis came running to me in great feare, and said that her
mistresse, to work her sorceries on such as shee loved, intended the
night following to transforme her selfe into a bird, and to fly whither
she pleased. Wherefore she willed me privily to prepare my selfe to see
the same. And when midnight came she led me softly into a high chamber,
and bid me look thorow the chink of a doore: where first I saw how shee
put off all her garments, and took out of a certain coffer sundry kindes
of Boxes, of the which she opened one, and tempered the ointment therein
with her fingers, and then rubbed her body therewith from the sole of
the foot to the crowne of the head, and when she had spoken privily with
her selfe, having the candle in her hand, she shaked the parts of her
body, and behold, I perceived a plume of feathers did burgen out, her
nose waxed crooked and hard, her nailes turned into clawes, and so she
became an Owle. Then she cried and screeched like a bird of that kinde,
and willing to proove her force, mooved her selfe from the ground by
little and little, til at last she flew quite away.

Thus by her sorcery shee transformed her body into what shape she would.
Which when I saw I was greatly astonied: and although I was inchanted by
no kind of charme, yet I thought that I seemed not to have the likenesse
of Lucius, for so was I banished from my sences, amazed in madnesse, and
so I dreamed waking, that I felt myne eyes, whether I were asleepe or
no. But when I was come againe to my selfe, I tooke Fotis by the hand,
and moved it to my face and said, I pray thee while occasion doth serve,
that I may have the fruition of the fruits of my desire, and grant me
some of this oyntment. O Fotis I pray thee by thy sweet paps, to make
that in the great flames of my love I may be turned into a bird, so I
will ever hereafter be bound unto you, and obedient to your
commandement. Then said Fotis, Wil you go about to deceive me now, and
inforce me to work my own sorrow? Are you in the mind that you will not
tarry in Thessaly? If you be a bird, where shall I seek you, and when
shall I see you? Then answered I, God forbid that I should commit such a
crime, for though I could fly in the aire as an Eagle or though I were
the messenger of Jupiter, yet would I have recourse to nest with thee:
and I swear by the knot of thy amiable hair, that since the time I first
loved thee, I never fancied any other person: moreover, this commeth to
my minde, that if by the vertue of the oyntment I shall become an Owle,
I will take heed I will come nigh no mans house: for I am not to learn,
how these matrons would handle their lovers, if they knew that they were
transformed into Owles: Moreover, when they are taken in any place they
are nayled upon posts, and so they are worthily rewarded, because it is
thought that they bring evill fortune to the house. But I pray you
(which I had almost forgotten) to tell me by what meanes when I am an
Owle, I shall return to my pristine shape, and become Lucius againe.
Feare not (quoth she) for my mistres hath taught me the way to bring
that to passe, neither thinke you that she did it for any good will and
favour, but to the end that I might help her, and minister some remedy
when she returneth home.

Consider I pray you with your selfe, with what frivolous trifles so
marvellous a thing is wrought: for by Hercules I swear I give her
nothing else save a little Dill and Lawrell leaves, in Well water, the
which she drinketh and washeth her selfe withall. Which when she had
spoken she went into the chamber and took a box out of the coffer, which
I first kissed and embraced, and prayed that I might \[have\] good
successe in my purpose. And then I put off all my garments, and greedily
thrust my hand into the box, and took out a good deale of oyntment and
rubbed my selfe withall.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventeenth Chapter](ga20.md)
