[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga21)  [Next](ga23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER

How Apuleius was prevented of his purpose, and how the Theeves came to
their den.

Not long after, the theeves laded us againe, but especially me, and
brought us forth of the stable, and when wee had gone a good part of our
journey what with the long way, my great burthen, the beating of staves,
and my worne hooves, I was so weary that I could scantly go. Then I saw
a little before mee a river running with fair water, and I said to
myself, Behold, now I have found a good occasion: for I will fall down
when I come yonder, and surely I will not rise againe, neither with
scourging nor with beating, for I had rather be slaine there presently,
than goe any further.

And the cause why I had determined so to doe was this, I thought that
the theeves when they did see me so feeble and weake that I could not
travell, to the intent they would not stay in their journey, they would
take the burthen from my backe and put it on my fellowes, and so for my
further punishment to leave me as a prey to the wolves and ravening
beasts. But evill fortune prevented so good a consideration; for the
other Asse being of the same purpose that I was of, by feigned and
coloured wearinesse fell downe first, with all his burthen on the ground
as though hee were dead, and he would not rise neither with beating nor
with pricking, nor stand upon his legs, though they pulled him by the
tail, by his legs, and by his eares: which when the theeves beheld, as
without all hope they said one unto another, What should we stand here
so long about a dead or rather a stony asse? let us bee gone: and so
they tooke his burthen, and divided some to mee, and some to my horse.
And then they drew out their swords and cut off his legs, and threw his
body from the point of a hill down into a great valley. Then I
considering with my selfe of the evill fortune of my poore companion,
and purposed now to forget all subtility and deceit, and to play the
good Asse to get my masters favour, for I perceived by their talke that
we were come home well nigh at our journeys end. And after that wee had
passed over a little hill, we came to our appointed place, and when we
were unladen of our burthens, and all things carried in, I tumbled and
wallowed in the dust, to refresh my selfe in stead of water. The thing
and the time compelleth me to make description of the places, and
especially of the den where the theeves did inhabit, I will prove my wit
in what I can doe, and the consider you whether I was an Asse in
judgement and sence, or no. For first there was an exceeding great hill
compassed about with big trees very high, with many turning bottoms full
of sharp stones, whereby it was inaccessible. There was many winding and
hollow vallies, environed with thickets and thornes, and naturally
fortressed round about. From the top of the hill ranne a running water
as cleare as silver, that watered all the valleyes below, that it seemed
like unto a sea inclosed, or a standing floud. Before the denne where
was no hill stood an high tower, and at the foot thereof were
sheep-coats fenced and walled with clay. Before the gate of the house
were pathes made in stead of wals, in such sort that you could easily
judge it to be a very den for theeves, and there was nothing else except
a little coat covered with thatch, wherein the theeves did nightly
accustome to watch by order, as I after perceived. And when they were
all crept into the house, and we were all tied fast with halters at the
dore, they began to chide with an old woman there, crooked with age, who
had the government and rule of all the house, and said, How is it old
witch, old trot, and strumpet, that thou sittest idley all day at home,
and having no regard to our perillous labours, hast provided nothing for
our suppers, but sittest eating and swilling thyself from morning till
night? Then the old woman trembled, and scantly able to speak gan say,
Behold my puissant and faithfull masters, you shall have meat and
pottage enough by and by: here is first store of bread, wine plenty,
filled in cleane rinsed pots, likewise here is hot water prepared to
bathe you.

Which when she had said, they put off all their garments and refreshed
themselves by the fire. And after they were washed and noynted with
oyle, they sate downe at the table garnished with all kind of dainty
meats. They were no sooner sate downe, but in came another company of
yong men more in number than was before, who seemed likewise to bee
Theeves, for they brought in their preyes of gold and silver, Plate,
jewels, and rich robes, and when they had likewise washed, they sate
among the rest, and served one another by order. Then they drank and eat
exceedingly, laughing, crying and making much noyse, that I thought that
I was among the tyrannous and wilde Lapithes, Thebans, and Centaures. At
length one of them more valiant than the rest, spake in this sort, We
verily have manfully conquered the house of Milo of Hippata, and beside
all the riches and treasure which by force we have brought away, we are
all come home safe, and are increased the more by this horse and this
Asse. But you that have roved about in the country of Boetia, have lost
your valiante captaine Lamathus, whose life I more regarded than all the
treasure which you have brought: and therfore the memory of him shall
bee renowned for ever amongst the most noble kings and valiant captains:
but you accustome when you goe abroad, like men with ganders hearts to
creepe through every corner and hole for every trifle. Then one of them
that came last answered, Why are you only ignorant, that the greater the
number is, the sooner they may rob and spoyle the house? And although
the family be dispersed in divers lodgings, yet every man had rather to
defend his own life, than to save the riches of his master: but when
there be but a few theeves, then will they not only rather regard
themselves, but also their substance, how little or great soever it be.
And to the intent you may beleeve me I will shew you an example: wee
were come nothing nigh to Thebes, where is the fountain of our art and
science, but we learned where a rich Chuffe called Chriseros did dwell,
who for fear of offices in the publique wel dissembled his estate, and
lived sole and solitary in a small coat, howbeit replenished with
aboundance of treasure, and went daily in ragged and torn apparel.
Wherefore wee devised with our selves to go to his house and spoyl him
of all his riches. And when night came we drew towards the dore, which
was so strongly closed, that we could neither move it, nor lift it out
of the hooks, and we thought it best not to break it open lest by the
noyse we should raise up to our harm the neighbours by. Then our strong
and valiant captaine Lamathus trusting in his own strength and force,
thrust in his had through a hole in the dore, and thought to pull back
the bolt: but the covetous caitif Chriseros being awake, and making no
noise came softly to the dore and caught his hand and with a great naile
nailed it fast to the post: which when he had done, he ran up to the
high chamber and called every one of his neighbours by name, desiring
them to succour him with all possible speed, for his own house was on
fire. Then every one for fear of his owne danger came running out to aid
him, wherewith we fearing our present peril, knew not what was best to
be don, whether wee should leave our companion there, or yeeld ourselves
to die with him: but we by his consent devised a better way, for we cut
off his arm by the elbow and so let it hang there: then wee bound his
wound with clouts, lest we should be traced by the drops of blood: which
don we took Lamathus and led him away, for fear we would be taken: but
being so nigh pursued that we were in present danger, and that Lamathus
could not keepe our company by reason of faintnesse; and on the other
side perceiving that it was not for his profit to linger behinde, he
spake unto us as a man of singular courage and vertue, desiring us by
much entreaty and prayer and by the puissance of the god Mars, and the
faith of our confederacy, to deliver his body from torment and miserable
captivity: and further he said, How is it possible that so courageous a
Captaine can live without his hand, wherewith he could somtime rob and
slay so many people? I would thinke myself sufficiently happy if I could
be slaine by one of you. But when he saw that we all refused to commit
any such fact, he drew out his sword with his other hand, and after that
he had often kissed it, he drove it clean through his body. Then we
honoured the corps of so puissant a man, and wrapped it in linnen
cloathes and threw it into the sea. So lieth our master Lamathus, buried
and did in the grave of water, and ended his life as I have declared.
But Alcinus, though he were a man of great enterprise, yet could he not
beware by Lamathus, nor voide himselfe from evill fortune, for on a day
when he had entred into an old womans house to rob her, he went up into
a high chamber, where hee should first have strangled her: but he had
more regard to throw down the bags of mony and gold out at a window, to
us that stood under; and when he was so greedy that he would leave
nothing behinde, he went into the old womans bed where she lay asleep,
and would have taken off the coverlet to have thrown downe likewise, but
shee awaked, and kneeling on her knees, desired him in this manner: O
sir I pray you cast not away such torn and ragged clouts into my
neighbours houses, for they are rich enough, and need no such things.
Then Alcinus thinking her words to be true, was brought in beleefe, that
such things as he had throwne out already, and such things as hee should
throw out after, was not fallen downe to his fellowes, but to other mens
houses, wherefore hee went to the window to see, and as hee thought to
behold the places round about, thrusting his body out of the window, the
old woman marked him wel, and came behind him softly, and though shee
had but small strength, yet with sudden force she tooke him by the
heeles and thrust him out headlong, and so he fell upon a marvellous
great stone and burst his ribs, wherby he vomited and spewed great
flakes of blood, and presently died. Then wee threw him to the river
likewise, as we had done Lamathus before.

When we had thus lost two of our companions, we liked not Thebes, but
marched towards the next city called Platea, where we found a man of
great fame called Demochares, that purposed to set forth a great game,
where should be a triall of all kind of weapons: hee was come of a good
house, marvellous rich, liberall, and wel deserved that which he had and
had prepared many showes and pleasures for the Common people, insomuch
that there is no man can either by wit or eloquence shew in words his
worthy preparations: for first he had provided all sorts of armes, hee
greatly delighted in hunting and chasing, he ordained great towers and
Tables to move hither and thither: hee made many places to chase and
encounter in: he had ready a great number of men and wilde beasts, and
many condemned persons were brought from the Judgement place, to try and
fight with those beasts. But amongst so great preparations of noble
price, he bestowed the most part of his patrimony in buying of Beares,
which he nourished to his great cost, and esteemed more than all the
other beasts, which either by chasing hee caught himself, or which he
dearely bought, or which were given him from divers of his friends.

Howbeit for all his sumptuous cost, hee could not be free from the
malitious eyes of envy, for some of them were well nigh dead with too
long tying up, some meagre with the broyling heat of the sunne, some
languished with lying, but all having sundry diseases, were so afflicted
that they died one after another, and there was well nigh none left, in
such sort that you might see them lying in the streets pittiously dead.
And the common people having no other meat to feed on, little regarding
any curiosity, would come forth and fill their bellies with the flesh of
the beares. Then by and by Babulus and I devised a pretty sport, wee
drew one of the greatest of the Beares to our lodging, as though wee
would prepare to eat thereof, where wee flayed of his skinne, and kept
his ungles whole, but we medled not with the head, but cut it off by the
necke, and so let it hang to the skinne. Then we rased off the flesh
from the necke, and cast dust thereon, and set it in the sun to dry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twentieth Chapter](ga23)
