[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga26)  [Next](ga28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SEVENTH BOOKE

# THE TWENTY-FOURTH CHAPTER

How hee that was left behinde at Hippata did bring newes concerning the
robbery of Miloes house, came home and declared to his Company, that all
the fault was laid to one Apuleius his charge.

  A soone as night was past, and the cleare Chariot of the Sunne  
had spred his bright beames on every coast, came one of the company of
the theeves, (for so his and their greeting together did declare) who at
the first entry into the Cave (after hee had breathed himselfe, and was
able to speake) told these tydings unto his companions in this sort.
Sirs, as touching the house of Milo of Hippata, which we forcibly entred
and ransackt the last day, we may put away all feare and doubt nothing
at all. For after that ye by force of armes, had spoyled and taken away
all things in the house, and returned hither into our Cave; I (thrusting
my selfe amongst the presse of the people, and shewing my selfe as
though I were sad and sorrowful for the mischance) consulted with them
for the boulting out of the matter, and devising what meanes might be
wrought for the apprehension of the theeves, to the intent I might
learne and see all that was done to make relation thereof unto you as
you willed me, insomuch that the whole fact at length by manifest and
evident proofes as also by the common opinion and judgement of the
people, was laid to one Lucius Apuleius charge as manifest author of
this common robbery, who a few dayse before by false and forged letters
and colored honesty, fell so farre in favour with this Milo, that he
entertained him into his house, and received him as a chiefe of his
familiar friends, which Lucius after that he had sojourned there a good
space, and won the heart of Miloes Maid, by fained love, did thoroughly
learne the waies and doores of all the house, and curiously viewed the
cofers and chests, wherein was laid the whole substance of Milo: neither
was there small cause given to judge him culpable, since as the very
same night that this robbery was done he fled away, and could not be
found in no place: and to the intent hee might cleane escape, and better
prevent such as made hew and crie after him, he tooke his white horse
and galloped away, and after this, his servant was found in the house,
who (accused as accessary to the fellony and escape of his Master) was
committed to the common gaole, and the next day following was cruelly
scourged and tormented till hee was welnigh dead, to the intent hee
should confesse the matter, but when they could wreast or learne no such
thing of him, yet sent they many persons after, towardes Lucius Countrey
to enquire him out, and so to take him prisoner. As he declared these
things, I did greatly lament with my selfe, to thinke of mine old and
pristine estate, and what felicity I was sometimes in, in comparison to
the misery that I presently susteined, being changed into a miserable
Asse, then had I no small occasion to remember, how the old and ancient
Writers did affirme, that fortune was starke blind without eies, because
she alwaies bestoweth her riches upon evil persons, and fooles, and
chooseth or favoureth no mortall person by judgement, but is alwaies
conversent, especially with much as if she could see, she should most
shunne, and forsake, yea and that which is more worse, she sheweth such
evill or contrary opinions in men, that the wicked doe glory with the
name of good, and contrary the good and innocent be detracted and
slandred as evill. Furthermore I, who by her great cruelty, was turned
into a foure footed Asse, in most vile and abject manner: yea, and whose
estate seemed worthily to be lamented and pittied of the most hard and
stonie hearts, was accused of theft and robbing of my deare host Milo,
which villany might rather be called parricide then theft, yet might not
I defend mine owne cause or denie the fact any way, by reason I could
not speake; howbeit least my conscience should seeme to accuse me by
reason of silence, and againe being enforced by impatience I endevored
to speake, and faine would have said, Never did I that fact, and verely
the first word, never, I cried out once or twise, somewhat handsome, but
the residue I could in no wise pronounce, but still remaining in one
voice, cried, Never, never, never. howbeit I settled my hanging lips as
round as I could to speake the residue: but why should I further
complaine of the crueltie of my fortune, since as I was not much
ashamed, by reason that my servant and my horse, was likewise accused
with me of the robbery.

While I pondered with my selfe all these things, a great care \[came\]
to my remembrance, touching the death, which the theeves provised for me
and the maiden, and still as I looked downe to my belly, I thought of my
poore gentlewoman that should be closed within me. And the theefe which
a little before had brought the false newes against me, drew out of the
skirt of his coate, a thousand crowns, which he had rifled from such as
hee met, and brought it into the common treasury. Then hee carefully
enquired how the residue of his companions did. To whom it was declared
that the most valiant was murdred and slaine in divers manners,
whereupon he perswaded them to remit all their affaires a certaine
season, and to seeke for other fellowes to be in their places, that by
the exercise of new lads, the terror of their martiall band might be
reduced to the old number, assuring them that such as were unwilling,
might be compelled by menaces and threatnings, and such as were willing
might be incouraged forward with reward. Further be said, that there
were some, which (seeing the profite which they had) would forsake their
base and servile estate, and rather bee contented to live like tyrants
amongst them. Moreover he declared, that for his part he had spoken with
a certaine tall man, a valiant companion, but of young age, stout in
body, and couragious in fight, whom he had fully perswaded to exercise
his idle hands, dull with slothfullnesse, to his greater profit, and
(while he might) to receive the blisse of better Fortune, and not to
hold out his sturdy arme to begge for a penny, but rather to take as
much gold and silver as hee would. Then everyone consented, that hee
that seemed so worthy to be their companion, should be one of their
company, and that they would search for others to make up the residue of
the number, whereupon he went out, and by and by (returning againe)
brought in a tall young man (as he promised) to whom none of the residue
might bee compared, for hee was higher then they by the head, and of
more bignesse in body, his beard began to burgen, but hee was poorely
apparelled, insomuch that you might see all his belly naked. As soone as
he was entred in he said, God speed yee souldiers of Mars and my
faithfull companions, I pray you make me one of your band, and I will
ensure you, that you shall have a man of singular courage and lively
audacity: for I had rather receive stripes upon my backe, then money or
gold in my hands. And as for death (which every man doth feare) I passe
nothing at all, yet thinke you not that I am an abject or a begger,
neither judge you my vertue and prowesse by ragged clothes, for I have
beene a Captaine of a great company, and subdued all the countrey of
Macedonia. I am the renowned theefe Hemes the Thracian, whose name all
countreys and nations do so greatly feare: I am the sonne of Theron the
noble theefe, nourished with humane bloud, entertained amongst the
stoutest; finally I am inheritour and follower of all my fathers
vertues, yet I lost in a short time all my company and all my riches, by
one assault, which I made upon a Factor of the Prince, which sometime
had beene Captaine of two hundred men, for fortune was cleane against
me; harken and I will tell you the whole matter. There was a certaine
man in the court of the Emperour, which had many offices, and in great
favour, who at last by the envy of divers persons, was banished away and
compelled to forsake the court: his wife Platina, a woman of rare faith
and singular shamefastnes having borne ten children to her husband,
despised all worldly Pompe and delicacy, and determined to follow her
husband, and to be partaker of his perils and danger, wherefore shee cut
off her haire, disguised her selfe like a man, and tooke with her all
her treasure, passing through the hands of the souldiers, and the naked
swords without any feare, whereby she endured many miseries, and was
partaker of much affliction, to save the life of her husband, such was
her love which she bare unto him. And when they had escaped many
perillous dangers, as well by land as by sea, they went together towards
Zacynthe, to continue there according as fortune had appointed. But when
they were arived on the sea coast of Actium (where we in our returne
from Macedony were roving about) when night came, they returned into a
house not far distant from their ship, where they lay all night. Then we
entred in and tooke away all their substance, but verely we were in
great danger: for the good matron perceiving us incontinently by the
noise of the gate, went into the chamber, and called up every man by his
name, and likewise the neighbors that dwelled round about, insomuch that
by reason of the feare that every one was in, we hardly escaped away,
but this most holy woman, faithfull and true to her husband (as the
truth must be declared) returned to Caesar, desiring his aid and
puissance, and demanding vengeance of the injury done to her husband,
who granted all her desire: then went my company to wracke, insomuch
that every man was slaine, so great was the authority and word of the
Prince. Howbeit, when all my band was lost, and taken by search of the
Emperours army, I onely stole away and delivered my selfe from the
violence of the souldiers, for I clothed my selfe in a womans attire,
and mounted upon an Asse, that carryed barly sheafes, and (passing
through the middle of them all) I escaped away, because every one deemed
that I was a woman by reason I lacked a beard. Howbeit I left not off
for all this, nor did degenerate from the glory of my father, or mine
own vertue, but freshly comming from the bloody skirmish, and disguised
like a woman, I invaded townes and castles alone to get some pray. And
therewithall he pulled out two thousand crownes, which he had under his
coate, saying: Hold here the dowry which I present unto you, hold eke my
person, which you shall alwayes find trusty and faithfull, if you
willingly receive me: and I will ensure you that in so doing, within
short space I wilt make and turne this stony house of yours into gold.
Then by and by every one consented to make him their Captaine, and so
they gave him better garments, and threw away his old. When they had
changed his attire, hee imbraced them one after another, then placed
they him in the highest roome of the table, and drunk unto him in token
of good lucke.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twenty-fifth Chapter](ga28.md)
