[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ga27)  [Next](ga29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE TWENTY-FIFTH CHAPTER

How the death of the Asse, and the Gentlewoman was stayed.

After supper they began to talke, and declare unto him the going away of
the Gentlewoman, and how I hare her upon my backe, and what death was
ordained for us two. Then he desired to see her, whereupon the
Gentlewoman was brought forth fast bound, whom as soone as he beheld, he
turned himselfe wringing his nose, and blamed them saying: I am not so
much a beast, or so rash a fellow to drive you quite from your purpose,
but my conscience will not suffer me to conceale any thing that toucheth
your profit, since I am as carefull for you, howbeit if my counsell doe
displease you, you may at your liberty proceed in your enterprise. I
doubt not but all theeves, and such as have a good judgement, will
preferre their owne lucre and gain above all things in the world, and
above their vengeance, which purchaseth damage to divers persons.
Therefore if you put this virgin in the Asses belly, you shall but
execute your indignation against her, without all manner of profit; But
I would advise you to carry the virgin to some towne and to sell her:
and such a brave girle as she is, may be sold for a great quantity of
money. And I my selfe know certaine bawdy Marchants, amongst whom
peradventure one will give us summes of gold for her. This is my opinion
touching this affaire: but advise you what you intend to do, for you may
rule me in this case. In this manner the good theefe pleaded and
defended our cause, being a good Patron to the silly virgin, and to me
poore Asse. But they staied hereupon a good space, with long
deliberation, which made my heart (God wot) and spirit greatly to
quaile. Howbeit in the end they consented to his opinion, and by and by
the Maiden was unloosed of her bonds, who seeing the young man, and
hearing the name of brothels and bawdy Merchants, began to wax joyfull,
and smiled with herself. Then began I to deeme evill of the generation
of women, when as I saw the Maiden (who was appointed to be married to a
young Gentleman, and who so greatly desired the same) was now delighted
with the talke of a wicked brothel house, and other things dishonest. In
this sort the consent and manners of women depended in the judgement of
an Asse.

THE TWENTY-SIXTH CHAPTER

How all the Theeves were brought asleepe by their new companion.

Then the young man spake againe, saying, Masters, why goe wee not about
to make our prayers unto Mars, touching this selling of the Maiden, and
to seeke for other companions. But as farre as I see, here is no other
manner of beast to make sacrifice withall, nor wine sufficient for us to
drinke. Let me have (quoth hee) tenne more with me, and wee will goe to
the next Castle, to provide for meat and other things necessary. So he
and tenne more with him, went their way: In the meane season, the
residue made a great fire and an Alter with greene turfes in the honour
of Mars. By and by after they came againe, bringing with them bottles of
wine, and a great number of beasts, amongst which there was a big Ram
Goat, fat, old, and hairy, which they killed and offered unto Mars. Then
supper was prepared sumptuously, and the new companion said unto the
other, You ought to accompt me not onely your Captaine in robbery and
fight, but also in pleasures and jolity, whereupon by and by with
pleasant cheere he prepared meat, and trimming up the house he set all
things in order, and brought the pottage and dainty dishes to the Table:
but above all he plyed them wel with great pots and jugs of wine.
Sometimes (seeming to fetch somewhat) hee would goe to the Maiden and
give her pieces of meate, which he privily tooke away, and would drinke
unto her, which she willingly tooke in good part. Moreover, hee kissed
her twice or thrice whereof she was well pleased but I (not well
contented thereat) thought in my selfe: O wretched Maid, thou hast
forgotten thy marriage, and doest esteeme this stranger and bloudy
theefe above thy husband which thy Parents ordained for thee, now
perceive I well thou hast no remorse of conscience, but more delight to
tarry and play the harlot heere amongst so many swords. What? knowest
thou not how the other theeves if they knew thy demeanour would put thee
to death as they had once appointed, and so worke my destruction
likewise? Well now I perceive thou hast a pleasure in the dammage and
hurt of other. While I did angerly devise with my selfe all these
things, I perceived by certaine signes and tokens (not ignorant to so
wise an Asse) that he was not the notable theefe Hemus, but rather
Lepolemus her husband, for after much communication he beganne to speake
more franckly, not fearing at all my presence, and said, Be of good
cheere my sweete friend Charites, for thou shalt have by and by all
these thy enemies captive unto thee. Then hee filled wine to the theeves
more and more, and never ceased, till as they were all overcome with
abundance of meat and drinke, when as hee himselfe abstained and bridled
his owne appetite. And truely I did greatly suspect, least hee had
mingled in their cups some deadly poyson, for incontinently they all
fell downe asleepe on the ground one after an other, and lay as though
they had beene dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twenty-seventh Chapter](ga29.md)
