[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land02)  [Next](land04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3

<span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> plantations and the woolly heads
of Negroes pounding the ground—cries in northern regions and round white
faces turned to the sky—fiery globes in the sky—a study in black, white,
and golden formations in one general glow. Upon the night of Nov. 13-14,
1833, occurred the most sensational celestial spectacle of the
nineteenth century: for six hours fiery meteors gushed from the heavens,
and were visible along the whole Atlantic coast of the United States.

One supposes that astronomers do not pound the ground with their heads,
and presumably they do not screech, but they have feelings just the
same. They itched. Here was something to formulate. When he hears of
something new and unquestionable in

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the sky, an astronomer is diseased with ill-suppressed equations.
Symbols persecute him for expression. His is the frenzy of someone who
would stop automobiles, railroad trains, bicycles, all things, to
measure them; run, with a yardstick, after sparrows, flies, all persons
passing his door. This is supposed to be scientific, but it can be
monomaniac. Very likely the distress and the necessity of Prof. Olmstead
were keenest. He was the first to formulate. He "demonstrated" that
these meteors, known as the Leonids, revolved around the sun once in six
months.

They didn't.

Then Prof. Newton "demonstrated" that the "real" period was thirty-three
and a quarter years. But this was done empirically, and that is not
divine, nor even aristocratic, and the thing would have to be done
rationally, or mathematically, by someone, because, if there be not
mathematical treatment, in gravitational terms, of such phenomena,
astronomers are in reduced circumstances. It was Dr. Adams, who,
emboldened with his experience in not having to point anywhere near
Neptune, but nevertheless being acclaimed by all patriotic Englishmen as
the real discoverer of Neptune, mathematically "confirmed" Prof.
Newton's "findings." Dr. Adams predicted that the Leonids would return
in November, 1866, and in November, 1899, occupying several years, upon
each occasion, in passing a point in this earth's orbit.

There were meteors upon the night of Nov. 13-14, 1866. They were
plentiful. They often are in the middle of November. They no more
resembled the spectacle of 1833 than an ordinary shower resembles a
cloudburst. But the "demonstration" required that there should be an
equal display, or, according to some aspects, a greater display, upon
the corresponding night of the next year. There was a display, the next
year; but it was in the sky of the United States, and was not seen in
England. Another occurrence nothing like that of 1833 was reported from
the United States.

By conventional theory, this earth was in a vast, wide stream of
meteors, the earth revolving so as to expose successive parts to
bombardment. So keenly did Richard Proctor visualize the earth so
immersed and so bombarded, that, when nothing was seen in England, he
explained. He spent most of his life explaining. In

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

the *Student*, 2-254, he wrote: "Had the morning of Nov. 14, 1867, been
clear in England, we should have seen the commencement of the display,
but not its more brilliant part."

We have had some experience with the "triumphs" of astronomers: we have
some suspicions as to their greatly advertised accuracy. We shall find
out for ourselves whether the morning of Nov. 14, 1867, was clear enough
in England or not. We suspect that it was a charming morning, in
England—

*Monthly Notices, R. A. S.* 28-32:

Report by E. J. Lowe, Highfield House, night of Nov. 13-14, 1867:

"Clear at 1.10 A.M.; high, thin cumuli, at 2 A.M., but sky not covered
until 3.10 A.M., and the moon's place visible until 3.55 A.M.; sky not
overcast until 5.50 A.M."

The determination of the orbital period of thirty-three years and a
quarter, but with appearances of a period of thirty-three years, was
arrived at by Prof. Newton by searching old records, finding that, in an
intersection-period of thirty-three years, there had been extraordinary
meteoric displays, from the year 902 A.D. to the year 1833 A.D. He
reminds me of an investigator who searched old records for appearances
of Halley's comet, and found something that he identified as Halley's
comet, exactly on time, every seventy-five years, back to times of the
Roman Empire. See the *Edinburgh Review*, vol. 66. It seems that he did
not know that orthodoxy does not attribute exactly a seventy-five year
period to Halley's comet. He got what he went looking for, anyway. I
have no disposition for us to enjoy ourselves at Prof. Newton's expense,
because, surely enough, his method, if regarded as only experimental, or
tentative, is legitimate enough, though one does suspect him of very
loose behavior in his picking and choosing. But Dr. Adams announced
that, upon mathematical grounds, he had arrived at the same conclusion.

The test:

The next return of the Leonids was predicted for November, 1899.

*Memoirs of the British Astronomical Association*, 9-6:

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

"No meteoric event ever before aroused such widespread interest, or so
grievously disappointed anticipation."

There were no Leonids in November, 1899.

It was explained. They would be seen next year.

There were no Leonids in November, 1900.

It was explained. They would be seen next year.

No Leonids.

Vaunt and inflation and parade of the symbols of the infinitesimal
calculus; the pomp of vectors, and the hush that surrounds quaternions:
but when an axis of co-ordinates loses its rectitude, bin the service of
a questionable selection, disciplined symbols become a rabble. The Most
High of Mathematics—and one of his proposed prophets points to the sky.
Nowhere near where he points, something is found. He points to a
date—nothing happens.

Prof. Serviss, in *Astronomy in a Nutshell*, explains. He explains that
the Leonids did not appear when they "should" have appeared, because
Jupiter and Saturn had altered their orbits.

Back in the times of the Crusades, and nothing was disturbing the
Leonids—and if you're stronger for dates than I am, think of some more
dates, and nothing was altering the orbit of the Leonids—discovery of
America, and the Spanish Armada, in 1588, which, by some freak, I always
remember, and no effects by Jupiter and Saturn—French Revolution and on
to the year 1866, and still nothing the matter with the Leonids—but,
once removed from "discovery" and "identification," and that's the end
of their period, diverted by Jupiter and Saturn, old things that had
been up in the sky at least as long as they had been. If we're going to
accept the calculi at all, the calculus of probabilities must have a
hearing. My own opinion, based upon reading many accounts of November
meteors, is that decidedly the display of 1833 did not repeat in 1866:
that a false priest sinned and that an equally false highpriest gave him
sanction.

The tragedy goes comically on. I feel that, to all good Neo-astronomers,
I can recommend the following serenity from an astronomer who was
unperturbed by what happened to his science, in November, 1899, and some
more Novembers

Bryant, *A History of Astronomy*, p. 252:

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

That the meteoric display of 1899 4 had failed to appear—"as had been
predicted by Dr. Downing and Dr. Johnstone Stoney." One starts to enjoy
this disguisement, thinking of virtually all the astronomers in the
world who had predicted the return of the Leonids, and the finding, by
Bryant, of two who had not, and his recording only the opinion of these
two, coloring so as to look like another triumph—but we may thank our
sorely stimulated suspiciousness for still richer enjoyment—

That even these two said no such saving thing—

*Nature*, Nov. 9, 1899:

Dr. Downing and Dr. Stoney, instead of predicting failure of the Leonids
to appear, advise watch for them several hours later than had been
calculated.

I conceive of the astronomers’ fictitious paradise as malarchitectural
with corrupted equations, and paved with rotten symbols. Seeming pure,
white fountains of formal vanities—boasts that are gushing from
decomposed triumphs. We shall find their furnishings shabby with
tarnished comets. We turn expectantly to the subject of comets; or we
turn cynically to the subject. We turn maliciously to the subject of
comets. Nevertheless, threading the insecurities of our various
feelings, is a motif that is the steady essence of Neo-astronomy:

That, in celestial phenomena, as well as in all other fields of
research, the irregular, or the unformulable, or the uncapturable, is
present in at least equal representation with the uniform: that, given
any clear, definite, seemingly unvarying thing in the heavens,
co-existently is something of wantonness or irresponsibility, bizarre
and incredible, according to the standards of purists—that the science
of Astronomy concerns itself with only one aspect of existence, because
of course there can be no science of the obverse phenomena—which is good
excuse for so enormously disregarding, if we must have the idea that
there are real sciences, but which shows the hopelessness of positively
attempting.

The story of the Comets, as not told in Mr. Chambers' book of that
title, is almost unparalleled in the annals of humiliation. When a comet
is predicted to return, that means faith in the Law of Gravitation. It
is Newtonism that comets, as well as planets, obey

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

the Law of Gravitation, and move in one of the conic sections. When a
comet does not return when it "should," there is no refuge for an
astronomer to say that planets perturbed it, because one will ask why he
did not include such factors in his calculations, if these phenomena be
subject to mathematical treatment. In his book, Mr. Chambers avoids, or
indicates that he never heard of, a great deal that will receive
cordiality from us, but he does publish a list of predicted comets that
did not return. Writing, in 1909, he mentions others for which he had
hopes:

Brooks’ First Periodic Comet (1886, IV)—"We must see what 6 the years
1909 and 1910 bring forth." This is pretty indefinite
anticipation—however, nothing was brought forth, according to *Monthly
Notices, R. A. S.*, 1909 and 1910: the Brooks’ comet that is recorded is
Brooks’, 1889. Giacobini's Second Periodic Comet (1900, III)—not seen in
1907—"so we shall not have a chance of knowing more about it until
1914." No more known about it in 1914. Borelly's Comet (1905, II)—"Its
expected return, in 1911 or 1912, will be awaited with interest." This
is pretty indefinite awaiting: it is now said that this comet did return
upon Sept. 19, 1911. Denning's Second Periodic Comet (1894, I)—expected,
in 1909, but not seen up to Mr. Chambers' time of writing—no mention in
Monthly Notices. Swift's Comet, of Nov. 20, 1894—"must be regarded as
lost, unless it should be found in December, 1912." No mention of it in
*Monthly Notices*.

Three comets were predicted to return in 1913—not one of them returned
(*Monthly Notices*, 74-326).

Once upon a time, armed with some of the best and latest cynicisms, I
was hunting for prey in the *Magazine of Science*, and came upon an
account of a comet that was expected in the year 1848. I supposed that
the thing had been positively predicted, and very likely failed to
appear, and, for such common game, had no interest. But I came upon the
spoor of disgrace, in the word "triumph"—"If it does come, it will
afford another astronomical triumph" (*Mag. of Sci.*, 1848-107). The
astronomers had predicted the return of a great comet in the year 1848.
In *Monthly Notices*, April, 1847, Mr. Hind says that the result of his
calculations had satisfied him that the identification had been
complete, and that,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

in all probability, "the comet must be very near." Accepting Prof.
Mädler's determinations, he predicted that the comet would return to
position nearest the sun, about the end of February, 1848.

No comet.

The astronomers explained. I don't know what the mind of an astronomer
looks like, but I think of a fizzle with excuses revolving around it. A
writer in the *American Journal of Science*, 2-9-442, explains
excellently. It seems that, when the comet failed to return, Mr. Barber,
of Etwell, again went over the calculations. He found that, between the
years 1556 and 1592, the familiar attractions of Jupiter and Saturn had
diminished the comet's period by 263 days, but that something else had
wrought an effect that he set down positively at 751 days, with a
resulting retardation of 488 days. This is magic that would petrify,
with chagrin, the arteries of the hemorrhagicalest statue that ever
convinced the faithful—reaching back through three centuries of
inter-actions, which, without divine insight, are unimaginable when
occurring in three seconds

But there was no comet.

The astronomers explained. They went on calculating, and ten years later
were still calculating. See *Recreative Science*, 1860-139. It would be
heroic were it not mania. What was the matter with Mr. Barber, of
Etwell, and the intellectual tentacles that he had thrust through
centuries is not made clear in most of the contemporaneous accounts;
but, in the year 1857, Mr. Hind published a pamphlet and explained. It
seems that researches by Littrow had given new verification to a path
that had been computed for the comet, and that nothing had been the
matter with Mr. Barber, of Etwell, except his insufficiency of data,
which had been corrected. Mr. Hind predicted. He pointed to the future,
but he pointed like someone closing a thumb and spreading four fingers.
Mr. Hind said that, according to Halley's calculations, the comet would
arrive in the summer of 1865. However, an acceleration of five years had
been discovered, so that the time should be set down for the middle of
August, 1860. However, according to Mr. Hind's calculated orbit, the
comet might return in the summer of 1864. However, allowing for
acceleration, "the comet is found to be due early in August, 1858."

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

Then Bomme calculated. He predicted that the comet would return upon
Aug. 2, 1858.

There was no comet.

The astronomers went on calculating. They predicted that the comet would
return upon Aug. 22, 1860.

No comet.

But I think that a touch of mercy is a luxury that we can afford;
anyway, we'll have to be merciful or monotonous. For variety we shall
switch from a comet that did not appear to one that did appear. Upon the
night of June 30, 1861, a magnificent humiliator appeared in the
heavens. One of the most brilliant luminosities of modern times appeared
as suddenly as if it had dropped through the shell of our solar
system—if it be a solar system. There were letters in the newspapers:
correspondents wanted to know why this extraordinary object had not been
seen coming, by astronomers. Mr. Hind explained. He wrote that the comet
was a small object, and consequently had not been seen coming by
astronomers. No one could deny the magnificence of the comet;
nevertheless Mr. Hind declared that it was very small, looking so large
because it was near this earth. This is not the later explanation:
nowadays it is said that the comet had been in southern skies, where it
had been observed. All contemporaneous astronomers agreed that the comet
had come down from the north, and not one of them thought of explaining
that it had been invisible because it had been in the south. A
luminosity, with a mist around it, altogether the apparent size of the
moon, had burst into view. In *Recreative Science*, 3-143, Webb says
that nothing like it had been seen since the year 1680. Nevertheless the
orthodox pronouncement was that the object was small and would fade away
as quickly as it had appeared. See the *Athenaeum*, July 6, 1861—"So
small an object will soon get beyond our view." (Hind)

*Popular Science Review*, 1-513:

That, in April, 1862, the thing was still visible.

Something else that was seen under circumstances that cannot be
considered triumphant—upon Nov. 28, 1872, Prof. Klinkerfues, of
Göttingen, looking for Biela's comet, saw meteors in the path of the
expected comet. He telegraphed to Pogson, of Madras, to

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

look near the star *Theta Centauri*, and he would see the comet. I'd not
say that this was in the field of magic, but it does seem consummate. A
dramatic telegram like this electrifies the faithful—an astronomer in
the north telling an astronomer far in the south where to look, so
definitely naming one special little star in skies invisible in the
north. Pogson looked where he was told to look and announced that he saw
what he was told to see. But at meetings of the R. A. S., Jan. to and
March 14, 1873, Captain Tupman pointed out that, even if Biela's comet
had appeared, it would have been nowhere near this star.

Among our later emotions will be indignation against all astronomers who
say that they know whether stars are approaching or receding. When we
arrive at that subject it will be the preciseness of the astronomers
that will perhaps inflame us beyond endurance. We note here the far
smaller difficulty of determining whether a relatively nearby comet is
coming or going. Upon Nov. 6, 1892, Edwin Holmes discovered a comet. In
the *Jour. B. A. A.*, 3-182, Holmes writes that different astronomers
had calculated its distance from twenty million miles to two hundred
million miles, and had determined its diameter to be all the way from
twenty-seven thousand miles to three hundred thousand miles. Prof. Young
said that the comet was approaching; Prof. Parkhurst wrote merely that
the impression was that the comet was approaching the earth; but Prof.
Berberich (*Eng. Mec.*, 56-316) announced that, upon November 6, Holmes’
comet had been 36,000,000 miles from this earth, and 6,000,000 miles
away upon the 16th, and that the approach was so rapid that upon the
21st the comet would touch this earth.

The comet, which had been receding, kept on receding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4](land04)
