[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land19)  [Next](land21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 20

<span class="smallcaps">Patched</span> by a blue inundation that had
never been seen before—this earth, early in the 60's of the 19th
century. Then faintly, from far away, this new appearance is seen to be
enveloped with volumes of gray. Flashes like lightning, and faintest of
rumbling sounds—then cloud-like envelopments roll away, and a blue
formation shines in the sun. Meteorologists upon the moon take notes.

But year after year there are appearances, as seen from the moon, that
are so characterized that they may not be meteorologic phenomena upon
this earth: changing compositions wrought with elements of blue and of
gray; it is like conflict between Synthesis and Dissolution: straight
lines that fade into scrawls, but that reform into seeming moving
symbols: circles and squares and triangles abound.

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

Having had no mean experience with interpretations as products of
desires, given that upon the moon communication with this earth should
be desired, it seems likely to me that the struggles of hosts of
Americans, early in the 60's of the 19th century, were thought by some
lunarians to be maneuvers directed to them, or attempts to attract their
attention. However, having had many impressions upon the resistance that
new delusions encounter, so that, at least upon this earth, some
benightments have had to wait centuries before finally imposing
themselves generally, I'd think of considerable time elapsing before the
coming of a general conviction upon the moon that, by means of living
symbols, and the firing of explosives, terrestrians were trying to
communicate.

Beacon-like lights that have been seen upon the moon. The lights have
been desultory. The latest of which I have record was back in the year
1847. But now, if beginning in the early 60's, though not coinciding
with the beginning of unusual and tremendous manifestations upon this
earth, we have data as if of greatly stimulated attempts to communicate
from the moon—why one assimilates one's impressions of such great
increase with this or with that, all according to what one's dominant
thoughts may be, and calls the product a logical conclusion. Upon the
night of May 15, 1864, Herbert Ingall, of Camberwell, saw a little to
the west of the lunar crater Picard, in the Mare Crisium, a remarkably
bright spot (*Astro. Reg.*, 2-264).

Oct. 24, 1864—period of nearest approach by Mars—red lights upon
opposite parts of Mars (*C. R.*, 85-538). Upon Oct. 16, Ingall had again
seen the light west of Picard. Jan. I, 1865—a small speck of light, in
darkness, under the east foot of the lunar Alps, shining like a small
star, watched half an hour by Charles Grover (*Astro. Reg.*, 3-255).
Jan. 3, .1865—again the red lights of Mars (*C. R.*, 85-538). A thread
of data appears, as an offshoot from a main streak, but it cannot
sustain itself. Lights on the moon and lights on Mars, but I have
nothing more that seems to signify both signals and responses between
these two worlds.

April 10, 1865—west of Picard, according to Ingall—"a most minute point
of light, glittering like a star" (*Astro. Reg.*, 3-189).

Sept. 5, 1865—a conspicuous bright spot west of Picard (*Astro. Reg.*,
3-252).

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It was seen again
by Ingall. He saw it again upon the 7th, but upon the 8th it had gone,
and there was a cloudlike effect where the light had been.

Nov. 24, 1865—a speck of light that was seen by the Rev. W. O. Williams,
shining like a small star in the lunar crater Carlini (*Intel. Obs.*,
II-58).

June to, 1866—the star-like light in Aristarchus; reported by Tempel
(Denning, *Telescopic Work*, p. 121).

Astronomically and seleno-meteorologically, nothing that I know of has
ever been done with these data. I think well of taking up the subject
theologically. We are approaching accounts of a different kind of
changes upon the moon. There will be data seeming so to indicate not
only persistence but devotedness upon the moon that I incline to think
not only of devotedness but of devotions. Upon the 16th of October,
1866, the astronomer Schmidt, of the land of Socrates, announced that
the isolated object, in the eastern part of the Mare Serenitatis, known
as Linné, had changed Linné stands out in a blank area like the Pyramid
of Cheops in its desert. If changes did occur upon Linné, the
conspicuous position. seems to indicate selection. Before October, 1866,
Linné was well-known as a dark object. Something was whitening an object
that had been black.

A hitherto unpublished episode in the history of theologies:

The new prophet who had appeared upon the moon—

Faint perceptions of moving formations, often almost rigorously
geometric, upon one part of this earth, and perhaps faintest of
signal-like sounds that reached the moon—the new prophet—and that he
preached the old lunar doctrine that there is no god but the Earth-god,
but exhorted his hearers to forsake their altars upon which had burned
unheeded lights, and to build a temple upon which might be recited a
litany of lights and shades.

We are only now realizing how the Earth-god looks to the beings of the
moon—who know that this earth is dominant; who see it frilled with the
loops of the major planets; its Elizabethan ruff wrought by the
complications of the asteroids; the busy little sun that brushes off the
dark.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

God of the moon, when mists make it expressionless—a vast, bland,
silvery Buddha.

God of the moon, when seeing is clear—when the disguise is off—when, at
night, from pointed white peaks drip the fluctuating red lights of a
volcano, this earth is the appalling god of carnivorousness.

Sometimes the great roundish earth, with the heavens behind it broken by
refraction, looks like something thrust into a shell from external
existence—clouds of tornadoes as if in its grasp—and it looks like the
fist of God, clutching rags of ultimate fire and confusion.

That a new prophet had appeared upon the moon, and had excited new hope
of evoking response from the bland and shining Stupidity that has so
often been mistaken for God, or from the Appalling that is so identified
with Divinity—from the clutched and menacing fist that has so often been
worshiped.

There is no intelligence except era-intelligence. Suppose the whole
geo-system be a super-embryonic thing. Then, by the law of the embryo,
its parts cannot organize until comes scheduled time. So there are local
congeries of development of a chick in an egg, but these local centers
cannot more than faintly sketch out relations with one another, until
comes the time when they may definitely integrate. Suppose that far back
in the 19th century there were attempts to communicate from the moon;
but suppose that they were premature: then we suppose the fate of the
protoplasmic threads that feel out too soon from one part of an egg to
another. In October, 1866, Schmidt, of Athens, saw and reported in terms
of the concepts of his era, and described in conventional selenographic
language. See *Rept. B. A.*, 1867.

Upon Dec. 14, 16, 25, 27, 1866, Linné was seen as a white spot. But
there was something that had the seeming more of a design, or of a
pattern, an elaboration upon the mere turning to white of something that
had been black—a fine, black spot upon Linné; by Schmidt and Buckingham,
in December, 1866 (*The Student*, 1-261). The most important
consideration of all is reviewed by Schmidt in the *Rept. B. A.*,
1867-22—that sunlight and changes of sunlight had nothing to do with the
changing appearances of Linné.

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jan. 14, 1867—the
white covering, or, at least, seeming of covering, of Linné, had
seemingly disappeared—Knott's impression of Linné as a dark spot, but
"definition" was poor. January 16—Knott's very strong impression, which,
however, he says may have been an illusion, of a small central dark spot
upon Linné. Dawes’ observation, of March 15, 1867—"an excessively minute
black dot in the middle of Linné."

A geometric figure that was white-bordered and centered with black,
formed and dissolved and formed again.

I have an impression of spectacles that were common in the United
States, during the War: hosts of persons arranging themselves in living
patterns: flags, crosses, and in one instance, in which thousands were
engaged, in the representation of an enormous Liberty Bell. Astronomers
have thought of trying to communicate with Mars or the moon by means of
great geometric constructions placed conspicuously, but there is nothing
so attractive to attention as change, and a formation that could appear
and disappear would enchance the geometric with the dynamic. That the
units of the changing compositions that covered Linné were the lunarians
themselves—that Linné was terraced—hosts of the inhabitants of the moon
standing upon the ridges of their Cheops of the Serene Sea, some of them
dressed in white and standing in a border, and some of them dressed in
black, centering upon the apex, or the dark material of the apex left
clear for the contrast, all of them unified in a hope of conveying an
impression of the geometric, as the product of design, and
distinguishable from the topographic, to the shining god that makes the
stars of their heavens marginal.

It is a period of great activity—or of conflicting ideas and
purposes—upon the moon: new and experimental demonstrations, but also,
of course, the persistence of the old. In the *Astronomical Register*,
5-114, Thomas G. Elger writes that upon the 9th of April, 1867, he was
surprised to see, upon the dark part of the moon, a light like a star of
the 7th magnitude, at 7:30 P.M. It became fainter, and looked almost
extinguished at 9 o'clock. Mr. Elger had seen lights upon the moon
before, but never before a light so clear—"too bright to be overlooked
by the most careless

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

observer." May 7, 1867—the beacon-like light of Aristarchus—observed by
Tempel, of Marseilles, when Aristarchus was upon the dark part of the
moon (*Astro. Reg.*, 5-220). Upon the night of June 10, 1867, Dawes saw
three distinct, roundish, black spots near Sulpicius Gallus, which is
near Linné; when looked for upon the 13th, they had disappeared (*The
Student*, 1-261).

Aug. 6, 1867—

And this earth in the sky of the moon—smooth and bland and featureless
earth—or one of the scenes that make it divine and appalling—jaws of
this earth, as seem to be rims of more or less parallel mountain ranges,
still shining in sunlight, but surrounded by darkness—

And, upon the moon, the assembling of the Chiaroscuroans, or the lunar
communicationists who seek to be intelligible to this earth by means of
lights and shades, patterned upon Linné by their own forms and costumes.
The Great Pyramid of Linné, at night upon the moon—it stands out as a
bold black triangularity pointing to this earth. It slowly suffuses
white—the upward drift of white-clad forms, upon the slopes of the
Pyramid. The jaws of this earth seem to munch, in variable light. There
is no other response. Devotions are the food of the gods.

Upon Aug. 6, 1867, Buckingham saw upon Linné, which was in darkness, "a
rising oval spot" (*Rept. B. A.*, 1867-7). In October, 1867, Linné was
seen as a convex white spot (*Rept. B. A.*, 1867-8) .

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

Also it may be that the moon is not inhabited, and is not habitable.
There are many astronomers who say that the moon has virtually no
atmosphere, because when a star is passed over by the moon, the star is
not refracted, according to them. See Clerke's *History of Astronomy*,
p. 264—that, basing his calculations upon the fact that a star is never
refracted out of place when occulted by the moon, Prof. Comstock, of
Washburn Observatory, had determined that this earth's atmosphere is
5,000 times as dense as the moon's.

I did think that in this secondary survey of ours we had pretty well
shaken off our old opposition, the astronomers: however, with something
of the kindliness that one feels for renewed meeting

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

with the familiar, here we are at home with the same old kind of
demonstrations: the basing of laborious calculations upon something that
is not so

See index of *Monthly Notices, R. A. S.*—many instances of stars that
have been refracted out of place when occulted by the moon. See the
*Observatory*, 24-210, 313, 315, 345, 414; *English Mechanic*, 23-197,
279; 26-229; 52—index, "atmosphere"; 81-60; 84-161; 85-108.

In the year 1821, Gruithuisen announced that he had discovered a city of
the moon. He described its main thoroughfare and branching streets. In
1826, he announced that there had been considerable building, and that
he had seen new streets. This formation, which is north of the crater
Schroeter, has often been examined by disagreeing astronomers: for a
sketch of it, in which a central line and radiating lines are shown, see
the *English Mechanic*, 18-638. There is one especial object upon the
moon that has been described and photographed and sketched so often that
I shall not go into the subject. For many records of observations, see
the *English Mechanic* and *L’Astronomie*. It is an object shaped like a
sword, near the crater Birt. Anyone with an impression of the transept
of a cathedral, may see the architectural here. Or it may be a mound
similar to the mounds of North America that have so logically been
attributed to the Mound Builders. In a letter, published in the
*Astronomical Register*, 20-167, Mr. Birmingham calls attention to a
formation that suggests the architectural upon the moon—"a group of
three hills in a slightly acute-angled triangle, and connected by three
lower embankments." There is a geometric object, or marking, shaped like
an "X," in the crater Eratosthenes (*Sci. Amer. Sup.*, 59-24, 469);
striking symbolic-looking thing or sign, or attempt by means of
something obviously not topographic, to attract attention upon this
earth, in the crater Plinius (*Eng. Mec.*, 35-34); reticulations, like
those of a city's squares, in Plato (*Eng. Mec.*, 64-253); and there is
a structural-looking composition of angular lines in Gassendi (*Eng.
Mec.*, 101466). Upon the floor of Littrow are six or seven spots
arranged in the form of the Greek letter Gamma (*Eng. Mec.*, 101-47).
This arrangement may be of recent origin, having been discovered Jan.
31, 1915. The Greek letter makes difficulty only for those who do

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

not want to think easily upon this subject. For a representation of
something that looked like a curved wall upon the moon, see
*L’Astronomie*, 1888-110. As to appearances like viaducts, see
*L’Astronomie*, 1885-213. The lunar craters are not in all instances the
simple cirques that they are commonly supposed to be. I have many
different impressions of some of them: I remember one sketch that looked
like an owl with a napkin tucked under his beak. However, it may be that
the general style of architecture upon the moon is Byzantine, very
likely, or not so likely, domed with glass, giving the dome-effect that
has so often been commented upon.

So then the little nearby moon—and it is populated by Liliputians.
However, our experience with agreeing ideas having been what it has
been, we suspect that the lunarians are giants. Having reasonably
determined that the moon is one hundred miles in diameter, we suppose it
is considerably more or less.

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

A group of astronomers had been observing extraordinary lights in the
lunar crater Plato. The lights had definite arrangement. They were so
individualized that Birt and Elger, and the other selenographers, who
had combined to study them, had charted and numbered them. They were
fixed in position, but rose and fell in intensity.

It does seem to me that we have data of one school of communicationists
after another coming into control of efforts upon the moon. At first our
data related to single lights. They were extraordinary, and they seem to
me to have been signals, but there seemed to be nothing of the
organization that now does seem to be creeping into the fragmentary
material that is the best that we can find. The grouped lights in Plato
were so distinctive, so clear and even brilliant, that if such lights
had ever shone before, it seems that they must have been seen by the
Schroeters, Gruithuisens, Beers and Mädlers, who had studied and charted
the features of the moon. For several of Gledhill's observations, from
which I derive my impressions of these lights, see *Rept. B. A.*,
1871-80—"I can only liken them to the small discs of stars, seen in the
transit-instrument";

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "just like small
stars in the transit instrument, upon a windy night!"

In August and September,. 1860, occurred a notable illumination of the
spots in Group I. It was accompanied by a single light upon a distant
spot.

February and March, 1870—illumination of another group.

April 17, 1870—another illumination in Plato, but back to the first
group.

As to his observations of May 10-12, 1870, Birt gives his opinion that
the lights of Plato were not effects of sunlight.

Upon the 13th of May, 1870, there was an "extraordinary display,"
according to Birt: 27 lights were seen by Pratt, and 28 by Elger, but
only 4 by Gledhill, in Brighton. Atmospheric conditions may have made
this difference, or the lights may have run up or down a scale from 4 to
28. As to independence of sunlight, Pratt says (*Rept. B. A.*, 1871-88)
as to this display, that only the fixed, charted points so shone, and
that other parts of the crater were not illuminated, as they would have
been to an incidence common throughout. In Pratt's opinion, and, I
think, in the opinion of the other observers, these lights were
volcanic. It seems to me that this opinion arose from a feeling that
there should be something of an opinion: the idea that the lights might
have been signals was not expressed by any of these astronomers that I
know of. I note that, though many observers were, at this time,
concentrating upon this one crater, there are no records find-able by me
of such disturbance of detail as might be supposed to accompany volcanic
action. The clear little lights seem to me to have been anything but
volcanic.

The play of these lights of Plato—their modulations and their
combinations—like luminous music—or a composition of signals in a code
that even in this late day may be deciphered. It was like
orchestration—and that something like a baton gave direction to Light
22, upon Aug. 12, 1870, to shine a leading part—"remarkable increase of
brightness." No. 22 subsided, and the leading part shone out in No. 14.
It, too, subsided, and No. 16 brightened.

Perhaps there were definite messages in a Morse-like code. There

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

is a chance for the electricity in somebody's imagination to start
crackling. Up to April, 1871, the selenographers had recorded 1,600
observations upon the fluctuations of the lights of Plato, and had drawn
37 graphs of individual lights. All graphs and other records were
deposited by W. R. Birt in the Library of the Royal Astronomical
Society, where presumably they are to this day. A Champollion may some
day decipher hieroglyphics that may have been flashed from one world to
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21](land21)
