[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land14)  [Next](land16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15

<span class="smallcaps">One</span> repeating mystery—the mystery of the
local sky.

How, if this earth be a moving earth, could anything sail to, fall to,
or in any other way reach this earth, without being smashed into fine
particles by the impact?

This earth is supposed to rip space at a rate of about 19 miles a
second.

Concepts smash when one tries to visualize such an accomplishment.

Now, three times over, we shall have other aspects of this one mystery
of the local sky. First we shall take up data upon seeming relation
between a region of this earth that is subject to earthquakes, or
so-called earthquakes, and appearances in the sky of this especial
region, and the repeating falls of objects and substances from this
local sky and nowhere else at the times.

We have had records of quakes that occurred at Irkutsk, Siberia, and of
stones that fell from the sky to Irkutsk. Upon March 8, 1829, a severe
quake, preceded by clattering sounds, was felt at Irkutsk. There was
something in the sky. Dr. Erman, the geologist, was in Irkutsk, at the
time. In the *Report of the British Association*, 1854-20, it is said
that, in Dr. Erman's opinion, the sounds that preceded the quake were in
the sky.

The situation at Comrie, Perthshire, is similar. A stone fell, May 17,
1830, in the "earthquake region" around Comrie. It fell at Perth,

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 22 miles from
Comrie. See *Fletcher's List*, p. 100. Upon Feb. 15, 1837, a black
powder fell upon the Comrie region (*Edin. New Phil. Jour.*, 31-293).
Oct. 12, 1839—a quake at Comrie. According to the Rev. M. Walker, of
Comrie, the sky, at the time, was "peculiarly strange and alarming, and
appeared as if hung with sackcloth." In Mallet's Catalogue (*Rept. B.
A.*, 1854-290) it is said that, throughout the month of October, shocks
were felt at Comrie, sometimes slight and sometimes severe—"like distant
thunder or reports of artillery"—"the noise sometimes seemed to be high
in the air, and was often heard without any sensible shock." Upon the
23rd of October, occurred the most violent quake in the whole series of
phenomena at Comrie. See the *Edin. New Phil. Jour.*, vol. 32. All data
in this publication were collected by David Milne. According to the Rev.
M. Maxton, of Foulis Manse, ten miles from Comrie, rattling sounds were
heard in the sky, preceding the shock that was felt. In vol. 33, p. 373,
of the Journal, someone who lived seven miles from Comrie is quoted: "In
every case, I am inclined to say that the sound proceeded not from
[underground](errata.htm#0). The sound seemed high in the air." Someone
who lived at Gowrie, forty miles from Comrie, is quoted: "The most
general opinion seems to be that the noise accompanying the concussion
proceeded from above." See vol. 34, p. 87: another impression of
explosion overhead and concussion underneath: "The noises heard first
seemed to be in the air, and the rumbling sound in the earth." Milne's
own conclusion—"It is plain that there are, connected with the
earthquake shocks, sounds both in the earth and in the air, which are
distinct and separate." If, upon the 23rd of October, 1839, there was a
tremendous shock, not of subterranean origin, but from a great explosion
in the sky of Comrie, and if this be accepted, there will be concussions
somewhere else. The "faults" of dogmas will open; there will be seismic
phenomena in science. I have a feeling of a conventional survey of this
Scottish sky: vista of a fair, blue, vacant expanse—our suspicions daub
the impression with black alarms—but also do we project detonating
stimulations into the fair and blue, but unoccupied and meaningless. One
cannot pass this single occurrence by, considering it only in itself: it
is one of a long series of quakes of the earth at Comrie and phenomena
in the sky at Comrie. We have stronger

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

evidence than the mere supposition of many persons, in and near Comrie,
that, upon Oct. 23, 1839, something had occurred in the sky, because
sounds seemed to come from the sky. Milne says that clothes, bleaching
on the grass, were entirely covered with black particles which
presumably had fallen from the sky. The shocks were felt in November: in
November, according to Milne, a powder like soot fell from the sky, upon
Comrie and surrounding regions. In his report to the British
Association, 1840, Milne, reviewing the phenomena from the year 1788,
says: "Occasionally there was a fall of fine, black powder."

Jan. 8, 1840—sounds like cannonading, at Comrie, and a crackling sound
in the air, according to some of the residents. Whether they were sounds
of quakes or concussions that followed explosions, 247 occurrences,
between Oct. 3, 1839, and Feb. 14, 1841, are listed in the *Edin. New
Phil. Jour.*, 32-107. It looks like bombardment, and like most
persistent bombardment—from somewhere—and the frequent fall from the sky
of the débris of explosions. Feb. 18, 1841a shock and a fall of
discolored rain at Comrie (*Edin. New Phil. Jour.*, 35-148). See Roper's
*List of Earthquakes*—year after year, and the continuance of this
seeming bombardment in one small part of the sky of this earth, though I
can find records only of dates and no details. However, I think I have
found record of a fall from the sky of débris of an explosion, more
substantial than finely powdered soot, at Crieff, which is several miles
from Comrie. In the *Amer. Jour. Sci.*, 2-28-275, Prof. Shepard tells a
circumstantial story of an object that looked like a lump of slag, or
cinders, reported to have fallen at Crieff. Scientists had refused to
accept the story, upon the grounds that the substance was not of "true
meteoric material." Prof. Shepard went to Crieff and investigated. He
gives his opinion that possibly the object did fall from the sky. The
story that he tells is that, upon the night of April 23, 1855, a young
woman, in the home of Sir William Murray, Achterlyre House, Crieff, saw,
or thought she saw, a luminous object falling, and picked it up,
dropping it, because it was hot, or because she thought it was hot.

For a description, in a letter, presumably from Sir William Murray, or
some member of his family, see *Year Book of Facts*, 1856-273.

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is said that
about 12 fragments of scorious matter, hot and emitting a sulphurous
odor, had fallen.

In Ponton's *Earthquakes*, p. 118, it is said that, upon the 8th of
October, 1857, there had been, in Illinois, an earthquake, preceded by
"a luminous appearance, described by some as a meteor and by others as
vivid flashes of lightning." Though felt in Illinois, the center of the
disturbance was at St. Louis, Mo. One notes the misleading and the
obscuring of such wording: in all contemporaneous accounts there is no
such indefiniteness as one description by "some" and another notion by
"others." Something exploded terrifically in the sky, at St. Louis, and
shook the ground "severely" or "violently," at 4:20 A.M., Oct. 8, 1857.
According to Timbs’ *Year Book of Facts*, 1858-271, "a blinding meteoric
ball from the heavens" was seen. "A large and brilliant meteor shot
across the heavens" (St. Louis Intelligencer, October 8). Of course the
supposed earthquake was concussion from an explosion in the sky, but our
own interest is in a series that is similar to others that we have
recorded. According to the *New York Times*, October 12, a slight shock
was said to have been felt four hours before the great concussion, and
another three days before. But see Milne's *Catalog of Destructive
Earthquakes*—not a mention of anything that would lead one away from
safe and standardized suppositions. See *Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer.*,
3-68—here the "meteor" is mentioned, but there is no mention of the
preceding concussions. Time after time, in a period of about three days,
concussions were felt in and around St. Louis. One of these concussions,
with its "sound like thunder or the roar of artillery" (*New York
Times*, October 8) was from an explosion in the sky. If the others were
of the same origin—how could detonating meteors so repeat in one small
local sky, and nowhere else, if this earth be a moving body? If it be
said that only by coincidence did a meteor explode over a region where
there had been other quakes, here is the question:

How many times can we accept that explanation as to similar series?

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

In the *Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research,* 19-144, a
correspondent writes that, in Herefordshire, Sept. 24, 1854, upon

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

a day that was "perfectly still, sky cloudless," he had heard sounds
like the discharges of heavy artillery, at intervals of about two
minutes, continuing several hours. Again the "mystery of the local
sky"—if these sounds did come from the sky. We have no data for thinking
that they did.

In the London *Times*, Nov. 9, 1858, a correspondent writes that, in
Cardiganshire, Wales, he had, in the autumn of 1855, often heard sounds
like the discharges of heavy artillery, two or three reports rapidly,
and then an interval of perhaps 20 minutes, also with long intervals,
sometimes of days and sometimes of weeks, continuing throughout the
winter of 1855-56. Upon the 3rd of November, 1858, he had heard the
sounds again, repeatedly, and louder than they had been three years
before. In the *Times*, November 12, someone else says that, at
Dolgelly, he, too, had heard the "mysterious phenomenon," on the 3rd of
November. Someone else—that, upon October 13, he had heard the sounds at
Swansea. "The reports, as if of heavy artillery, came from the west,
succeeding each other at apparently regular intervals, during the
greater part of the afternoon of that day. My impression was that the
sounds might have proceeded from practicing at Milford, but I
ascertained, the following day, that there had been no firing of any
kind there." Correspondent to the *Times*, November 20—that, with little
doubt, the sounds were from artillery practice at Milford. He does not
mention the investigation as to the sounds of October 13, but says that
there had been cannon-firing, upon November 3rd, at Milford. *Times*,
December 1—that most of the sounds could be accounted for as sounds of
blasting in quarries. *Daily News*, November 16—that similar sounds had
been heard, in 1848, in New Zealand, and were results of volcanic
action. *Standard*, November 16—that the "mysterious noise" must have
been from Devonport, where a sunken rock had been blown up. So, with at
least variety these sounds were explained. But we learn that the series
began before October 13. Upon the evening of September 28, in the
Dartmoor District, at Crediton, a rumbling sound was heard. It was not
supposed to be an earthquake, because no vibration of the ground was
felt. It was thought that there had been an explosion of gunpowder. But
there had been no such terrestrial explosion. About an hour later
another explosive sound was

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

heard. It was like all the other sounds, and in one place was thought to
be distant cannonading—terrestrial cannonading. See *Quar. Jour. Geolog.
Soc. of London*, vol. 15.

Somewhere near Barisal, Bengal, were occurring just such sounds as the
sounds of Cardiganshire, which were like the sounds of Melida. In the
*Proc. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal*, November, 1870, are published letters
upon the Barisal Guns. One writer says that the sounds were probably
booming of the surf. Someone else points out that the sounds, usually
described as "explosive," were heard too far inland to be traced to such
origin. A clear, calm day, in December, 1871—in *Nature*, 53-197, Mr. G.
B. Scott writes that, in Bengal, he had heard "a dull, muffled boom, as
if of distant cannon"—single detonations, and then two or three in
quicker succession.

In the London *Times*, Jan. 20, 1860, several correspondents write as to
a sound "resembling the discharge of a gun high in the air" that was
heard near Reading, Berkshire, England, Jan. 17, 1860. See the *Times*,
January 24th. To say that a meteor had exploded would, at present, well
enough account for this phenomenon.

Sounds like those that were heard in Herefordshire, Sept. 24, 1854, were
heard later. In the *English Mechanic*, 100-279, it is said that, upon
Nov. 9, 1862, the Rev. T. Webb, the astronomer, of Hardwicke, fifteen
miles west of Hereford, heard sounds that he attributed to gunfire at
Milford Haven, about 85 miles from Hardwicke. Upon Aug. 1, 1865, Mr.
Webb saw flashes upon the horizon, at Hardwicke, and attributed them to
gunfire at Tenby, upon occasion of a visit by Prince Arthur. Tenby, too,
is about 85 miles from Hardwicke. There were other phenomena in a region
centering around Hereford and Worcester. Upon Oct. 6, 1863, there was a
disturbance that is now listed as an earthquake; but in the London
newspapers so many reports upon this occurrence state that a great
explosion had been thought to occur, and that the quake was supposed to
be an earthquake of subterranean origin only after no terrestrial
explosion could be heard of, that the phenomenon is of questionable
origin. There was a similar concussion in about the same region, Oct.
30, 1868. Again the shock was widely attributed to a great explosion,
perhaps in London, and again was supposed

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

to have been an earthquake when no terrestrial explosion could be heard
of.

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

*Arcana of Science*, 1829-196:

That, near Mhow, India, Feb. 27, 1828, fell a stone "perfectly similar"
to the stone that fell near Allahabad, in 1802, and a stone that fell
near Mooradabad, in 1808. These towns are in the Northwestern Provinces
of India.

I have looked at specimens of these stones, and in my view they are
similar. They are of brownish rock, streaked and spotted with a darker
brown. A stone that fell at Chandakopur, in the same general region,
June 6, 1838, is like them. All are as much alike as "erratics" that,
because they are alike, geologists ascribe to the same derivation,
stationary relatively to the places in which they are found.

It seems acceptable that, upon July 15 and 17, 1822, and then upon a
later date, unknown seeds fell from the sky to this earth. If these
seeds did come from some other world, there is another mystery as well
as that of repetition in a local sky of this earth. How could a volume
of seeds remain in one aggregation; how could the seeds be otherwise
than scattered from Norway to Patagonia, if they met in space this
earth, and if this earth be rushing through space at a rate of 19 miles
a second? It may be that the seeds of 1822 fell again. According to
Kaemtz (*Meteorology*, p. 465) yellowish brown corpuscles, some round, a
few cylindrical, were found upon the ground, June, 1830, near Griesau,
Silesia. Kaemtz says that they were tubercules from roots of a
well-known Silesian plant—stalk of the plant dries up; heavy rain raises
these tubercules to the ground—persons of a low order of mentality think
that the things had fallen from the sky. Upon the night of March 24-25,
1852, a great quantity of seeds did fall from the sky, in Prussia, in
Heinsberg, Erklenz, and Juliers, according to M. Schwann, of the
University of Liége, in a communication to the Belgian Academy of
Science (*La Belgique Horticole*, 2-319).

In *Comptes Rendus*, 5-549, is Dr. Wartmann's account of water that fell
from the sky, at Geneva. At nine o'clock, morning of Aug. 9, 1837, there
were clouds upon the horizon, but the zenith was

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

clear. It is not remarkable that a little rain should fall now and then
from a clear sky: we shall see wherein this account is remarkable. Large
drops of warm water fell in such abundance that people were driven to
shelter. The fall continued several minutes and then stopped. But then,
several times during an hour, more of this warm water fell from the sky.
*Year Book of Facts*, 1839-262—that upon May 31, 1838, lukewarm water in
large drops fell from the sky, at Geneva. *Comptes Rendus*, 15-290—no
wind and not a cloud in the sky—at 10 o'clock, morning of May 11, 1842,
warm water fell from the sky at Geneva, for about six minutes; five
hours later, still no wind and no clouds, again fell warm water, in
large drops; falling intermittently for several minutes.

In *Comptes Rendus*, 85-681, is noted a succession of falls of stones in
Russia: June 12, 1863, at Buschof, Courland; Aug. 8, 1863, at
Pillitsfer, Livonia; April 12, 1864, at Nerft, Courland. Also—see
*Fletcher's List*—a stone that fell at Dolgovdi, Volhynia, Russia, June
26, 1864. I have looked at specimens of all four of these stones, and
have found them all very much alike, but not of uncommon meteoritic
material: all gray stones, but Pillitsfer is darker than the others, and
in a polished specimen of Nerft, brownish specks are visible.

In the *Birmingham Daily Post*, June 14, 1858, Dr. C. Mansfield Ingleby,
a meteorologist, writes: "During the storm on Saturday (12th) morning,
Birmingham was visited by a shower of aerolites. Many hundreds of
thousands must have fallen, some of the streets being strewn with them."
Someone else writes that many pounds of the stones had been gathered
from awnings, and that they had damaged greenhouses, in the suburbs. In
the *Post*, of the 15th, someone else writes that, according to his
microscopic examinations, the supposed aerolites were only bits of the
Rowley ragstone, with which Birmingham was paved, which had been washed
loose by the rain. It is not often that sentiment is brought into
meteorology, but in the *Report of the British Association*, 1864-37,
Dr. Phipson explains the occurrence meteorologically, and with an
unconscious tenderness. He says that the stones did fall from the sky,
but that they had been carried in a whirlwind from Rowley, some miles
from Birmingham. So we are to sentimentalize

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

over the stones in Rowley that had been torn, by unfeeling paviers, from
their companions of geologic ages, and exiled to the pavements of
Birmingham, and then some of these little bereft companions, rising in a
whirlwind and traveling, unerringly, if not miraculously, to rejoin the
exiles. More dark companions. It is said that they were little black
stones.

They fell again from the sky, two years later. In *La Science Pour
Tous*, June 19, 1860, it is said that, according to the *Wolverhampton
Advertiser*, a great number of little black stones had fallen, in a
violent storm, at Wolverhampton. According to all records findable by me
no such stones have ever fallen anywhere in Great Britain, except at
Birmingham and Wolverhampton, which is 13 miles from Birmingham.

Eight years after the second occurrence, they fell again. *English
Mechanic*, July 31, 1868—that stones "similar to, if not identical with
the well-known Rowley ragstones" had fallen in Birmingham, having
probably been carried from Rowley, in a whirlwind.

We were pleased with Dr. Phipson's story, but to tell of more of the
little dark companions rising in a whirlwind and going unerringly from
Rowley to rejoin the exiles in Birmingham is overdoing. That's not
sentiment: that's mawkishness.

In the *Birmingham Daily Post*, May 30, 1868, is published a letter from
Thomas Plant, a writer and lecturer upon meteorological subjects. Mr.
Plant says, I think, that for one hour, morning of May 29, 1868, stones
fell, in Birmingham, from the sky. His words may be interpretable in
some other way, but it does not matter: the repeating falls are
indication enough of what we're trying to find out—"From nine to ten,
meteoric stones fell in immense quantities in various parts of town."
"They resembled, in shape, broken pieces of Rowley ragstone … in every
respect they were like the stones that fell in 1858." In the *Post*,
June 1, Mr. Plant says that the stones of 1858 did fall from the sky,
and were not fragments washed out of the pavement by rain, because many
pounds of them had been gathered from a platform that was 20 feet above
the ground.

It may be that for days before and after May 29, 1868, occasional stones
fell from some unknown region stationary above Birmingham.

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the *Post*,
June 2, a correspondent writes that, upon the first of June, his niece,
while walking in a field, was struck by a stone that injured her hand
severely. He thinks that the stone had been thrown by some unknown
person. In the Post, June 4, someone else writes that his wife, while
walking down a lane, upon May 24th, had been cut on the head by a stone.
He attributes this injury to stone-throwing by boys, but does not say
that anyone had been seen to throw the stone.

*Symons’ Met. Mag.*, 4-137:

That, according to the *Birmingham Gazette*, a great number of small,
black stones had been found in the streets of Wolverhampton, May 25,
1869, after a severe storm. It is said that the stones were precisely
like those that had fallen in Birmingham, the year before, and resembled
Rowley ragstone outwardly, but had a different appearance when broken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16](land16)
