[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land01)  [Next](land03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2

"<span class="smallcaps">Prediction</span> Confirmed!"

"Another Verification!"

"A Third Verification of Prediction!"

Three times, in spite of its long-established sobriety, the *Journal of
the Franklin Institute*, vols. 106 and 107, reels with an astronomer's
exhilarations. He might exult and indulge himself, and that would be no
affair of ours, and, in fact, we'd like to see everybody happy, perhaps,
but it is out of these three chanticleerities by Prof. Pliny Chase that
we materialize our opinion that, so far as methods and strategies are
concerned, no particular differences can be noted between astrologers
and astronomers, and that both represent engulfment in Dark Ages. Lord
Bacon pointed out that the astrologers had squirmed into prestige and
emolument by shooting at marks, disregarding their misses, and recording
their hits with unseemly advertisement. When, in August, 1878, Prof.
Swift and Prof. Watson said that, during an eclipse of the sun, they had
seen two luminous bodies that might be planets between Mercury and the
sun, Prof. Chase announced that, five years before, he had made a
prediction,

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

and that it had been confirmed by the positions of these bodies. Three
times, in capital letters, he screamed, or announced, according to one's
sensitiveness, or prejudices, that the "new planets" were in the exact
positions of his calculations. Prof. Chase wrote that, before his time,
there had been two great instances of astronomic calculation confirmed:
the discovery of Neptune and the discovery of "the asteroidal belt," a
claim that is disingenuously worded. If by mathematical principles, or
by any other definite principles, there has ever been one great, or
little, instance of astronomic discovery by means of calculations,
confusion must destroy us, in the introductory position that we take, or
expose our irresponsibility, and vitiate all that follows: that our data
are oppressed by a tyranny of false announcements; that there never has
been an astronomic discovery other than the observational or the
accidental.

In *The Story of the Heavens*, Sir Robert Ball's opinion of the
discovery of Neptune is that it is a triumph unparalleled in the annals
of science. He lavishes—the great astronomer Leverrier, buried for
months in profound meditations—the dramatic moment—Leverrier rises from
his calculations and points to the sky—"Lo!" there a new planet is
found.

My desire is not so much to agonize over the single fraudulencies or
delusions, as to typify the means by which the science of Astronomy has
established and maintained itself:

According to Leverrier, there was a planet external to Uranus; according
to Hansen, there were two; according to Airy, "doubtful if there were
one."

One planet was found—so calculated Leverrier, in his profound
meditations. Suppose two had been found—confirmation of the brilliant
computations by Hansen. None—the opinion of the great astronomer, Sir
George Airy.

Leverrier calculated that the hypothetic planet was at a distance from
the sun, within the limits of 35 and 37.9 times this earth's distance
from the sun. The new planet was found in a position said to be 30 times
this earth's distance from the sun. The discrepancy was so great that,
in the United States, astronomers refused to accept that Neptune had
been discovered by means of calculation: see such publications as the
*American Journal of Science*, of the period.

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Upon Aug. 29,
1849, Dr. Babinet read, to the French Academy, a paper in which he
showed that, by the observations of three years, the revolution of
Neptune would have to be placed at 165 years. Between the limits of 207
and 233 years was the period that Leverrier had calculated.
Simultaneously, in England, Adams had calculated. Upon Sept. 2, 1846,
after he had, for at least a month, been charting the stars in the
region toward which Adams had pointed, Prof. Challis wrote to Sir George
Airy that this work would occupy his time for three more months. This
indicates the extent of the region toward which Adams had pointed.

The discovery of the asteroids, or in Prof. Chase's not very careful
language, the discovery of the "asteroidal belt as deduced from Bode's
Law":

We learn that Baron Von Zach had formed a society of twenty-four
astronomers to search, in accordance with Bode's Law, for "a planet"—and
not "a group," not "an asteroidal belt"—between Jupiter and Mars. The
astronomers had organized, dividing the zodiac into twenty-four zones,
assigning each zone to an astronomer. They searched. They found not one
asteroid. Seven or eight hundred are now known.

*Philosophical Magazine*, 12-62:

That Piazzi, the discoverer of the first asteroid, had not been
searching for a hypothetic body, as deduced from Bode's Law, but, upon
an investigation of his own, had been charting stars in the
constellation Taurus, night of Jan. 1, 1801. He noticed a light that he
thought had moved, and, with his mind a blank, so far as asteroids and
brilliant deductions were concerned, announced that he had discovered a
comet.

As an instance of the crafty way in which some astronomers now tell the
story, see Sir Robert Ball's *Story of the Heavens*, p. 230:

The organization of the astronomers of Lilienthal, but never a hint that
Piazzi was not one of them—"the search for a small planet was soon
rewarded by a success that has rendered the evening of the first day of
the nineteenth century memorable in astronomy." Ball tells of Piazzi's
charting of the stars, and makes it appear that Piazzi had charted stars
as a means of finding asteroids deductively, rewarded soon by success,
whereas Piazzi had never heard of such

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

a search, and did not know an asteroid when he saw one. "This laborious
and accomplished astronomer had organized an ingenious system of
exploring the heavens, which was eminently calculated to discriminate a
planet among the starry host … at length he was rewarded by a success
which amply compensated him for all his toil."

Prof. Chase—these two great instances not of mere discovery, but of
discovery by means of calculation, according to him—now the subject of
his supposition that he, too, could calculate triumphantly—the
verification depended upon the accuracy of Prof. Swift and Prof. Watson
in recording the positions of the bodies that they had announced—

*Sidereal Messenger*, 6-84:

Prof. Colbert, Superintendent of Dearborn Observatory, leader of the
party of which Prof. Swift was a member, says that the observations by
Swift and Watson agreed, because Swift had made his observations agree
with Watson's. The accusation is not that Swift had falsely announced a
discovery of two unknown bodies, but that his precise determining of
positions had occurred after Watson's determinations had been published.

*Popular Astronomy*, 7-13:

Prof. Asaph Hall writes that, several days after the eclipse, Prof.
Watson told him that he had seen "a" luminous body near the sun, and
that his declaration that he had seen two unknown bodies was not made
until after Swift had been heard from.

Perched upon two delusions, Prof. Chase crowed his false raptures. The
unknown bodies, whether they ever had been in the orbit of his
calculations or not, were never seen again.

So it is our expression that hosts of astronomers calculate, and
calculation-mad, calculate and calculate and calculate, and that, when
one of them does point within 600,000,000 miles (by conventional
measurements) of something that is found, he is the Leverrier of the
text-books; that the others are the Prof. Chases not of the text-books.

As to most of us, the symbols of the infinitesimal calculus humble
independent thinking into the conviction that used to be enforced by
drops of blood from a statue. In the farrago and conflicts of daily

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

lives, it is relief to feel such a *rapport* with finality, in a
religious sense, or in a mathematical sense. So then, if the seeming of
exactness in Astronomy be either infamously, or carelessly and
laughingly, brought about by the connivances of which Swift and Watson
were accused, and if the prestige of Astronomy be founded upon nothing
but huge capital letters and exclamation points, or upon the
disproportionality of balancing one Leverrier against hundreds of
Chases, it may not be better that we should know this, if then to those
of us who, in the religious sense, have nothing to depend upon, comes
deprivation of even this last, lingering seeming of foundation, or
seeming existence of exactness and realness, somewhere—

Except—that, if there be nearby lands in the sky and beings from foreign
worlds that visit this earth, that is a great subject, and the trash
that is clogging an epoch must be cleared away.

We have had a little sermon upon the insecurity of human triumphs, and,
having brought it to a climax, now seems to be the time to stop; but
there is still an involved "triumph" and I'd not like to have
inefficiency, as well as probably everything else, charged against us—

The Discovery of Uranus.

We mention this stimulus to the text-book writers' ecstasies, because
out of phenomena of the planet Uranus, the "Neptune-triumph" developed.
For Richard Proctor's reasons for arguing that this discovery was not
accidental, see *Old and New Astronomy*, p. 646. *Philosophical
Transactions*, 71-492—a paper by Herschel—"An account of a comet
discovered on March 13, 1781." A year went by, and not an astronomer in
the world knew a new planet when he saw one: then Lexell did find out
that the supposed comet was a planet.

Statues from which used to drip the life-blood of a parasitic cult—

Structures of parabolas from which bleed equations—

As we go along we shall develop the acceptance that astronomers might as
well try to squeeze blood from images as to try to seduce symbols into
conclusions, because applicable mathematics has no more to do with
planetary inter-actions than have statues of saints. If this denial that
the calculi have place in gravitational astronomy

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

be accepted, the astronomers lose their supposed god; they become an
unfocused priesthood; the stamina of their arrogance wilts. We begin
with the next to the simplest problem in celestial mechanics: that is,
the formulation of the inter-actions of the sun and the moon and this
earth. In the highest of mathematics, final, sacred mathematics, can
this next to the simplest problem in so-called mathematical astronomy be
solved?

It cannot be solved.

Every now and then, somebody announces that he has solved the Problem of
the Three Bodies, but it is always an incomplete, or impressionistic,
demonstration, compounded of abstractions, and ignoring the conditions
of bodies in space. Over and over we shall find vacancy under supposed
achievements; elaborate structures that are pretensions without
foundation. Here we learn that astronomers cannot formulate the
inter-actions of three bodies in space, but calculate anyway, and
publish what they call the formula of a planet that is inter-acting with
a thousand other bodies. They explain. It will be one of our most
lasting impressions of astronomers: they explain and explain and
explain. The astronomers explain that, though in finer terms, the mutual
effects of three planets cannot be determined, so dominant is the power
of the sun that all other effects are negligible.

Before the discovery of Uranus, there was no way by which the miracles
of the astro-magicians could be tested. They said that their formulas
worked out, and external inquiry was panic-stricken at the mention of a
formula. But Uranus was discovered, and the magicians were called upon
to calculate his path. They did calculate, and, if Uranus had moved in a
regular path, I do not mean to say that astronomers or college boys have
no mathematics by which to determine anything so simple.

They computed the orbit of Uranus.

He went somewhere else.

They explained. They computed some more. They went on explaining and
computing, year in and year out, and the planet Uranus kept on going
somewhere else. Then they conceived of a powerful perturbing force
beyond Uranus—so then that at the distance of Uranus the sun is not so
dominant—in which case the

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

effects of Saturn upon Uranus and Uranus upon Saturn are not so
negligible—on through complexes of inter-actions that infinitely
intensify by cumulativeness into a black outlook for the whole brilliant
system. The palæo-astronomers calculated, and for more than fifty years
pointed variously at the sky. Finally two of them, of course agreeing
upon the general background of Uranus, pointed within distances that are
conventionally supposed to have been about six hundred millions of miles
of Neptune, and now it is religiously, if not insolently, said that the
discovery of Neptune was not accidental—

That the test of that which is not accidental is ability to do it again—

That it is within the power of anybody, who does not know a hyperbola
from a cosine, to find out whether the astronomers are led by a cloud of
rubbish by day and a pillar of bosh by night

If, by the magic of his mathematics, any astronomer could have pointed
to the position of Neptune, let him point to the planet past Neptune.
According to the same reasoning by which a planet past Uranus was
supposed to be, a Trans-Neptunian planet may be supposed to be. Neptune
shows perturbations similar to those of Uranus.

According to Prof. Todd there is such a planet, and it revolves around
the sun once in 375 years. There are two, according to Prof. Forbes, one
revolving once in 1,000 years, and the other once in 5,000 years. See
Macpherson's *A Century's Progress in Astronomy*. It exists, according
to Dr. Eric Doolittle, and revolves once in 283 years (*Sci. Amer.*,
122-641). According to Mr. Hind it revolves once in 1,600 years
(*Smithson. Miscell. Cols.*, 20-20).

So then we have found out some things, and, relatively to the
oppressions that we felt from our opposition, they are reassuring. But
also are they depressing. Because, if, in this existence of ours, there
is no prestige higher than that of astronomic science, and, if that
seeming of substantial renown has been achieved by a composition of
bubbles, what of anything like soundness must there be to all lesser
reputes and achievements?

Let three bodies inter-act. There is no calculus by which their
inter-actions can be formulated. But there are a thousand inter-acting
bodies in this solar system—or supposed solar system—and we find

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

that the highest prestige in our existence is built upon the tangled
assertions that there are magicians who can compute in a thousand
quantities, though they cannot compute in three.

Then all other so-called human triumphs, or moderate successes, products
of anybody's reasoning processes and labors—and what are they, if higher
than them all, more academic, austere, rigorous, exact are the methods
and the processes of the astronomers? What can be thought of our whole
existence, its nature and its destiny?

That our existence, a thing within one solar system, or supposed solar
system, is a stricken thing that is mewling through space, shocking
able-minded, healthy systems with the sores on its sun, its ghastly
moons, its civilizations that are all broken out with sciences; a
celestial leper, holding out doddering expanses into which charitable
systems drop golden comets? If it be the leprous thing that our findings
seem to indicate, there is no encouragement for us to go on. We cannot
discover: we can only betray new symptoms. If I be a part of such a
stricken thing, I know of nothing but sickness and sores and rags to
reason with: my data will be pustules; my interpretations will be
inflammations—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3](land03)
