[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sos07)  [Next](sos09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0007EHL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Saucers*, by Orfeo M. Angelucci, \[1955\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

### CHAPTER VI

### AIRPLANES DO DISAPPEAR!

Not long after my publication of the paper a new aspect of my
experiences with the saucers developed. On the afternoon of March 3,
1953 I was sitting alone in the kitchen, reading. I was dully aware of
the steady drone of an airplane which continued for some time. The sound
apparently was coming from the west. Gradually it dawned upon me that
the sound was too steady and too unwavering for an ordinary aircraft.

Curiously, I got up and looked out the door. Coming from the north I saw
what appeared to be an ordinary small aluminum airplane. From where I
was standing in the doorway there was nothing unusual in the sound of
the craft as it assumed the normal crescendo of direct approach. I
stepped out of doors and watched it fly directly overhead Until it was
fairly in the face of the sun—when suddenly and astoundingly the plane
was no longer there! Just as mysteriously the sound of its motor ceased
abruptly too. I never saw the plane again. Confused, I went back into
the house. Obviously the craft was not a flying disk, but a conventional
type aircraft, for I had not experienced any of the unpleasant physical
symptoms that a flying disk invariably produces in my body.

Four days later about five o'clock in the afternoon

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I was accompanying
Jane Vanderlick, a neighbor who is employed at the [Los
Feliz](errata.htm#8) Theatre cafe. We were walking to the cafe where
Jane was going to open it half an hour early that day. We were laughing
and talking when Jane noticed an airplane nearby in the sky, flying
south. It seemed just an ordinary airplane of the most common type:
"Maybe that's a flying saucer, Orfeo!"

I thought she was kidding me and replied: "Not you too, Jane!"

But her eyes were serious. "I mean it, Orfeo. There's something peculiar
about that airplane."

For the first time I scrutinized the craft carefully. After a moment I
had to admit there was something unusual about it. It appeared extremely
dull and flat-surfaced and did not reflect any of the rays of the
setting sun as it ordinarily should have done.

While we were both staring at it the airplane suddenly vanished right
before our eyes in a clear and cloudless sky! The sound of its motor
ceased just as abruptly. Both of us stood in our tracks. Jane stared at
me. "What happened to that airplane, Orfeo?"

I shook my head and then replied slowly: "I wasn't going to mention it
to anyone, Jane, but I saw the same thing happen four days ago. I don't
know what it means!"

We stood there for some minutes our eyes vainly searching the skies for
some trace of the vanished plane. I requested Jane to remember every
detail of the strange incident. She promised that she would. If you ask
her about it today, she will verify

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the experience just as I have related it to you.

Several days later I was with a group of employees sitting around the
Lockheed Plant. It was about five minutes before four in the afternoon.
We were waiting for the shifts to change preparatory to going on duty.
My good friend, but most confirmed skeptic, Richard Butterfield, was
with us. While we were talking idly, an apparently ordinary two-engine
airplane came into view over the hills.

Butterfield's attention was attracted to the craft. He arose from the
bench and stared up at it as though he was spellbound. His behavior
reminded me immediately of Jane Vanderlick's actions a few days
previously. Her eyes had been attracted to that particular plane just as
Butterfield's eyes were now drawn to this one. Yet neither of the planes
had any effect upon me. The crowd all noticed Butter-field's deep
absorption in the small plane. Some of them started laughing and began
ribbing him. I remember someone shouting: "Look! He ain't never seen an
airplane before!" But Butterfield paid no attention. Finally, almost as
though talking to himself, he said: "What is that?"

Several voices helpfully jibed in with wise-cracks about his being
sorely in need of an optician's advice. One fellow remarked scathingly:
"Any dope can see it's nothing but an ordinary two-engine airplane."

I didn't say anything, for I had noticed by then how flat-toned the
craft was and how it failed to reflect the rays of the afternoon sun.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Suddenly there was an instantaneous flash that appeared to envelope the
plane. When the flash was over there was no sign of a plane to be seen
anywhere in the sky. The droning of its motors too had ceased. Many of
the group had seen the phenomenon. They were startled and confused and
everyone started talking at once trying to explain just what had
happened. Others continued to stare into the skies searching for the
vanished plane.

Butterfield dazedly brushed his hand across his eyes. It seemed
difficult for him to come back to the norm of this world. He didn't say
much, but for a long time after we had gone on the job he appeared to be
in deep thought. I didn't volunteer any explanations, for the sudden
disappearance of the plane in a brilliant flash was a new development
for me. I kept mulling it over in my mind as well as the two previous
experiences in which I had seen airplanes simply disappear into thin
air. But I didn't give the incidents too much thought as I had more than
enough to do to try and unscramble the puzzle of my previous experiences
with the extraterrestrials without adding more problems.

Within a week most of those who had seen the plane disappear had either
forgotten the incident or had figured out some explanation that
satisfied them. I saw then that the human mind does not want to believe
anything it cannot understand; it will rationalize to any extent rather
than face the unknown.

As the weeks passed I continued to be ribbed more

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and more. Some of my fellow workers were even inferring that I was lying
just for cheap publicity. I would joyfully have dropped the whole thing
like a red-hot coal, if I had not had the deep sense of loyalty and
responsibility to those Greater Beings that neither I nor my fellows
could begin to understand.

As the situation became more unpleasant at the plant, I finally decided
to turn in my notice; for by then my experiences were fairly well-known
throughout Southern California and thus I was in for constant ridicule.
I knew I'd either have to shut up about space visitors or else quit my
job. I decided on the latter.

My last three weeks at work were rather memorable. On August 14th Ernie
Oxford and I were working on an airplane part outside the building. He,
like all of the others when they got me alone, was harping on the space
visitors and my "wild story in that *Twentieth Century Times*." He was
contentiously declaring that neither he or his girl friend could swallow
such a story.

I told him that it was his right to believe only what he wished to
believe. Then I suggested that we forget the subject and concentrate on
the job we had to do. But Ernie couldn't be stopped. He kept on telling
me what a big mistake I was making.

While he was berating me, I looked toward the Burbank mountains and
there directly over a ridge top was a flying saucer. I touched Ernie on
the shoulder and pointed to the saucer. He dropped his

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

tools and stared. Don Quinn, working nearby, saw us gazing into the sky
and came running over.

While we were watching the thing it appeared suddenly to "flip" and
vanished. Ernie kept asking: "Where did it go?" And after that
experience he was quiet for a while. Then he began talking about the
saucers and nothing else. He still didn't believe my story, but he knew
he had actually seen a saucer.

Friday, August 21st, at 9:15 in the evening, the entire shift was hard
at work. My mind was preoccupied and I was busy on an airplane part.
Suddenly a tremor passed over me. I knew it could mean only one thing. I
put down my tools and walked to the huge door, which was open only about
a foot. As I looked out into the night I saw a light in the skies which
appeared to be approaching the plant. While I watched, the light stopped
in midair and changed from amber to red. There was no doubt in my mind
about what it was.

I called to some of the fellows in the plant and beckoned them to join
me. A number of them hurried over and we pushed open the door and went
outside. All who came were rewarded. Every one of the men saw the red
disk hanging overhead in the sky. While they were staring I glanced at
their faces and I was deeply impressed with what I saw. Momentarily,
they were like changed men. Wonder, awe, and belief were in their faces.
Thus I was struck with the realization of what the mere sight of a
single disk can do to the thinking of a number of persons.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

While I was watching their reactions, they all turned suddenly and
looked questioningly at me. I glanced up into the sky to see that the
disk had vanished and only the moon and the stars were overhead. I asked
where the disk had gone and all of them started to tell me.

From the many explanations I learned that the saucer had appeared to
move until it was directly below the moon where it began to ascend. As
it ascended it changed in color from red to amber and then to the
silvery color of the moon. As it climbed higher its color became
indistinguishable from the moon so that they could not tell what
actually happened to it. But it had vanished. All of that had happened
while I was watching their faces.

We trouped back in to work and all of the men were quiet and thoughtful.
At the ten minute break I told them that on the following night at the
second break I was going to ask each one of them to tell his story of
what he had seen.

Every man told precisely the same story. In all there were twelve men. I
failed somehow to get the names of two of the fellows but here are the
names of the other nine: Dave Donegan, Al Durand, Dave Remick, Michael
Gallegos, Richard Becker, Richard McGinley, Bruce Bryan, Ernie Oxford
and Louis Pasko. Every one of these men will affirm the details of this
sighting. The phenomenon did not happen fast; they all had plenty of
time to observe and impress details on their minds.

All of them believed they had seen a flying saucer.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hence, I was
enabled to leave my job with much of the stigma of untruth taken from
the account of my experiences I had printed in all good faith in my
*Twentieth Century Times*.

Among those twelve men there are two who are still deeply perplexed.
They are Ernie Oxford and Michael Gallegos, for they had seen me drop my
tools and go to the door as though beckoned by an unseen force. They
said I behaved as though I were under a spell. Both of them started
involuntarily to follow me, but on second [thought](errata.htm#9)
remained on the job until I called them to come out.

Both of them insist that I must have received a message of some kind
from the disk. When I told them that it was only a physical reaction and
a deep intuitive feeling that space visitors were near, they believed I
was holding something back from them. For they said that for a moment
they too had felt something indescribable. With that I agree fully and I
was happy that I was no longer alone.

Friday, August 28th was my last work night at Lockheed. I was outside
working on an airplane part. That night Don Quinn was my partner. He was
among those most skeptical of my saucer experiences and like the others
he always insisted upon talking about them when we were together. He was
telling me what a big mistake I was making in giving up my job and
getting myself generally ridiculed. But I was used to such talk, and let
him talk on. I glanced up into the sky and saw a silvery disk moving
southeastward along the mountain rim.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I immediately
called Don's attention to it. He dropped his tools and stared and
immediately began demanding to know what it was. "Why does it behave
that way?" "How can it hang in the air like that?" I didn't reply to any
of his questions.

Suddenly, it too just disappeared. Poor Don stared at me incredulous and
bewildered. He admitted its flight characteristics were like nothing he
had ever seen or heard of; yet he would not fully go along with the
flying saucer explanation. Actually, he could not quite believe his own
eyes. Thus seeing is not always believing. For I have seen other persons
actually see a saucer and refuse to believe the evidence of their own
sight.

It was during August that many of the strange events included in this
chapter occurred. It was also in August that a revealing press release
came through International News Service which recalled to my mind those
cases of the airplanes which mysteriously vanished in thin air. The news
item follows:

PLANES SEEN OVER ARCTIC

Washington, Aug. 1 (INS). An Air Force spokesman disclosed today that
roughly twelve unidentified airplanes have penetrated the U. S. defense
perimeter in the Arctic within the last year.

The spokesman said that the "invaders" were not identified as Russian so
no protests could be made to Soviet authorities.

Some of the planes were tracked on radarscopes while others were seen to
give off white vapor

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

streaks. But before U. S. fighter pilots could give chase, they would
mysteriously disappear out of radar range, the spokesman said.

He asserted that the "raiders" crossed the edge of the U. S. radar
perimeter in Greenland and Alaska, but added they also flew elsewhere
over the North American continent.

The Air Force has given pilots strict orders not to fire upon any
unidentified plane unless a "hostile" act has been committed or is about
to be, such as a bomber flying over U. S. territory with its bomb-bay
doors open.

Could it be that those mysterious "disappearing airplanes" I had seen
had penetrated the U. S. defense perimeter in the Arctic?

On the following day a counter-release came through International News
Service. This counter-release negated all of the information given out
in the first release.

These contradictory reports followed an already definitely established
pattern. Official news releases of a mystifying nature concerning the
saucers are invariably followed up by counter releases or actual
retractions of previous statements.

As irritating and confusing as such contradictory reports are to the
public, nevertheless this method of handling UFO information by the
authorities is best for everyone concerned. For with a little thought,
it is clear that such mystifying news stories without an official damper
placed upon them immediately, might easily flare up into a nationwide

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

conflagration of panic and hysteria. Official headquarters would be
snowed under with avalanches of telegrams, letters, phone calls and
personal inquiries. Thus only further confusion would result.

The story of the extra-terrestrials is one that no one can or will ever
be able to finish with any degree of finality. It is my sincere personal
belief that the Air Force and other responsible offices have responded
to and handled the problems of space visitors precisely as those
visitors have anticipated and desired them to do. As more and more
thinking persons realize this significant fact, we will be prepared for
greater revelations to come.

Perhaps it would be well to state here that in the cases of disappearing
aircraft I do not believe the .ships dematerialize or dissolve into
nothingness, as it would appear. Being composed primarily of a
crystalline substance the ships may give the illusion of complete
transparency or, if so controlled, they can be rendered entirely opaque.
Thus, also, they can manifest any color or combination of colors,
depending upon the energy employed and its control on the molecular
substance of the crystal body.

It is no problem for the crystal disks to project visual images of
ordinary aircraft and similarly to produce the auditory vibrations of
aircraft engines. These projections may be easily picked up on a radar
screen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Flying Saucer Convention In Hollywood](sos09)
