[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sos12)  [Next](sos14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0007EHL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Saucers*, by Orfeo M. Angelucci, \[1955\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### CHAPTER XI

### I HAVE A VISION

Hundreds of volumes could never put into words all that has transpired
in my life and states of consciousness within the last two years. The
enthrallment, the divine ecstacy and the joyous rhapsody of breaking the
chains of matter and mortal mind cannot be even dimly imagined. Yet in
our sad world of pain and woe one must pay with anguish in equal degree
for each upward step. Hence, I tell you in all truth that the vast
majority would cringe from facing the bitter sufferings and trials that
have been my lot in this and previous lives before I attained the
revelation of the infinite majesty of reality.

Today I can see in the higher octaves of light and hence understand the
unreality of all my sufferings. All that I endured was the illusion of
pain superinduced by the limited vision of my material mind in those
periods when the supposed suffering occurred. It is perfectly clear to
me now that physical pain, mental anguish, material obstructions,
defeats, disease, adversaries and adversities exist only within limited
material consciousness. My sufferings seem to be real in the erroneous
three-dimensional physical plane of existence and within the time
dimension. But in the light of the truth of my eternal self, the
supposed suffering is in reality non-existent.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

To many people what I have just said may sound like an absurd paradox,
but thousands of others will understand my meaning, for they themselves
have been through this evolutionary process in varying degrees. As one
emerges into the truth of spirit from false material consciousness an
entire new concept of materiality is attained. Increasing numbers of
persons will go through some stages of this understanding within the
next few years, for material adversity in all of its many aspects will
be stepped up to a considerable degree. We are at the beginning of the
Days of Sorrow!

Today it rained again in Los Angeles. Water is flowing in the bed of the
Los Angeles River. In the late afternoon the sky began clearing. As
evening was coming on I walked down to the river, stood on the bridge
and looked over the concrete guard rail.

I looked down upon the spot where I had sat at Neptune's feet. A great
wave of emotion swept over me shaking me to the innermost depths of my
being. "Ah, Neptune," I thought, "do you, too, feel the poignant tragedy
of Earth when you set foot upon this ground?"

As in a dream then I heard a gentle voice saying: "Consider Earth's
solar system and the many other solar systems throughout the universe.
Are not the planetary units of these solar systems the true archetypes
of the flying disks? The disks, like the planets, are round, suspended
in ether, propelled by ether waves and magnetic light from system to
system.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

"Many of the entities of the various worlds throughout the cosmos have
discovered the basic principles of the universe and hence have been
enabled to travel in the various solar systems. Their actions and
thoughts are in perfect harmony and full accord with the laws of the
cosmos. They respect the rights of all worlds and of all individuals
everywhere. But most of all do they respect and act in perfect harmony
with the infinite mind in which they live and move and have their being.

"Speak to all you see, Orfeo. Tell them of the undiscovered wonders of
the material universe and of the infinitely greater wonders beyond. You
will speak with the truth of harmonious love, which is the only real
authority. In reality, all is light; eternal light throughout space, the
reverse of the testimony of the material mind. Within the spiritual
universe only the points behind the planets give the illusion of
darkness where a mere trifle of light is occulted by the body of the
planet. But in reality darkness is only an illusion created by the false
thoughts of material consciousness. All who come out of the illusion of
darkness into the light will never again be lost in the illusion.
Throughout the universe entities wait eagerly to aid your brothers of
Earth, but the choice is up to each individual, for every mortal being
has been equally endowed with free will. You, Orfeo, have walked through
the valley of the shadow of death and emerged into eternal light. Help
others to do likewise."

For a while then there was silence as inexpressible

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

thoughts and emotions flooded my consciousness. At last the voice
continued: "Behold, two thousand years are rolled back tonight before
your eyes."

As I listened to the incredibly beautiful voice, my eyes were upon a
revolving aircraft beacon light on a nearby hill. While I watched, the
red and green of the beacon light resolved into a soft amber color and
the amber flame in turn became a shining sword. Slowly the sword was
transfigured into a cross and upon it I saw the figure of a Man in
death.

While I watched spellbound, He awakened and looked down from the cross
upon me. His face broke into a radiant smile, and with no effort at all
He stepped down from the cross and walked toward me in shining beauty. I
looked again at the cross and it was only a shadow that splintered into
nothingness.

As He walked toward me I heard a tremendous chorus of voices singing
joyous music, and floods of happiness overflowed my heart.

I looked again and He was standing just beyond the wall of the bridge. I
beheld Him more clearly than the light of day, yet in no detail, as when
one looks upon the sun and beholds only radiance.

I heard His voice inquiring gently: "What is your name?"

I replied: "Matthew." But even as I spoke I corrected myself mentally.
Matthew was my middle name.

He said: "You chose that name yourself when you

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

were a small child. You wanted no other name but that one. Do you
remember?"

I nodded my head, for I did indeed remember.

And then I heard him say: "But Matthew was a publican. And were you not
as a publican before May 23, 1952?"

I bowed my head in shame before Him, for I realized that I was indeed as
a publican and perhaps even worse.

In a voice filled with infinite tenderness then, He said: "Do not be
ashamed, Orfeo. Don't you remember I always chose the publicans and
harlots over self-righteous hypocrites?"

Veils were dropping from my eyes and I was remembering details of a life
lived many lives ago back in Time. I hid my face from His sight and
tears of shame and remorse blinded my sight.

"Do not weep, Orfeo," He said gently. "That is all in the past now. But
I am with you today even as I was with you then. Tell mankind that I
live and love them today even as I did two thousand years ago when I
walked the shores of [Galilee](errata.htm#15). But tell men that to know
me today when soon I shall again appear publicly upon Earth they must
find me first within their own hearts."

He paused and my eyes could no longer bear to look upon the radiance of
His beauty. And then he said: "Remember, Orfeo, wherein it was revealed
to you not long ago that beings from other worlds now walk upon the
Earth. Each is a double of the other and they have of their own free
will entered

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

the valley of sorrows that is Earth, to help mankind. One moderates
another when too little is accomplished or when certain limits are
exceeded. No man upon Earth shall know them except the ones to whom they
reveal themselves. And who publicly claims to be one, is not at all.
Only by their fruits may they be known. This is the beginning of the
mysteries of the New Age."

Slowly then, the shining vision before me faded until He was no longer
there. Only a soft shining green light remained pervading the
atmosphere. I stood for a long while in silence as the heart of creation
enfolded me in infinite peace.

At last, I was just turning to go home when I heard a familiar voice
call to me: "Orfeo, what are you thinking?"

I turned and saw Neptune standing on the banks of the river, close to
the spot where we had sat some eighteen months before.

As I tried to collect my thoughts, I replied: "Don't you know what I'm
thinking, Neptune? Or am I lost to you now?"

"No, Orfeo, you shall never be lost to me," he answered. "But there are
sublime moments when no one may penetrate another's world of thought. Or
perhaps I should say that those who would do so are not able, and those
who could would under no circumstances do so."

"I understand, Neptune," I said. "The ultimates are for all, but in
moments of realization one becomes a universe within himself and hence
is protected

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

by the powers of the cosmos. You then are as we and we are as you,
children together in the Father's infinite worlds of manifestation."
When I had finished speaking, I was surprised at my own words. It did
not seem possible that I could be saying such things to Neptune. And yet
I had said them and he was smiling at me as though my thoughts were his
very own.

But as I looked at him he vanished from my sight. And suddenly I felt
alone and very small and insignificant. I ran along the bridge to the
pathway leading down to the spot where Neptune had been standing. He was
nowhere to be seen; but in the archway of the bridge I saw again the
softly glowing outlines of a flying disk.

The door of the saucer was open and while I was wondering whether or not
to enter, a woman appeared in the entrance. It was Lyra, more
exquisitely beautiful than I had remembered her. Smiling at me she
stepped from the craft and it seemed that the blades of grass trembled
mysteriously and the wind stirred, vibrant with strange music that was
barely audible. All of nature seemed to stir as though touched by a
caressing hand. She walked slowly toward me and her shining white gown
fairly scintillated as though in protest to the dense, irrational
atmosphere of Earth. All of the infinite love for man in his Christly
potential which I was feeling at that moment, was blissfully culminated
in the wonder of her presence. She who encompassed all

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

love, all compassion and all understanding and whose radiant eyes were a
benediction.

When she was closer to me I saw that her gown shimmered like restlessly
drifting moonbeams, just as had Neptune's darker uniform here in our
dense atmosphere. In her hand she was holding a glass which she held out
to me saying: "Drink from this glass, Orfeo, and your normal
consciousness shall return. You will then be an equal with your own
fellows and able to show them the way."

Uncertainly, I took the crystal goblet from her, but I dreaded to drink
from it, for I feared that she and Neptune and all the world might
recede forever from me.

She smiled again and a soft golden light enfolded her just as in her
world. "Everything we have done with you both in your world and in ours
has been adequately moderated. Hence all that you experienced in the
higher worlds has been compensated to a similar degree in the lower.
Thus be neither glad nor sorry for all that has thus far been granted to
you. Remember, love is understanding and understanding is love
throughout the universe. Hence love is the constant of all worlds. By
love I mean only selfless love and not the carnality which is often
mistaken here on Earth for love. Love is infinite freedom. Drink from
this glass and know peace again within yourself."

Slowly I raised the glass to my lips and drank. When I had finished, I
let the glass fall to the ground, but heard no sound of it. The drink
seemed

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

to clear my head and to give me a feeling of strength and normalcy. Lyra
had not faded as I feared she might. Rather she appeared to be more real
than ever before.

"We must go now, Orfeo," she said gently.

Her words greatly saddened me for I dreaded to think of her leaving me.
But only for a moment, for I immediately realized none of them would
ever in reality leave me again. Slowly, I said: "I understand what you
meant about the drink, Lyra. For now I feel that I am at home again upon
Earth as I used to be. I shall never forget you, Lyra, for I am a part
of you and Neptune and Orion and your world, even as you are a part of
me. I know now there is no death other than that which men upon Earth
call life. Also, I know there is no evil act in the world which cannot
be atoned. Lyra, you shall be with me always."

With those words I bowed my head and when I looked again she was gone as
though she had simply faded into nothingness. Only an exquisite
fragrance was left permeating the air as if bowers of invisible flowers
were everywhere.

When I thought to look for the outline of the saucer under the arch of
the bridge, it was no longer there. I stood for a time in the soft
reflected light of the evening, at peace with myself and all things.
Although they were gone, I no longer felt alone, for in reality I knew I
could never be alone again in this life or any life to come.

I turned and walked home. When I opened the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

front door I felt a tremendous wave of warmth and peace that awaited me
in my own house. The boys were busy with some magazines and Mabel was
sitting in a rocker sewing buttons on one of my shirts. When I came in
she looked up and smiled and for the first time in months I seemed to
see her clearly for the wonderful person she is. With the light from a
floor lamp falling on her hair and in her simple dress she looked like a
Botticelli madonna. Within her I beheld all the mystery and wonder of
womanhood: she was like a reflection of Lyra, the highest potential of
feminine evolution.

"We've missed you, Orfie," Mabel said. "Where have you been?"

"Oh, just down by the river, Mae," I replied as I kissed her more
tenderly than I had in months.

She rewarded me with a smile as she said: "It's so good to have you home
again."

Her words increasing my feeling of peace and serenity, for I was home
again. Lyra and Neptune had indeed given me back to my family.

I walked over and turned on the radio for news. Busy, eager voices were
enthusiastically staccatoing the latest horrors of the terrible
devastation of the recent H-Bomb test. News of the tremendous discovery
of a hideous nerve gas, a pint of which would kill an entire city of
people. Earthquakes. The rumble of war in Indo-China and other danger
spots. Unrest. Anxiety. Murders. Suicides. Fear. More reports of the
subtle evil forces insidiously at work here among us weaving their own
devious webs of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

deception and obstruction. Man against man to the bitter end! Oh God,
how long, I thought. How long before the compassionate Earth shudders in
revulsion—shaking the stars!

As I switched off the radio I realized more than ever how much work
there is to be done. In reality this age of discord and stark
materialism is already in the past and we have entered into the New Age.
Many spiritually awakened persons today are well aware of the true state
of affairs. To all of these men and women of honest heart and sincerity
of purpose and to all of those in past ages who have worked against
fearful and bitter odds for the good of man and the betterment of his
lot upon Earth I have dedicated my life.

Now is the hour! The great promise of the golden dawn is breaking. The
light of its revelations is imminent in religion, medicine, scientific
research and all other fields of human endeavor. Fulfillment of the
great promise of the ages is at hand. Space visitors are the harbingers
of dawn upon Earth.

Mistakes shall occur, but we shall correct them. When war, tribulation
and cataclysm come, even these shall quickly pass. For the rainbow of
eternal promise is now in the heavens. The shining hosts of the great
brotherhood of the spiritual federation of the universe are waiting to
receive us into their midst and to let us know them as they really are.
The highest flights of our imagination and air wildest dreams cannot
compare with the wonderful world of reality that lies ahead in Time for
us.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

The universe is you—and you are the universe. The infinite numbers of
entities in God's mansions in the cosmos are essentially as you and I as
we are and have ever been in true spiritual reality. If we will but
waken from our dark dreams of death they will lavish life and beauty
upon us. Thus choose for yourself. There is no in-between road today. We
have come to the dividing of the way and it is now one path or the other
for every entity upon Earth and its adjoining planes of manifestation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. How to Know A Flying Saucer](sos14)
