[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](roli14)  [Next](roli16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LUISEÑO CREATION.

Third Version. <span id="fr_153"></span>[138](#fn_148)—By Salvador
Cuevas.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Everything in the beginning was empty and quiet. Kivish Atakvish <span
id="fr_154"></span>[139](#fn_149)  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[140](#fn_150) was the only being.

Next came Whaikut Piwkut <span id="fr_156"></span>[141](#fn_151)
(whitish gray, unexplained).

Whaikut Piwkut created two objects like great round balls called
Maikumkush <span id="fr_157"></span>[142](#fn_152) (meaning, something
round, not having an end).

They lay there three days and then were made alive, brought into being,
after which they recognized each other. They were called Soimal-um <span
id="fr_158"></span>[143](#fn_153) (-um being the plural ending). They
were male and female. Whaikut Piwkut, being the father of these two,
left them and was no more seen.

The two children (created beings) remained there. When they were by
themselves, they quarreled: "I am older than you." "No, I am older than
you." Each could read the thoughts of the other and this contention
continued. The female being said that she was the older. She was Kivish
Atakvish. The male began describing the color of the sky, by this to
prove his earlier existence. "See, I am older than you." She got a stone
smoking pipe, chahal, <span id="fr_159"></span>[144](#fn_154) and showed
it to prove herself the first. He got three kinds of pipes, kalulmul,
nyatlumul, and chetmul, <span id="fr_160"></span>[145](#fn_155) and held
them up, and thus he silenced her and won (in this contention). Then
with sighs (guttural breathings used in solemnities), he made her sleep,
and after this she knew that she was to be a mother. He was ashamed of
his deed, and went up in the sky (*i.e.*, became the sky). He was
Tukmit, <span id="fr_161"></span>[146](#fn_156) the Sky.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

When she found she was to bring forth, she was making ready. She made
the same sort of sighing groans and thereby created a small piece of
land. There was no land until then.

Then the first born of her children, the First People, came forth in the
following order.

1\. *Topal Tamyush*. <span id="fr_162"></span>[147](#fn_157) Double
name. Topal, ordinary stone grinding mortar; tamyush, sacred toloache
bowls of stone; but in this sense tamyush is like an adjective
qualifying topal. Museums should classify the stone bowls more
carefully, differentiating between the two sorts where possible.

2\. *Kenhut Paviut*. <span id="fr_163"></span>[148](#fn_158) Double
name. Kenhut, strings of wampum-like beads used for money; paviut,
sacred stone knife larger than an arrowhead set on the end of a staff
for ceremonial purposes. Both of these objects were used as money, that
is, carried from one village to the other to pay for the services of
those performing the ceremonies. When two words are connected thus in a
double term, there is always some such similarity of use, meaning, or
purpose. This is a very remarkable peculiarity, more metaphysical than
linguistic.

3\. *Hunwut Ashwut*. <span id="fr_164"></span>[149](#fn_159) Hunwut,
bear; ashwut, eagle. The connection is that both belong to Chungichnish.

These above named were those of the First People who were afterwards
sent north, excepting the two latter, which the informant evidently
transposed from their proper place, and instead of them there should
come here in third position:

4\. *Kimul Chehenish*. <span id="fr_165"></span>[150](#fn_160) Kimul is
the mast with baskets hung on top in the Notish ceremony for the dead.
The pole is climbed as a contest of skill. If no one can get the
baskets, they dig about the pole to make it fall. When the kimul is set
up, they sing songs for the dead and dance. They have this ceremony in
the north. They never had it here in the mountains. Chehenish is the
pole before it is painted and hung with baskets.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

5\. *Mahul Kwichal*. <span id="fr_166"></span>[151](#fn_161) Mahul, palm
tree; kwichal, Spanish bayonet, yucca. These were sent East.

6\. *Tukvul Wekunla*. <span id="fr_167"></span>[152](#fn_162) Tukvul,
carrying net; wekunla, sort of carrying sack. These were sent South.

7\. *Somal Kachamul*. Meaning unknown. Sent South.

8\. *Makwit Awiwunowut*. <span id="fr_168"></span>[153](#fn_163) Makwit,
wild grape; awiwunowut, clematis. Sent to the center.

9\. *Paulovla Tovolwish*. <span id="fr_169"></span>[154](#fn_164) These
were sent East. Paulovla is a tall painted mast in the middle of the
sacred inclosure used by the Indians in the East, who got it from the
First People. Tovolwish means the color of this painted post.

10\. *Uutish Kahankish*. Uutish, tree that grows in the East; kahankish,
unknown. Sent East.

11\. *Pauhut Abahut*. <span id="fr_170"></span>[155](#fn_165) Pauhut,
canoe (also a box hollowed out of a log to keep things in); abahut,
cottonwood tree out of which it is made. Sent West.

12\. *Pevesish Hoyowish*. <span id="fr_171"></span>[156](#fn_166)
Pevesish, tule; hoyowish, cat-tail rush. Sent West.

13\. *Sanut Tanahut*. <span id="fr_172"></span>[157](#fn_167) Sanut,
black asphalt on the seashore; tanahut, sea-weed. Sent West.

14\. *Yuamul Tovoymul*. <span id="fr_173"></span>[158](#fn_168) Yuamul,
pine tree; tovoymul, cedar. Sent to the center, *i.e.*, where "we" live,
the Mountain Indians.

15\. *Kwila Sukut*. <span id="fr_174"></span>[159](#fn_169) Kwila, oak
with edible acorns; sukut, deer (both used for food). Sent to the
center.

And here should probably come *Hunut Ashwut*, in the center instead of
to the North.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

(Here belongs the song sung by Tomaiyowit, the Earth-mother, to make the
land larger for her children, as previously given in the description of
phonograph record 405.)

The Earth-mother sent these first-born of her children to the North,
South, East, West, and Center. After this everything else was brought
forth. The sun came forth at the same time, and as he was there among
all the rest of the people, he gave so much light and heat that he
nearly killed them all. It would be better to send him away. So they
sent him to the east, and in three days he rose in the east. All things
were now prepared. Before this all had been confusion and disturbance,
but now Tomaiyowit lay back outstretched, her feet to the north, her
head to the south, her right hand to the east, her left hand to the
west, and everything became quiet. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[160](#fn_170)

This ends the first part of the Creation Story. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[161](#fn_171)

The Earth-mother, when she sent her children to all the four quarters of
the world, made feathers for them to wear on their heads. The chief men,
the best, quickest and bravest in battle, used to wear them on a long
stick high on their heads, and the others wore them close to the head.

While the people were traveling along, carrying arrows, they would stop
at a pond to play and swim about. Ouiot was traveling along with the
rest and they did not know anything especial about him. He was like one
of the rest.

Wahawut <span id="fr_177"></span>[162](#fn_172) was a handsome
fine-looking woman, with long hair. When she jumped into the water,
Ouiot was surprised to see that behind she had no flesh on her body, but
was flat and thin. He said nothing but was thinking about it. Wahawut
could read his thoughts, and made her plans to kill him. Soon he fell
sick.

Ouiot got sick and said he wanted to see his sons. At this time he acted
to the people like a father. Before this he had only

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

been a person like the others. Now he called for his sons (the First
People) from the north to come and see him, and they all tried to cure
him. They were like witches then, and could tell by looking at him what
was the matter; and they all tried their best to cure him, but could
give no help, so they went back north. In the same way the people came
in turn from the south, east, west, and center, but could do nothing.
Tishmel <span id="fr_178"></span>[163](#fn_173) the hummingbird was an
important person then and he went to see if he could find out what was
the matter. Sakapipi, <span id="fr_179"></span>[164](#fn_174) who is now
a tiny bird, got up and put his ear to Ouiot's heart so that he could
hear his breathing, and then he said it was Wahawut who was working to
kill him by witchcraft.

Then the people found out that it was Wahawut who was doing this; but
she had gone down into the mud and water and never was seen. Since she
began to work against Ouiot she stayed there. (No. This is not the place
in the story to explain that she was the frog, for she was a person
then. They were all people at that time.)

Ouiot told them that he would not live much longer. "I think I shall die
soon," he said, and he mentioned the names of all the months, and each
month they waited until the time was up. "I may die in this month."

When Ouiot was sick, he told his people to take him to the hot spring at
Pawi Chawimai <span id="fr_180"></span>[165](#fn_175) (Cahuilla), and
they took him there, and he bathed in the waters, but did not get any
better. On the contrary he grew worse and worse. Then they took him to
Kupa Kawima <span id="fr_181"></span>[166](#fn_176) (Agua Caliente,
Warner's Ranch Hot Springs), then to Paska Mahala, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[167](#fn_177) a little further on, then to Pauma,
near Pala. When there he died but revived again. They got ready to burn
his body, making use of the same sticks with which they clubbed Coyote.
When he revived again, they took him to Malama Ekapa <span
id="fr_183"></span>[168](#fn_178) (Agua Tibia), trying all these hot
springs to cure him, but

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

they did no good. Then they took him to Cherukanukna Jaquiwuna, <span
id="fr_184"></span>[169](#fn_179) near Temecula, to the hot spring
there. <span id="fr_185"></span>[170](#fn_180) Then to Etengvo
Wumoma, <span id="fr_186"></span>[171](#fn_181) hot springs at Elsinore,
and this was the last place, for he died there. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[172](#fn_182)

Before Ouiot died he told Chehemal (the kingbird now) <span
id="fr_188"></span>[173](#fn_183) that he was going to die, but he said
he would come back, and told him that in three days he would rise in the
east. <span id="fr_189"></span>[174](#fn_184) Kauki Chahiwul, <span
id="fr_190"></span>[175](#fn_185) something gone that comes again.
Ovaweleva, something that will come back, disappears and returns.

He died in the season Soimamul mokat. When he died the people wanted to
burn his body, and they sent Coyote to the north to the people there to
see if he could get fire; but he only went a little way and came back.
Then they sent him to the people of the east, Uutish Kahankish, and so
on, and in the same way to the people of the west, the south, and the
center. Each time he went a little further off, and while he was gone
Sariwut, <span id="fr_191"></span>[176](#fn_186) the bluefly, made the
fire with the fire-drill. <span id="fr_192"></span>[177](#fn_187) Then
Coyote came running back yelling and saying: "Why do you play such a
trick on me? I want to see my father."

The people all stood around the fire where only the heart was left
unburned, and Coyote starting a little way back took a running jump over
their heads. Wiskun, now a tiny squirrel, the chipmunk, was the
strongest man then, and he had gone and brought a log ten men could not
lift. Ouiot was laid on it. All the body was burned but the bones, after
Coyote got the heart. <span id="fr_193"></span>[178](#fn_188)

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

When the three days were up, Chehemel got on his housetop in the dark
and sang and everyone listened. Meaning of the song: "Ouiot, Ouiot is
coming. He is coming. I am watching for him, looking to the east. Ouiot
is coming."

Pretty soon he did come, as the new moon, Moyla achagha. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[179](#fn_189) They could just barely see it, a
little line. Chehemel saw it in the east, but no one else could see it
there. The others saw it in the west.

Before Ouiot died, he told them when they saw him, the new moon, in the
west, they should get together and make races (as an answer to the moon,
giving their spirits to it). If they made these races, and shouted at
this time, they would live longer. (This means that as a part of the
Chungichnish ceremonial, obedience is required, and reward or punishment
promised for that or the reverse, as in all the Chungichnish
instruction.) After this they always made these races. Salvador
remembers them, sixty years or so ago, when he was a boy.

The chief men who had charge of these things would know when the new
moon was expected and would watch for it. Then they would get ready, and
just as soon as the moon appeared one man would start a fire and shout,
and all would come together. They would shout three times, and then all
start together in a straight line, side by side, and run until the
fastest runner got ahead of the others, when he cut across in front of
them, and that was the end of it. There might be from twenty to fifty
who did the running. They made the indescribable guttural invocation to
send their spirits to the moon, and they had to have a fire as they did
in every religious ceremony. The head men always started the fire, and
the long ceremonial pipes they smoked were lighted at it.

At the time Ouiot died he did not talk much, but only told them about
the races they should have. But after he died the people held a council,
and talked it over among themselves to decide what they could do. Some
of the people had gone north, south, east, and west, and some had gone
up in the sky or down in the ground. So they considered what they could
do. Some

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

thought they could do the same as Ouiot, die for a time and then come
back; but they could not do this. Some thought the deer would be good to
eat. They could kill him and have a gathering and have that meat to eat.
They spoke to Deer about it, but he said, No. He was a shaman and very
powerful. He had something in his nose like the black asphalt on the
seashore, <span id="fr_195"></span>[180](#fn_190) and this would protect
him. <span id="fr_196"></span>[181](#fn_191) They gave up killing him
when he said that.

Then they laid on the ground one of the sacred stones, <span
id="fr_197"></span>[182](#fn_192) wiala, enormous crystals, and said
they could kill him with them. But Deer said, No, he had some of that
too, and they could not kill him with them. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[183](#fn_193) Then they laid down one of the
eagle-feather skirts, Pahlut, <span id="fr_199"></span>[184](#fn_194)
and said they could kill him with that. He said, No, he had some of that
too. <span id="fr_200"></span>[185](#fn_195) Then they put down tobacco,
Pivat, and said they could kill him with that. Deer said, No, he had
some of that too, and they could not kill him with that. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[186](#fn_196)

Then they laid down some "wild bamboo," the kind that grows at Warner's
Ranch and they use for arrows, huikish, <span
id="fr_202"></span>[187](#fn_197) and said they could kill him with
that. He showed them that the bones in his nostrils were like that, and
said they could not kill him with it.

Then they laid down arrows already made with flint points fastened to
them; so then he had no more to say. He gave up. So they killed him with
bow and arrows, and ever since the people have used them to kill the
deer; and they skinned him and took the bones of the leg for awls to
make baskets. They gave them to Wahawut,—not the one that killed
Ouiot,—and she made a good-sized basket in which to collect the bones of
Ouiot, and after that they always used the baskets in ceremonies. And
they killed

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

other animals besides the deer. They killed acorns,—they were people
then,—and killed all that they now have to eat. These turned into
animals and seeds, acorns and plants.

Eagle was a big man, a great "hechicero," then, and they told him they
would kill him to have ceremonies. But he said, No, it was not right. He
was a person of importance. When they told Eagle they were going to kill
him, he thought he could get away from them, for he was very wise and
knew a great deal. So he went north, thinking that from there he could
get entirely away from this world, reach its limits and fly away; and he
tried it everywhere, but could not do it. He thought he could live
forever and keep away from death, but there was death, Pikmakvul, <span
id="fr_203"></span>[188](#fn_198) wherever he went. Then he went east
and did the same thing, and south and west the same, and then he came
home to the center and stayed there. He had to die. There was no death
before this time.

By this time the people's council was concluded. Wahawut had finished
her basket. <span id="fr_204"></span>[189](#fn_199) She had been working
all the while and had lost no time. So they gathered the bones and put
them in the basket to carry them, and they put the bones into a stone
mortar and ground them, and added water and made it into a kind of mush.
When all was well mixed they made a hole in the ground and poured it
into the hole and buried it. The crushed bones were not contained in any
vessel. <span id="fr_205"></span>[190](#fn_200) They made the solemn
guttural invocation with waving motions to the north and all the other
points of the compass, to send Ouiot's spirit up to the sky; and since
then the people do the same thing when they have the ceremonies for the
dead. <span id="fr_206"></span>[191](#fn_201)

When the people scattered from the place where Ouiot died, all the
tribes had names, but many are dead and few living. He

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

does not know the name of this tribe. These Indians (the Luiseños) are
called by themselves Western Indians. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[192](#fn_202) When they scattered, the people
traveled about, two or three families together, and they claimed the
places where they stopped for a time, <span
id="fr_208"></span>[193](#fn_203) and a great deal of fighting came from
this. Other groups coming after would occupy the land claimed by the
first. The La Jolla people would fight the Potrero people. A man could
not go from La Jolla to San Jacinto without being killed by some enemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[128:138](roli15.htm#fr_153) Two versions, of
the Luiseño creation myth, one a fragment, have been published. Journ.
Am. Folk-Lore, XIX, 145, 1906. See also *ibid*., 310. The two versions
herewith given, which are probably more primitive and more complete,
were related by Salvador Cuevas and Lucario Cuevish, aged Indians of La
Jolla and Potrero in the mountains.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[129:139](roli15.htm#fr_154) Luiseño religious
terms are double, made of two words, each with a different meaning
supplementing and reinforcing each other—a very marked peculiarity.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[129:140](roli15.htm#fr_155) Kyuvish, empty,
solitary, unoccupied; also a noun, as in po-up auma kyuvi-nga, he lives
in solitude. Ataxvish (x German ch), empty. Kyuvish Ataxvish, used
together, mean some thing like the empty, solitary, unoccupied place,
and are used in speaking of before the world was created. Kyuvish
Ataxvish is also spoken of as a person who made Tamayowut, the first
woman, and Tukomit, the first man.—S.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[129:141](roli15.htm#fr_156) From whaiahat,
white, piwahat, whitish, grayish.—S.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[129:142](roli15.htm#fr_157) Makumkush,
round.—S.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[129:143](roli15.htm#fr_158) Saimalum. Some say
these were a man and a woman born from two eggs made by Whaikut Piwkut;
others deny this.—S.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[129:144](roli15.htm#fr_159) Hahal, stone pipe.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[129:145](roli15.htm#fr_160) Kalulmal,
ngatlamal, chetmal. There is only one man who knows of these words.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[129:146](roli15.htm#fr_161) Tukomit, night,
also the first man, made by Kyuvish Ataxvish; tupash is sky.—S.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[130:147](roli15.htm#fr_162) Topal, tamyush.—S.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[130:148](roli15.htm#fr_163) Kenghut, a string
of shells or bear-claws; paviut, stick with a crystal in one end, used
in ceremonies.—S.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[130:149](roli15.htm#fr_164) Hunwut, ashwut.—S.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[130:150](roli15.htm#fr_165) Kimal, small
house; chehenish, the objects hung on kutumit, the pole erected at the
notush ceremony; probably a derivative from chehe'i, to appear, show.—S.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[131:151](roli15.htm#fr_166) Mahul, palm;
kwichal, unknown; the species of yucca growing in the San Luis Rey
valley are called panal and hunuvut.—S.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[131:152](roli15.htm#fr_167) Tukval is
sea-otter; the carrying net is called ikut; wekunla, network sack with
very fine mesh.—S.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[131:153](roli15.htm#fr_168) Makwit, wild
grape-vine; awiwanawut, clematis.—S.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[131:154](roli15.htm#fr_169) Paulovla, (?);
tovolvush or tovolovahat, adjective meaning of different colors.—S.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[131:155](roli15.htm#fr_170) Pauhit, yellow
pine, also dug-out canoe; avahut, cottonwood tree. It is said that the
feathers of San Luis Rey were kept in a canoe found on the beach and
considered sacred.—S.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[131:156](roli15.htm#fr_171) Pevesash, tule;
hoyawish, species of rush.—S.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[131:157](roli15.htm#fr_172) Shanut, asphalt,
gum; tanahut, sea-weed.—S.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[131:158](roli15.htm#fr_173) Yuila, species of
pine, tovut, cedar; yuimal and tovomal are diminutives.—S.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[131:159](roli15.htm#fr_174) Kwila, *Quercus
californica;* shukut, deer.—S.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[132:160](roli15.htm#fr_175) This is why all
ceremonies are performed facing the north. Cf. the drawing by a Luiseño
in Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XIX, 312, 1906.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[132:161](roli15.htm#fr_176) Another old Indian
story teller here appeared on the scene and some tact was necessary to
manage the situation. It was feared that Salvador might object to the
presence of a rival; but when asked if he were willing to continue his
recitation he smiled and said that there need be no jealousy as he told
nothing but the truth. So he continued.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[132:162](roli15.htm#fr_177) Wahawut, frog, an
ugly woman that bewitched and killed Wiyot.—S.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[133:163](roli15.htm#fr_178) Tushmal.—S.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[133:164](roli15.htm#fr_179) Sakapepi,
titmouse, who found out who had killed Wiyot.—S.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[133:165](roli15.htm#fr_180) Cf. notes 84 and
120.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[133:166](roli15.htm#fr_181) Cf. notes 85 and
120.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[133:167](roli15.htm#fr_182) Paskwa, San José,
on upper San Luis river, given in this series of publications, II, 148,
as in Diegueño territory.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[133:168](roli15.htm#fr_183) Malamai, Agua
Tibia.—S.; *ibid*., this series, II, 147.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[134:169](roli15.htm#fr_184) Cheruka, locative
Cherukanga, large rock near Potrero; also one near Temecula.—S.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[134:170](roli15.htm#fr_185) A few miles the
other side of the railroad station near Murietta.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[134:171](roli15.htm#fr_186) Etengvo;
Mumoma.—S.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[134:172](roli15.htm#fr_187) The names of all
these places are mentioned in the Ouiot songs.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[134:173](roli15.htm#fr_188) Chehemal, kingbird
or bee martin.—S. Given in Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XIX, 313, 1906, as
chekhemal, a bird, possibly the meadowlark.—Ed.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[134:174](roli15.htm#fr_189) Perhaps a trace of
Christian influence.—But compare the incident in *ibid*.—Ed.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[134:175](roli15.htm#fr_190) Kauki chehevo,
said to be the name of a place.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[134:176](roli15.htm#fr_191) Shariwut,
blowfly.—S.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[134:177](roli15.htm#fr_192) Albañas,
commenting on Salvador's story, says that the idea of the fire being
started by Bluefly with the whirling-stick came to these Indians from
some other source, he thinks from the north. Juan de Dios gives the
Bluefly as originator of the fire. Albañas in his version leaves it in
doubt as to where it came from, but he evidently approves Lucario's
statement that it was Glow-worm who had the fire.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[134:178](roli15.htm#fr_193) Coyote jumped over
the heads of the people into the fire to seize the heart of Ouiot, which
he ate.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[135:179](roli15.htm#fr_194) Moila, moon;
achohax (x German ch), adjective, born; achohahup moila, it is born
moon, there is a new moon.—S.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[136:180](roli15.htm#fr_195) Sacred as a
Chungichnish object, and one of the First People.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[136:181](roli15.htm#fr_196) The shiny black on
the deer's nose is like that.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[136:182](roli15.htm#fr_197) Two of these
stones I have seen are of white crystalline rock in round shape ten
inches or so in diameter, others of clear quartz (?) crystal, ten inches
long.—Wiyala, rock crystals.—S.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[136:183](roli15.htm#fr_198) The white fat of
the deer looks like that.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[136:184](roli15.htm#fr_199) Pa’lut.—S.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[136:185](roli15.htm#fr_200) The deer's
entrails are like that.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[136:186](roli15.htm#fr_201) There is some
bushy hair on the deer's hind leg near the joint that smells like
tobacco.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[136:187](roli15.htm#fr_202) Huikish, *Elymus
condensatus*, from which arrows are made.—S.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[137:188](roli15.htm#fr_203) Cf. *ante*, under
"Ceremonial Songs," records number 391 and 410.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[137:189](roli15.htm#fr_204) Note the different
statements in each story as to who was the first basket-maker, showing a
possible family descent in stories, as is the case in songs.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[137:190](roli15.htm#fr_205) I have not found
among the Luiseños any allusion to the burial ollas for containing the
bones and ashes of the cremated body so common among the Diegueños.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[137:191](roli15.htm#fr_206) In former times
they burned the bodies of the dead. Salvador, seventy-five years old,
never saw this, but his grandfather did. They burned the bodies in a
certain place, digging holes in which they made the fire and burying the
ashes in the same place.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[138:192](roli15.htm#fr_207) It is remarkable
that the Diegueños as far south as Manzanita also use this name in their
language for themselves.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[138:193](roli15.htm#fr_208) See the account of
the munival, or songs of landmarks, below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luiseño Creation: Fourth Version](roli16)
