[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](roli13)  [Next](roli15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

## MYTHS.

It is a noticeable fact, and one not unimportant scientifically, that
each old man discredits the stories and authority of the other. Cinon
Duro of Mesa Grande, Diegueño, who has lately died, was the last of the
hereditary chiefs. Juan de Dios of La Jolla, Luiseño, if not partly
demented by age, would be an authority, as he used to be leader of
ceremonies in his pueblo. Apolonio of Rincon is still leader of
ceremonies, and a devoted adherent of the old religion. Salvador Cuevas
still leads ceremonies, but more from lack of any better authority than
from his own ability to do so. He claims to know everything, having
learned from the old men the things that were still in force when he was
a boy. There is no doubt that he is one of the few authorities now
living. At the same time, the disuse of things once vital, now mere
memories, renders it uncertain how valid are the claims of each when
they conflict. Salvador says that Jose Albañas knows nothing. The
admirers of Albans doubt Salvador's memory. Lucario Cuevish claims that
he is best informed.

The important thing in this connection is that it further illustrates
the strong differentiation of family groups shown also in the hereditary
possession of songs. I have suggested that in the past these divisions
may have been clans of some sort. The stories have also descended in
families with more or less distinctness, not nearly so marked as in the
case of the songs, as no one could claim a story. The tendency to
variation in the myths is, I think, explained by the segregation into
groups, which is the only marked organization of which traces can be
found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luiseño Creation: Third Version](roli15.md)
