[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](roli30)  [Next](roli32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### APPENDIX II.

#### NOTES ON THE LUISEÑOS.

##### By <span class="smallcaps">A. L. Kroeber</span>.

The subjoined information regarding Luiseño beliefs and customs was
given principally by Felix Calac of Rincon, and Pachito, an old man of
Pauma, in 1904. Pachito was born at the old village site by the Pauma
cemetery, not far from the present rancheria of Pauma, and neither he,
his father, nor his grandfather, lived at the San Luis Rey mission.

Besides mourning ceremonies of various kinds—five are mentioned below,
the Luiseño possessed puberty or initiation rites for both boys and
girls. Those for girls have been described as follows: <span
id="fr_327"></span>[310](#fn_321.md)

*Girls’ Puberty Ceremony*.

A fire was made in a hole in the ground. In this tule was placed. The
girls were laid on this on their backs. Two flat stones were heated and
laid on their abdomens. Several girls, generally relatives, were usually
put through the ceremony at once. They were called *as*, and the
ceremony *weghenish*. The ceremony lasted four or five days. A headdress
of a plant called *engwish* <span id="fr_328"></span>[311](#fn_322.md) was
worn by the girls for several months after the ceremony. During this
period they could neither eat meat nor fish. The duration of this
restriction does not seem to have been altogether fixed. The longer it
was observed the better it was thought to be for the girls. In some
cases it is said to have lasted a year. The ceremony was performed in
order to make good women of the girls. They were talked to by their
relatives and advised to be good and to give water and food to people.

The conclusion of the girls’ period of restrictions at puberty was
marked by paintings made by them on the smooth surfaces of large granite
boulders. These paintings, some of which can

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span id="img_fig04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 4.Remains of
red rock-paintings made by girls after weghenish ceremony at Sheva, an
old village site a mile from Rincon.](tn/fig04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig04.jpg.md)  
Fig. 4.—Remains of red rock-paintings made by girls after weghenish
ceremony at Sheva, an old village site a mile from Rincon.  
</span>

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

still be seen, especially near the old village sites, consist of
geometrical arrangements of red lines, usually in patterns forming
vertical stripes several feet high. ([Fig. 4](#img_fig04)..md) After making
her painting, a girl was again free to eat meat and salt. The paintings
were called *yunish*. <span id="fr_329"></span>[312](#fn_323.md)

At one period, apparently at the beginning of the ceremony, the girls
ate tobacco. Several small balls of this, it is said without admixture
of any other substance, were swallowed by them, after which they drank
hot water. If they retained the tobacco they were said to be good; but
if they vomited it, they were regarded as bad.

*Boys’ Puberty Ceremony*.

The initiation or puberty ceremony for boys, like that for girls,
included a test of fortitude. Ants, antum, were put into a hole in the
ground, the boys placed into the hole, and after more ants had been
thrown on them they were covered over and left for a time. Afterwards
they were made to run a race. From the old village site Taghanashpa,
where the Pauma graveyard still is, they would run around the hill which
lies to the northeast, and back again. In connection with the ceremony
the boys were also preached to, and exhorted to be good men, and strong
and enduring runners.

The chief initiation of boys, which is said to have followed the ant
ordeal, was accompanied by the drinking of a decoction of jimsonweed
roots, Spanish toloache. This plant was called mani. The period of
stupefaction lasted two or three days, or sometimes four days, but this
was regarded as too heavy a dose. The boys to be initiated were caught
in the evening and given the drink in the wamgush, the ceremonial
enclosure, the same night. Any adult man who might happen to be
uninitiated on account of having lived elsewhere in his youth, would
also be made to take the drink. The boys were instructed to be good and
kind-hearted and not to steal. For several months after the ceremony
they could eat no meat. If they refrained for a year they were thought
more highly of. After the ceremony the boys were called pumal, plural
pumalum, which is equivalent in meaning to

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "initiate." The
ceremony was called mani paash, toloache-drinking. It was held at
irregular intervals, not annually, according as there were boys of age
to be initiated. The custom is said not to have come from the divinity
Wiyot, but from the tribes of the coast, who in turn derived it from the
San Clemente islanders, who were brought to San Luis Rey mission. The
mountain Luiseño, after learning the ceremony from the coast people,
taught it to other tribes.

The plant was also used as medicine for pain in the body. Its power of
bringing on visions was well known.

A part of the initiation ceremonies were connected with a
ground-painting in the wamgush. The painting was made with red and
yellow paint, paesul and navyot, ashes for white, and charcoal for
black, on the ground which formed the background of the painting. The
entire picture, which was circular and represented the world, was called
torokhoish. ([Fig. 5](#img_fig05).md). The circle was bisected from north
to south and from east to west. At each end of the two diameters were
represented the bear and the rattlesnake. The four radii formed by the
intersecting diameters, and pointing as it were to the cardinal
directions, were called tamaiawot pomo, the hands of the world. Parallel
to the circle on one side, and apparently outside of it, was a
representation of mountains, tota-kolauwot, literally, rock-wood or
stone-timber. This representation may have consisted of no more than a
line. In the two quadrants of the circle farthest away from this
mountain symbol, were placed representations respectively of the raven,
and of the spider called kuikhingish, or the tarantula. In the center of
the circle, where the two diameters intersected, was a hole perhaps a
foot and a half across, called the navel. This is said to have had
reference to death, to have represented the grave, and indicated to the
initiates the fate that would overtake them if they disobeyed. (The
ceremonial feathers of an initiate were buried in this hole after his
death.) The world is thought to be tied at the north, south, east, and
west with hair-ropes, yula-wanaut or yula-wanal. At each of its four
ends is a little hill, khawimal, and a rod or cane, nakhat, to which one
of the four hair ropes is tied. It is not clear whether this is only a
cosmological conception or was also represented in the painting. The
entire torokhoish

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

painting "filled the wamgush," being apparently about twelve or fifteen
feet in diameter. <span id="fr_330"></span>[313](#fn_324.md)

<span id="img_fig05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
5.Sand-painting, torokhoish, representing tamaiawot, the
earth.](tn/fig05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig05.jpg.md)  
Fig. 5.—Sand-painting, torokhoish, representing tamaiawot, the earth.  
</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span class="small">1. Hands (or arms) of the world.<br />
2. Mountain.<br />
3. Spider.<br />
4. Raven.<br />
5. Bear.<br />
6. Rattlesnake.<br />
7. Central hole, navel.</span></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

The raven was represented in the torokhoish painting because he is
thought to see the whole world and to bring good fortune if one obeys
him, but to cause the death of those who do not obey ceremonial
instructions or who refuse to enter ceremonies. When a raven was seen
coming and cawing, "witiak" was said to him.

After having drunk the jimsonweed, and apparently toward the conclusion
of the entire initiation ceremony, the boys rose and stood in a circle
around the sand-painting. The initiated men

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

were with them, and other people looked on from outside. An old man
talked to the boys. He explained the meaning of the picture. He told how
the raven would see everything, and if anyone disobeyed or thought
lightly of the ceremony, the bear and the rattlesnake would kill him.
Whether he went north or south or east or west he would be killed. In
this way the old man instructed the boys.

A short rope made of wish, <span id="fr_331"></span>[314](#fn_325.md) and
called wanawut or wanal, whereas an ordinary rope is wichit, was laid
next to the hole in the center of the painting. The boys went to the
wanaut and, holding their feet together, made three jumps along on it.
Thereupon they spat into the hole, thereby ending the ceremony.

When one of the initiated, the pumalum, dies, the ground-painting is
again made. In the hole in the center are buried his head-dress, cheyat,
and similar articles. At the end of the ceremony the initiates squat in
a circle, with their hands stretched forward, growl or blow three times,
and erase the painting.

When a boy had a bad dream, the initiates brought baskets of seeds and
deposited them in the ceremonial enclosure, where they were divided,
especially among the old people. Thereupon the initiates danced for
three days. If they failed to do this the boy would be bitten by a
rattlesnake and would die. Perhaps this refers to a boy dreaming while
being initiated.

The ceremonial structure or wamgush, the vanquech of Boscana, is an open
enclosure of brush. It is only a few feet high, so that it can be looked
over from the outside. The eastern end is left open. At the north and
south are small gaps used as entrances. A little distance to the east is
a smaller brush enclosure in which the dancers put on their ceremonial
dress. When there is dancing in the wamgush as in the tanish or dancing
in connection with the toloache ceremony, the pumalum or initiated
dancers stand at the western or closed end. A fire is in the middle. The
singers, old men, sit at the open or east end, and behind them are women
who sing. The people who are looking on are behind these. Half of the
dancers proceed from the small enclosure around the southern side of the
wamgush and

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

enter at the north, while the other half pass around the northern end
and enter from the south.

*Mourning Ceremonies*.

Three similar mourning ceremonies, differing in degree of elaborateness,
were practiced, besides the eagle ceremony and the morahash dance. These
three were the tuvish, when the clothes of the dead were washed; the
djudjamish, when his clothes were burned; and the totinish or tautinish,
at which images of the dead were burned and property was distributed.

At the tuvish, the first and simplest of these ceremonies, the clothes
of the dead person were brought to the fire in the ceremonial enclosure
and washed or gone over with water, after which they were kept to be
burned at the djudjamish. There was singing throughout the tuvish, and
at times men or women danced. The men three times emitted a growling or
groaning sound ending in a blowing, and accompanied by the exclamation
"wiau." This was done to prevent the dead spirit from being about.

The djudjamish was apparently held somewhat later, also in the
ceremonial enclosure and at night, and its general course seems to have
been similar to that of the tuvish. Its purpose is described as having
been to sever all connection with the dead and to cause them to be
forgotten. They were told not to remain about, but to go to the sky. If
their clothes were not burned, their ghosts would not depart. At this
ceremony the relatives of the dead wanted to think of them for the last
time.

The tautinish or totinish was prepared for many months before. Women
made baskets, which at the ceremony were burned or thrown among the
spectators. The same was done with other property and with money.
Figures representing the dead were made of tule, dressed in clothing,
and burned. Visitors who attended this ceremony were given money or
property by the people of the place. They were paid also for dancing.
The tautinish ceremony seems to have been held at irregular intervals.
Whenever the chief thought that enough people had died to warrant the
ceremony being held, it was made. A recent ceremony at Pala was made for
twelve persons.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

A tuvish ceremony that was seen, began in the early part of the night.
There was a fire in the ceremonial enclosure. About midnight some of the
people were sitting about inside, but the majority were outside in
groups, talking and not paying attention to what was being done. A man
holding a turtle-shell rattle was leading the singing. Near him sat
several old men, while behind him, on the ground, were several women. At
intervals between songs, one of the old men would speak, for about a
minute at a time, in a ceremonial or oratorical style, in short detached
words. This speaking resembled the declamation which is a characteristic
part of Mohave ceremonies, but was less loud and the words were not so
abruptly uttered. Also as among the Mohave on such occasions, the
content of these speeches was said to have been much the same as the
meaning of the words of the songs. Both the rattling and the singing
were less monotonous than under similar circumstances among the Mohave;
the rattling especially was somewhat varied. All the songs had words.
Once an old woman stood up and danced. She held her feet together and
her knees were somewhat bent, so that her American dress reached the
ground. In consequence it was impossible to determine whether she jumped
from the ground a little at each step of the dance, or whether she only
raised herself on her toes. She held her hands together in front of her.
Most of the time she stretched them out from the wrists, stiffening her
arms. Her eyes were shut. While she danced some of the old men stamped
one foot on the ground, uttering each time a growl or grunt. Usually
several women dance together on this occasion, it was said. After a few
songs the old woman sat down again. The principal singer was about
southeast of the fire. Several other men sat on the opposite side of the
fire. Some of these occasionally accompanied the singing or helped it by
exclamations. The woman who danced stood east of the fire, not far from
the singers. Those in the enclosure smoked freely, and children and dogs
ran about it. The ceremony is said to have continued until about two in
the morning.

The songs sung on occasions such as this, in part name animals, and at
least at times contain references to myths. It was not learned whether
or not they form a connected narrative

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

series. The owl is sung of because the owl's call is a sign that some
one will die. The words of the song mention the bird's call and express
regret. Other songs mention the coyote, a coyote's cry near a house
being an omen of death to one of the inmates. The words of one song are
said to be: "I am sorry, for we must all die." Many songs are about
Wiyot, especially his death. Such matters as his foretelling of the time
when he would die, and his counting or naming the months until his
death, are typical of the subjects of the songs.

In recent years the Indians of Pichanga had given up the mourning
ceremonies. A woman of high rank, of a chief's family, had died. Then a
person dreamed of Coyote. Coyote said to him: "Why do you not hold the
djudjamish any longer? It is not good not to have it. I do not like it
so." Then this person told the chief of his dream. He said to him: "Have
you heard the coyote howling at night? That was the dead woman. She told
me that she wanted us to burn the clothes of the dead again." This dream
caused the resumption of the ceremony.

The eagle ceremony is a mourning ceremony for a chief. It is called
ashwut maknash, eagle killing. Either an eagle or a condor is used. The
people of the coast also use bald eagles and chicken hawks. The birds
are taken when young from their nests in the canyons. The eagles of
certain places belong to certain villages. Thus the Potrero people owned
the eagles at Pachorivo. When caught, an eagle is raised by the chief.
At the eagle-ceremony dancing is made during the night around a fire.
Men take turns holding the eagle. As each man holds it he presses it,
breaking an additional bone. At the cry, "Hu! Hu!" the dancer who is
carrying the eagle gives it to another, who then dances with it until
the cry is heard again. Toward morning the eagle is finally killed by a
certain pressure on the heart. The relatives of the dead chief for whom
the ceremony is made then cry. A blanket is laid down and the eagle put
on this. The chief's relatives thereupon bring property and money, and
lay them with the eagle, which is finally covered with a large basket.
People whose relatives have died place the clothing and property of
these on the blanket with the eagle. In return the dead chief's
successor, who is holding the ceremony, seems to give these people

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

an equivalent in property. The entire property placed with the eagle's
body is given by the chief making the ceremony to the chief of another
village, who divides it among his own people. This chief also takes the
eagle, which he burns. The entire ceremony seems to be made by a son or
grandson or relative, in other words the successor, of the chief in
whose honor it is held, and whom the eagle represents or "calls."

A dance called morahash was performed by a single dancer in the wamgush.
It would be made for a dead chief by his son, some years after his
death. The young chief would hire the man who danced for him. All chiefs
had such dancers; they did not dance themselves. The women sang, the men
"growled" or blew, and the singer shook a turtle-shell rattle. The songs
were descriptive of the dancing. The dancer was called totawish; his
performance is evidently what is called the "tatahuila" dance by the
present-day Diegueño, who do not acknowledge this word as their own. The
dancer wore a skirt of eagle feathers, called balat; cheyat, a
head-dress of a bunch of owl, crow, or raven feathers, fastened to the
hair by a pin or stick; piwish, ropes of owl feathers, wound around the
head or hung around the neck; and apuma, a head-dress of long
eagle-feathers worn upright on the head.

This morahash dance is said to have been among the Luiseño before the
toloache-ceremony. It is thought to go back to the time when the people
were still in the north. It is not from Wiyot, for Wiyot did not give
dances, but the people made them after his death. The morahash was first
made over his ashes.

*Customs and Beliefs*.

The medicine man is called pula. He derives his power from dreaming. He
does not dream of Wiyot, nor derive his power from him, but dreams of a
rock, a mountain, a person, or something similar. Shamans were men, not
women.

The shamans have songs, which they receive from the object of their
dream, and which they sing to themselves. It is not known whether they
also sing them while doctoring. Their stone pipes seem to be regarded as
fetishes. At least shamans frequently speak to their pipes. They also
blow tobacco smoke on

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

the sick person. Sometimes they sleep near the patient, waiting for a
dream in which their guardian spirit tells them how to proceed. The main
reliance seems to be on sucking. Water is also spurted or blown on the
patient.

When a man killed a deer, or rabbits, he brought them to the wamgush.
Then the people ate the meat, but he did not partake of it. If he should
eat of the meat of animals he himself had killed, even only very little,
he would not be able to kill others. However if he confessed to the
people that he had taken some of the meat, he would again be able to
hunt successfully.

The dead went to the sky.

A menstruating woman did not mix with other people. She could not cook
for them. She herself ate neither meat nor fish. She slept by herself,
outside the house.

After the birth of a child both the mother and the father remained
quiet. They did not cook or work. They remained lying down for twenty,
thirty, or forty days. They used medicine of a plant called
hulvul, <span id="fr_332"></span>[315](#fn_326.md) boiled in water. They
ate no meat. All this was done for the health of the child. When the
child's navel string was cut, it was tied over the navel. After the cord
fell off, it was buried.

Women were tattooed on the chin, with a vertical line down the forehead,
and with a small circle on each cheek. On their wrists there were bands
of tattooing and across the breast a curved band or line from which
lines extended downward. Men tattooed less than women.

The following animals are said not to have been eaten: the dog, bear,
coyote, lizard, frog, turtle, eagle, buzzard, and raven.

At marriage property was given to the parents of the bride. It is not
certain whether this took the form of a purchase payment or merely of a
customary gift. The informants questioned knew of no restrictions on
communication between parents-in-law and children-in-law.

*Houses and Implements*.

The house consisted of a framework of posts, rafters, and poles, with a
thatching of shuikawat <span id="fr_333"></span>[316](#fn_327.md) plants.
The thatching was

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

then thickly covered with soil. The interior of the house was excavated
perhaps two feet. Tule houses were built by the mountain Luiseño while
at San Luis Rey mission.

The sweat-house was similar but smaller. Two forked posts were erected
and connected by a log, on which poles were rested from both sides. A
thatching of plants was covered with mud, and over this was put dry
soil. The door was on one of the long sides. The sweat-house was not
used for dancing, all such functions occurring in the wamgush enclosure.
The sweat-house was regularly used for sweating in the evening, and
sometimes in the morning also. After sweating in the evening, men slept
in the house, not in the sweat-house. The heat in the sweat-house was
produced directly by a fire, not by steam.

The mortars of the Luiseño are generally large boulders weighing perhaps
two hundred pounds or more. The cavity is conical and pointed rather
than rounded. The pestles are usually a foot or more long and rather
unshaped. One or two sides are generally flat, as in Yokuts pestles, and
the butt end, which is wider than it is thick, has a diameter of about
half the length of the pestle. On the whole the pestles seem to be
boulders or slabs which are little worked except at the rather pointed
pounding end. The most common material is granite. A flat metate, malal,
was also used.

Head-bands of human hair, called yukish, <span
id="fr_334"></span>[317](#fn_328.md) were made from hair cut off in
mourning, and were worn by old men in dancing.

Nothing corresponding to a drum is said to have been used in any
ceremonies. Whistles, bakhal, of cane or reed, huikish, <span
id="fr_335"></span>[318](#fn_329.md) and asphalt, shanat, were used at the
boys’ initiation, at the time when the boys were buried and covered with
ants. The pumalum or initiated men danced in a circle on this occasion,
blowing these whistles and singing in slow broken syllables. The chief
musical instrument in ceremonies was the rattle. This was made of a
turtle-shell, paayat, which often contained cherry-seeds. String was
wound around the shell until the head and leg openings were covered. A
stick was put through the top and bottom of the shell until it projected
a few inches above and about a foot below.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such rattles were
used in the singing in the mourning ceremonies. They were also used for
the dancing in connection with the girls’ puberty ceremony. At this
ceremony women danced, while men, bending their bodies forward, sang and
rattled, stamping one foot.

Money, auvirat or khenkhat, was made from shells called si’wal, probably
a clam; khapshut, almeja; and shauvish, a large univalve of which the
columella was used. The clam shells were made into small disks which
were perforated and strung. The strings were measured around the
circumference of the hand, much as by the Yokuts, except that the
measurement seems to have been a little scantier. The end of the string
was held between the tips of two fingers. The string was then passed
entirely around the edge of the hand back to its beginning, and
continued a second time down one side of the hand to the wrist. This
measure, approximately one and a half times the circuit of the hand and
fingers, was half the unit measure, which was called ponko. This full
measure was also determined by taking the end of the string between two
finger tips, and then passing around the elbow and back to the finger
tips.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_321"></span>[174:310](roli31.htm#fr_327.md) Am. Anthr., n. s.
VIII, 32, 1906.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[174:311](roli31.htm#fr_328.md) Enwish,
*Echinocystis macrocarpa*.—S.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[176:312](roli31.htm#fr_329.md) Yuninish, the
girls’ puberty ceremony.—S. Cf. note [34](roli08.htm#fn_34.md).

<span id="fn_324"></span>[178:313](roli31.htm#fr_330.md) Compare the native
drawing in Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XIX, 312, 1906.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[179:314](roli31.htm#fr_331.md) Objective case of
wicha, given by Mr. Sparkman as *Apocynum cannabinum*, while Dr.
Barrows, in his Ethno-botany of the Cahuilla [Indians](errata.htm#2.md),
makes Cahuilla wish the name of *Phragmites communis*.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[184:315](roli31.htm#fr_332.md) Hulval, *Artemisia
californica*.—S.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[184:316](roli31.htm#fr_333.md) *Croton
californicum*.—S.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[185:317](roli31.htm#fr_334.md) Yula, hair; yukut,
hairy; yutush, the scalp, when detached.—S.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[185:318](roli31.htm#fr_335.md) *Elymus
condensatus*.—S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plates](roli32.md)
