[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](roli12)  [Next](roli14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### CEREMONIAL SONGS.

Among the Luiseños the relation of ceremonial songs to distinct series
with special meanings and uses can still be clearly traced. The most
important of these series were used in the Image ceremony, as has been
stated above. The complete list, as far as obtained, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[57](#fn_61) may be given as follows:

Pikmakvul series, songs of death.

Temenganesh series, songs of seasons.

Chum Towi or Kwinamish series, songs of the spirit. Kamalum series,
songs of the First People.

Kish series, songs of the house.

Nokwanish series, songs in memory of the dead.

Totowish series, songs of the Chungichnish avengers.

Munival series, songs of landmarks.

Nyachish series, songs of people cursing their enemies.

Anut series, songs of the ant-ordeal, now used in other ceremonies.

Sungamish, the finishing songs.

Topasish, men's dance songs.

Then the songs of the individual for lesser ceremonial occasions,
shaman's songs for rain-making, for fair weather; for harvest; for good
luck, doctoring; bad luck, death to enemies; for deeds of wonder as
instruction to boys, and so on. These include songs of Chatish, songs of
Numkish, songs of Tuknish, all of which are Chungichnish songs.

For the benefit of the special student who may be interested, a
description of those obtained on graphophone records follows:

Record 369. <span id="fr_65"></span>[58](#fn_62) Song of Temenganesh,
Songs of Seasons. The words as spelled by José Albañas or Albañez, the
singer, in Spanish orthography, are: Achonacua tuganecancua a
guanaguot, <span id="fr_66"></span>[59](#fn_63) etc. This song means:
"All these I have mentioned and Wanawut. I have mentioned all the names
of the seasons and stars

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and Wanawut. I am proud of my songs. I have believed in my songs." All
danced as they sang this song, which is part of the second series in the
Image ceremony.

Record 370. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Luiseño words: Helemocme
temenganesh apangaula, etc. <span id="fr_67"></span>[60](#fn_64) This is
a women's song. It mentions the water and mud in which are Wahawut, the
frog, and Karout, <span id="fr_68"></span>[61](#fn_65) the earth-worm.
Wahawut hid away Temenganesh, *i.e.*, frogs disappear and are unheard at
certain seasons, and at a certain month come out and begin to sing.

Record 371. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Luiseño words: Yjason noqui
son notelaneba, etc. Month of Novoyamul. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[62](#fn_66) When Tukmit the Sky grows old. When
Tomaiyowit, the Earth, has her menses (the green scum, fresh water algae
that appear on ponds). Eagles moult. This song mentions the months <span
id="fr_70"></span>[62](#fn_66) Tasmoimal and Taunamal. "What shall I say
about my home and about my talks?" Women dance to this song.

Record 372. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Luiseño words: Potoyau
yauca anmal, etc. The ant has his season. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[63](#fn_67) He has opened his house. When the days
grow warm he comes out. The spider has her little house and her hill.
The butterfly has her house, pohota. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[64](#fn_68) (This word refers to the sacred enclosure
of brush made in circular form, in which the religious ceremonies were
held.) Wiskun, chipmunk, and also the larger squirrel, yet have the
mavakul, <span id="fr_73"></span>[65](#fn_69) (log hollowed out and used
for holding acorns. The allusion is to the log which the chipmunk
carried when he was one of the First People, a log ten men could not
lift, on which they laid the body of Ouiot when they burned it.) The
song on the record ends here. The rest of the song is as follows:
Atachama, <span id="fr_74"></span>[66](#fn_70) a bird, and another bird
are mentioned.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is time for the
eagle to fly off. It is time for the acorns to fall from the trees.

Record 373. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Luiseño words: Memec no
asunecua awawik, <span id="fr_75"></span>[67](#fn_71) etc., "I am
something doing." This is Nemoimal season. The bear sheds his hair and
says, I am fat. The whale, koyowut, now gets fat. The deer grows fat.

Record 374. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Luiseño words: Tomamec
uchanat potoblecala, <span id="fr_76"></span>[68](#fn_72) etc. "North
the elk has young." In the north at this season uchanat has her young;
and pashakut, <span id="fr_77"></span>[69](#fn_73) the elk, has young.
In the east pahut, <span id="fr_78"></span>[70](#fn_74) the mountain
sheep, and chakla, <span id="fr_79"></span>[71](#fn_75) a desert animal,
bring forth young. In the south awawut and tamyasowut bring forth young.
In the west the ocean is hunauish, <span id="fr_80"></span>[72](#fn_76)
tossing its waves back and forth. In the center, "here," the deer sheds
his hair, and the acorn grows fat. The sky "sheds," that is, changes
color. The clouds of winter are swept away. Tupush is sky. Nahonit also
means sky. Tukmit is the personified sky. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[73](#fn_77) This is the season of Pahoyomal, when
snakes crawl out, frogs sing, trees are juicy and ready to put out
leaves, in early spring.

Record 375. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. First part of song: Whaimul
piwamul (primeval stage of being, with some reference to the Milky
Way, <span id="fr_82"></span>[74](#fn_78)) lies back extended making a
humming noise. Second part: I recognized afar off, from the door of my
house, Nahut, <span id="fr_83"></span>[75](#fn_79) the stick used to
club Coyote, <span id="fr_84"></span>[76](#fn_80) and Kashlapish, the
ringing stones used in the girls’ ceremony. Third part: I look east. I
look up. Look, Nükülish (Antares) rises.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yungavish
(buzzard, Altair) rises. Ahuta (Milky Way) is rising at the same time.
Aylucha <span id="fr_85"></span>[77](#fn_81) (Venus) is rising.

Record 376. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Luiseño words: Asguot pela
telamoc, <span id="fr_86"></span>[78](#fn_82) etc., "Ashwut was saying."
The eagle, ashwut, talked about the stars rising. Kariya <span
id="fr_87"></span>[79](#fn_83) Ahuta, rises Milky Way. Antares and
Altair rise.—In the west the eagle mentions the things in the ocean.—The
singer does not know what these words mean. The Chungichnish worship
with its songs was brought to the mountain Indians from the islands of
the ocean. He mentions Harasa, Catalina Island, and Kimki, San Clemente
Island. <span id="fr_88"></span>[80](#fn_84)

Record 377. Song of Temenganesh. By Albañas. Mulmusña hete pela kamai
temet, etc. The sun rose at Mulmus. <span id="fr_89"></span>[81](#fn_85)
Antares rose too.

Record 378. Song of Temenganesh. Wunal Pewipwe tiwium, <span
id="fr_90"></span>[82](#fn_86) etc. "That San Bernardino mountain see,"
Sulkul, the fall cricket, <span id="fr_91"></span>[83](#fn_87) said.
(Sulkul was the first basket-maker, according to one version of the
creation myth.) "Look at Pewipwe; look at (naming all the other high
mountains that were born as First People). The acorns are ripe. Look at
Pawi Chawima, <span id="fr_92"></span>[84](#fn_88) (Cahuilla); Kupa
Kawima, <span id="fr_93"></span>[85](#fn_89) (a hill at Warner's ranch),
I’pa <span id="fr_94"></span>[86](#fn_90)

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Volcan); Naavo
Waheto, <span id="fr_95"></span>[87](#fn_91) (hills south and east of
Potrero); Malava, <span id="fr_96"></span>[88](#fn_92) (Palomar
Mountain)." The song mentions the cold wind of early morning when
Antares rises, at the time when all the Indians take a bath. This was
the rule. Everyone must bathe daily.

Record 379. By Albañas. After the Temenganesh series comes the Kwinamish
series, songs of the spirit. In the Image ceremony the songs of
Pikmakvul, songs of death, each one mentioning Ouiot, are sung for six
or seven hours; then Temenganesh, Kwinamish, and others. In the Girls’
ceremony the Kwinamish songs come second.

First song of Kwinamish. This is like talking to themselves, and sending
their spirit to the Milky Way. This song tells of the council the people
held after the death of Ouiot, to see what they could do, after they
found that there was death. This mentions Yula Wanawut, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[89](#fn_93) the spirit of the dead. If the ceremonies
are done right, the spirit will be sent off all right, and will not stay
in its former abode. In the council they tried to see what they could do
about their spirits, and so they arranged these ceremonies. The song
says: The Sky, after all these ceremonies were rightly done, felt good
in his heart. It mentions the sand-painting, Eskanish Tarohayish.

Record 380. Song of Kwinamish. By Albañas. Tomamik yula poaukala, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[90](#fn_94) north the spirit remains; kwimik yula
poaukala, <span id="fr_99"></span>[90](#fn_94) east the spirit remains;
south and west, the same. It is held, tied, to the four quarters of the
sky, so that it will remain there and will not get away.

Record 381. Kwinamish song. By Albañas. Tomamik yula Wanawut poponakala
poñarakala auma, <span id="fr_100"></span>[91](#fn_95) etc. "To the
north the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

spirit (double name) with (elaborately woven) strings remains tied." No
kwinamo wunac qua auma. <span id="fr_101"></span>[92](#fn_96) "My spirit
up there remains." Antares and Altair make the wind blow and remain
there in the east.

Record 382. Kwinamish song. By Albañas. No suna qua haiyawa moyna, no
suna qua takwaya moyna, <span id="fr_102"></span>[93](#fn_97) etc. "At
the time of death, when I found there was to be death, I was very much
surprised. All was failing. My home, I was sad to leave it." The second
part means: "I have been looking far, sending my spirit north, south,
east, and west, trying to escape from death, but could find nothing, no
way of escape."

Record 383. Song of Munival. By Albañas. The Munival songs are
individual and inherited. They describe the exact route of the Temecula
people, ancestors to the singer, and the landmarks made by each to claim
title to places in their migrations, usually at very short distances.
Munival no qua awut, <span id="fr_103"></span>[94](#fn_98) "the tracks I
do not understand." Munival no qua nalachat, <span
id="fr_104"></span>[95](#fn_99) "the tracks I make mistakes about." They
are therefore explained. The song mentions different places: Nachivo
pomisavo, <span id="fr_105"></span>[96](#fn_100) the cañon the First
People could not go through; Tokta totpa, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[97](#fn_101) a place; Kawima polalak, <span
id="fr_107"></span>[98](#fn_102) a certain hill; Ashwut kalikwona (eagle
sits on something), a place; Waasawaha pometavoy; <span
id="fr_108"></span>[99](#fn_103) and Exvo Temeko, <span
id="fr_109"></span>[100](#fn_104) Temecula.

Record 384. Chatish song. By Albañas. The Chatish <span
id="fr_110"></span>[101](#fn_105)

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

series are secret individual songs, descended in the family or composed
by the singer. This is a song the great-uncle of Albañas used to sing.
No enge no mane hortata kulkula, etc., from my feet, from my hands, I
drew forth, etc. <span id="fr_111"></span>[102](#fn_106). Some of the
shamans would extract something from their legs or hands or different
parts of the body during the dances to show their power: acorns or
rabbits or little snakes or frogs. Albañas’s great-aunt was a shaman,
and could vomit up from her mouth a small live rattlesnake.

Record 385. Song of Chatish. By Albañas. Nororia hechum sil pom
mane, <span id="fr_112"></span>[103](#fn_107) etc. "It thundered.
Something from their feet, their hands, etc." The earth shakes and
rumbles when the shamans march around.

These songs were sometimes sung to make plenty, to bring abundance of
rain, grass, and acorns. They are also called Songs of Numkwish <span
id="fr_113"></span>[104](#fn_108) or Tuknish. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[105](#fn_109) Each "hechicero" has two or three of
these secret songs, which he sings at his house and not at public
gatherings.

Record 386. Chatish song. By Albañas. These songs were also sung to hurt
people with sickness and death, and this particular song could kill a
man at a distance of many miles. Lewea lewea towowea, shoots off an
invisible (spirit-like) power. The "hechicero" had within him something
which could not be seen. <span id="fr_115"></span>[106](#fn_110) He
would draw it out and throw it off towards the man he wished to injure.
The "hechicero stick,"—wood without stone in the end, shaped like a
small straight sword,—would be used to do this.

Sometimes several shamans met at a house to kill a man at a distance.
Tukmul Chayut (double name: tukmul, flat coiled basket, Chayut, flat
twined basket) <span id="fr_116"></span>[107](#fn_111) would be made
ready, each

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

man bringing his own basket. Chungichnish said that they must always
have tukmul chayut when they had the ceremonies or did anything. A
certain Indian's mother was killed by witchcraft by his own uncle, after
which some of his mother's people, shamans, met together at night and
killed the old man in the same way. He died in a few days. Another
well-known instance of these beliefs was the killing by witchcraft of
the woman who dispossessed the Indians from an ancient village site,
having acquired the land under the terms of a Spanish grant. The Indians
thus driven off had their revenge in this way, and she did not live long
to enjoy her property.

Record 387. By Albañas. Song of Anut, the large ant of the ant-ordeal,
used as a hunting song, since the ordeal has been long discontinued. Pom
peai yaumo oskamo. <span id="fr_117"></span>[108](#fn_112) "They kept
the game to themselves." This tells about the animals when they were
killed after the death of Ouiot. Mountain lion killed the deer, though
he tried to escape from death. Tukwut, mountain lion, Iswut, wolf (long
since extinct), Tomihut, summer-cloud or thunder-cloud, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[109](#fn_113) were some of the chief men in
arranging the ceremonies after the death of Ouiot. They are mentioned in
the song.

Record 388. Song of Chatish. By Albañas. Words: Necop manaa, Towit
manaa, Yawit manaa, etc. "It is coming to me. Towit is coming. Yawit is
coming." <span id="fr_119"></span>[110](#fn_114) Towit is the thick mist
that comes before the rain. <span id="fr_120"></span>[111](#fn_115) This
is a Chungichnish song of plenty. One man will dance while another sings
it. It may also be sung as an individual song at the Image ceremony.

Record 389. Sung by Lucario Cuevish. This song was sung in the ceremony
for healing a man punished by Chungichnish. It is a Chungichnish song.
Anyone in the old times revealing the secrets ("as I am doing now," he
says), would be stricken down with illness, and these songs would aid in
effecting his cure.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The song mentions
hainit, the band around the head used to put the feathers in, and
pecheya, feather headdress. <span id="fr_121"></span>[112](#fn_116) It
tells about the shadows cast by the sun. The connection between hainit
and the sun is hard to be understood; but the allusion may possibly be
the same here as in the myth, <span id="fr_122"></span>[113](#fn_117)
where it is difficult to understand who Hainit was. He was probably the
one among the First People who afterwards became the head-band for the
feathers.

Record 390. Chungichnish song. By Lucario Cuevish. The song mentions
Muta, the horned owl, whose feathers make the sacred headdress. It
mentions also the sea-weed on the seashore, one of the First People and
sacred to Chungichnish. It mentions pecheya, feather headdress. The same
words are repeated over and over.

The Chungichnish worship was brought to the mountains from San Juan
Capistrano. Near Capistrano is a hill where there are a live rattlesnake
and a raven, Chungichnish animals, that have been there from time
immemorial. They are still there.

Record 391. By Lucario Cuevish. Not a song, but a recitative by the
eagle; part of the Ouiot story. The eagle, seeking escape from death,
went north from Temecula to San Bernardino, came around by the east to
the south and west through Julian, Cuyamaca, and Palomar, going towards
Temecula, and died at Temecula. <span id="fr_123"></span>[114](#fn_118)
The eagle sang this song or recitative at Temecula. When he got sick he
talked this way. He was talking about the spirit. When they were all
going along they could hear something singing far away, and the eagle
said that was the spirit; and he told the people that everywhere that he
had been, north, south, east, and west, death was there waiting for
them. It was very near. No one knew when it would come, but they would
all have to die.

Record 392. By Lucario Cuevish. Song of the Eagle ceremony. The mourning
for the dead, cutting the hair, and so on,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

continues for a year or so, until they have the eagle ceremony at the
time the chief decides. This ends the period of mourning. The eagle is
killed amid universal lamentations. He is one of the representatives of
the spirit and is connected with the spirits of the dead. The song
means: "Stand up and hold the eagle in

<span id="img_11400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Notation of
Eagle-dance song. Record 392.](tn/11400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11400.jpg)  
Notation of Eagle-dance song. Record 392.  
</span>

your arms. Do not be ashamed. Stand up, all, and dance." They dance
around the fire and sing this song holding the eagle in their arms.

Record 393. By Lucario Cuevish. Recitative by Ouiot. Used in the Image
ceremony. Ouiot tells of his sufferings and names the months in which he
may die. <span id="fr_124"></span>[115](#fn_119)

Record 394. Toloache ceremony march song. By Lucario Cuevish. Tamyush
noya kwoya, etc., Tamyush marches by

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

twisting. <span id="fr_125"></span>[116](#fn_120) The power of motion
attributed to tamyush, the sacred stone bowl, and this song, have been
mentioned in the account of the toloache ceremony.

Record 395. By Lucario Cuevish. Song of Wukunish, the girls’ ceremony.
This is the last song of the ceremony, and is sung by the women. The
women's songs all end by mentioning Elsinore, where Kauko and
Chehemal <span id="fr_126"></span>[117](#fn_121) first had menses. When
the first ceremony was concluded, they felt happy and composed this
song. It mentions the journeying of the First People from Katuktu to
Kalaupa <span id="fr_127"></span>[118](#fn_122) and then to Elsinore.

Record 396. By Lucario Cuevish. Song of Munival, landmarks. This
mentions the turtle-rock on the land now occupied by Albañas, but owned
by Lucario's ancestors from time immemorial. There is a large flat rock
there marked with cracks like the markings on a turtle's back. This used
to be a turtle and was left in this shape as a track of possession. The
song means that he is singing to his ancestors. He is singing about the
rock. It is his. They left it here to claim the land which was theirs.

Record 397. By Lucario Cuevish. Song of the girls’ ceremony. Words: No
ashwo, <span id="fr_128"></span>[119](#fn_123) etc. I am menstruating.
One man sings this to the accompaniment of the ringing stones in the
girls’ ceremony while the others dance. This song mentions the mountains
that were First People, starting with San Bernardino on the north;
Taakwi popat, San Jacinto; Kupa Kawima (Kupa hill), the mountain at
Warner's ranch; I’pa, Volcan; Kachikchi; Cuyamaca; Pawi Chawimai, hot
spring near Cahuilla; Waheto Naavo, hills east and south of Potrero in
the mountains; Pahamuk Malaya, pre-historic village on Palomar
mountain. <span id="fr_129"></span>[120](#fn_124) The song also mentions
So-o Ponota, <span id="fr_130"></span>[121](#fn_125) the famous place
where the first Notish

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

ceremony for the dead was made and races were held. It mentions also
Wikio Potoypa, <span id="fr_131"></span>[122](#fn_126) a place on
Palomar ridge towards Temecula. San Bernardino, gray-head, white on top,
is the elder brother; San Jacinto is the younger brother.

Record 398. By Lucario Cuevish. Song of the Flood. This mentions
Katuta, <span id="fr_132"></span>[123](#fn_127) Mora, the little hill
that was the only dry land when the water covered the high
mountains. <span id="fr_133"></span>[124](#fn_128) This hill was one of
the First People.

<span id="img_11600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Notation of Image
Ceremony song. Record 399.](tn/11600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11600.jpg)  
Notation of Image Ceremony song. Record 399.  
</span>

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Record 399. Ouiot Song. Pikmakvul. Sung by Juan de Dios, now blind and
partly demented from old age. Once a famous chief, and leader of the
ancient religion. Ouiot sang this when he was at Temecula, where he
died. (See notation of this song on opposite page.)

Record 400. By Juan de Dios. Ouiot Song. Pikmakvul. Ouiot's counsel to
his people when he was dying.

Record 401. Song of Pikmakvul. By Juan de Dios. Ouiot enumerates the
"months," in each of which he expects to die.

Record 402. Pikmakvul. By Salvador Cuevas. Ouiot song, sung while the
images are being burned.

Record 403. By Salvador Cuevas. Song of Temenganesh, telling of the
"month" Tasmoymal. The spider-web now catches butterflies and
grasshoppers.

Record 404. By Salvador Cuevas. Chungichnish song, in the language of
the coast, now extinct. It was taught to Salvador by Hilario, a famous
singer from the coast.

Record 405. By Salvador Cuevas. Two songs of Tomaiyowit, <span
id="fr_134"></span>[125](#fn_129) the Earth-mother. She sang these when
she was making the land larger for her children.

Second song on same record. Chungichnish song, sung by a boy when he
jumped into the fire.

Record 406. By Salvador Cuevas. Song of Tomaiyowit, sung in the Image
ceremony. This song tells of the noise and confusion when the First
People were being born. The songs of Tomaiyowit may be a separate
series, though they are not so described.

Record 407. By Salvador Cuevas. Song of Munival, the landmarks of
ancestors. This mentions some small hills, and the cañon which was too
small for the people to go through. Some of Salvador's ancestors were
there.

Record 408. By Salvador Cuevas. Song of Kwinamish, the spirit. Tomamik
yula, tomamik wanawut, etc. To the north the spirit, etc. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[126](#fn_130) This song mentions the names of those
First People who were sent north, then those in the east, south, and
west. It mentions Sovul (a plant) and Makawut, wild grapes, <span
id="fr_136"></span>[127](#fn_131)

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

people of the East; and Pauwhut Abahut, hollowed long coffer used to
keep sacred feathers in, <span id="fr_137"></span>[128](#fn_132) people
of the south.

Record 409. By Salvador Cuevas. Song of Nahachish, <span
id="fr_138"></span>[129](#fn_133) one of the Temecula people, who gave
names to all the localities in the La Jolla mountain region. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[130](#fn_134) This song mentions the chia seed they
used to gather in early days, and another plant with small black seeds
used for food. It mentions the deer feast, Pisatish. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[131](#fn_135) The last food of the year, the last of
the store of seeds and acorns, could be eaten only by the old people.
Nahachish was a great glutton; and it is significant that the name means
also a disease, consumption, and an insect.

Record 410. By Martasal Tabac. Ashish song. The song mentions Deer when,
like Eagle, he tried to escape from death. He sent his spirit north,
south, east, and west, trying to find a way of escape; but death was
everywhere; and Buzzard and Blue-fly followed him and killed him.

Record 411. Anut song. By Martasal Tabac. This is a very old song which
he learned from his ancestors; the ceremony being done in very ancient
times. These songs of Anut were later sung in the girls’ ceremony.

Record 412. By Martasal Tabac. Song of Pikmakvul. Image ceremony. The
women dance while this is sung. The song tells how they prepared the
ground to burn the body of Ouiot, first digging a shallow hole and
placing wood there for the funeral pile. Then they went around three
times and laid the body on the pile and started the fire.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

Record 413. By Martasal Tabac. Song of Pikmakvul. Image ceremony. Ouiot
is very sick and names the months in which he may die. After his death,
when death came to all, these songs were composed. They were made at
that time. A notation of this record is given below.

<span id="img_11900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Notation of Image
Ceremony song. Record 413.](tn/11900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11900.jpg)  
Notation of Image Ceremony song. Record 413.  
</span>

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

Record 414. By Martasal Tabac. Ashish song. This song mentions the man
who leads the hunt. When the men go rabbit hunting they meet in a
certain place where a stone stands up at the side of the road. This song
is given in notation below.

<span id="img_12000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Notation of Ashish
song. Record 414.](tn/12000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12000.jpg)  
Notation of Ashish song. Record 414.  
</span>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

Record 415. By Martasal Tabac. Women's Ashish song. The men's and
women's songs are about the same, but the tunes are different. This song
mentions the hill where the rock is painted after the conclusion of the
ceremony.

Record 416. By Salvador Cuevas. Temenganesh song. This song mentions the
stars. When Ouiot was dying he talked about the east where he was to
rise. The song mentions Nükülish and Yungavish, Antares and Altair. The
eagles now fly. This is the month Townamal.

Each man's songs are different from another's, having reached him in a
strict line of descent; but the subject matter of each song series is
the same with all.

Record 1079. <span id="fr_141"></span>[132](#fn_136) Sung by Juan de
Dios. Song of Ouiot. Image ceremony.

Record 1080. By Juan de Dios. Song of Ouiot after he was burned, sung in
the Image ceremony after burning the Images. Record 1096. By Juan de
Dios. Ouiot song.

Record 1082. Sung by Margarita Subish. Women's song of Ouiot. Pikmakvul
series. Ouiot mentions the different months in each of which he thinks
that he may die.

Record 1098. By Margarita Subish. Song of Tochinish, Image ceremony.
Women's song, telling about making the images; sung while they are set
up in the sacred enclosure.

Record 1084. By Margarita Subish. Song of Wukunish, the girl's ceremony.
Women's song sung to the accompaniment of ringing stones. Gives
instruction to the girls.

Record 1085. By Albañas. Toloache song. After drinking the toloache they
march to the dancing place, and begin to feel the effects of the drink:
This song tells of the beginning of the intoxication.

Second song on the record. A Chungichnish song sung when they reach the
dancing place.

Record 1100. Sung by Albañas. Song of Pikmakvul sung in the Image
ceremony. Ouiot counts the "months." <span
id="fr_142"></span>[133](#fn_137) The

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

month Tasmoymal, when the grass begins to grow green, is mentioned.

Record 1076. Creation song of Kivish Atakvish. This song does not belong
to Albañas who sings it, but to the chief of his "clan." It is very
sacred. The song tells of Tukmit and Tomaiyowit, Sky and Earth.

Record 1100. By Albañas. Ouiot song. Sung to the accompaniment of the
rattle. This is what Kingbird sang on the housetop in the early morning:
"Ouiot is coming." The stars Nükülish and Yungavish, Antares and Altair,
are mentioned.

Record 1088. By Albañas. Song of Tomaiyowit, the Earth-mother. There are
ten or fifteen songs about Tomaiyowit. They dance to some and not to
others. This tells of the birth of her children. They stayed in that
place and then journeyed to another place.

Record 1077. By Albañas. Ouiot song. This tells about Wahawut who killed
Ouiot; and mentions Orion and the Pleiades when they went up in the sky.

Record 1102. Sung by Salvador Cuevas. Song of the dead, not used for
dancing; but sung in the Image ceremony; or when relatives come to
console the family for the death of a member they stay all night and
sing this song. It mentions Antares and Altair rising in the early
morning. When Antares rises winter is at an end. Grass and fresh things
come up; everything dry now grows green. Then when Altair rises the
grass is higher.

Record 1091. By Salvador Cuevas. Coyote kills Wahawut. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[134](#fn_138)

Record 1092. By Salvador Cuevas. Song of the dead. This mentions Muta,
the owl, Ano, coyote, and Pawewish, fox. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[135](#fn_139) They always come around the house when
some one is going to die. The song tells how they are coming nearer and
swarming around.

Record 1078. By Salvador Cuevas. Chungichnish song in the extinct
language of the coast. This song came from Lukup, a large rancheria
south of Santa Ana on the coast. <span id="fr_145"></span>[136](#fn_140)
Pura means Chungichnish in the old language of the coast. A man named

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hilario came from
Ushma, now Las Flores, <span id="fr_146"></span>[137](#fn_141) where
there used to be a big village, and taught this song and other songs and
dances.

Record 1095. By Salvador Cuevas. Chungichnish dance song. This is sung
at the time when the feather headdress is buried in the center hole of
the sand-painting in the ceremony performed when one of the initiates
dies. The song tells about pecheya, the feather headdress, and muta, the
owl, whose feathers are used to make it.

Record 1097. Diegueño. By Hatakek. Tutomunp. It refers to Wikami, Mohave
Avikwame, the sacred mountain where all the people were created and
where all religious song and dance originated. This place is alluded to
at the beginning of every ceremony. The song means: There were two
brothers. The father died and his spirit went north into the pine trees
and forests. The sons went after him. When they got there they heard the
spirit crying. This is the noise in the pine trees.

Record 1083. Diegueño. By Hatakek. Song of Wukaruk, the Image ceremony.
The first song on this record means: Two brothers were going along when
one was bitten by a rattlesnake, and died of the bite. The other was
afraid of his spirit. It was following him and terrifying him. The
second song on the record means: He came to the track of Coyote. There
was the Coyote's track. This is a women's song of the Image ceremony.

Record 1075. Diegueño. By Hatakek. Song of the Image ceremony, Wukaruk.
When Tuchaipa died through the work of the frog, they wanted to make the
Image dance and sent to Maiheowit to get him to teach them how. Then
they burned the sacred house and burned him too.

Record 1099. Diegueño. By Hatakek. Song of the Image ceremony. It tells
of Ishpa, the eagle, and describes his feeling when he knows that death
is near. Compare the Luiseño song of the eagle, above, number 391.

Record 1086. Diegueño. By Hatakek. Song of the Image ceremony. This
tells of Coyote. He slept all night and was warming himself in the early
morning. The series of these songs

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

is almost endless, as they are sung all night and for several nights
during the Image ceremony. Each song is different. It is impossible to
collect the entire series or to trace very clearly the connection
between the songs. The singer, a very old man from Manzanita, was sent
for far and wide to conduct the Image ceremony on the occasions when it
was celebrated. The memory displayed in retention of these series of
songs is remarkable.

Record 1087. Diegueño. By Hatakek. Song of the Image ceremony, telling
of the great horned deer, probably the elk.

Record 1104. Diegueño. Sung by Pion. Dance song called Orup from the
desert Indians. It tells about two brothers building their house.

Record 1089. Diegueño. Sung by Pion. First song on the record: Two
brothers are building a house. Coyote sings in the early morning. The
third song on the record tells about the willow trees.

Record 1090. Diegueño. Sung by Pion. Songs of Orup. The first song on
the record tells about the clouds from the north, Katutl; the south,
Kawak; the east, Awik; the west, Nyak. The second song is a night song,
and tells about the dark night.

Record 1073. Diegueño. Sung by Hulapok Hitlmiup. Song of Akil, the
girls’ ceremony. The men have bows and arrows in their hands and dance
as they sing this song. Both men and women dance in a circle, at
different times, around the place where the girl is in a hole in the
ground covered with brush.

Record 1074. Diegueño. Sung by Hulapok. Songs of the Image ceremony.
First song: The man who makes the images goes into the house and cries.
The second song mentions the birds. The bird cries.

Record 1103. Diegueño. Sung by Hulapok. Song of the wild-cat dance. This
dance comes from the Mohaves. It is accompanied by a gourd rattle,
hulma. For the Image ceremony they use a deer-foot rattle.

Record 1093. Diegueño. Sung by Hulapok. Song of the toloache ceremony.
The old dancers are seated in a circle on the ground, while the chief
pounds the toloache root in the sacred stone bowl to the accompaniment
of this song.

Record 1094. Diegueño. Sung by Hulapok. Toloache song.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This song is the
same as the beginning of the war dance. It also repeats part of the last
record, which is sung when the dancers come in on hands and knees. The
singer drank the toloache in his youth. The last ceremony at Manzanita
was about fifty years ago. Five old men remain in this region who are
toloache initiates.

Record 1072. Diegueño. Toloache song. Also a war dance song. This song
is also used at Mesa Grande. Hulapok, the singer, first heard this song
at a village called Hawiya, south of Julian.

Besides the ceremonial songs, the myths have their own songs, which are
incorporated in the story as part of the text which they amplify and
explain, giving character to the narrative as light and shade do to a
picture. The story can be told without them, but it loses much of its
emphasis and impressiveness.

The Cuyahomarr story of which three versions have been given: one from
Mesa Grande, called The Story of Chaup; <span
id="fr_147"></span>[137a](#fn_142) and two, one a fragment, from
Manzanita, <span id="fr_148"></span>[137b](#fn_143) is a good example of
a primitive myth in which the narrative is blended with song.

The Luiseños have a version of the same story communicated to them sixty
years ago by the Mesa Grande people. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[137c](#fn_144) Some of the old men among the
Luiseños can sing its songs, but they hesitate to relate the story from
the Diegueño, being uncertain of the meaning in parts, especially in the
songs.

One such song was sung to me by Salvador Cuevas, Luiseño, but he was
reluctant to begin it, fearing that Takwish, Chaup, might overhear him.
As Chaup's dwelling place is in the San Bernardino or San Jacinto
mountains, not so very far from La Jolla in the mountains, the fear
seemed well founded.

The Diegueños identified the being whose name on earth was Cuyahomarr,
the wonder-working boy, and whose name in the sky is Chaup or Shiwiw,
with the large meteoric fire-ball which is his physical manifestation.

Certain Indians, it is said, have an ogre myth-being who is

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

identified in their myths with the electric fireball. The two stories
have therefore become blended to a certain extent; but while the full
text of the Diegueño Cuyahomarr myth has been obtained, and some
fragments of the ogre story have been secured, it has not been possible
to trace the latter with precision. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[137d](#fn_145)

Chaup is feared among the Luiseños and Diegueños, but why or in what
degree it is difficult to say. It is said that the Indians believe that
if he casts the shadow of a man on the ground in his passage overhead,
the man will soon die.

The Luiseños sometimes call him Towish Takwish, which means spirit
meteor. The younger Indians, who know only the corrupted meaning of
Towish, which in modern Luiseño is 'devil,' understand it in that sense.

Takwish, Salvador Cuevas explained, takes the spirit of people just
before they die. He does not take the body. One sees the light because
he is carrying the spirit.

The following are graphophone records of songs of the Diegueño
Cuyahomarr myth.

1\. From Mesa Grande. Sung by Antonio. The flute is making music to call
the girls.

Ichtaha kwataha, Ichtaha kwataha, Toli otoli, toli otoli, Ichtaha
kotoho, Ichtaha kwataha, Toli otoli kotoli, Toli otoli kotoli, etc.

The brothers sat down facing in turn towards the north, south, east, and
west, and girls from the four quarters came to them attracted by the
music, but none pleased them except the girls from the east.

2\. By Antonio. The girls by the pond first hear the music of the flute.
"It was the younger sister who first heard the music. The girls were on
their way to a pond where they used to swim every morning."

3\. By Antonio. The girls’ song of farewell to their home. They have
come very far and they can see their home far away. "They looked back
and saw their old home and sang a song of farewell."

4\. By Antonio. The old woman, Sinyohauch, or Sinyohau’,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

calls the girls from the east to come and marry her sons. Wichukama,
wichukama, repeated many times.

5\. By Antonio. The two brothers marry the two sisters.

6\. By Antonio. "We shall die for the sake of the girls. I shall never
see my home again." The elder brother's song.

Cinan chakom whi-i-i.

Ocinan chakom whi-i-i, repeated many times, but the tune varies.

Mainan chakom whi-i-i.

Kamaina chakom whi-i.

7\. By Antonio. Cuyahomarr sat on his grandmother's lap and she put her
arms around him and they both cried. Antonio feels like crying when he
sings this:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Kawa kowa hi-i, Kawa kowa hi,  
Kawa kowa hi-i, Kawa kowa hi, etc.

</div>

8\. Manzanita Diegueño. Sung by Hatakek. First song on the record. The
younger brother's music on the flute. Second song, that of the elder
brother making music on the flute. Third song, that of the younger
sister who is tired and lagging behind. "'I can come no faster,' said
the younger sister. 'I am thinking of my old father whom I left
behind.'"

9\. Manzanita Diegueño. Sung by Hatakek. First song on record.
Sinyohauch sings to call the dead eagles to come to life and come to the
boys’ home. Second song. The elder brother sings to call the girls.

Third song on the record. The song of the brothers when the whirlwind
lifted the eagles out of their graves. "No sooner had they buried the
birds than the whirlwind swept by, lifting the dead eagles from out of
the ground, and carrying them through the air." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[137e](#fn_146)

10\. Diegueño song sung by a Luiseño, Salvador Cuevas, who does not know
exactly what the words mean; but it is the song sung by the boy in the
gambling game when he began to win back all that his uncle had lost. "As
soon as he fixed his eyes upon him he made his uncle win. He began
winning back every point he had lost." See Manzanita version of
Cuyahomarr story. <span id="fr_152"></span>[137f](#fn_147)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[105:57](roli13.htm#fr_64) See also the
preceding account of the Image Ceremony.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[105:58](roli13.htm#fr_65) Unless otherwise
mentioned, numbers refer to the collection of phonographic records in
the Museum of the University of California.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[105:59](roli13.htm#fr_66) Choun, all, everyone;
tungani, to give name to; -kwa, suffix, then; wanawut.—S.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[106:60](roli13.htm#fr_67) Helimuk, hid;
temenganesh, season; panga, in the water.—S.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[106:61](roli13.htm#fr_68) Karawut,
earth-worm.—S.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[106:62](roli13.htm#fr_70) See the section
headed Star Lore and Calendar, below, for a discussion the "months" or
divisions of the year.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[106:63](roli13.htm#fr_71) Potauyowi yauka
anmal, his language has ant.—S.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[106:64](roli13.htm#fr_72) Po-hota, his or her
brush fence, from hotahish, *ante*, enclosure of wamkish, ceremonial
place.—S.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[106:65](roli13.htm#fr_73) Mavakul or
mavakush.—S.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[106:66](roli13.htm#fr_74) Atachimai, a very
small bird.—S.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[107:67](roli13.htm#fr_75) Mimik-mo ashunin-kwa
awa’awik, meaning as given.—S.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[107:68](roli13.htm#fr_76) Tomamik uchanut
potovlykala, north where the buffalo is breeding, or, in the north the
buffalo his breeding place. Uchanut, a fabulous animal, identified with
the bison; tovli, breed, bear young, lay eggs.—S.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[107:69](roli13.htm#fr_77) Pashakut, elk.—S.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[107:70](roli13.htm#fr_78) Paut,
mountain-sheep.—S.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[107:71](roli13.htm#fr_79) Chalaka, horned
toad.—S.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[107:72](roli13.htm#fr_80) Perhaps
wanauwanahish, verbal noun from wanauwani, to move.—S.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[107:73](roli13.htm#fr_81) Tupash, sky,
nahainit, sky, in ceremonial language; tukmit, night.—S.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[107:74](roli13.htm#fr_82) See the Creation
myths given below. Mr. Sparkman says: Only used in songs and myths;
perhaps from whaiahat, white, and pewipwish, gray.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[107:75](roli13.htm#fr_83) Nahut, walking
stick.—S.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[107:76](roli13.htm#fr_84) See the account of
the death of Ouiot in the Creation myths below.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[108:77](roli13.htm#fr_85) Eluchax (x German
ch).—S.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[108:78](roli13.htm#fr_86) Ashwut-pila’ telamuk,
golden-eagle was-saying.—S.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[108:79](roli13.htm#fr_87) Kari’ya, rose.—S.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[108:80](roli13.htm#fr_88) Catalina island:
Kimki harasa; San Clemente island: Shoi ponga’; San Nicolas island;
Atauki ponga’. I have had much trouble in ascertaining the names of
these islands. Some say Kimki harasa is Catalina, others that it is
Clemente. Some say ponga’ is Catalina, others that it means island. As
ponga’ is placed after Shoi and Atauki it probably means island.—S.

Kimki is unquestionably San Clemente, and Harasa Catalina. Shoi and
Atauki are not referred to by others. Kinki, Kinki-par is the Gabrielino
name of San Clemente (present series of publications, IV, 143, 153).
Harasa has only been given in the locative form Haras-gna; it occurs in
Reid's list of Gabrielino rancherias, but without a designation of its
situation (quoted, *ibid*., 143). The usual Gabrielino name for Catalina
is Pimu; Pipimar has been obtained among the Luiseño (*ibid*., 142, 143,
144, 153).—Ed.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[108:81](roli13.htm#fr_89) Malmusnga heta-pila’
kamala temet, at Malmus rose the son sun.—S.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[108:82](roli13.htm#fr_90) Wunal Pewipwi
tiwiyam, that San Bernardino mountain see ye.—S. Puwipui, Piwipui,
present series, IV, 133, 148.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[108:83](roli13.htm#fr_91) Shulkul, a green
cricket.—S.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[108:84](roli13.htm#fr_92) Pawi, the warm spring
in the center of village at Cahuilla; Chawimai, probably a valley at
Cahuilla known as Duraznos.—S.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[108:85](roli13.htm#fr_93) Kupa, Agua Caliente,
kawimal, hill.—S. (Gupa, present series of publications, IV, 148, 150).

<span id="fn_90"></span>[108:86](roli13.htm#fr_94) I’pa.—S.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[109:87](roli13.htm#fr_95) Naav, a mountain
south of Rincon, across the river from it; Wee’to, Pine mountain, across
the river from Potrero; wee’tut, the great-coned pine, *Pinus
coulteri*.—S.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[109:88](roli13.htm#fr_96) Malava, old village
on Palomar mountain.—S.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[109:89](roli13.htm#fr_97) Yula wanawut, hair
wanawut. These words may refer to plaiting the hair of a dead person and
using it at dances for some time afterward.—S.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[109:90](roli13.htm#fr_99) Tomanik (resp.
kwimik) yula poauwkala, north (east) the hair its-remaining; poauwkala,
from auwi, to be, live, means it living, its living place, etc.—S.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[109:91](roli13.htm#fr_100) Tomamik yula wanawut
poponakala pongarakala auwma, north hair wanawut its-tying its-fastening
is; poni, tie; ngari, tie, fasten; po-, pronominal third person.—S.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[110:92](roli13.htm#fr_101) No-kwinamo wuna’-kwa
auwma, my-spirit (origin) there-then lives.—S.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[110:93](roli13.htm#fr_102) Noshunupkwa hayinga
moinga, noshunupkwa takwayak moinga, then-I-thought at-race in-moon,
then-my-heart is-surprised in-moon. A race called hayish was held at the
time of the new moon; hayinga is the locative case, as moinga is of
moila, moon. No-shun, my heart, is used in speaking of thoughts,
sometimes with a verb and sometimes without.—S.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[110:94](roli13.htm#fr_103) Monival-no-kwa
auwik, tracks-I-then do-not-know; auwi, to not know.—S.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[110:95](roli13.htm#fr_104) Monival-no-kwa
nalahik; nalahi, to err.—S.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[110:96](roli13.htm#fr_105) Journ. Am.
Folk-Lore XIX, 313, 1906: Nachivomisavo, a place "north of the San
Bernardino Needles," where the hitherto united people were separated,
thus acquiring distinct languages. Mr. Sparkman says: "A canyon near San
Bernardino. Nachi, a negative verb, not to go in or under. Misi, a
negative verb, not to go through, not to get past."

<span id="fn_101"></span>[110:97](roli13.htm#fr_106) Totka; totpa; names
of places.—S.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[110:98](roli13.htm#fr_107) Kawimai polalak,
name of a hill.—S.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[110:99](roli13.htm#fr_108) Wiashaha pomhetavoi
or pohetavoi.—S.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[110:100](roli13.htm#fr_109) Exva (x German
ch), a place near Temecula; Temeko, Temecula.—S.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[110:101](roli13.htm#fr_110) Chatush, a series
of songs of wizards.—S.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[111:102](roli13.htm#fr_111) No-engai no-mangai
hothota kulkala, from my feet, from my hands, was drawn, was drawn. The
first two words are ablatives, from no-e’ and no-ma; hothota and kulkala
are intensive forms of hoti, to pull, haul, and kuli, to pull up, pull
out.—S.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[111:103](roli13.htm#fr_112) Ngorora hechasil
pom-engai pom-mangai, sounded (thundered) something from their feet,
from their hands.—S.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[111:104](roli13.htm#fr_113) Namkush, a
ceremony performed with the idea of making acorns, rabbits, etc.,
plentiful. Namkokwat kwil, one who makes acorns grow.—S.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[111:105](roli13.htm#fr_114) Tu’nish, a
ceremony to make plants which are valued, such as chia, sage, grow.—S.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111:106](roli13.htm#fr_115) Lewya lewya
towauya, meaning about as given, past tenses.—S.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[111:107](roli13.htm#fr_116) Tukmal; chayut,
open-work sifting basket of rush.—S.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[112:108](roli13.htm#fr_117) Pom-peai yaumuk
oshkamuk, their-killing had did-not-wish-to-give; they did not wish to
give away what they had killed.—S.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[112:109](roli13.htm#fr_118) Tomihat or
tomawut.—S.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[112:110](roli13.htm#fr_119) Nekup mona,
Towutup mona, Yawutup mona, to me it comes, Towut comes, Yawut comes.—S.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[112:111](roli13.htm#fr_120) Towut, or Yawut, a
fine dust seen in the air when the north wind is blowing at a
distance.—S.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[113:112](roli13.htm#fr_121) Hainit, headband;
cheyat, feather headdress, pocheya, his feather headdress.—S.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[113:113](roli13.htm#fr_122) Compare the latter
of the two versions of the creation myth given below.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[113:114](roli13.htm#fr_123) Lucario's
conception of distance is limited, perhaps on account of his blindness.
This also illustrates the tendency in Luiseño myths to concentrate the
idea of locality to the Temecula region, which would seem to have been
the home of these Indians in very early times, at least in their own
beliefs.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[114:115](roli13.htm#fr_124) See the
corresponding passages in the creation myths.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[115:116](roli13.htm#fr_125) Cf. page
[79](roli04.htm#page_79).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[115:117](roli13.htm#fr_126) Kaukau,
blackswift; chekemal, kingbird or bee martin.—S.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[115:118](roli13.htm#fr_127) Katukto, a hill
probably between Bonsall and San Luis Rey, where the people are said to
have taken refuge at the time of a flood; Kalaupa, mountain near Santa
Margarita.—S. See the story of the Flood below.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[115:119](roli13.htm#fr_128) Non ashka, I am
menstruating the first time.—S.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[115:120](roli13.htm#fr_129) Taakwi, San
Jacinto mountain; po-pet, his younger brother; Kupa, Agua Caliente or
Warner's Ranch, kawimal, hill; I’pa, Volcan; Kachikchi, Cuyamaca
mountain; Pawi, warm spring in village at Cahuilla valley, Chawimai,
probably Duraznos valley at Cahuilla; Weye’to, Pine mountain, across the
river from Potrero; Naav, a mountain south of Rincon; Pahamuk and
Malaya, old villages on Palomar mountain.—S. See *ante*, notes
[82](#fn_86) to [88](#fn_92).

<span id="fn_125"></span>[115:121](roli13.htm#fr_130) Shoau po-nota,
Shoau its notush ceremony; Shoau is a place on Palomar mountain.—S.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[116:122](roli13.htm#fr_131) Wikyo, the highest
peak of Palomar; Potopa, a place on Palomar mountain.—S.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[116:123](roli13.htm#fr_132) Katukto.—S. Cf.
*ante*, note [118](#fn_122).

<span id="fn_128"></span>[116:124](roli13.htm#fr_133) See the second of
the Luiseño creation myths given below.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[117:125](roli13.htm#fr_134) Tamaiyowut.—S.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[117:126](roli13.htm#fr_135) Literally, to the
north the hair, to the north the wanawut-rope.—S.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[117:127](roli13.htm#fr_136) Shovul, *Rhus
aromatica* or *trilobata*; makwit wild grape-vine.—S.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[118:128](roli13.htm#fr_137) Pauhit, yellow
pine, also canoe; avahut, cottonwood. It is said that the feathers of
San Luis Rey were kept in a canoe that was found on the beach and
considered sacred.—S.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[118:129](roli13.htm#fr_138) Nahachish, a man
of Temecula; the walking-stick insect; consumption; with a possessive
prefix, -nhacho, plural -nahacho, old age, men, or male animals.
Nachaonwut, glutton, from nachooni, to eat.—S.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[118:130](roli13.htm#fr_139) See the tradition
of Nahachish, below.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[118:131](roli13.htm#fr_140) Pisatish, a feast
where a deer was killed and divided up.—S.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[121:132](roli13.htm#fr_141) The songs on the
following thirty records, together with some of the Luiseño myths, were
collected with the assistance and co-operation of the American Museum of
Natural History, through the courtesy of which they are here published.
The numbers refer to the Museum's catalogue.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[121:133](roli13.htm#fr_142) For an account of
these "months," which are not lunar, see the section on Star Lore and
Calendar, below.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[122:134](roli13.htm#fr_143) See the myth of
How Coyote killed the Frog, below.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[122:135](roli13.htm#fr_144) Ano’; Kewewish.—S.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[122:136](roli13.htm#fr_145) Lukup, Las Bolsas.
See this series of publications, IV, 144. Las Bolsas was in territory
inhabited by Indians speaking the language of San Gabriel.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[123:137](roli13.htm#fr_146) Ushmai, Las
Flores, place of roses, from ush-la, rose.—S.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[125:137a](roli13.htm#fr_147) Journ. Am.
Folk-Lore, XVII, 217-241, 1904.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[125:137b](roli13.htm#fr_148) *Ibid*., XIX,
145-164, 1906.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[125:137c](roli13.htm#fr_149) See *ibid*., XIX,
317, 318, 1906, for a statement by a Luiseño informant that he knew only
the last part of the story of dakwish or takwish, Diegueño Chaup, but
that the Diegueño knew the first part.—Ed.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[126:137d](roli13.htm#fr_150) See Journ. Am.
Folk-Lore, XIX, 317, 1906, for Luiseño beliefs of the cannibalistic
tendencies of Takwish.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[127:137e](roli13.htm#fr_151) Journ. Am.
Folk-Lore, XVII, 217-241, 1904.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[127:137f](roli13.htm#fr_152) *Ibid*., XIX,
145-164, 1906.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](roli14)
