[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](roli25)  [Next](roli27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

## TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE.

### ANCESTRAL LANDMARKS AND DESCENT OF SONGS.

After the water dried, the people went on to Kalaupa, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[290](#fn_300) and killed a bear there, and held a
council whether they should go any further. They decided to go on, and
went to Elsinore where the lake is. From there they scattered, north,
south, east, and west, in parties as they are now. The people of La
Jolla stayed in one place; those of Rincon in another, and so on. When
they scattered in this way they composed the songs about their travels
and the different places where they stopped. These are the songs of
Munival.

When the people scattered from Ekvo Temeko, Temecula, they were very
powerful. When they got to a place they would sing a song to make water
come there, and would call that place theirs; or they would scoop out a
hollow in a rock with their hands to have that for their mark as a claim
upon the land. The different parties of people had their own marks. For
instance, Albañas's ancestors had theirs, and Lucario's people had
theirs, and their own songs of Munival to tell how they traveled from
Temecula, of the spots where they stopped and about the different places
they claimed.

Wasimul, one of the Temecula people, who is now a small flat rock at
Rincon in the field below the store, was one of Pio Amago's ancestors,
and he has a song about it. It mentions Temecula and mentions Wasimul.
Lucario cannot sing this song because it does not belong to his family.

Piyevla, <span id="fr_307"></span>[291](#fn_301) the man who scooped out
a rock on the hill near Albañas's house at La Jolla, was one of
Lucario's ancestors; and the turtle rock in the same locality was
brought from Temecula by one of Lucario's ancestors and left there. The
oak tree growing on this rocky knoll was called long ago Pecheya, sacred
feather headdress. ([Pl. 4, fig. 1](roli32.htm#img_pl04).) The place
itself is called

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

Popikvo. The sliding place on a large rock in Trujillo's field adjoining
Popikvo, was made smooth by Lucario's ancestors sliding on it.

One of the most striking rocks in this locality of ancient monuments is
the painted rock, Exwanyawish <span id="fr_308"></span>[292](#fn_302)
which was one of the Temecula people, a woman, who turned into this
form. Indians suffering bodily pain rub against the rock to obtain
relief. It is not known when the painting on the hollowed side was done,
nor when the sacred stones, wiala, were poised on top. The oldest man
remembers that they were always there, though the touch of a hand might
overturn them. ([Pl. 4, fig. 2](roli32.htm#img_pl04).)

In those days they used to sing songs to kill each other by witchcraft,
and Lucario knows these songs. He has one of them which mentions the
turtle rock, and tells how it was left there. <span
id="fr_309"></span>[293](#fn_303) The large flat rock is divided by
cracks which resemble the marks on the turtle's back.

Lucario is the last of his line, party, or clan, and everything sacred
will be lost when he is gone, as the succession in these things ends
with him. He is dispossessed from his ancient home place, which was
allotted to another.

Each man knows the migration route of his ancestors, and claims certain
localities as having been theirs. They did not travel great distances,
according to tradition. Salvador says that when the people scattered
from Temecula all the tribes had names, but many are dead and few now
living. He does not know the name of his own tribe. They are called by
themselves Western people. <span id="fr_310"></span>[294](#fn_304) When
they scattered, the people traveled in parties of two or three families,
and they would claim the land where they stopped, though they might have
left it and gone further and others might have occupied it later. This
led to a great deal of fighting. The La Jolla people would fight the
Potrero people. A man could not go from Potrero to San Jacinto without
danger of being killed by some enemy.

The family songs of Munival mention the marks made by the earliest
Temecula people when they took possession of certain

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

localities. Every family or "party" had its own songs, and no man is
allowed to sing a song belonging to another family connection. It would
be an unpardonable offense against custom. Lucario was quite indignant
when it was suggested that his song of the eagle dance might have been
heard at Mesa Grande. One of the songs in his version of the creation
myth belongs to the Calacs, so that he could not sing it but only refer
to it.

The subject matter of the song series in all the lines of descent or
"parties" is the same. All the singers have songs mentioning the same
places and subjects; but Juan de Dios's song of Ouiot, for instance,
would be entirely different from Lucario's in tune and arrangement.

This may also account for the variation in the myth versions, as the
songs are part of the story, and the rigid separation of songs among
family groups must have resulted in certain differences in the
transmission of traditions.

Inheritance in these unsubstantial things is strictly observed until the
family line is extinct. My Indian driver once pointed out a distant
cliff of gray rocks, tall and forbidding, far from a human habitation,
and informed me that an eagle had its nest on that cliff, and that this
eagle belonged to Maria Subish.

This means that she is the last of a line in which the possession of
this eagle eyrie was hereditary. The old eagle never dies, it is
thought, hence may descend as the songs do. The young ones from this
locality may have been caught for the performance of the eagle ceremony
in this family.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[158:290](roli26.htm#fr_306) Kalaupa, mountain
near Santa Margarita.—S.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[158:291](roli26.htm#fr_307) See the story of
the Dance of the Spirits, ante.—Peyevla, a hollow rock near Potrero.—S.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[159:292](roli26.htm#fr_308) Exvongawish (x
German ch), of Exva, a place near Temecula; Exvayam, people of Exva.—S.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[159:293](roli26.htm#fr_309) See song record
396, above.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[159:294](roli26.htm#fr_310) The Diegueño also
give themselves this name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Clans Or Traditional Groups](roli27)
