[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](roli01)  [Next](roli03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EDITOR'S NOTE.

Miss Constance Goddard DuBois, the author of the present publication, is
well known for her literary work dealing with Southern California. Of
recent years she has earned distinction for her accounts of the myths
and ceremonies of the Diegueño Mission Indians of this region, which
have been published in several anthropological journals. In the summer
of 1906 Miss DuBois spent some weeks in San Diego county, in field
studies with the Luiseño Indians. This work she carried on under the
Ethnological and Archaeological Survey of California, which Mrs. Phoebe
A. Hearst's generosity has made it possible for the Department of
Anthropology of the University of California to conduct. In the present
paper Miss DuBois reports the results of this study, adding certain
information acquired during her previous visits to the Mission Indians.

Of the tribes formerly attached to the Franciscan missions of California
the Luiseño and Diegueño are the only ones to survive in any numbers.
Inasmuch as they have been fully under European influence for more than
a hundred years, and as for nearly two generations they lived under a
direct and enforced Christian discipline, it is as surprising as it is
gratifying that so much of their own inner life still remains as Miss
DuBois has been able to show in this paper, and that at least the memory
of their old life continues unaffected by civilization. But it need
hardly be said that the best of this information is all contained in the
minds of a few of the old men, and that with their passing it also will
disappear forever.

The Luiseño and Diegueño languages are distinct, forming part
respectively of the great Uto-Aztekan and Yuman families; but the two
tribes are physically similar, and share in common

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the majority of their customs, arts, and beliefs. The terms Diegueño and
Luiseño originally referred to the Indians of San Diego and San Luis Rey
missions, irrespective of their native affiliations; but they have come
to be the customary names of tribes, or more exactly, of two groups of
people each speaking a common dialect.

Miss DuBois introduces her account of the religion of the Luiseño with a
discussion of the beliefs and practices centering about the divine being
Chungichnish, the central figure in Luiseño religious worship. Under the
name of Chinigchinich this character has furnished the title for the
missionary Boscana's account of the closely related neighboring Indians
of mission San Juan Capistrano, by far the most illuminating and
valuable account of the Indians of California that the world owes to the
mission period. Miss DuBois's Luiseño informants state that the
Chungichnish worship came to them from the coast and from the north; and
that they in turn transmitted it to the Diegueño. There seems every
reason for believing this statement; and although it is necessarily
uncertain to what extent any uncorroborated tradition of an uncivilized
people can be accepted as historically true, the interest and value of
such traditions is clearly as great to those who may be skeptically
inclined on general grounds, as to those who, for good reasons in
particular cases, take them more nearly at face value.

Miss DuBois’ account of Luiseño symbolism, as embodied especially in the
wanawut or rope-figure, and in the ground-painting, is of special
interest on account of the slight development of symbolic religious
expression heretofore discovered among the California Indians. It is
significant that the Luiseño ground-paintings are of a comparatively
simple geometrical character, recalling basketry patterns, and that they
indicate the existence of objects rather than that they attempt to
picture their form, or supposed appearance, even in a conventional style
of representation. It seems uncertain whether these paintings are to be
regarded as historically the result of the same cultural influences that
gave a similar form of expression to the Pueblo and Navaho Indians. The
geographically intervening Yuman tribes on the Colorado river show no
trace of any equivalent practice.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

Almost all the ceremonies of the Luiseño are either commemorative of the
dead, or serve to initiate boys and girls into the condition of tribal
and religious manhood and womanhood. The principal initiation of boys is
the toloache ceremony, in which the central figure is the drinking of a
stupefying decoction of jimsonweed, Spanish toloache.

The two new versions of the Luiseño creation given by Miss DuBois are
fuller and more esoteric than any previously obtained among the Mission
Indians. The succession of births or existences, some of them psychic,
evidences an unusual point of view for an American people, and is
reminiscent of Oceanic and Asiatic ways of thought. Supplemented by
Boscana's two accounts of the creation at San Juan Capistrano, and by
the Luiseño and Diegueño versions previously collected by Miss DuBois
and others, these two valuable myths give an adequate conception of the
Mission Indians’ beliefs concerning the origin of things.

In 1904 the editor had occasion to make a short stay among the Luiseño
of Rincon, Pauma, and Pala, in the course of which certain information
was acquired on the subjects here studied by Miss DuBois. While far less
complete than the results of Miss DuBois, this information was
independently gathered, and confirms her conclusions on a number of
points. It has therefore been added in an appendix.

It is a source of regret that an expression of obligation in which Miss
DuBois would join the editor can no longer be made. Mr. P. S. Sparkman
of Valley Center, known for his long and patient study of the Luiseño
language, was kind enough to examine and report on all Luiseño terms
occurring in this paper. By his permission his valuable renderings,
translations, and comments on these terms have been given in footnotes
signed S, in all cases where they add anything to Miss DuBois's use of
the words. Soon after the completion of this labor of love, Mr. Sparkman
met an untimely end. It is a source of satisfaction that his notes in
this work may at least serve in some degree as a monument of his
intelligent, careful, and persevering study of the Luiseño language.

<span class="smallcaps">A. L. Kroeber</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](roli03.md)
