[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](roli03)  [Next](roli05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

## INITIATION CEREMONIES.

### THE TOLOACHE CEREMONY. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

The jimson-weed, *Datura meteloides*, in Spanish toloache, Luiseño
naktamush, <span id="fr_7"></span>[7a](#fn_7.md)  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8.md) is one of the most imposing plants of
Southern California. Its gigantic bluish-white bell-shaped flowers,
opening towards evening and fading when the sun of the following day
becomes intense, contrasted with the dull green leaves, attract the most
casual notice, as they occur in waste spaces in field and roadside,
growing by hundreds where conditions favor their increase. The plant is
remarkable in the extent of its distribution. Undiscouraged by the
intervening wastes of desert, it appears throughout Arizona as in
California.

The roots of the toloache contain a narcotic principle which has a
marked effect on the mind; and the taking of this is the center of an
important ceremony. It is fifty years or more since the toloache ritual
has been celebrated by the Luiseños; but for convenience the present
tense is used.

At the time of the Mani, <span id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9.md) the toloache
ceremony, a big fire is lighted at the main place of gathering. They
have two places, and the one where they actually give the toloache is at
a distance from the other. The places are made ready in the day time,
but the ceremony does not begin till evening. In the main place the
sacred enclosure of brush, the wamkish, is built in a circle to about
the height of a man. On the ground inside are placed the sacred
ceremonial objects: the tamyush or sacred stone toloache bowls, large
and small,—all but one which is to be used in the other place in
drinking the toloache; feather head-dresses and eagle-feather skirts;
and the paviut, the sacred sticks with flint in the end.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

The tamyush, which since the last celebration of the ceremony have been
buried in the ground, in a place known only to the chief, are taken out
in good time and freshly painted so that they look nice. They are
painted red, white, and black. Of the sacred ceremonial objects the
tukmul <span id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10.md) is not in the main enclosure
but at the other place. The tukmul is a flat winnowing basket sacred to
the Chungichnish rites. It belongs to the men, that is, is possessed by
every initiate, and during every ceremony is placed on the ground
containing grain, the sacred stone pipes, or other objects.

When it grows dark the people gather at the main place. The chief has
charge of the religious conduct of the ceremony; but to see to the
correct performance of every part of it during the four or five days of
its continuance, two officers, Paha, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11.md) are selected, with varied functions.

They must go around to the different houses to collect the candidates
for the Mani, carrying some of the little boys who may be found asleep.
One Paha is detailed to supervise the main place; the other, the place
for drinking the toloache. By a well understood law no one is allowed to
run around or make any noise. The Paha must be a hechicero, or shaman,
of repute; and he could tell by looking at the mother of a boy whether
she had been doing wrong in any way. No woman could be admitted to the
ceremony who was unclean, unchaste, or menstruating.

It is dark in the place where they take toloache. The large tamyush
selected for the purpose is placed on the ground before the chief. It
contains the root, previously prepared and dried, perhaps a year
before. <span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12.md) The chief pounds the dry
scraped bark with the stone mano (muller or pestle) to the accompaniment
of a curious recitative, not a song: "Chanyoko, yoko," while the boys
stand waiting in the darkness. The powder is then placed in a small
twined sifting basket <span id="fr_13"></span>[13](#fn_13.md) and sifted
again into the tamyush,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

which is filled with water. The Paha goes about whispering: "Keep quiet
all of you. Do not talk. Everyone keep quiet."

The chief superintends the drinking, and as the candidates kneel in turn
before the big tamyush to drink out of it, he holds the head of each
with the palm of his hand under the forehead, and raises it when they
have drunk a sufficient quantity of the liquid, watching to see that
they do not drink too much. They drink from the tamyush in which the
toloache was mixed.

They give the toloache to the boys in the dark; and while it is being
administered, the Paha goes over to the main place three times in
succession, and the third time tells them to get ready, for Mani is
coming. He sings a curious recitative.

The men and boys in this ceremony do not wear clothes. Before they
start, each man takes charge of one of the boys who have partaken of the
drink, and they stand and get ready. Now begins the marching song or
recitative as they march to the main place, taking the boys along. The
words of this recitative are: "Tamyush noya kwoya, Tamyush walks by
twisting." <span id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14.md) In the early days this
tamyush, finely painted, out of which they drank toloache, when it was
time to march to the main place, would walk along by itself. This was
done with a twisting motion from side to side,—as a heavy barrel is
moved.

Tukmul, the sacred winnowing basket, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15.md) would do the same thing. He would run by
himself to the main place; so would the other sacred basket,
piavala, <span id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16.md) a small basket in the
shape of an olla. These three, tamyush, tukmul, and piyevala, would have
to stop three times on their way to the main place.

The dancers crawled in on their hands and knees, making the noises of
birds and animals. They had some secrets about this, shamanistic power,
and could talk in the language of these birds

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

and animals, hawks and owls, and ravens and weasels. One could hear this
but could see nothing. <span id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17.md)

Then they march around the fire, and dance singing the toloache song.
The boys soon grow dizzy and fall down, and they carry them to the other
place and leave them there, under the charge of some of the old people,
until the toloache intoxication wears off.

After this come the dances and the Chungichnish songs, and sometimes new
songs are composed at this time. Some of the old men have composed them
to teach to the boys, and they dance all night long. At daylight they
sing the song: "Tukaina wonipa," <span id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18.md)
which means to go off; and they march to the other place where they took
toloache, where they remain during the day.

The boys cannot eat anything. The Paha watches to see that they do not
eat more than two or three spoonfuls at most; but the others eat.

When night comes each man takes one of the boys to the main place; and
before all the people these old men do magic tricks ([Pl.
1](roli32.htm#img_pl01).md) to teach the boys how to perform them. In the
old days when they took Mani these people could do anything. They

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

could put the feather head-dresses in the fire, and they would not be
burned; and they could make the raven talk and everything was done as he
said. They were so full of Chungichnish.

Not so very long ago, a shaman cut his tongue off, blood ran all over
his breast, and he held it out so everyone could see. Then he put it
back and it grew together again. This was while the Indians all lived
where Trujillo's land is now. This spot was a prehistoric Indian village
site, the author's camping place at Potrero.

In the same place at this time a shaman stood up and another one shot
him with bow and arrow. The arrow went deep into his breast, and he
vomited blood and fell down apparently dead. The people all began to cry
when they saw him shot; but the second shaman pulled the arrow out,
doctored him and blew on him, and he got up perfectly well and went on
dancing.

One man named Turiyo threw his feather head-dress on the big fire that
was burning. One could smell the feathers burn and everyone saw it. He
walked around and began looking about and there was the same feather
head-dress on the ground.

They would do these things when they got ready to put the fire out,
singing the Chungichnish songs and dancing. They wore no clothes but the
feather head-dresses and breech-cloths, but they were painted with white
clay and black charcoal on their backs to protect them from the heat.

They put the fire out by witchcraft. They would have a very big fire,
"as big as a house," and when they got ready to put it out several of
the old men would jump right into the middle of the fire and stand there
several minutes. You could smell the feathers burn and know that they
were burning, but they would jump out again unhurt.

This was not so very long ago. Everyone knows about it. These were the
things they taught the boys to do.

The Paha would superintend the putting out of the fire as he did
everything else, calling out: "Come up to the fire. Don't be afraid.
Don't shirk."

They put the fire out by pulling the burning logs out and stamping on
them and putting them out by witchcraft. The chief would not let anyone
come near with water, as the hot steam

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

would burn. They would tramp with hands and feet, and had the
Chungichnish sticks. In the early days they would not feel fire. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19.md)

It is the men of the same village where the boys live who give them
toloache; but the next day, perhaps, the people from another village
will come; and their chief men will take the boys and teach them their
ways and ceremonies, and dance all night long. The men that take the
boys to instruct them will talk to them and tell them how they must
behave. These men bring the dancing feathers, tukmul, and other objects
belonging to Chungichnish. During the time they are teaching the boys
and giving them presents of the feathers and objects, the fathers and
mothers of the boys give back the same value in baskets and other
possessions.

Then the instructors dress the boys in the feathers, paint them all
over, give them the wonder-working sticks, and go home.

Next day the men of another village come and do the same thing, and so
on for four or five days, different parties coming and going.

The boy has to fast from salt and meat for two or three weeks.

Then they use Wanawut, and the boys all jump. (The account of the rope
ceremony is given below). If anyone should fail to do it rightly he
would not live long. When he comes through this he is free. He joins
Chungichnish. (The narrator stood and reverently pointed upward. "The
spirit is always sent up.") They have Wanawut for long life, and the
boys must believe in it, and obey the rules.

After the fasting is over, they make the sand-painting. (The description
of this is also given below.) The instruction is then given in the
proper rule of life for the initiate, the Chungichnish rule of life:

No one must eat immediately after rising. They must wait so long that
their spirit may return to them from sleep, and then they can eat. In
the same way they must not eat immediately upon their return from a
journey among the hills. They must

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

wait for their spirit to return to them. They must not eat before the
old people have eaten, and no young person can eat the last of the seed
or grain, the harvest of the previous year. This must be kept for the
old. A boy may eat deer's meat when he has grown to the height of his
father's shoulder and not before. They must eat sparingly and observe
all these rules so that they will live long and have sons and grandsons
to perform the ceremonies at their death and to burn their bodies. In
the old days they lived to be so old that they became like little babies
again, and would lie down and die of old age. Now they eat too much, and
they have no rules for eating, and they die young.

They must be kind to the old and not turn their back upon a stranger
when he comes to their house. They must not whip their children, for the
spirits will be about and will steal their spirits away so that the
children will die.

A bath must be taken every morning.

There were many other rules pertaining to the rites and ceremonies and
the requirement of secrecy.

If any of the rules were disobeyed, Chungichnish would send the bear,
mountain lion, or rattlesnake to bite, and stinging weeds to injure the
transgressor. Sickness would come upon him. The earth would hear, and
the sun would spy out the guilty by day and the moon by night.

Sage seed ground and mixed with salt is made into a lump, and with this
the chief touches the forehead, shoulders, breast, knees, and feet of
each boy in turn, telling him that whenever the sun rises he must make
the sort of invocation used at this time, sending his spirit towards
it,—in an indescribable sound, for which we have no word. Three times
this is done,—Ugh-ugh-ha-a-a.

The lump of sage-seed and salt is then put into the mouth of the
candidate, who bends over the sand-painting, kneeling before it with
arms extended one on each side of it. He spits the lump into the central
hole, which is then carefully covered by the old men, who obliterate the
sand-painting by pushing it from the circumference towards the center.
(See again the special account of the sand-painting below.)

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

This ends the first part of the toloache ceremony. It is probable that a
race was made by the boys and that a rock was painted as is described in
the account of the ant-ordeal, and in the girls’ ceremony; but my
authorities did not mention this here.

The chief has to take care of those who are under him, and he must save
all he can in food and valuables and plan to finish the whole ceremony,
notifying his people when it is time to burn the sacred enclosure, which
is done four or five weeks later to end the Mani.

The sacred enclosure (Luiseño, wamkish or hotahish; <span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20) Spanish, casa grande.md) is made in a
circular form of willow and other brush. The ceremony of burning it is
performed in the day time. First the Paha takes the food collected by
the chief and distributes it among the different houses to be prepared
for eating; then when all is ready he brings it to the main place, where
they have a feast.

Instead of burning the whole of the sacred enclosure, a part of the
brush is taken from it and this is burned while they dance and sing the
appropriate songs.

This ends the ceremony of Mani which came to the mountain people from
San Luis Rey. They do not have it regularly, perhaps every two or three
years. During the march which ends the ceremony the mothers of the
initiated boys throw away baskets and other valuables among the guests.

The following comments on the toloache fiesta are by Salvador Cuevas:
Mani was a training for boys. In it they were told how to act in all
ways, to old people, to be kind to strangers, not to eat too much, so
that they could run miles and miles, and could live long. They were
instructed how to dance and how to perform the ceremonies.

Part of the ceremony Salvador hesitated to describe as it was too sacred
to be told; but having confidence in me he was willing to do so if I
would promise not to repeat it to the Indians. He was willing that I
should give it to the white people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[77:7](roli04.htm#fr_6.md) Based on an account given
by the Luiseño informant Lucario Cuevish.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[77:7a](roli04.htm#fr_7.md) Vowels have the
continental sounds, ai, au, ä, and ü being as in German. The letter x
represents the sound of German ch or Spanish j. V, being bilabial in
Luiseño, is much more like w than in English.—Ed.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[77:8](roli04.htm#fr_8.md) Naktomush.—S.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[77:9](roli04.htm#fr_9.md) Mani or pa’nish mani.—S.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[78:10](roli04.htm#fr_10.md) Tukmul is given by
Boscana as tucmel.—Tukmal.—S.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[78:11](roli04.htm#fr_11.md) Paha’, manager of
morahash dance and of mani.—S.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[78:12](roli04.htm#fr_12.md) Among the Diegueños
the juice is said to be expressed from the fresh root and mixed with
water. Only a root growing towards the north is selected. The song used
in this connection in Diegueño begins: "Choki, choki. "

<span id="fn_13"></span>[78:13](roli04.htm#fr_13.md) University of
California, Department of Anthropology, Museum number 1-10619.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[79:14](roli04.htm#fr_14.md) University of
California, Department of Anthropology, phonograph record 394.—Tamyush
ngoxya (x German ch) kwoya, tamyush walked twisting.—S.—Dr. R. B. Dixon,
in the Northern Maidu, Bulletin American Museum of Natural History,
XVII, 137, 1905, says that the Shasta Indians of Northern California
believe that certain mortars move of themselves, and describes their
ceremonial use by the Maidu.—Ed.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[79:15](roli04.htm#fr_15.md) University of
California, Department of Anthropology, Museum number 1-10620.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[79:16](roli04.htm#fr_16.md) Peyevmal; peyevla, a
large storage basket.—S.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[80:17](roli04.htm#fr_17.md) Lucario knows nothing
about personal "totem animals" or guardian spirits with which this part
of the ceremony was probably connected. Boscana's account of the
connection of the guardian spirit animal with the toloache ceremony is
so clear to the modern reader of his work as to be undoubtedly founded
on fact; and at Mesa Grande it was possible to extract enough from some
of the old men to be sure that the personal totem had long ago existed
among the Diegueño Indians. Boscana says: "At the age of six, or seven
years, they gave them a kind of god, as protector; an animal, in whom
they were to place entire confidence, who could defend them from all
dangers, particularly those in war against their enemies . . . . . That
they might know the class of animal, which the God, Chinigchinich, had
selected for their particular veneration, a kind of drink was
administered to them, made from a plant called *Pibat*, \[*i.e.*,
tobacco\] which was reduced to powder, and mixed with other intoxicating
ingredients. Soon after taking this preparation they became insensible,
and for three days were deprived of any sustenance whatever. During this
period they were attended by some old men or women, who were continually
exhorting them to be on the alert, not to sleep for fear the coyote, the
bear, the crow, or the rattlesnake might come; to observe if it were
furious or gentle, and to inquire of the first that should come, what
were its desires. The poor Indian thus intoxicated, without food or
drink, suffering under delirium, beheld all kinds of visions; and when
he made known that he had seen any particular being, who explained the
observances required of him, then they gave him to eat and drink, and
made a grand feast; at the same time advising him to be particular in
obeying the commands of the mysterious apparition." (Op. cit., 270-1).

<span id="fn_18"></span>[80:18](roli04.htm#fr_18.md) Tekaia wenepa: said to
refer to the placing of the bones of Ouiot in a receptacle and pouring
them into a hole in the ground.—S.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[82:19](roli04.htm#fr_19.md) The Diegueños of Mesa
Grande had a very wonderful stone, which was used in this ceremony of
putting out the fire in the toloache fiesta. It was worn by the chief
about his neck, and was placed upon the fire at the proper time to put
it out by magic power. It was also used when red hot by the medicine men
among their other deeds of wonder. They would hold it in their hands,
lick it with the tongue, and so on.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[84:20](roli04.htm#fr_20.md) Vanquech as given by
Boscana, pronounced Vankesh, is closely allied to Luiseño wamkish, v and
w being more nearly alike than in English. The Diegueño name is awa-iku.

Hotahish, brush enclosure at mani; wamkish, the space enclosed.—S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanawut, the Sacred Net](roli05.md)
