[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](roli29)  [Next](roli31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

## APPENDIX I.

### GAMES, ARTS, AND INDUSTRIES OF THE DIEGUEÑOS AND LUISEÑOS. <span id="fr_321"></span>[\*](#fn_315)

##### By <span class="smallcaps">Constance Goddard DuBois</span>.

The Diegueños had many gambling games which were simply contests of
skill. One was played by throwing a stick at a rolling hoop. Men and
women had different but somewhat similar games, played by throwing
sticks marked with certain figures, and counting so many for the throw,
which are quite complicated and not easily understood unless
illustrated. The men's game called "quince" is named from the Spanish,
but is probably much older than that would suggest.

The most important game is "peon," which has almost the value of a
religious ceremonial. It is played at midnight on the occasion of an
Indian fiesta. A shaman should lead each side, and all his power must be
exerted for the success of his village, the challengers being visitors
from a distance.

Sides are chosen and money in considerable quantity is staked on the
result. Wooden counters are used as in all the games to mark the score.
White and black "sticks" made of bone fastened by a string are tied
securely to the fingers of the players, so there can be no cheating, but
all depends on skill or quickness of observation.

The players of one side, kneeling in a row upon the ground, are covered
to the waist with a blanket which hides all motion as they arrange the
pieces of bone upon the finger. While doing this, the better to confuse
the observation of the opponents, they sway from side to side emitting
the most unearthly series of repeated sounds in measured time to the
accompaniment of the women's songs.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

When they are ready the blanket is dropped, and the other side must
guess the location of the small disk of bone concealed in the hand of
the player, whose name is called while the hands are clapped and pointed
with lightning rapidity first to one and then to another in the row. The
points are counted and awards made by the leader or "umpire" in the
game.

Gambling with the Indians satisfied that instinct for recreation and
excitement which in civilized man finds expression in the countless
amusements good and bad which he devises for his leisure hours. Peon is
thrilling even to a bystander; but all is managed with the precision and
self-restraint which is inherited from primitive days, when every act
was in some sense a religious ceremonial.

As is the case in all primitive tribes, basketry and pottery rank first
in importance among the industrial arts of the Diegueños and Luiseños.

The former used pottery not only for domestic purposes, but in the form
of burial vessels, ollas, for the preservation of the ashes of the dead.
After the body was burned, the ashes and bones were collected and
deposited in the pottery receptacle or olla, and carefully buried in
some secret place. The whereabouts of some of the burial ollas are still
known to the initiated. Others have been discovered by chance by
tourists and collectors. With the Indians, to betray the secret would be
to profane the most sacred things of their religion. Fortunately two
fine specimens of these rare objects have lately been secured. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[305](#fn_316) They were found buried among fallen
granite rocks in a distant cañon of the mountains near a deserted Indian
village. They contained bits of burned bones, charcoal, arrow-heads,
etc.

Next in importance were the large storage pots or ollas for the seed
supply of the family. The seeds, carefully harvested, were deposited in
these receptacles, which were hidden among heaps of rocks in canons or
on almost inaccessible mountain sides, discouraging discovery, but
allowing the members of the household to resort to this granary in time
of need.

One fine specimen collected for the American Museum of Natural History
was made by the grandfather of the man of

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

sixty-five who sold it; and he remembers going as a little boy at night
with his grandfather to this secret storehouse. This vessel was
photographed, and also the inaccessible rocky hillside, near the top of
which it had been hidden among the rocks.

In the Ballena district, eight miles or so from Mesa Grande, there is an
exceedingly interesting painted rock which marks the site of a
prehistoric village. The flat rocks near by show the round holes left by
the departed grinders of seeds, grains, and acorns. But the most
remarkable feature of the place consists in the circles of stones
grouped on top of the hillock as if huddled together for protection
against the foe.

Upon first examination it seemed that these circles had been the
foundations of Indian houses, though of what material the superstructure
had been made it was impossible to conjecture. They were formed of loose
boulders rolled into place, and showed no trace of other building
material. They were singularly small in circumference if houses were to
be erected upon them.

Later the probable explanation of these circles was found in Venegas.
Venegas writes: "The people near Cape San Lucas make huts of the
branches of trees. In other parts of the country, their houses are only
a little space inclosed with stones laid one upon another, half a yard
high, one yard square, and without any covering but the heavens;
dwellings indeed so scanty and mean that an European tomb would here be
reckoned a palace. For within this small precinct they have not room to
lie at full length; so that they sleep in a sitting posture."

This exactly describes the stone circles at Spring Hill. It would be
interesting to know from what locality Venegas's description was
derived, and to trace the connection between the tribes making the stone
circles in Lower and Southern California.

It is evident that the site in question was abandoned in very early
times, possibly before the Diegueño occupation of the country, for no
tradition remains to explain these monuments.

They are described in this connection to account for a rare specimen of
pottery collected for the American Museum of Natural History, an ancient
vessel with a base, found on this village site. The shape is quite
unlike those made by the Diegueños, who so far as known never made ollas
with bases.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

Venegas mentions very little pottery among the Indians of the peninsula,
crediting only one tribe with the making of pottery cups. It was at one
time imagined that pottery was not native to the California Indians. But
it is certain that it existed in some localities from early times. Tiny
pottery vessels were used in the Image ceremony among the southernmost
Diegueños and allied Indians, hung in a net about the neck of the image,
to supply food and drink to the spirit of the departed. Domestic
utensils of every shape were made, cups, bowls, jars, and pots. A rude
decoration was lately made at Manzanita, and some good specimens of
small decorated pieces have been collected.

Basketry existed in great perfection in the old days.

The sacred ceremonial baskets of the Luiseños have already been
described. The great granary baskets of the Diegueños are alluded to in
the myths. The bestowing of baskets upon the visiting guests who
assisted in performing the various ceremonials has already been
mentioned. Beautiful baskets were burned with the other possessions of
the dead.

It is this burning of household belongings which makes the collecting of
ancient specimens of the sort an almost impossible task. Only a few
ceremonial objects remain. The things worn and used in daily life have
been destroyed.

Weaving was practiced in a rude way in early and later times. All of
these Indians had rabbit-skin blankets, worn in cold weather as a cloak.
They were made by twisting the strips of the skin into a rope and
weaving this as the warp, with strings of milkweed or yucca twine for
the woof.

That more elaborate woven goods were manufactured like those alluded to
by Venegas, girdles, fillets, and so on, is by no means impossible,
since the burning of household effects would account for the
non-existence of such at present.

One fine example of Diegueño weaving is the woven sack now in the
National Museum, described and figured in Professor Mason's book on
Aboriginal American Basketry (Pl. 203, p. 487). It is made of two
varieties of milkweed fibre twine woven in alternate bands of the white
and red. It is twenty-nine inches high and was made for the storage of
seeds. It was discovered hidden in the brush walls of an Indian hut
owned by two aged

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

brothers. Its manufacture long antedated their memory of the past.

Women's skirts of peeled elder or willow bark were made in the simplest
way, but a certain amount of weaving was necessary at the top to hold
the dependent fringes in place about the waist. Little girls wore
petticoats of reddish milkweed twine netted at the top and hanging in
fringes.

Netting was universally practiced, the reddish twine being in favor in
the mountains near Warner's ranch, where the red-bark milkweed grows;
and the yucca fibres being used farther south and towards the desert.

Carrying nets, bags of various sorts, prickly pear cleaners (loose long
pouches closed at each end, in which the fruit was gathered and shaken
to rid it of its prickles), and so on, were manufactured in this way.

Two sorts of netting stitches are seen, to correspond with the two
different regions mentioned above.

At Mesa Grande and Warner's ranch the common netting stitch called the
"bowline on a bight" was and is used. In the southern mountains, the
Manzanita region, the double loop or square knot is used. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[306](#fn_317)

The Luiseño netting stitch has not been investigated. Sandals made of
yucca fibre very neatly arranged or woven are still worn at Manzanita.

A little brush for sweeping the metate stone is manufactured with great
precision, the fibres bound with knotted and twisted twine.

Although coiled basketry is common among Luiseños and Diegueños, the
twined weave was known and is still used to a certain extent. The
chakwhit, <span id="fr_324"></span>[307](#fn_318) Luiseño ceremonial
basket, also used by men on a staff hung over the shoulder, was twined,
as

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

are the Diegueño basket hats still worn in the Manzanita region. Sifting
baskets are made in an openwork twined mesh. The cheyut, <span
id="fr_325"></span>[308](#fn_319) Luiseño ceremonial basket used with
the coiled tukmul, was twined in flat plaque shape, but is not now to be
found in existence. A sacred basket in jar shape was probably twined.

The immense granary baskets made in circular form with a lid, and placed
on high rocks or on a framework of poles to secure their contents from
the depredations of rodents, are made in a rough twining or interlacing.

Small rudely twined baskets of the same sort were used about the house.

A rare and obsolete form of basket was made by piercing splints of
symmetrical shape laid close together and stringing them on twine.

Stone arrow-heads were made within the memory of old people now living;
but the sacred flints set on sticks, paviut, were not made, being born
of the Earth-mother.

The common grinding mortars and metate stones were made. Very beautiful
metates set on three legs, hewn of solid stone, were manufactured at the
Missions; <span id="fr_326"></span>[309](#fn_320) but the sacred
symmetrical toloache bowls were born of the Earth-mother as people, and
were later transformed into their present shape.

Many rare and interesting objects were collected at the command of the
early missionaries by their shaman converts and burned as a renunciation
of heathenism. As many have probably perished by degrees during Spanish,
Mexican, and American occupation in Southern California.

It is not safe to generalize in a negative way from any lack of existing
specimens.

Some of the old shaman's sticks from near the desert show rude inlaid
work in abalone fragments glued with mescal or other juice. Decorations
of feathers, of powdered mica, of beads or disks of mica, and abalone
were used. Hair was woven into bracelets and anklets. The eagle-feather
skirt was manufactured with twined and netted milkweed fibre, sometimes
colored red with the iron scum of springs burned into paint. At the end
of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

every lowest loop an eagle feather was inserted, hung by the stiff end
of the hollow quill bent upon itself. The ends of the strings were left
long to fasten about the waist. Feather headdresses were sometimes made
with a buckskin cap to which the bunches of feathers were sewn; more
commonly of a headband into which the bunches, owl-feathers tied on
sticks, were inserted. Painted boards of various sorts were used in
ceremonies, now mostly lost. One bull-roarer still exists.

We are enumerating the merest fragments of a past that was undoubtedly
rich in objects of native art and industry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_315"></span>[167:\*](roli30.htm#fr_321) The following notes
on the culture of the Luiseño and Diegueño were incidentally obtained by
Miss DuBois during her stay among them while she was engaged in the
study of their religion.—Ed.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[168:305](roli30.htm#fr_322) See Amer. Anthr.
IX, pl. XXIX, 1907.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[171:306](roli30.htm#fr_323) The bowline on a
bight is made by bringing the shuttle over before the stick, up through
the loop of the last row, behind both lines of the loop and down in
front of both lines and through the loose loop of new thread on the
stick.

The square knot is made by bringing the shuttle behind the stick, up
through the loop of the last row, behind both lines of the loop and down
between both lines of the loop, over the first and under the second
line, pulling backwards and towards the left.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[171:307](roli30.htm#fr_324) Cha’kwut, openwork
rush basket for gathering acorns, cactus, etc.—S.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[172:308](roli30.htm#fr_325) Cheyit, openwork
rush basket for sifting.—S.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[172:309](roli30.htm#fr_326) Probably under
Mexican influence.—Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II. Notes On The Luiseños (A. L. Kroeber)](roli31)
