[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joh)  [Next](rom) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Acts

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> I have given an earlier account, O
Theophilus, of all the things which Jesus did, and of his teaching from
the first,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Till the day when he was taken up to heaven
after he had given his orders, through the Holy Spirit, to the Apostles
of whom he had made selection:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And to whom he gave clear and certain signs
that he was living, after his death; for he was seen by them for forty
days, and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And when they were all together, with him,
he gave them orders not to go away from Jerusalem, but to keep there,
waiting till the word of the Father was put into effect, of which, he
said, I have given you knowledge:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For the baptism of John was with water, but
you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit, after a little time.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> So, when they were together, they said to
him, Lord, will you at this time give back the kingdom to Israel?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he said to them, It is not for you to
have knowledge of the time and the order of events which the Father has
kept in his control.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But you will have power, when the Holy
Spirit has come on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and
all Judaea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And when he had said these things, while
they were looking, he was taken up, and went from their view into a
cloud.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And while they were looking up to heaven
with great attention, two men came to them, in white clothing,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And said, O men of Galilee, why are you
looking up into heaven? This Jesus, who was taken from you into heaven,
will come again, in the same way as you saw him go into heaven.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then they went back to Jerusalem from the
mountain named Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey
away.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And when they came in, they went up into
the room where they were living; Peter and John and James and Andrew,
Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James, the son of Alphaeus,
and Simon the Zealot, and Judas, the son of James.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And they all with one mind gave
themselves up to prayer, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus,
and his brothers.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in those days Peter got up among the
brothers (there were about one hundred and twenty of them), and said,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> My brothers, the word of God had to be
put into effect, which the Holy Spirit had said before, by the mouth of
David, about Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he was numbered among us, and had his
part in our work.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (Now this man, with the reward of his
evil-doing, got for himself a field, and falling head first, came to a
sudden and violent end there.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And this came to the knowledge of all
those who were living in Jerusalem, so that the field was named in their
language, Akel-dama, or, The field of blood.)

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For in the book of Psalms it says, Let
his house be waste, and let no man be living in it: and, Let his
position be taken by another.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For this reason, of the men who have been
with us all the time, while the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Starting from the baptism of John till he
went up from us, one will have to be a witness with us of his coming
back from death.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they made selection of two, Joseph,
named Barsabbas, whose other name was Justus, and Matthias.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they made prayers and said, Lord,
having knowledge of the hearts of all men, make clear which of these two
has been marked out by you,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> To take that position as a servant and
Apostle, from which Judas by his sin was shut out, so that he might go
to his place.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And they put it to the decision of
chance, and the decision was given for Matthias, and he was numbered
with the eleven Apostles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And when the day of Pentecost was come,
they were all together in one place.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And suddenly there came from heaven a sound
like the rushing of a violent wind, and all the house where they were
was full of it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And they saw tongues, like flames of fire,
coming to rest on every one of them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And they were all full of the Holy Spirit,
and were talking in different languages, as the Spirit gave them power.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now there were living at Jerusalem, Jews,
God-fearing men, from every nation under heaven.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And when this sound came to their ears,
they all came together, and were greatly surprised because every man was
hearing the words of the disciples in his special language.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And they were full of wonder and said, Are
not all these men Galilaeans?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And how is it that every one of us is
hearing their words in the language which was ours from our birth?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Men of Parthia, Media, and Elam, and those
living in Mesopotamia, in Judaea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> In Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and
the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and those who have come from Rome, Jews
by birth and others who have become Jews,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Men of Crete and Arabia, to all of us
they are talking in our different languages, of the great works of God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they were all surprised and in doubt
saying to one another, What is the reason of this?

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But others, making sport of them, said,
They are full of new wine.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But Peter, getting up, with the eleven,
said in a loud voice, O men of Judaea, and all you who are living in
Jerusalem, take note of this and give ear to my words.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For these men are not overcome with wine,
as it seems to you, for it is only the third hour of the day;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But this is the thing which was said by
the prophet Joel;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And it will come about, in the last days,
says God, that I will send out my Spirit on all flesh; and your sons and
your daughters will be prophets, and your young men will see visions,
and your old men will have dreams:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And on my men-servants and my
women-servants I will send my Spirit, and they will be prophets.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And wonders will be seen in heaven, and
signs on the earth, blood and fire and smoke:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The sun will become dark and the moon
will be turned to blood, before that great day of the Lord comes in
glory:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And whoever makes his prayer to the Lord
will have salvation.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Men of Israel, give ear to these words:
Jesus of Nazareth, a man who had the approval of God, as was made clear
to you by the great works and signs and wonders which God did by him
among you, as you yourselves have knowledge,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Him, when he was given up, by the
decision and knowledge of God, you put to death on the cross, by the
hands of evil men:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But God gave him back to life, having
made him free from the pains of death because it was not possible for
him to be overcome by it.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For David said of him, I saw the Lord
before my face at all times, for he is at my right hand, so that I may
not be moved:

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And for this cause my heart was glad and
my tongue full of joy, and my flesh will be resting in hope:

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> For you will not let my soul be in hell
and you will not give up your Holy One to destruction.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> You have made me see the ways of life; I
will be full of joy when I see your face.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> My brothers, I may say to you openly that
David came to his death, and was put in the earth, and his resting-place
is with us today.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But being a prophet, and having in mind
the oath which God had given to him, that of the fruit of his body one
would take his place as a king,

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> He, having knowledge of the future, was
talking of the coming again of Christ from the dead, that he was not
kept in hell and his body did not see destruction.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This Jesus God has given back to life, of
which we all are witnesses.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And so, being lifted up to the right hand
of God, and having the Father's word that the Holy Spirit would come, he
has sent this thing, which now you see and have knowledge of.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> For David has not gone up into heaven,
but says, himself, The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand,

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Till I put all those who are against you
under your feet.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> For this reason, let all Israel be
certain that this Jesus, whom you put to death on the cross, God has
made Lord and Christ.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Now when these words came to their ears
their hearts were troubled, and they said to Peter and the other
Apostles, Brothers, what are we to do?

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And Peter said, Let your hearts be
changed, every one of you, and have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ,
for the forgiveness of your sins; and you will have the Holy Spirit
given to you.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> For the word of God is for you and for
your children and for all those who are far off, even all those who may
be marked out by the Lord our God.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And with more such words he gave his
witness, offering them salvation and saying, Come out from this evil
generation.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> Then those who gave hearing to his words
had baptism: and about three thousand souls were joined to them that
day.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And they kept their attention fixed on
the Apostles' teaching and were united together in the taking of broken
bread and in prayer.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> But fear came on every soul: and all
sorts of wonders and signs were done by the Apostles.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And all those who were of the faith kept
together, and had all things in common;

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> And exchanging their goods and property
for money, they made division of it among them all, as they had need.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And day by day, going in agreement
together regularly to the Temple and, taking broken bread together in
their houses, they took their food with joy and with true hearts,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> Giving praise to God, and having the
approval of all the people; and every day the number of those who had
salvation was increased by the Lord.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Peter and John were going up to the
Temple at the ninth hour, the hour of prayer;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And a certain man who from birth had had no
power in his legs, was taken there every day, and put down at the door
of the Temple which is named Beautiful, requesting money from those who
went into the Temple;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> He then, seeing Peter and John going into
the Temple, made a request to them.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Peter, looking at him, with John, said,
Keep your eyes on us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he gave attention to them, hoping to
get something from them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Peter said, I have no silver or gold,
but what I have, that I give to you. In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, get up on your feet.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he took him by his right hand, lifting
him up; and straight away his feet and the bones of his legs became
strong,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And, jumping up, he got on to his feet and
went into the Temple with them, walking and jumping and giving praise to
God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And all the people saw him walking and
praising God:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And they saw that it was the man who made
requests for money at the door of the Temple, and they were full of
wonder and surprise at what had taken place.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And while he kept his hands on Peter and
John, all the people came running together to the covered way which is
named Solomon's, full of wonder.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And when Peter saw it he said to the
people, You men of Israel, why are you so greatly surprised at this man?
or why are you looking at us as if by our power or virtue we had given
him the use of his legs?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob, the God of our fathers, has given glory to his servant Jesus;
whom you gave up, turning your backs on him, when Pilate had made the
decision to let him go free.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But you would have nothing to do with the
Holy and Upright One, and made request for a man of blood to be given to
you,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And put to death the Lord of life; whom
God gave back from the dead; of which fact we are witnesses.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And his name, through faith in his name,
has made this man strong, whom you see and have knowledge of: yes, the
faith which is through him has made him well, before you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And now, my brothers, I am conscious that
you did this, as did your rulers, without knowledge.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But the things which God had made clear
before, by the mouth of all the prophets, that the Christ would have to
undergo, he has put into effect in this way.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> So then, let your hearts be changed and
be turned to God, so that your sins may be completely taken away, and
times of blessing may come from the Lord;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And that he may send the Christ who was
marked out for you from the first, even Jesus:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who is to be kept in heaven till the time
when all things are put right, of which God has given word by the mouth
of his holy prophets, who have been from the earliest times.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For Moses said, The Lord will give you a
prophet from among your people, like me; you will give ear to everything
which he will say to you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And every soul who does not give
attention to that prophet, will be cut off from among the people.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And all the prophets from Samuel and
those who came after, every one of them, gave word of these days.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> You are the sons of the prophets, and of
the agreement which God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham,
Through your seed a blessing will come on all the families of the earth.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> To you, first, God sent his servant,
blessing you by turning every one of you from his sins.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And while they were talking to the people,
the priests and the captain of the Temple and the Sadducees came up to
them,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Being greatly troubled because they were
teaching the people and preaching Jesus as an example of the coming back
from the dead.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And they took them and put them in prison
till the morning, for it was now evening.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But a number of those who gave hearing to
the word had faith; and they were now about five thousand.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And on the day after, the rulers and those
in authority and the scribes came together in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Annas, the high priest, was there, and
Caiaphas and John and Alexander, and all the relations of the high
priest.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then sending for Peter and John, they said,
By what power and in whose name have you done this?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then Peter, being full of the Holy Spirit,
said to them, O you rulers of the people and men of authority,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> If we are questioned today about a good
work done to a man who was ill, as to how he has been made well,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Take note, all of you, and all the people
of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you put to
death on the cross, whom God gave back from the dead, even through him
is this man now before you completely well.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> He is the stone which you builders had no
use for, but which has been made the chief stone of the building.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And in no other is there salvation: for
there is no other name under heaven, given among men, through which we
may have salvation.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now when they saw that Peter and John
were without fear, though they were men of no education or learning,
they were greatly surprised; and they took note of them that they had
been with Jesus.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And, seeing that the man who had been
made well was there with them, they were not able to say anything
against it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But when they had given them orders to go
out of the Sanhedrin, they had a discussion among themselves,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Saying, What are we to do with these men?
for certainly it is clear to all who are living in Jerusalem that a most
important sign has been done by them, and it is not possible to say that
it is not so.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But so that it may not go farther among
the people, let us put them in fear of punishment if they say anything
in future in this name.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And they sent for them, and gave them
orders not to make statements or give teaching in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But Peter and John in answer said to
them, It is for you to say if it is right in the eyes of God to give
attention to you more than to God:

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For it is not possible for us to keep
from saying what we have seen and have knowledge of.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And when they had said more sharp words
to them, they let them go, not seeing what punishment they might give
them, because of the people; for all men were giving praise to God for
what had taken place.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For the man on whom this act of power was
done was more than forty years old.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And when they had been made free, they
came back to their friends, and gave an account of all the things which
the chief priests and the authorities had said to them.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And hearing it, they all, with one mind,
made prayer to God and said, O Lord, maker of heaven and earth and the
sea and all things in them:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Who has said, by the Holy Spirit, through
the mouth of our father David your servant, Why are the nations so
violently moved, and why are the thoughts of the people so foolish?

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> The kings of the earth were lifted up,
the rulers came together, against the Lord, and against his Christ:

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For, truly, in this town, against your
holy servant, Jesus, who was marked out by you as Christ, Herod, and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, came
together,

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> To do that which had been fixed before by
your hand and your purpose.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And now, Lord, take note of their cruel
words, and give your servants power to be preachers of your word without
fear,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> While your hand is stretched out to do
works of mercy; so that signs and wonders may be done through the name
of your holy servant Jesus.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And when their prayer was ended, the
place where they were was violently moved, and they all became full of
the Holy Spirit, preaching the word of God without fear.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And all those who were of the faith were
one in heart and soul: and not one of them said that any of the things
which he had was his property only; but they had all things in common.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with great power the Apostles gave
witness of the coming back of the Lord Jesus from the dead; and grace
was on them all.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And no one among them was in need; for
everyone who had land or houses, exchanging them for money, took the
price of them,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And put it at the feet of the Apostles
for distribution to everyone as he had need.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And Joseph, who was given by the Apostles
the name of Barnabas (the sense of which is, Son of comfort), a Levite
and a man of Cyprus by birth,

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Having a field, got money for it and put
the money at the feet of the Apostles.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But a certain man named Ananias, with
Sapphira his wife, got money for his property,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And kept back part of the price, his wife
having knowledge of it, and took the rest and put it at the feet of the
Apostles.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But Peter said, Ananias, why has the Evil
One put it into your heart to be false to the Holy Spirit, and to keep
back part of the price of the land?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> While you had it, was it not your property?
and after you had given it in exchange, was it not still in your power?
how has this purpose come into your mind? you have been false, not to
men, but to God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And at these words, Ananias went down on
the earth, and his life went from him: and great fear came on all who
were present.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the young men went and made ready his
body, and took it out, and put it in the earth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And about three hours after, his wife,
having no knowledge of what had taken place, came in.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Peter said to her, Give me an answer:
was this amount of money the price of the land? And she said, Yes, it
was.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> But Peter said to her, Why have you made an
agreement together to be false to the Spirit of the Lord? See, the feet
of the young men who have put the body of your husband in the earth, are
at the door, and they will take you out.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And straight away she went down at his
feet, and her life went from her: and the young men came in and saw her
dead, and they took her out and put her in the earth with her husband.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Then great fear came on all the church
and on all who had knowledge of these things.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Now a number of signs and wonders were
done among the people by the hands of the Apostles; and they were all
together in Solomon's covered way.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> The others, in fear, kept back from
joining them: but the people made much of them;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And a great number of men and women had
faith, and were joined to the Lord;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And they even took into the streets
people who were ill, and put them on beds, so that when Peter went by,
some of them might be in his shade.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And numbers of people came together from
the towns round about Jerusalem, with those who were ill and those who
were troubled with unclean spirits: and they were all made well.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But the high priest and those who were
with him (the Sadducees) were full of envy,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And they took the Apostles and put them
in the common prison.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But in the night an angel of the Lord,
opening the doors of the prison, took them out and said,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Go, take your place in the Temple and
give the people all the teaching about this Life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And hearing this, they went into the
Temple at dawn, and were teaching. But the high priest and those who
were with him got together the Sanhedrin and the representatives of the
children of Israel, and sent to the prison to get them.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But the men who were sent saw that they
were not in the prison, and came back with the news,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Saying, The doors of the prison were
safely shut, and the keepers were at the doors, but when they were open,
there was nobody inside.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Now, at these words, the captain of the
Temple and the chief priests were greatly troubled about what might be
the end of this business.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And someone came and said to them, The
men, whom you put in prison, are in the Temple teaching the people.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Then the captain and some of the police
went and took them, but not violently, for fear that they might be
stoned by the people.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And they took them into the Sanhedrin,
and the high priest said to them,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> We gave you very clear orders not to give
teaching in this name: and now Jerusalem is full of your teaching, and
you are attempting to make us responsible for this man's death.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> But Peter and the Apostles, answering,
said, We have to do the orders of God, not of man.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> The God of our fathers gave Jesus back to
life, whom you had put to death, hanging him on a tree.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Him God has put on high at his right
hand, as a Ruler and a Saviour, to give to Israel a change of heart and
forgiveness of sins.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And we are witnesses of these things, and
so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who keep his laws.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But when these words came to their ears,
they were cut to the heart, and had a mind to put them to death.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But one of the Sanhedrin, a Pharisee
named Gamaliel, a man of learning in the law, of whom all the people had
a high opinion, got up and made a suggestion for the men to be put
outside for a little time.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> And he said to them, Men of Israel, take
care what you do about these men.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> For before this there was Theudas, who
said he was someone important, to whom about four hundred men gave their
support: he was put to death, and his band was broken up and came to
nothing.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> After this man, there was Judas of
Galilee, at the time of the numbering, and some of the people went after
him: he was put to death, and all his supporters were put to flight.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And now I say to you, Do nothing to these
men, but let them be: for if this teaching or this work is of men, it
will come to nothing:

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But if it is of God, you will not be able
to overcome them, and you are in danger of fighting against God.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And he seemed to them to be right: and
they sent for the Apostles, and, after having them whipped and giving
them orders to give no teaching in the name of Jesus, they let them go.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> So they went away from the Sanhedrin,
happy to undergo shame for the Name.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And every day, in the Temple and
privately, they went on teaching and preaching Jesus as the Christ.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now in those days, when the number of the
disciples was increasing, protests were made by the Greek Jews against
the Hebrews, because their widows were not taken care of in the
distribution of food every day.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the Apostles sent for all the disciples
and said, It is not right for us to give up preaching the word of God in
order to make distribution of food.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Take then from among you seven men of good
name, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, to whom we may give control of
this business.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then we will give all our time to prayer
and the teaching of the word.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And this saying was pleasing to all of
them: and they made selection of Stephen, a man full of faith and of the
Holy Spirit, and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas
and Nicolas of Antioch, who had become a Jew:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> These they took to the Apostles, who, after
prayer, put their hands on them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the word of God was increasing in
power; and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem became very great,
and a great number of priests were in agreement with the faith.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And Stephen, full of grace and power, did
great wonders and signs among the people.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But some of those who were of the Synagogue
named that of the Libertines, and some of the men of Cyrene and of
Alexandria and those from Cilicia and Asia, had arguments with Stephen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> But they were not able to get the better
of him, for his words were full of wisdom and of the Spirit.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then they got men to say, He has said
evil against Moses and against God, in our hearing.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the people, with the rulers and the
scribes, were moved against him, and they came and took him before the
Sanhedrin,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And they got false witnesses who said,
This man is for ever saying things against this holy place and against
the law:

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For he has said in our hearing that this
Jesus of Nazareth will put this place to destruction and make changes in
the rules which were handed down to us by Moses.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And all those who were in the Sanhedrin,
looking at him, saw that his face was like the face of an angel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Then the high priest said, Are these things
true?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And he said, My brothers and fathers, give
hearing. The God of glory came to our father Abraham, when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he was living in Haran,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And said to him, Go out of your land, and
away from your family, and come into the land to which I will be your
guide.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then he came out of the land of the
Chaldaeans, and went into Haran; and from there, when his father was
dead, he was guided by God into this land, where you are living now:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And God gave him no heritage in it, not
even enough to put his foot on: but he gave him an undertaking that he
would give it to him and to his children after him, though he had no
child at that time.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And God said that his seed would be living
in a strange land, and that they would make them servants, and be cruel
to them for four hundred years.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And I will be the judge, said God, of that
nation which made them servants: and after that, they will come out and
give me worship in this place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he made with him the agreement of which
circumcision was the sign. And so Abraham had a son, Isaac, and gave him
circumcision on the eighth day; and Isaac had a son, Jacob, and Jacob
was the father of the twelve heads of the families of Israel.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the brothers, moved with envy against
Joseph, gave him to the Egyptians for money: but God was with him,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And made him free from all his troubles,
and gave him wisdom and the approval of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made
him ruler over Egypt and all his house.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now there was no food to be had in all
Egypt and Canaan, and there was great trouble: and our fathers were not
able to get food.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But Jacob, hearing that there was grain
in Egypt, sent out our fathers the first time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And the second time his brothers had a
meeting with Joseph, and Pharaoh had knowledge of Joseph's family.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then Joseph sent for Jacob his father and
all his family, seventy-five persons.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And Jacob went down to Egypt, and came to
his end there, and so did our fathers;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And they were taken over to Shechem, and
put to rest in the place which Abraham got for a price in silver from
the sons of Hamor in Shechem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But when the time was near for putting
into effect the undertaking which God had given to Abraham, the people
were increasing in Egypt,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Till another king came to power, who had
no knowledge of Joseph.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He, having evil designs against our
nation, was cruel to our fathers, and they were forced to put out their
young children, so that they might not go on living.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> At which time Moses came to birth, and he
was very beautiful; and he was kept for three months in his father's
house:

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And when he was put out, Pharaoh's
daughter took him and kept him as her son.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Moses was trained in all the wisdom
of Egypt, and was great in his words and works.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But when he was almost forty years old,
it came into his heart to go and see his brothers, the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And seeing one of them being attacked, he
went to his help and gave the Egyptian a death-blow:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And he was hoping that his brothers would
see that God had sent him to be their saviour; but they did not see.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And the day after, he came to them, while
they were having a fight, and would have made peace between them,
saying, Sirs, you are brothers; why do you do wrong to one another?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But the man who was doing wrong to his
neighbour, pushing him away, said, Who made you a ruler and a judge over
us?

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Will you put me to death as you did the
Egyptian yesterday?

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And at these words, Moses went in flight
to the land of Midian, and was living there for a time, and had two
sons.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> At the end of forty years, an angel came
to him in the waste land of Sinai, in the flame of a burning thorn-tree.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And Moses, seeing it, was full of wonder,
and when he came up to have a nearer view of it, the voice of the Lord
came to him, saying,

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> I am the God of your fathers, the God of
Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob. And Moses, shaking with fear, kept
his eyes from looking at it.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the Lord said, Take off the shoes
from your feet, for the place where you are is holy.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> Truly, I have seen the sorrows of my
people in Egypt, and their cries have come to my ears, and I have come
down to make them free: and now, come, I will send you to Egypt.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This Moses, whom they would not have,
saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge? him God sent to be a ruler and
a saviour, by the hand of the angel whom he saw in the thorn-tree.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> This man took them out, having done
wonders and signs in Egypt and in the Red Sea and in the waste land, for
forty years.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is the same Moses, who said to the
children of Israel, God will give you a prophet from among your
brothers, like me.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> This is the man who was in the church in
the waste land with the angel who was talking to him in Sinai, and with
our fathers; and to him were given the living words of God, so that he
might give them to you.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> By whom our fathers would not be
controlled; but they put him on one side, turning back in their hearts
to Egypt,

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> And saying to Aaron, Make us gods to go
before us: as for this Moses, who took us out of the land of Egypt, we
have no idea what has become of him.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And they made the image of a young ox in
those days, and made an offering to it, and had joy in the work of their
hands.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> But God was turned from them and let them
give worship to the stars of heaven, as it says in the book of the
prophets, Did you make offerings to me of sheep and oxen for forty years
in the waste land, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> And you took up the tent of Moloch and
the star of the god Rephan, images which you made to give worship to
them: and I will take you away, farther than Babylon.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Our fathers had the Tent of witness in
the waste land, as God gave orders to Moses to make it after the design
which he had seen.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Which our fathers, in their turn, took
with them when, with Joshua, they came into the heritage of the nations
whom God was driving out before the face of our fathers, till the time
of David,

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> Who was pleasing to God; and he had a
desire to make a holy tent for the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> But Solomon was the builder of his house.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> But still, the Most High has not his
resting-place in houses made with hands, as the prophet says,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> Heaven is the seat of my power, and earth
is a resting-place for my feet: what sort of house will you make for me,
says the Lord, or what is my place of rest?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Did not my hand make all these things?

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> You whose hearts are hard and whose ears
are shut to me; you are ever working against the Holy Spirit; as your
fathers did, so do you.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> Which of the prophets was not cruelly
attacked by your fathers? and they put to death those who gave them the
news of the coming of the Upright One; whom you have now given up and
put to death;

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> You, to whom the law was given as it was
ordered by angels, and who have not kept it.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> Hearing these things, they were cut to
the heart and moved with wrath against him.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> But he was full of the Holy Spirit, and
looking up to heaven, he saw the glory of God and Jesus at the right
hand of God.

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> And he said, Now I see heaven open, and
the Son of man at the right hand of God.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> But with loud cries, and stopping their
ears, they made an attack on him all together,

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> Driving him out of the town and stoning
him: and the witnesses put their clothing at the feet of a young man
named Saul.

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> And Stephen, while he was being stoned,
made prayer to God, saying, Lord Jesus, take my spirit.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> And going down on his knees, he said in a
loud voice, Lord, do not make them responsible for this sin. And when he
had said this, he went to his rest.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Saul gave approval to his death. Now at
that time a violent attack was started against the church in Jerusalem;
and all but the Apostles went away into all parts of Judaea and Samaria.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And God-fearing men put Stephen's body in
its last resting-place, making great weeping over him.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But Saul was burning with hate against the
church, going into every house and taking men and women and putting them
in prison.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> But those who had gone in flight went
everywhere preaching the word.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Philip went down to Samaria and was
teaching them about Christ.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And all the people gave attention to the
words which Philip said, when they saw the signs which he did.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For unclean spirits came out from those who
had them, crying with a loud voice; and a number of those who were ill
and broken in body were made well.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And there was much joy in that town.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But there was a certain man named Simon,
who in the past had been a wonder-worker and a cause of surprise to the
people of Samaria, saying that he himself was a great man:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> To whom they all gave attention, from the
smallest to the greatest, saying, This man is that power of God which is
named Great.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they gave attention to him, because
for a long time his wonder-working powers had kept them under his
control.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when they had faith in the good news
given by Philip about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, a
number of men and women had baptism.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Simon himself had faith and, having
had baptism, he went with Philip and, seeing the signs and the great
wonders which he did, he was full of surprise.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now when the Apostles at Jerusalem had
news that the people of Samaria had taken the word of God into their
hearts, they sent to them Peter and John;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Who, when they came there, made prayer
for them, that the Holy Spirit might be given to them:

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> For up to that time he had not come on
any of them; only baptism had been given to them in the name of the Lord
Jesus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then they put their hands on them, and
the Holy Spirit came on them.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit
was given through the touch of the Apostles' hands, he made them an
offering of money, saying,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Give me this power, so that when I put my
hands on anyone he may get the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> But Peter said, May your money come to
destruction with you, because you had the idea that what is freely given
by God may be got for a price.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> You have no part in this business,
because your heart is not right before God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Let your heart be changed, and make
prayer to God that you may have forgiveness for your evil thoughts.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> For I see that you are prisoned in bitter
envy and the chains of sin.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Simon, answering, said, Make prayer
for me to the Lord, so that these things which you have said may not
come on me.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> So they, having given their witness and
made clear the word of the Lord, went back to Jerusalem, giving the good
news on their way in a number of the small towns of Samaria.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But an angel of the Lord said to Philip,
Get up, and go to the south, to the road which goes from Jerusalem to
Gaza, through the waste land.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he went and there was a man of
Ethiopia, a servant of great authority under Candace, queen of the
Ethiopians, and controller of all her property, who had come up to
Jerusalem for worship;

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> He was going back, seated in his
carriage, and was reading the book of the prophet Isaiah.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near,
and get on his carriage.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Philip, running up to him, saw that
he was reading Isaiah the prophet, and said to him, Is the sense of what
you are reading clear to you?

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he said, How is that possible when I
have no guide? And he made Philip get up by his side.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now the place in the book where he was
reading was this: He was taken, like a sheep, to be put to death; and as
a lamb is quiet when its wool is being cut, so he made no sound:

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Being of low degree, his cause was not
given a hearing: who has knowledge of his family? for his life is cut
off from the earth.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And the Ethiopian said to Philip, About
whom are these words said by the prophet? about himself, or some other?

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> So Philip, starting from this writing,
gave him the good news about Jesus.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And while they were going on their way,
they came to some water, and the Ethiopian said, See, here is water; why
may I not have baptism?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> \[\]

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> And he gave orders for the carriage to be
stopped, and the two of them went down into the water, and Philip gave
him baptism.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> And when they came up out of the water,
the Spirit of the Lord took Philip away; and the Ethiopian saw him no
more, for he went on his way full of joy.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But Philip came to Azotus, and went
through all the towns, preaching the good news, till he came to
Caesarea.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> But Saul, still burning with desire to put
to death the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And made a request for letters from him to
the Synagogues of Damascus, so that if there were any of the Way there,
men or women, he might take them as prisoners to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And while he was journeying, he came near
Damascus; and suddenly he saw a light from heaven shining round him;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And he went down on the earth, and a voice
said to him, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And he said, Who are you, Lord? And he
said, I am Jesus, whom you are attacking:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But get up, and go into the town, and it
will be made clear to you what you have to do.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And the men who were with him were not able
to say anything; hearing the voice, but seeing no one.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Saul got up from the earth, and when
his eyes were open, he saw nothing; and he was guided by the hand into
Damascus.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And for three days he was not able to see,
and he took no food or drink.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now there was a certain disciple at
Damascus, named Ananias; and the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias!
and he said, Here I am, Lord.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Lord said to him, Get up, and go
to the street which is named Straight, and make search at the house of
Judas for one named Saul of Tarsus: for he is at prayer;

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he has seen a man named Ananias
coming in and putting his hands on him, so that he may be able to see.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But Ananias said, Lord, I have had
accounts of this man from a number of people, how much evil he has done
to your saints at Jerusalem:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And here he has authority from the chief
priests to make prisoners all who give worship to your name.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But the Lord said, Go without fear: for
he is a special vessel for me, to give to the Gentiles and kings and to
the children of Israel the knowledge of my name:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For I will make clear to him what
troubles he will have to undergo for me.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And Ananias went out and came to the
house, and putting his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus,
whom you saw when you were on your journey, has sent me, so that you may
be able to see, and be full of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And straight away it seemed as if a veil
was taken from his eyes, and he was able to see; and he got up, and had
baptism;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And when he had taken food his strength
came back. And for some days he kept with the disciples who were in
Damascus.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And straight away, in the Synagogues, he
was preaching Jesus as the Son of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And all those hearing him were full of
wonder and said, Is not this the man who in Jerusalem was attacking all
the worshippers of this name? and he had come here so that he might take
them as prisoners before the chief priests.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Saul went on increasing in power, and
the Jews in Damascus were not able to give answers to the arguments by
which he made it clear that Jesus was the Christ.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Then, after some days, the Jews made an
agreement together to put him to death:

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But Saul got knowledge of their design.
And they kept watch day and night on the roads out of the town, so that
they might put him to death:

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But his disciples took him by night and
let him down from the wall in a basket.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And when he came to Jerusalem, he made an
attempt to be joined to the disciples, but they were all in fear of him,
not taking him for a disciple.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Barnabas took him to the Apostles and
gave them an account of how he had seen the Lord on the road, and had
given hearing to his words, and how at Damascus he had been preaching in
the name of Jesus without fear.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he was with them, going in and out at
Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Preaching in the name of the Lord without
fear; and he had discussions with the Greek Jews; but they were working
for his death.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And when the brothers had knowledge of
it, they took him to Caesarea and sent him to Tarsus.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And so the church through all Judaea and
Galilee and Samaria had peace and was made strong; and, living in the
fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, was increased
greatly.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And it came about that while Peter was
going through all parts of the country he came to the saints who were
living at Lydda.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And there was a certain man there, named
Aeneas, who for eight years had been in bed, without power of moving.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus
Christ makes you well: get up and make your bed. And straight away he
got up.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And all those living in Lydda and Sharon
saw him, and were turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple
named Tabitha, that is, Dorcas: this woman was given to good works and
acts of mercy at all times.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it came about, in those days, that
she got ill and came to her death: and when she had been washed, they
put her in a room which was high up.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And because Lydda was near Joppa, the
disciples, having knowledge that Peter was there, sent two men to him,
requesting him to come to them straight away.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Peter went with them. And when he had
come, they took him into the room: and all the widows were there,
weeping and putting before him the coats and clothing which Dorcas had
made while she was with them.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> But Peter made them all go outside, and
went down on his knees in prayer; and turning to the body, he said,
Tabitha, get up. And, opening her eyes, she saw Peter and got up.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And he took her hand, lifting her up;
and, sending for the saints and widows, he gave her to them, living.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And news of it went all through Joppa,
and a number of people had faith in the Lord.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And he was living in Joppa for some time
with Simon, a leather-worker.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now there was a certain man in Caesarea,
named Cornelius, the captain of the Italian band of the army;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> A serious-minded man, fearing God with
all his family; he gave much money to the poor, and made prayer to God
at all times.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> He saw in a vision, clearly, at about the
ninth hour of the day, an angel of the Lord coming to him and saying to
him, Cornelius!

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he, looking on him in fear, said,
What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Your prayers and your offerings
have come up to God, and he has kept them in mind.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Now send men to Joppa, and get one Simon,
named Peter,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Who is living with Simon, a
leather-worker, whose house is by the sea.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when the angel who said these words
to him had gone away, he sent for two of his house-servants, and a
God-fearing man of the army, one of those who were waiting on him at all
times;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And having given them an account of
everything, he sent them to Joppa.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Now the day after, when they were on
their journey and were near the town, Peter went up to the top of the
house for prayer, about the sixth hour:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he was in need of food: but while
they were getting it ready, a deep sleep came on him;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he saw the heavens opening, and a
vessel coming down, like a great cloth let down on the earth,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> In which were all sorts of beasts and
birds.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And a voice came to him, saying, Come,
Peter; take them for food.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Peter said, No, Lord; for I have
never taken food which is common or unclean.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the voice came to him a second
time, What God has made clean, do not you make common.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And this was done three times: and then
the vessel was taken back into heaven.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now while Peter was in doubt as to the
purpose of this vision, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made
search for Simon's house, came to the door,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> To see if Simon, named Peter, was
living there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And, while Peter was turning the vision
over in his mind, the Spirit said to him, See, three men are looking for
you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Go down, then, and go with them,
doubting nothing, for I have sent them.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Peter went down to the men, and
said, I am the man you are looking for: why have you come?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And they said, Cornelius, a captain, an
upright and God-fearing man, respected by all the nation of the Jews,
had word from God by an angel to send for you to his house, and to give
hearing to your words.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> So he took them in for the night. And
the day after, he went with them, taking some of the brothers from Joppa
with him.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the day after that, they came to
Caesarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having got together his
relations and his near friends.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And when Peter came in, Cornelius came
to him and, falling down at his feet, gave him worship.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But Peter, lifting him up, said, Get
up, for I am a man as you are.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And saying these words, he went in, and
saw that a great number of people had come together;

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And he said to them, You yourselves
have knowledge that it is against the law for a man who is a Jew to be
in the company of one who is of another nation; but God has made it
clear to me that no man may be named common or unclean:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And so I came without question, when I
was sent for. What then is your purpose in sending for me?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Cornelius said, Four days from now
I was in my house in prayer at the ninth hour; and I saw before me a man
in shining clothing,

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Who said, Cornelius, your prayer has
come to the ears of God, and your offerings are kept in his memory.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Send, then, to Joppa, and get Simon,
named Peter, to come to you; he is living in the house of Simon, a
leather-worker, by the sea.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> So, straight away, I sent for you; and
you have done well to come. And now, we are all present before God,
ready to give attention to all the things which the Lord has given you
to say.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Then Peter said, Truly, I see clearly
that God is no respecter of persons:

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> But in every nation, the man who has
fear of him and does righteousness is pleasing to him.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> The word which he sent to the children
of Israel, giving the good news of peace through Jesus Christ (who is
Lord of all)--

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> That word you yourselves have knowledge
of, which was made public through all Judaea, starting from Galilee,
after the baptism of which John was the preacher,

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> About Jesus of Nazareth, how God gave
the Holy Spirit to him, with power: and how he went about doing good and
making well all who were troubled by evil spirits, for God was with him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And we are witnesses of all the things
which he did in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they put
to death, hanging him on a tree.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> On the third day God gave him back to
life, and let him be seen,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Not by all the people, but by witnesses
marked out before by God, even by us, who took food and drink with him
after he came back from the dead.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And he gave us orders to give news of
this to the people, and to give public witness that this is he whom God
has made judge of the living and the dead.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> To him all the prophets give witness,
that through his name everyone who has faith in him will have
forgiveness of sins.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> While Peter was saying these words, the
Holy Spirit came on all those who were hearing the word.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> And the Jews of the faith, who had come
with Peter, were full of wonder, because the Holy Spirit was given to
the Gentiles,

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> And they were talking in tongues, and
giving glory to God. Then Peter said,

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> Will any man say that these may not
have baptism who have been given the Holy Spirit as we have?

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And he gave orders for them to have
baptism in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they kept him with them for
some days.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now the Apostles and the brothers who
were in Judaea had news that the word of God had been given to the
Gentiles.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And when Peter came to Jerusalem, those
who kept the rule of circumcision had an argument with him,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Saying, You went to men without
circumcision, and took food with them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But Peter gave them an account of it all
in order, saying to them,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> I was in the town of Joppa, at prayer:
and falling into a deep sleep, I saw in a vision a vessel like a great
cloth let down from heaven, and it came down to me:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And looking on it with attention I saw in
it all sorts of beasts and birds.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And a voice came to my ears saying, Come,
Peter; take them for food.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But I said, No, Lord; for nothing common
or unclean has ever come into my mouth.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But the voice, coming a second time from
heaven, said, What God has made clean, do not you make common.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And this was done three times, and they
were all taken up again into heaven.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And at that minute, three men, sent
from Caesarea, came to the house where we were.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the Spirit gave me orders to go
with them, doubting nothing. And these six brothers came with me; and we
went into that man's house:

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And he gave us an account of how he had
seen the angel in his house, saying, Send to Joppa, and get Simon, named
Peter, to come to you;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Who will say words to you through which
you and all your family may get salvation.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And, while I was talking to them, the
Holy Spirit came on them, as on us at first.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And the words of the Lord came into my
mind, how he said, The baptism of John was with water, but you will have
baptism with the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> If then God gave them, when they had
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the same as he gave to us, who was I to
go against God?

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And hearing these things they said
nothing more, but gave glory to God, saying, Then to the Gentiles as to
us has God given a change of heart, so that they may have life.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Then those who had gone away at the
time of the trouble about Stephen, went as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus,
preaching to the Jews only.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But some of them, men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, when they came to Antioch, gave the good news about the Lord
Jesus to the Greeks.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And the power of the Lord was with
them, and a great number had faith and were turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And news of them came to the ears of
the church at Jerusalem: and they sent Barnabas as far as Antioch:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Who, when he came and saw the grace of
God, was glad; and he made clear to them the need of keeping near the
Lord with all the strength of their hearts:

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For he was a good man and full of the
Holy Spirit and of faith: and a great number were joined to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then he went on to Tarsus, looking for
Saul;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And when he had come across him, he
took him to Antioch. And they were with the church there for a year,
teaching the people; and the disciples were first given the name of
Christians in Antioch.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Now in those days prophets came from
Jerusalem to Antioch.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And one of them, named Agabus, said
publicly through the Spirit that there would be serious need of food all
over the earth: which came about in the time of Claudius.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And the disciples, everyone as he was
able, made a decision to send help to the brothers living in Judaea:

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Which they did, sending it to the
rulers of the church by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now, about that time, Herod the king made
cruel attacks on the Christians.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he put James, the brother of John, to
death with the sword.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And when he saw that this was pleasing to
the Jews he went on to take Peter in addition. This was at the time of
the feast of unleavened bread.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And having taken him, he put him in
prison, with four bands of armed men to keep watch over him; his purpose
being to take him out to the people after the Passover.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> So Peter was kept in prison: but the
church made strong prayer to God for him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And when Herod was about to take him out,
the same night Peter was sleeping in chains between two armed men, and
the watchmen were keeping watch before the door of the prison.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And a great light was seen shining in the
room, and an angel of the Lord came to Peter and, touching him on his
side so that he came out of his sleep, said, Get up quickly. And his
chains came off his hands.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Then the angel said, Put on your shoes
and get ready to go. And he did so. And he said, Put your coat round you
and come with me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he went out after him; and he was not
certain if what was done by the angel was a fact, for it seemed to him
that he was seeing a vision.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And when they had gone past the first
and second watchmen they came to the iron door into the town, which came
open by itself: and they went out and down one street; and then the
angel went away.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when Peter came to his senses he
said, Now, truly, I am certain that the Lord has sent his angel and
taken me out of the hands of Herod, against all the hopes of the Jews.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And when he became clear about this, he
went to the house of Mary, the mother of John named Mark, where a number
of them had come together for prayer.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And he gave a blow on the door, and a
young girl came to it, named Rhoda.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And hearing the voice of Peter, in her
joy she went running, without opening the door, to say that Peter was
outside.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they said to her, You are off your
head. But still she said, with decision, that it was so. And they said,
It is his angel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But Peter went on giving blows on the
door: and when it was open and they saw him, they were full of wonder.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But he made a sign to them with his
hand to be quiet, and gave them an account of how the Lord had taken him
out of prison. And he said, Give the news to James and the brothers. And
then he went away.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Now when it was day, the armed men were
greatly troubled about what had become of Peter.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And Herod, when he sent for him, and he
was not there, after questioning the watchmen, gave orders that they
were to be put to death. Then he went down from Judaea to Caesarea for a
time.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now he was very angry with the people
of Tyre and Sidon: and they came to him, all together, and having made
friends with Blastus, the controller of the king's house, they made a
request for peace, because their country was dependent on the king's
country for its food.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And on the day which had been fixed,
Herod, dressed in his robes and seated in his place, made a public
statement to them.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the people, with loud cries, said,
It is the voice of a god, not of a man.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And straight away the angel of the Lord
sent a disease on him, because he did not give the glory to God: and his
flesh was wasted away by worms, and so he came to his end.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the word of the Lord went on
increasing.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Barnabas and Saul came back from
Jerusalem, when their work was ended, taking with them John named Mark.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now there were at Antioch, in the church
there, prophets and teachers, Barnabas, and Symeon who was named Niger,
and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, a relation of Herod the king, and
Saul.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And while they were doing the Lord's
work, and going without food, the Holy Spirit said, Let Barnabas and
Saul be given to me for the special work for which they have been marked
out by me.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Then, after prayer and going without food
they put their hands on them, and sent them away.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit,
they went down to Seleucia; and from there they went by ship to Cyprus.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And at Salamis they were preaching the
word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews: and John was with them,
helping them.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when they had gone through all the
island to Paphos, they came across a certain wonder-worker and false
prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar-Jesus;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Who was with the ruler, Sergius Paulus,
an able man. This man sent for Barnabas and Saul, desiring to have
knowledge of the word of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But Elymas, the wonder-worker (for that
is the sense of his name), put himself against them, with the purpose of
turning the ruler from the faith.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But Saul, whose other name is Paul, being
full of the Holy Spirit, looking hard at him, said,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> O you, who are full of false tricks and
evil ways, a son of the Evil One, hating all righteousness, will you for
ever be turning people from the right ways of the Lord?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And now, see, the hand of the Lord is
on you, and you will be blind and not able to see the sun for a time.
And straight away a dark mist came down on him; and he went about
looking for a guide.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then the ruler, when he saw what was
done, had faith, being full of wonder at the teaching of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Then Paul and those who were with him
went by ship from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia: and there John
went away from them and came back to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But they, going through from Perga,
came to Antioch in Pisidia; and they went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath and were seated.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And after the reading of the law and
the prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent to them, saying,
Brothers, if you have a word of comfort for the people, say on.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And Paul, getting up and making a sign
with his hand, said, Men of Israel, and you who have the fear of God,
give ear.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The God of this people Israel made
selection of our fathers, lifting the people up from their low condition
when they were living in the land of Egypt, and with a strong arm took
them out of it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And for about forty years he put up
with their ways in the waste land.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And having put to destruction seven
nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them the land for their heritage
for about four hundred and fifty years.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And after these things he gave them
judges, till the time of Samuel the prophet.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Then at their request for a king, God
gave them Saul, the son of Kish, a man of the family of Benjamin, who
was their king for forty years.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And having put him on one side, he made
David their king, to whom he gave witness, saying, I have taken David,
the son of Jesse, a man dear to my heart, who will do all my pleasure.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> From this man's seed has God given to
Israel a Saviour, even Jesus, as he gave his word;

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> For whose coming John made ready the
way by preaching to all the people of Israel the baptism which goes with
a change of heart.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And when John was completing his work,
he said, What do I seem to you to be? I am not he; but one is coming
after me, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> My brothers, children of the family of
Abraham, and those among you who have the fear of God, to us the word of
this salvation is sent.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> For the men of Jerusalem and their
rulers, having no knowledge of him, or of the sayings of the prophets
which come to their ears every Sabbath day, gave effect to them by
judging him.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And though no cause of death was seen
in him, they made a request to Pilate that he might be put to death.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And when they had done all the things
said in the Writings about him, they took him down from the tree, and
put him in the place of the dead.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> But God gave him back from the dead:

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And for a number of days he was seen by
those who came with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his
witnesses before the people.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And we are giving you the good news of
the undertaking made to the fathers,

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Which God has now put into effect for
our children, by sending Jesus; as it says in the second Psalm, You are
my Son; this day I have given you being.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And about his coming back from the
dead, never again to go to destruction, he has said these words, I will
give you the holy and certain mercies of David.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Because he says in another Psalm, You
will not let your Holy One see destruction.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Now David, having done God's work for
his generation, went to sleep, and was put with his fathers, and his
body came to destruction:

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But he, who was lifted up by God, did
not see destruction.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> And so, let it be clear to you, my
brothers, that through this man forgiveness of sins is offered to you:

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> And through him everyone who has faith
is made free from all those things, from which the law of Moses was not
able to make you free.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> So take care that these words of the
prophets do not come true for you;

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> See, you doubters, have wonder and come
to your end; for I will do a thing in your days to which you will not
give belief, even if it is made clear to you.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And when they went out, they made a
request that these words might be said to them again on the Sabbath
after.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Now when the meeting was ended, a
number of the Jews and of the God-fearing Gentiles who had become Jews,
went after Paul and Barnabas: who put before them how important it was
to keep on in the grace of God.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> And on the Sabbath after, almost all
the town came together to give hearing to the word of God.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> But when the Jews saw such a great
number of people, they were full of envy and said evil words against
Paul's preaching.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> Then Paul and Barnabas without fear
said, It was necessary for the word of God to be given to you first; but
because you will have nothing to do with it, and have no desire for
eternal life, it will now be offered to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> For so the Lord has given us orders,
saying, I have given you for a light to the Gentiles so that you may be
for salvation to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> And the Gentiles, hearing this, were
glad and gave glory to the word of God: and those marked out by God for
eternal life had faith.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> And the word of the Lord went through
all the country.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> But the Jews, working up the feelings
of the God-fearing women of high position and of the chief men of the
town, got an attack started against Paul and Barnabas, driving them out
of those parts.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> But they, shaking off the dust of that
place from their feet, came to Iconium.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And the disciples were full of joy and
of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now in Iconium they went together to the
Synagogue of the Jews and gave such teaching that a great number of Jews
and Greeks had faith.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But those Jews who had not the faith,
made the minds of the Gentiles bitter against the brothers.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> So they kept there for a long time,
taking heart in the Lord, who gave witness to the word of his grace by
causing signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But there was a division among the people
of the town; some were on the side of the Jews and some on the side of
the Apostles.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And when a violent attempt was made by
the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, to make an attack on them
and have them stoned,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Having got news of it, they went in
flight to the towns of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the country
round about:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And went on preaching the good news
there.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And at Lystra there was a certain man,
who from birth had been without the use of his feet, never having had
the power of walking.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> This man was giving ear to the preaching
of Paul, who, looking at him, and seeing that he had faith to be made
well,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Said in a loud voice, Get up on your
feet. And, jumping up, he went walking about.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And when the people saw what Paul had
done, they said in a loud voice, in the language of Lycaonia, The gods
have come down to us in the form of men.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And they gave the name of Jupiter to
Barnabas, and to Paul that of Mercury, because he was the chief talker.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And the priest of the image of Jupiter,
which was before the town, took oxen and flowers to the doors of the
town, and was about to make an offering with the people.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> But when this came to the ears of the
Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, they went running out among the people,
parting their clothing, and crying out,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Good people, why are you doing these
things? We are men with the same feelings as you, and we give you the
good news so that you may be turned away from these foolish things to
the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all
things in them:

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Who in the past let all nations go in
the ways which seemed good to them.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> But he was not without witness, because
he did good, and gave you rain from heaven and times of fruit, making
your hearts full of food and joy.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And even with these words, it was hard
for them to keep the people from making an offering to them.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But some Jews came to that place from
Antioch and Iconium, and got control over the people; and after stoning
Paul, they had him pulled out of the town, taking him for dead.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But when the disciples came round him,
he got up and went into the town: and the day after he went away with
Barnabas to Derbe.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And having made a number of disciples
through the preaching of the good news in that town, they went back to
Lystra and Iconium and Antioch,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Making strong the souls of the
disciples, saying to them that they were to keep the faith, and that we
have to go through troubles of all sorts to come into the kingdom of
God.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And when they had made selection of
some to be rulers in every church, and had given themselves to prayer
and kept themselves from food, they put them into the care of the Lord
in whom they had faith.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And they went through Pisidia and came
to Pamphylia.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And, after preaching the word in Perga,
they went down to Attalia;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And from there they went by ship to
Antioch, where they had been handed over to the grace of God for the
work which they had not done.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And when they came there, and had got
the church together, they gave them an account of all the things which
God had done through them, and how he had made open a door of faith to
the Gentiles.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And they were with the disciples there
for a long time.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now certain men came down from Judaea,
teaching the brothers and saying that without circumcision, after the
rule of Moses, there is no salvation.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And after Paul and Barnabas had had no
little argument and discussion with them, the brothers made a decision
to send Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them to the Apostles and
the rulers of the church at Jerusalem about this question.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> So they, being sent on their way by the
church, went through Phoenicia and Samaria, giving news of the salvation
of the Gentiles, to the great joy of all the brothers.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And when they came to Jerusalem, they had
a meeting with the church and the Apostles and the rulers, and they gave
an account of all the things which God had done through them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But some of the Pharisees, who were of
the faith, got up and said, It is necessary for these to have
circumcision and to keep the law of Moses.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the Apostles and the rulers of the
church came together and gave thought to the question.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And when there had been much discussion,
Peter got up and said to them, My brothers, you have knowledge that some
time back it was God's pleasure that by my mouth the good news might be
given to the Gentiles so that they might have faith.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And God, the searcher of hearts, was a
witness to them, giving them the Holy Spirit even as he did to us;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Making no division between them and us,
but making clean their hearts by faith.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Why then are you testing God, by
putting on the neck of the disciples a yoke so hard that not even our
fathers or we were strong enough for it?

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But we have faith that we will get
salvation through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way as they.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And all the people were quiet while
Barnabas and Paul gave an account of the signs and wonders which God had
done among the Gentiles by them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when they had come to an end,
James, answering, said, My brothers, give ear to me:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Symeon has given an account of how God
was first pleased to take from among the Gentiles a people for himself.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And this is in agreement with the words
of the prophets, as it is said,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> After these things I will come back,
and will put up the tent of David which has been broken down, building
up again its broken parts and making it complete:

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> So that the rest of men may make search
for the Lord, and all the Gentiles on whom my name is named,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Says the Lord, who has made these
things clear from the earliest times.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For this reason my decision is, that we
do not put trouble in the way of those who from among the Gentiles are
turned to God;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But that we give them orders to keep
themselves from things offered to false gods, and from the evil desires
of the body, and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against
the law, and from blood.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For Moses, from times long past, has
his preachers in every town, reading his law in the Synagogues every
Sabbath.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then it seemed good to the Apostles and
the rulers and all the church, to send men from among them to Antioch
with Paul and Barnabas; Judas, named Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men
among the brothers:

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they sent a letter by them, saying,
The Apostles and the older brothers, to the brothers who are of the
Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, may joy be with you:

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Because we have knowledge that some who
went from us have been troubling you with their words, putting your
souls in doubt; to whom we gave no such order;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> It seemed good to us, having come to an
agreement together, to send these men to you, with our well loved
Barnabas and Paul,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Men who have given up their lives for
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And so we have sent Judas and Silas,
who will say the same things to you themselves, by word of mouth.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit
and to us, to put on you nothing more than these necessary things;

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> To keep from things offered to false
gods, and from blood, and from things put to death in ways which are
against the law, and from the evil desires of the body; if you keep
yourselves from these, you will do well. May you be happy.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> So they, being sent away, came down to
Antioch, and having got the people together, they gave them the letter.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And after reading it, they were glad of
its comfort.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Judas and Silas, who themselves
were prophets, gave teaching to the brothers and made them strong in the
faith.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And when they had been there for some
time, they were sent back in peace by the brothers to those who had sent
them.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> \[\]

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But Paul and Barnabas kept on in
Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of God, with a number of
others.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And after some days, Paul said to
Barnabas, Let us go back and see the brothers in every town where we
have given the word of God, and see how they are.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Barnabas had a desire to take with
them John, named Mark.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But Paul was of the opinion that it was
not right to take with them one who had gone away from them in
Pamphylia, and had not gone on with the work.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And there was a sharp argument between
them, so that they were parted from one another, and Barnabas took Mark
with him and went by ship to Cyprus;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> But Paul took Silas and went away with
the blessing of the brothers.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And he went through Syria and Cilicia,
making the churches stronger in the faith.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And he came to Derbe and Lystra: and
there was a certain disciple there named Timothy, whose mother was one
of the Jews of the faith, but his father was a Greek;

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Of whom the brothers at Lystra and
Iconium had a high opinion.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Paul had a desire for him to go with him,
and he gave him circumcision because of the Jews who were in those
parts: for they all had knowledge that his father was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And on their way through the towns, they
gave them the rules which had been made by the Apostles and the rulers
of the church at Jerusalem, so that they might keep them.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> So the churches were made strong in the
faith and were increased in number every day.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And after they had gone through the land
of Phrygia and Galatia, the Holy Spirit did not let them take the word
into Asia;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And having come to Mysia, they made an
attempt to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not let them;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And going past Mysia, they came down to
Troas.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Paul had a vision in the night; a man
of Macedonia came, requesting him, and saying, Come over into Macedonia
and give us help.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And when he had seen the vision,
straight away we made the decision to go into Macedonia, for it seemed
certain to us that God had sent us to give the good news to them.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> So, from Troas we went straight by ship
to Samothrace and the day after to Neapolis;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And from there to Philippi, which is
the most important town of Macedonia and a Roman colony: and we were
there for some days.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And on the Sabbath we went outside the
town, by the river, where we had an idea that there would be a place of
prayer; and, being seated, we had talk with the women who had come
together.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And a certain woman named Lydia, a
trader in purple cloth of the town of Thyatira, and a God-fearing woman,
gave ear to us: whose heart the Lord made open to give attention to the
things which Paul was saying.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when she and her family had had
baptism, she made a request to us, saying, If it seems to you that I am
true to the Lord, come into my house and be my guests. And she made us
come.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And when we were going to the place of
prayer, we came across a girl with a spirit which gave knowledge of the
future, whose masters made great profit from her power.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> She came after Paul and us, crying out
and saying, These men are the servants of the Most High God, who are
giving you news of the way of salvation.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And this she did on a number of days.
But Paul was greatly troubled and, turning, said to the spirit, I give
you orders in the name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And it came
out that very hour.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> But when her masters saw that their
hope of profit was gone, they took Paul and Silas, pulling them into the
market-place before the rulers;

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And when they had taken them before the
authorities, they said, These men, who are Jews, are greatly troubling
our town;

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Teaching rules of living which it is
not right for us to have or to keep, being Romans.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And the people made an attack on them
all together: and the authorities took their clothing off them, and gave
orders for them to be whipped.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And when they had given them a great
number of blows, they put them in prison, giving orders to the keeper of
the prison to keep them safely:

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And he, having such orders, put them
into the inner prison with chains on their feet.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> But about the middle of the night, Paul
and Silas were making prayers and songs to God in the hearing of the
prisoners;

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And suddenly there was an earth-shock,
so that the base of the prison was moved: and all the doors came open,
and everyone's chains came off.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the keeper, coming out of his
sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, took his sword and was about to
put himself to death, fearing that the prisoners had got away.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But Paul said in a loud voice, Do
yourself no damage, for we are all here.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And he sent for lights and came rushing
in and, shaking with fear, went down on his face before Paul and Silas,

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And took them out and said, Sirs, what
have I to do to get salvation?

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And they said, Have faith in the Lord
Jesus, and you and your family will have salvation.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And they gave the word of the Lord to
him and to all who were in his house.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And that same hour of the night, he
took them, and when he had given attention to their wounds, he and all
his family had baptism straight away.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And he took them into his house and
gave them food, and he was full of joy, having faith in God with all his
family.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> But when it was day, the authorities
sent the police, saying, Let these men go.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And the keeper said to Paul, The
authorities have given orders to let you go: come out now, and go in
peace.

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> But Paul said to them, They have given
us who are Romans a public whipping without judging us, and have put us
in prison. Will they now send us out secretly? no, truly, let them come
themselves and take us out.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And the police gave an account of these
words to the authorities, and they were full of fear on hearing that
they were Romans;

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> Then they came and made prayers to
them, requesting them, when they had taken them out, to go away from the
town.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And they came out of the prison and
went to the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brothers they
gave them comfort and went away.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Now when they had gone through Amphipolis
and Apollonia they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Synagogue of
the Jews:

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And Paul, as he generally did, went in to
them, and on three Sabbath days had discussions with them from the holy
Writings,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Saying to them clearly and openly that
Christ had to be put to death and come back to life again; and that this
Jesus, whom, he said, I am preaching to you, is the Christ.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And some of them had faith, and were
joined to Paul and Silas; and a number of the God-fearing Greeks, and
some of the chief women.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> But the Jews, being moved with envy, took
with them certain low persons from among the common people, and getting
together a great number of people, made an outcry in the town, attacking
the house of Jason with the purpose of taking them out to the people.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And when they were not able to get them,
they took Jason and some of the brothers by force before the rulers of
the town, crying, These men, who have made trouble all over the world
have now come here;

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Whom Jason has taken into his house: and
they are acting against the orders of Caesar, saying that there is
another king, Jesus.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And hearing these things the people and
the rulers of the town were troubled.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And having made Jason and the others give
an undertaking to keep the peace, they let them go.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And the brothers straight away sent
Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea: and they, when they came there,
went to the Synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Now these were more noble than the Jews
of Thessalonica, for they gave serious attention to the word, searching
in the holy Writings every day, to see if these things were so.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And a number of them had faith, and no
small number of the Greek women of high position and of the men.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But when the Jews of Thessalonica had
news that Paul was preaching the word at Beroea, they came there,
troubling the people and working them up.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> So the brothers sent Paul straight away
to the sea: but Silas and Timothy kept there still.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But those who went with Paul took him
as far as Athens, and then went away, with orders from him to Silas and
Timothy to come to him quickly.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now while Paul was waiting for them at
Athens, his spirit was troubled, for he saw all the town full of images
of the gods.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> So he had discussions in the Synagogue
with the Jews and God-fearing Gentiles, and every day in the
market-place with those who were there.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And some of those who were supporters
of the theories of the Epicureans and the Stoics, had a meeting with
him. And some said, What is this talker of foolish words saying? And
others, He seems to be a preacher of strange gods: because he was
preaching of Jesus and his coming back from the dead.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And they took him to Mars' Hill,
saying, Will you make clear to us what is this new teaching of yours?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> For you seem to us to say strange
things, and we have a desire to get the sense of them.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> (Now all the Athenians and the men from
other lands who come there were giving all their time to talking or
hearing of anything new.)

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And Paul got to his feet on Mars' Hill
and said, O men of Athens, I see that you are overmuch given to fear of
the gods.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> For when I came by, I was looking at
the things to which you give worship, and I saw an altar with this
writing on it, TO THE GOD OF WHOM THERE IS NO KNOWLEDGE. Now, what you,
without knowledge, give worship to, I make clear to you.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> The God who made the earth and
everything in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, is not housed in
buildings made with hands;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And he is not dependent on the work of
men's hands, as if he had need of anything, for he himself gives to all
life and breath and all things;

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And he has made of one blood all the
nations of men living on all the face of the earth, ordering their times
and the limits of their lands,

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> So that they might make search for God,
in order, if possible, to get knowledge of him and make discovery of
him, though he is not far from every one of us:

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> For in him we have life and motion and
existence; as certain of your verse writers have said, For we are his
offspring.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> If then we are the offspring of God, it
is not right for us to have the idea that God is like gold or silver or
stone, formed by the art or design of man.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> Those times when men had no knowledge
were overlooked by God; but now he gives orders to all men in every
place to undergo a change of heart:

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> Because a day has been fixed in which
all the world will be judged in righteousness by the man who has been
marked out by him for this work; of which he has given a sign to all men
by giving him back from the dead.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> Now on hearing about the coming back
from death, some of them made sport of it, but others said, Let us go
more fully into this another time.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> And so Paul went away from among them.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> But some men gave him their support:
among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and
others with them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> After these things, he went away from
Athens, and came to Corinth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And there he came across a certain Jew
named Aquila, a man of Pontus by birth, who not long before had come
from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had given orders
that all Jews were to go away from Rome: and he came to them;

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And because he was of the same trade, he
was living with them, and they did their work together; for by trade
they were tent-makers.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And every Sabbath he had discussions in
the Synagogue, turning Jews and Greeks to the faith.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And when Silas and Timothy came down from
Macedonia, Paul was completely given up to the word, preaching to the
Jews that the Christ was Jesus.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And when they put themselves against him,
and said evil words, he said, shaking his clothing, Your blood be on
your heads, I am clean: from now I will go to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And moving from there, he went into the
house of a man named Titus Justus, a God-fearing man, whose house was
very near the Synagogue.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Crispus, the ruler of the Synagogue,
with all his family, had faith in the Lord; and a great number of the
people of Corinth, hearing the word, had faith and were given baptism.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the Lord said to Paul in the night,
in a vision, Have no fear and go on preaching:

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> For I am with you, and no one will make
an attack on you to do you damage: for I have a number of people in this
town.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And he was there for a year and six
months, teaching the word of God among them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But when Gallio was ruler of Achaia,
all the Jews together made an attack on Paul, and took him to the
judge's seat,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Saying, This man is teaching the people
to give worship to God in a way which is against the law.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> But when Paul was about to say
something, Gallio said to the Jews, If this was anything to do with
wrongdoing or crime, there would be a reason for me to give you a
hearing:

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> But if it is a question of words or
names or of your law, see to it yourselves; I will not be a judge of
such things.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And he sent them away from the judge's
seat.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And they all made an attack on
Sosthenes, the ruler of the Synagogue, and gave him blows before the
judge's seat; but Gallio gave no attention to these things.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And Paul, after waiting some days, went
away from the brothers and went by ship to Syria, Priscilla and Aquila
being with him; and he had had his hair cut off in Cenchrea, for he had
taken an oath.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And they came down to Ephesus and he
left them there: and he himself went into the Synagogue and had a
discussion with the Jews.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And being requested by them to be there
for a longer time, he said, No;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And went from them, saying, I will come
back to you if God lets me; and he took ship from Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And when he had come to land at
Caesarea, he went to see the church, and then went down to Antioch.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And having been there for some time, he
went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, making the
disciples strong in the faith.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an
Alexandrian by birth, and a man of learning, came to Ephesus; and he had
great knowledge of the holy Writings.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> This man had been trained in the way of
the Lord; and burning in spirit, he gave himself up to teaching the
facts about Jesus, though he had knowledge only of John's baptism:

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And he was preaching in the Synagogue
without fear. But Priscilla and Aquila, hearing his words, took him in,
and gave him fuller teaching about the way of God.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And when he had a desire to go over
into Achaia, the brothers gave him help, and sent letters to the
disciples requesting them to take him in among them: and when he had
come, he gave much help to those who had faith through grace:

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> For he overcame the Jews in public
discussion, making clear from the holy Writings that the Christ was
Jesus.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came about that while Apollos was
at Corinth, Paul, having gone through the higher country, came to
Ephesus, where there were certain disciples:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And he said to them, Did you get the Holy
Spirit when you had faith? And they said to him, No, we have had no
knowledge of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he said, What sort of baptism did you
have? And they said, The baptism of John.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Paul said, John gave a baptism which
goes with a change of heart, saying to the people that they were to have
faith in him who was coming after him, that is, in Jesus.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And hearing this, they had baptism in the
name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And when Paul had put his hands on them,
the Holy Spirit came on them; and they had the power of talking in
tongues, and acting like prophets.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And there were about twelve of these men.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And he went into the Synagogue, and for
three months he was preaching there without fear, reasoning and teaching
about the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But because some of the people were
hard-hearted and would not give hearing, saying evil words about the Way
before the people, he went away from them, and kept the disciples
separate, reasoning every day in the school of Tyrannus.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And this went on for two years, so that
all those who were living in Asia had knowledge of the word of the Lord,
Greeks as well as Jews.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And God did special works of power by
the hands of Paul:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> So that bits of linen and clothing from
his body were taken to people who were ill, and their diseases went away
from them and the evil spirits went out.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> But some of the Jews who went from
place to place driving out evil spirits, took it on themselves to make
use of the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits,
saying, I give you orders, by Jesus, whom Paul is preaching.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And there were seven sons of a man
named Sceva, a Jew and a chief priest, who did this.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And the evil spirit, answering, said to
them, I have knowledge of Jesus, and of Paul, but who are you?

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the man in whom the evil spirit
was, jumping on them, was stronger than the two of them, and overcame
them, so that they went running from that house, wounded and without
their clothing.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And this came to the ears of all those,
Jews and Greeks, who were living at Ephesus; and fear came on them all,
and the name of the Lord Jesus was made great.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And a number of those who had faith
came and made a public statement of their sins and all their acts.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And a great number of those who were
experts in strange arts took their books and put them on the fire in
front of everyone: and when the books were valued they came to fifty
thousand bits of silver.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> So the word of the Lord was increased
very greatly and was full of power.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Now after these things were ended, Paul
came to a decision that when he had gone through Macedonia and Achaia he
would go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I have a desire
to see Rome.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And having sent two of his helpers,
Timothy and Erastus, into Macedonia, he himself went on living in Asia
for a time.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And about that time a great outcry took
place about the Way.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> For there was a certain man named
Demetrius, a silver-worker, who made silver boxes for the images of
Diana, and gave no small profit to the workmen;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Whom he got together, with other
workmen of the same trade, and said to them, Men, it is clear that from
this business we get our wealth.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And you see, for it has come to your
ears, that not only at Ephesus, but almost all through Asia, this Paul
has been teaching numbers of people and turning them away, saying that
those are not gods who are made by men's hands:

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And there is danger, not only that our
trade may be damaged in the opinion of men, but that the holy place of
the great goddess Diana may be no longer honoured, and that she to whom
all Asia and the world give worship, will be put down from her high
position.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And hearing this, they were very angry,
crying out and saying, Great is Diana of Ephesus.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the town was full of noise and
trouble, and they all came running into the theatre, having taken by
force Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia who were journeying in
company with Paul.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And when Paul was about to go in to the
people, the disciples did not let him.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And some of the rulers of Asia, being
his friends, sent to him, requesting him seriously not to put himself in
danger by going into the theatre.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> And some said one thing, and some
another: for there was no order in the meeting; and most of them had no
idea why they had come together.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> Then they took Alexander out from among
the people, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander, making a sign
with his hand, was about to make a statement to the people in answer:

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But when they saw that he was a Jew,
all of them with one voice went on crying out for about two hours, Great
is Diana of Ephesus.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And when the chief secretary had got
the people quiet, he said, Men of Ephesus, is any man without knowledge
that the town of Ephesus is the keeper of the holy place of the great
Diana, who was sent down from Jupiter?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> So then, because these things may not
be doubted, it would be better for you to be quiet, and do nothing
unwise.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> For you have taken these men, who are
not doing damage to the holy place or talking against our goddess.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> If, then, Demetrius and the workmen who
are with him have a protest to make against any man, the law is open to
them, and there are judges; let them put up a cause at law against one
another.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> But if any other business is in
question, let it be taken up in the regular meeting.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For, truly, we are in danger of being
made responsible for this day's trouble, there being no cause for it:
and we are not able to give any reason for this coming together.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And when he had said this, he sent the
meeting away.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And after the noise had come to an end,
Paul, having sent for the disciples and given them comfort, went away
from them to Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when he had gone through those parts
and given them much teaching, he came into Greece.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And when he had been there three months,
because the Jews had made a secret design against him when he was about
to take ship for Syria, he made a decision to go back through Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And Sopater of Beroea, the son of
Pyrrhus, and Aristarchus and Secundus of Thessalonica, and Gaius of
Derbe, and Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia, went with him as
far as Asia.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> But these had gone before, and were
waiting for us at Troas.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And we went away from Philippi by ship
after the days of unleavened bread, and came to them at Troas in five
days; and we were there for seven days.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And on the first day of the week, when we
had come together for the holy meal, Paul gave them a talk, for it was
his purpose to go away on the day after; and he went on talking till
after the middle of the night.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And there were a number of lights in the
room where we had come together.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And a certain young man named Eutychus,
who was seated in the window, went into a deep sleep; and while Paul
went on talking, being overcome by sleep, he had a fall from the third
floor, and was taken up dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Paul went down and, falling on him,
took him in his arms and said, Do not be troubled, for his life is in
him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And when he had gone up, and had taken
the broken bread, he went on talking to them for a long time, even till
dawn, and then he went away.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And they took the boy in, living, and
were greatly comforted.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But we, going before him by ship, went
to Assos with the purpose of taking Paul in there: for so he had given
orders, because he himself was coming by land.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And when he came up with us at Assos,
we took him in the ship and went on to Mitylene.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And going from there by sea, we came on
the day after opposite Chios, and touching at Samos on the day after
that, we came on the third day to Miletus.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> For Paul's purpose was to go past
Ephesus, so that he might not be kept in Asia; for he was going quickly,
in order, if possible, to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus for
the rulers of the church.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And when they had come, he said to
them, You yourselves have seen what my life has been like all the time
from the day when I first came into Asia,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Doing the Lord's work without pride,
through all the sorrow and troubles which came on me because of the evil
designs of the Jews:

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And how I kept back nothing which might
be of profit to you, teaching you publicly and privately,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Preaching to Jews and to Greeks the
need for a turning of the heart to God, and faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And now, as you see, I am going to
Jerusalem, a prisoner in spirit, having no knowledge of what will come
to me there:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Only that the Holy Spirit makes clear
to me in every town that prison and pains are waiting for me.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But I put no value on my life, if only
at the end of it I may see the work complete which was given to me by
the Lord Jesus, to be a witness of the good news of the grace of God.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And now I am conscious that you, among
whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom, will not see my face
again.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And so I say to you this day that I am
clean from the blood of all men.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> For I have not kept back from you
anything of the purpose of God.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Give attention to yourselves, and to
all the flock which the Holy Spirit has given into your care, to give
food to the church of God, for which he gave his blood.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> I am conscious that after I am gone,
evil wolves will come in among you, doing damage to the flock;

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And from among yourselves will come men
who will give wrong teaching, turning away the disciples after them.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> So keep watch, having in mind that for
three years without resting I was teaching every one of you, day and
night, with weeping.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And now, I give you into the care of
God and the word of his grace, which is able to make you strong and to
give you your heritage among all the saints.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> I have had no desire for any man's
silver or gold or clothing.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> You yourselves have seen that with
these hands I got what was necessary for me and those who were with me.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> In all things I was an example to you
of how, in your lives, you are to give help to the feeble, and keep in
memory the words of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, There is a
greater blessing in giving than in getting.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And having said these words, he went
down on his knees in prayer with them all.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And they were all weeping, falling on
Paul's neck and kissing him,

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Being sad most of all because he had
said that they would not see his face again. And so they went with him
to the ship.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And after parting from them, we put out
to sea and came straight to Cos, and the day after to Rhodes, and from
there to Patara:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And as there was a ship going to
Phoenicia, we went in it.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And when we had come in view of Cyprus,
going past it on our left, we went on to Syria, and came to land at
Tyre: for there the goods which were in the ship had to be taken out.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And meeting the disciples we were there
for seven days: and they gave Paul orders through the Spirit not to go
up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And when these days came to an end, we
went on our journey; and they all, with their wives and children, came
with us on our way till we were out of the town: and after going on our
knees in prayer by the sea,

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> We said our last words to one another,
and got into the ship, and they went back to their houses.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And journeying by ship from Tyre we came
to Ptolemais; and there we had talk with the brothers and were with them
for one day.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And on the day after, we went away and
came to Caesarea, where we were guests in the house of Philip, the
preacher, who was one of the seven.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And he had four daughters, virgins, who
were prophets.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And while we were waiting there for
some days, a certain prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judaea.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And he came to us, and took the band of
Paul's clothing, and putting it round his feet and hands, said, The Holy
Spirit says these words, So will the Jews do to the man who is the owner
of this band, and they will give him up into the hands of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And hearing these things, we and those
who were living in that place made request to him not to go to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Paul said, What are you doing,
weeping and wounding my heart? for I am ready, not only to be a
prisoner, but to be put to death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And as he might not be moved we did no
more, saying, Let the purpose of God be done.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And after these days we got ready and
went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And some of the disciples from Caesarea
went with us, taking a certain Mnason of Cyprus, one of the early
disciples, in whose house we were to be living.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And when we came to Jerusalem, the
brothers were pleased to see us.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And on the day after, Paul went with us
to James, and all the rulers of the church were present.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And when he had said how glad he was to
see them, he gave them a detailed account of the things which God had
done through his work among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And hearing it, they gave praise to
God; and they said to him, You see, brother, what thousands there are
among the Jews, who have the faith; and they all have a great respect
for the law:

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And they have had news of you, how you
have been teaching all the Jews among the Gentiles to give up the law of
Moses, and not to give circumcision to their children, and not to keep
the old rules.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> What then is the position? They will
certainly get news that you have come.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Do this, then, which we say to you: We
have four men who have taken an oath;

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Go with these, and make yourself clean
with them, and make the necessary payments for them, so that they may be
free from their oath: and everyone will see that the statements made
about you are not true, but that you put yourself under rule, and keep
the law.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But as to the Gentiles who have the
faith, we sent a letter, giving our decision that they were to keep
themselves from offerings made to false gods, and from blood, and from
the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law, and from the
evil desires of the body.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Then Paul took the men, and on the day
after, making himself clean with them, he went into the Temple, giving
out the statement that the days necessary for making them clean were
complete, till the offering was made for every one of them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And when the seven days were almost
ended, the Jews from Asia, seeing him in the Temple, got the people
together and put their hands on him,

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> Crying out, Men of Israel, come to our
help: this is the man who is teaching all men everywhere against the
people and the law and this place: and in addition, he has taken Greeks
into the Temple, and made this holy place unclean.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> For they had seen him before in the
town with Trophimus of Ephesus, and had the idea that Paul had taken him
with him into the Temple.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And all the town was moved, and the
people came running together and put their hands on Paul, pulling him
out of the Temple: and then the doors were shut.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And while they were attempting to put
him to death, news came to the chief captain of the band that all
Jerusalem was out of control.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And straight away he took some armed
men and went quickly down to them: and the Jews, seeing them, gave no
more blows to Paul.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then the chief captain came near and
took him, and gave orders for him to be put in chains, questioning them
as to who he was and what he had done.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And some said one thing and some
another, among the people: and as he was not able to get a knowledge of
the facts because of the noise, he gave orders for Paul to be taken into
the army building.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And when he came on to the steps, he
was lifted up by the armed men, because of the force of the people;

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> For a great mass of people came after
them, crying out, Away with him!

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> And when Paul was about to be taken
into the building, he said to the chief captain, May I say something to
you? And he said, Have you a knowledge of Greek?

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> Are you by chance the Egyptian who,
before this, got the people worked up against the government and took
four thousand men of the Assassins out into the waste land?

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> But Paul said, I am a Jew of Tarsus in
Cilicia, which is not an unimportant town: I make a request to you to
let me say a word to the people.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> And when he let him do so, Paul, from
the steps, made a sign with his hand to the people, and when they were
all quiet, he said to them in the Hebrew language,

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> My brothers and fathers, give ear to the
story of my life which I now put before you.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And, hearing him talking in the Hebrew
language, they became the more quiet, and he said,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia by birth,
but I had my education in this town at the feet of Gamaliel, being
trained in the keeping of every detail of the law of our fathers; given
up to the cause of God with all my heart, as you are today.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And I made attacks on this Way, even to
death, taking men and women and putting them in prison.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Of which the high priest will be a
witness, and all the rulers, from whom I had letters to the brothers;
and I went into Damascus, to take those who were there as prisoners to
Jerusalem for punishment.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And it came about that while I was on my
journey, coming near to Damascus, about the middle of the day, suddenly
I saw a great light from heaven shining round me.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And when I went down on the earth, a
voice came to my ears saying to me, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me
so cruelly?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And I, answering, said, Who are you;
Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are attacking.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And those who were with me saw the light,
but the voice of him who was talking to me came not to their ears.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And I said, What have I to do, Lord?
And the Lord said to me, Get up, and go into Damascus; and it will be
made clear to you what you have to do.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And because I was unable to see because
of the glory of that light, those who were with me took me by the hand,
and so I came to Damascus.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And one Ananias, a God-fearing man, who
kept the law, and of whom all the Jews in that place had a high opinion,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Came to my side and said, Brother Saul,
let your eyes be open. And in that very hour I was able to see him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And he said, You have been marked out
by the God of our fathers to have knowledge of his purpose, and to see
the Upright One and to give ear to the words of his mouth.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> For you will be a witness for him to
all men of what you have seen and of what has come to your ears.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And now, why are you waiting? get up,
and have baptism, for the washing away of your sins, giving worship to
his name.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And it came about that when I had come
back to Jerusalem, while I was at prayer in the Temple, my senses became
more than naturally clear,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And I saw him saying to me, Go out of
Jerusalem straight away because they will not give hearing to your
witness about me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I said, Lord, they themselves have
knowledge that I went through the Synagogues putting in prison and
whipping all those who had faith in you:

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And when Stephen your witness was put
to death, I was there, giving approval, and looking after the clothing
of those who put him to death.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And he said to me, Go, for I will send
you far away to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And they gave him a hearing as far as
this word; then with loud voices they said, Away with this man from the
earth; it is not right for him to be living.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And while they were crying out, and
pulling off their clothing, and sending dust into the air,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> The chief captain gave orders for him
to be taken into the army building, saying that he would put him to the
test by whipping, so that he might have knowledge of the reason why they
were crying out so violently against him.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And when they had put leather bands
round him, Paul said to the captain who was present, Is it the law for
you to give blows to a man who is a Roman and has not been judged?

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And hearing this, the man went to the
chief captain and gave him an account of it, saying, What are you about
to do? for this man is a Roman.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And the chief captain came to him and
said, Give me an answer, are you a Roman? And he said, Yes.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And the chief captain said, I got Roman
rights for myself at a great price. And Paul said, But I had them by
birth.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Then those who were about to put him to
the test went away: and the chief captain was in fear, seeing that he
was a Roman, and that he had put chains on him.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> But on the day after, desiring to have
certain knowledge of what the Jews had to say against him, he made him
free, and gave orders for the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to
come together, and he took Paul and put him before them.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Paul, looking fixedly at the
Sanhedrin, said, My brothers, my life has been upright before God till
this day.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And the high priest, Ananias, gave orders
to those who were near him to give him a blow on the mouth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then Paul said to him, God will give
blows to you, you whitewashed wall: are you here to be my judge by law,
and by your orders am I given blows against the law?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And those who were near said, Do you say
such words against God's high priest?

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Paul said, Brother, I had no idea
that he was the high priest: for it has been said, You may not say evil
about the ruler of your people.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But when Paul saw that half of them were
Sadducees and the rest Pharisees, he said in the Sanhedrin, Brothers, I
am a Pharisee, and the son of Pharisees: I am here to be judged on the
question of the hope of the coming back from the dead.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And when he had said this, there was an
argument between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and a division in the
meeting.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> For the Sadducees say that there is no
coming back from the dead, and no angels or spirits: but the Pharisees
have belief in all these.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And there was a great outcry: and some of
the scribes on the side of the Pharisees got up and took part in the
discussion, saying, We see no evil in this man: what if he has had a
revelation from an angel or a spirit?

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And when the argument became very
violent, the chief captain, fearing that Paul would be pulled in two by
them, gave orders to the armed men to take him by force from among them,
and take him into the army building.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And the night after, the Lord came to
his side and said, Be of good heart, for as you have been witnessing for
me in Jerusalem, so will you be my witness in Rome.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And when it was day, the Jews came
together and put themselves under an oath that they would take no food
or drink till they had put Paul to death.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And more than forty of them took this
oath.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And they came to the chief priests and
the rulers and said, We have taken a great oath to take no food till we
have put Paul to death

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> So now, will you and the Sanhedrin make
a request to the military authorities to have him sent down to you, as
if you were desiring to go into the business in greater detail; and we,
before ever he gets to you, will be waiting to put him to death.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> But Paul's sister's son had word of
their design, and he came into the army building and gave news of it to
Paul.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And Paul sent for a captain and said,
Take this young man to your chief, for he has news for him.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So he took him to the chief captain and
said, Paul, the prisoner, made a request to me to take this young man to
you, for he has something to say to you.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And the chief took him by the hand and,
going on one side, said to him privately, What is it you have to say to
me?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he said, The Jews are in agreement
together to make a request to you for Paul to be taken, on the day after
this, into the Sanhedrin, to be questioned in greater detail.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> But do not give way to them, for more
than forty of them are waiting for him, having taken an oath not to take
food or drink till they have put him to death: and now they are ready,
waiting for your order.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> So the chief captain let the young man
go, saying to him, Do not say to anyone that you have given me word of
these things.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And he sent for two captains and said,
Make ready two hundred men, with seventy horsemen and two hundred
spearmen, to go to Caesarea, at the third hour of the night:

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And get beasts so that they may put
Paul on them, and take him safely to Felix, the ruler.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And he sent a letter in these words:

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Claudius Lysias, to the most noble
ruler, Felix, peace be with you.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> This man was taken by the Jews, and was
about to be put to death by them, when I came on them with the army and
took him out of danger, having knowledge that he was a Roman.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And, desiring to get at the reason for
their attack on him, I took him down to their Sanhedrin:

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Then it became clear to me that it was
a question of their law, and that nothing was said against him which
might be a reason for prison or death.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And when news was given to me that a
secret design was being made against the man, I sent him straight away
to you, giving orders to those who are against him to make their
statements before you.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> So the armed men, as they were ordered,
took Paul and came by night to Antipatris.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> But on the day after, they sent the
horsemen on with him, and went back to their place:

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And they, when they came to Caesarea,
gave the letter to the ruler, and took Paul before him.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And after reading it, he said, What
part of the country do you come from? And, hearing that he was from
Cilicia,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> I will give hearing to your cause, he
said, when those who are against you have come. And he gave orders for
him to be kept in Herod's Praetorium.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And after five days, the high priest,
Ananias, came with certain of the rulers, and an expert talker, one
Tertullus; and they made a statement to Felix against Paul.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And when he had been sent for, Tertullus,
starting his statement, said, Because by you we are living in peace, and
through your wisdom wrongs are put right for this nation,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> In all things and in all places we are
conscious of our great debt to you, most noble Felix.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But, so that I may not make you tired, I
make a request to you of your mercy, to give hearing to a short
statement.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For this man, in our opinion, is a cause
of trouble, a maker of attacks on the government among Jews through all
the empire, and a chief mover in the society of the Nazarenes:

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Who, in addition, was attempting to make
the Temple unclean: whom we took,

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> \[\]

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And from whom you will be able, by
questioning him yourself, to get knowledge of all the things which we
say against him.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the Jews were in agreement with his
statement, saying that these things were so.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then when the ruler had given him a
sign to make his answer, Paul said, Because I have knowledge that you
have been a judge over this nation for a number of years, I am glad to
make my answer:

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Seeing that you are able to make
certain of the fact that it is not more than twelve days from the time
when I came up to Jerusalem for worship;

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And they have not seen me in argument
with any man in the Temple, or working up the feelings of the people, in
the Synagogues or in the town:

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And they are not able to give facts in
support of the things which they say against me now.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But this I will say openly to you, that
I do give worship to the God of our fathers after that Way, which to
them is not the true religion: but I have belief in all the things which
are in the law and in the books of the prophets:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Hoping in God for that which they
themselves are looking for, that there will be a coming back from the
dead for upright men and wrongdoers.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And in this, I do my best at all times
to have no reason for shame before God or men.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after a number of years I came to
give help and offerings to my nation:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And having been made clean, I was in
the Temple, but not with a great number of people, and not with noise:
but there were certain Jews from Asia,

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And it would have been better if they
had come here to make a statement, if they have anything against me.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Or let these men here present say what
wrongdoing was seen in me when I was before the Sanhedrin,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> But only this one thing which I said
among them in a loud voice, I am this day being judged on the question
of the coming back from the dead.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> But Felix, who had a more detailed
knowledge of the Way, put them off, saying, When Lysias, the chief
captain, comes down, I will give attention to your business.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And he gave orders to the captain to
keep Paul under his control, and to let him have everything he had need
of; and not to keep his friends from coming to see him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> But after some days, Felix came with
Drusilla his wife, who was of the Jews by birth, and sent for Paul, and
gave hearing to him about faith in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And while he was talking about
righteousness and self-control and the judging which was to come, Felix
had great fear and said, Go away for the present, and when the right
time comes I will send for you.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> For he was hoping that Paul would give
him money: so he sent for him more frequently and had talk with him.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> But after two years Porcius Festus took
the place of Felix, who, desiring to have the approval of the Jews, kept
Paul in chains.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> So Festus, having come into that part of
the country which was under his rule, after three days went up to
Jerusalem from Caesarea.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And the chief priests and the chief men
of the Jews made statements against Paul,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Requesting Festus to give effect to their
design against him, and send him to Jerusalem, when they would be
waiting to put him to death on the way.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But Festus, in answer, said that Paul was
being kept in prison at Caesarea, and that in a short time he himself
was going there.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> So, he said, let those who have authority
among you go with me, and if there is any wrong in the man, let them
make a statement against him.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And when he had been with them not more
than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; and on the day after,
he took his place on the judge's seat, and sent for Paul.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And when he came, the Jews who had come
down from Jerusalem came round him, and made all sorts of serious
statements against him, which were not supported by the facts.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Then Paul, in his answer to them, said, I
have done no wrong against the law of the Jews, or against the Temple,
or against Caesar.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But Festus, desiring to get the approval
of the Jews, said to Paul, Will you go up to Jerusalem, and be judged
before me there in connection with these things?

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And Paul said, I am before the seat of
Caesar's authority where it is right for me to be judged: I have done no
wrong to the Jews, as you are well able to see.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> If, then, I am a wrongdoer and there is
a cause of death in me, I am ready for death: if it is not as they say
against me, no man may give me up to them. Let my cause come before
Caesar.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then Festus, having had a discussion
with the Jews, made answer, You have said, Let my cause come before
Caesar; to Caesar you will go.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Now when some days had gone by, King
Agrippa and Bernice came to Caesarea and went to see Festus.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And as they were there for some days,
Festus gave them Paul's story, saying, There is a certain man here who
was put in prison by Felix:

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Against whom the chief priests and the
rulers of the Jews made a statement when I was at Jerusalem, requesting
me to give a decision against him.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> To whom I gave answer that it is not
the Roman way to give a man up, till he has been face to face with those
who are attacking him, and has had a chance to give an answer to the
statements made against him.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> So, when they had come together here,
straight away, on the day after, I took my place on the judge's seat and
sent for the man.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> But when they got up they said nothing
about such crimes as I had in mind:

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> But had certain questions against him
in connection with their religion, and about one Jesus, now dead, who,
Paul said, was living.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And as I had not enough knowledge for
the discussion of these things, I made the suggestion to him to go to
Jerusalem and be judged there.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> But when Paul made a request that he
might be judged by Caesar, I gave orders for him to be kept till I might
send him to Caesar.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And Agrippa said to Festus, I have a
desire to give the man a hearing myself. Tomorrow, he said, you may give
him a hearing.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> So on the day after, when Agrippa and
Bernice in great glory had come into the public place of hearing, with
the chief of the army and the chief men of the town, at the order of
Festus, Paul was sent for.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all
those who are present here with us, you see this man, about whom all the
Jews have made protests to me, at Jerusalem and in this place, saying
that it is not right for him to be living any longer.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> But, in my opinion, there is no cause
of death in him, and as he himself has made a request to be judged by
Caesar, I have said that I would send him.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> But I have no certain account of him to
send to Caesar. So I have sent for him to come before you, and specially
before you, King Agrippa, so that after the business has been gone into,
I may have something to put in writing.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> For it seems to me against reason to
send a prisoner without making clear what there is against him.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And Agrippa said to Paul, You may put
your cause before us. Then Paul, stretching out his hand, made his
answer, saying:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> In my opinion I am happy, King Agrippa,
to be able to give my answer before you today to all these things which
the Jews say against me:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> The more so, because you are expert in
all questions to do with the Jews and their ways: so I make my request
to you to give me a hearing to the end.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> All the Jews have knowledge of my way of
life from my early years, as it was from the start among my nation, and
at Jerusalem;

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And they are able to say, if they would
give witness, that I was living as a Pharisee, in that division of our
religion which is most regular in the keeping of the law.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And now I am here to be judged because of
the hope given by God's word to our fathers;

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> For the effecting of which our twelve
tribes have been working and waiting night and day with all their
hearts. And in connection with this hope I am attacked by the Jews, O
king!

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Why, in your opinion, is it outside
belief for God to make the dead come to life again?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> For I, truly, was of the opinion that it
was right for me to do a number of things against the name of Jesus of
Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And this I did in Jerusalem: and
numbers of the saints I put in prison, having had authority given to me
from the chief priests, and when they were put to death, I gave my
decision against them.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And I gave them punishment frequently,
in all the Synagogues, forcing them to say things against God; and
burning with passion against them, I went after them even into far-away
towns.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Then, when I was journeying to Damascus
with the authority and orders of the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> In the middle of the day, on the road I
saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining round me and
those who were journeying with me.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And when we had all gone down on the
earth, a voice came to me, saying in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul,
why are you attacking me so cruelly? It is hard for you to go against
the impulse which is driving you.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And I said, Who are you, Lord? And the
Lord said, I am Jesus, whom you are attacking.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But get up on your feet: for I have
come to you for this purpose, to make you a servant and a witness of the
things in which you have seen me, and of those in which you will see me;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And I will keep you safe from the
people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> To make their eyes open, turning them
from the dark to the light, and from the power of Satan to God, so that
they may have forgiveness of sins and a heritage among those who are
made holy by faith in me.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> So, then, King Agrippa, I did not go
against the vision from heaven;

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> But I went about, first to those in
Damascus and Jerusalem, and through all the country of Judaea, and then
to the Gentiles, preaching a change of heart, so that they, being turned
to God, might give, in their works, the fruits of a changed heart.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For this reason, the Jews took me in
the Temple, and made an attempt to put me to death.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And so, by God's help, I am here today,
witnessing to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and
Moses said would come about;

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> That the Christ would go through pain,
and being the first to come back from the dead, would give light to the
people and to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And when he made his answer in these
words, Festus said in a loud voice, Paul, you are off your head; your
great learning has made you unbalanced.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> Then Paul said, I am not off my head,
most noble Festus, but my words are true and wise.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> For the king has knowledge of these
things, to whom I am talking freely; being certain that all this is
common knowledge to him; for it has not been done in secret.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> King Agrippa, have you faith in the
prophets? I am certain that you have.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And Agrippa said to Paul, A little more
and you will be making me a Christian.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And Paul said, It is my prayer to God
that, in little or great measure, not only you, but all those hearing me
today might be even as I am, but for these chains.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And the king and the ruler and Bernice
and those who were seated with them got up;

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And when they had gone away they said
to one another, This man has done nothing which might give cause for
death or prison.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And Agrippa said to Festus, This man
might have been made free, if he had not put his cause before Caesar.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And when the decision had been made that
we were to go by sea to Italy, they gave Paul and certain other
prisoners into the care of a captain named Julius, of the Augustan band.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And we went to sea in a ship of
Adramyttium which was sailing to the sea towns of Asia, Aristarchus, a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And on the day after, we came to Sidon;
and Julius was kind to Paul, and let him go to see his friends and take
a rest.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And sailing again from there, we went on
under cover of Cyprus, because the wind was against us.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And having gone across the sea off
Cilicia and Pamphylia we came to Myra, in Lycia.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And there the captain came across a ship
of Alexandria, sailing for Italy, and put us in it.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And when we had gone on slowly for a long
time, and had had hard work getting across to Cnidus, for the wind was
against us, we went under cover of Crete, in the direction of Salmone;

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And sailing down the side of it, as well
as we were able, we came to a certain place named Fair Havens, near
which was the town of Lasea.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And as a long time had gone by, and the
journey was now full of danger, because it was late in the year, Paul
put the position before them,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Saying, Friends, I see that this
journey will be one of great damage and loss, not only to the goods and
the ship, but to ourselves.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the captain gave more attention to
the master and the owner of the ship than to what Paul said.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And as the harbour was not a good one
in which to be for the winter, the greater number of them were for going
out to sea, in order, if possible, to put in for the winter at Phoenix,
a harbour of Crete, looking to the north-east and south-east.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And when the south wind came softly,
being of the opinion that their purpose might be effected, they let the
ship go and went sailing down the side of Crete, very near to the land.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But after a little time, a very violent
wind, named Euraquilo, came down from it with great force.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And when the ship got into the grip of
it, and was not able to make headway into the wind, we gave way, and
went before it.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And, sailing near the side of a small
island named Cauda, we were able, though it was hard work, to make the
ship's boat safe:

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> And having got it up, they put cords
under and round the ship; but fearing that they might be pushed on to
the Syrtis, they let down the sails and so went running before the wind.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And, still fighting the storm with all
our strength, the day after they made a start at getting the goods out
of the ship;

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And on the third day, they let all the
sailing apparatus go over the side.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And as we had not seen the sun or stars
for a long time, and a great storm was on us, all hope of salvation was
gone.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And when they had been without food for
a long time, Paul got up among them and said, Friends, it would have
been better if you had given attention to me and not gone sailing out
from Crete, to undergo this damage and loss.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> But now, I say to you, be of good
heart, for there will be no loss of life, but only of the ship.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> For this night there came to my side an
angel of the God who is my Master and whose servant I am,

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Saying, Have no fear, Paul, for you
will come before Caesar, and God has given to you all those who are
sailing with you.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> And so, O men, be of good heart, for I
have faith in God that it will be as he said to me.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> But we will be sent on to a certain
island.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> But when the fourteenth day came, while
we were going here and there in the Adriatic sea, about the middle of
the night the sailors had an idea that they were getting near land;

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> And they let down the lead, and saw
that the sea was a hundred and twenty feet deep; and after a little time
they did it again and it was ninety feet.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> Then, fearing that by chance we might
come on to the rocks, they let down four hooks from the back of the
ship, and made prayers for the coming of day.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> Then the sailors made attempts secretly
to get away from the ship, letting down a boat as if they were about to
put down hooks from the front of the ship;

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> But Paul said to the captain and his
men, If you do not keep these men in the ship, you will not be safe.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Then the armed men, cutting the cords
of the boat, let her go.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And when dawn was near, Paul gave them
all orders to take food, saying, This is the fourteenth day you have
been waiting and taking no food.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> So I make request to you to take food;
for this is for your salvation: not a hair from the head of any of you
will come to destruction.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And when he had said this and had taken
bread, he gave praise to God before them all, and took a meal of the
broken bread.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> Then they all took heart and did the
same.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And we were, in the ship, two hundred
and seventy-six persons.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And when they had had enough food, they
made the weight of the ship less, turning the grain out into the sea.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And when it was day, they had no
knowledge of the land, but they saw an inlet of the sea with a floor of
sand, and they had the idea of driving the ship up on to it if possible.

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> So cutting away the hooks, and letting
them go into the sea, and freeing the cords of the guiding-blades, and
lifting up the sail to the wind, they went in the direction of the
inlet.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> And coming to a point between two seas,
they got the ship to land; and the front part was fixed in the sand and
not able to be moved, but the back part was broken by the force of the
waves.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> Then the armed men were for putting the
prisoners to death, so that no one would get away by swimming.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> But the captain, desiring to keep Paul
safe, kept them from their purpose, and gave orders that those who had
knowledge of swimming were to go off the ship and get first to land:

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And the rest, some on boards and some
on things from the ship. And so it came about that they all got safe to
land.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And when we were safe, we made the
discovery that the island was named Melita.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And the simple people living there were
uncommonly kind to us, for they made a fire for us, and took us in,
because it was raining and cold.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> But when Paul had got some sticks
together and put them on the fire, a snake came out, because of the
heat, and gave him a bite on the hand.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And when the people saw it hanging on his
hand, they said to one another, Without doubt this man has put someone
to death, and though he has got safely away from the sea, God will not
let him go on living.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> But shaking off the beast into the fire,
he got no damage.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> But they had the idea that they would see
him becoming ill, or suddenly falling down dead; but after waiting a
long time, and seeing that no damage came to him, changing their
opinion, they said he was a god.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Now near that place there was some land,
the property of the chief man of the island, who was named Publius; who
very kindly took us into his house as his guests for three days.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And the father of Publius was ill, with a
disease of the stomach; to whom Paul went, and put his hands on him,
with prayer, and made him well.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And when this took place, all the others
in the island who had diseases came and were made well.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then they gave us great honour, and,
when we went away, they put into the ship whatever things we were in
need of.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And after three months we went to sea
in a ship of Alexandria sailing under the sign of the Dioscuri, which
had been at the island for the winter.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And going into the harbour at Syracuse,
we were waiting there for three days.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And from there, going about in a curve,
we came to Rhegium: and after one day a south wind came up and on the
day after we came to Puteoli:

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Where we came across some of the
brothers, who kept us with them for seven days; and so we came to Rome.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And the brothers, when they had news of
us, came out from town as far as Appii Forum and the Three Taverns to
have a meeting with us: and Paul, seeing them, gave praise to God and
took heart.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And when we came into Rome, they let
Paul have a house for himself and the armed man who kept watch over him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Then after three days he sent for the
chief men of the Jews: and when they had come together, he said to them,
My brothers, though I had done nothing against the people or the ways of
our fathers, I was given, a prisoner from Jerusalem, into the hands of
the Romans.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Who, when they had put questions to me,
were ready to let me go free, because there was no cause of death in me.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> But when the Jews made protest against
it, I had to put my cause into Caesar's hands; not because I have
anything to say against my nation.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> But for this reason I sent for you, to
see and have talk with you: for because of the hope of Israel I am in
these chains.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And they said to him, We have not had
letters from Judaea about you, and no one of the brothers has come to us
here to give an account or say any evil about you.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> But we have a desire to give hearing to
your opinion: for as to this form of religion, we have knowledge that in
all places it is attacked.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And when a day had been fixed, they
came to his house in great numbers; and he gave them teaching, giving
witness to the kingdom of God, and having discussions with them about
Jesus, from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning till
evening.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And some were in agreement with what he
said, but some had doubts.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And they went away, for there was a
division among them after Paul had said this one thing: Well did the
Holy Spirit say by the prophet Isaiah to your fathers,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Go to this people and say, Though you
give ear, you will not get knowledge; and seeing, you will see, but the
sense will not be clear to you:

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the heart of this people has become
fat and their ears are slow in hearing and their eyes are shut; for fear
that they might see with their eyes and give hearing with their ears and
become wise in their hearts and be turned again to me, so that I might
make them well.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Be certain, then, that the salvation of
God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will give hearing.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> \[\]

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And for the space of two years, Paul
was living in the house of which he had the use, and had talk with all
those who went in to see him,

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Preaching the kingdom of God and
teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ without fear, and no orders were
given that he was not to do so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans](rom)
