[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phi)  [Next](th1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Colossians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the
purpose of God, and Timothy our brother,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To the saints and true brothers in Christ
at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We give praise to God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, making prayer for you at all times,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> After hearing of your faith in Christ
Jesus, and of the love which you have for all the saints,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Through the hope which is in store for you
in heaven; knowledge of which was given to you before in the true word
of the good news,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Which has come to you; and which in all the
world is giving fruit and increase, as it has done in you from the day
when it came to your ears and you had true knowledge of the grace of
God;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> As it was given to you by Epaphras, our
well-loved helper, who is a true servant of Christ for us,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And who, himself, made clear to us your
love in the Spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For this reason, we, from the day when we
had word of it, keep on in prayer for you, that you may be full of the
knowledge of his purpose, with all wisdom and experience of the Spirit,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Living uprightly in the approval of the
Lord, giving fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge
of God;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Full of strength in the measure of the
great power of his glory, so that you may undergo all troubles with joy;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Giving praise to the Father who has given
us a part in the heritage of the saints in light;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Who has made us free from the power of
evil and given us a place in the kingdom of the Son of his love;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> In whom we have our salvation, the
forgiveness of sins:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Who is the image of the unseen God coming
into existence before all living things;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For by him all things were made, in
heaven and on earth, things seen and things unseen, authorities, lords,
rulers, and powers; all things were made by him and for him;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> He is before all things, and in him all
things have being.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And he is the head of the body, the
church: the starting point of all things, the first to come again from
the dead; so that in all things he might have the chief place.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For God in full measure was pleased to be
in him;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Through him uniting all things with
himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross; through him,
I say, uniting all things which are on earth or in heaven.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And you, who in the past were cut off and
at war with God in your minds through evil works, he has now made one

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> In the body of his flesh through death,
so that you might be holy and without sin and free from all evil before
him:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> If you keep yourselves safely based in
the faith, not moved from the hope of the good news which came to you,
and which was given to every living being under heaven; of which I,
Paul, was made a servant.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Now I have joy in my pain because of you,
and in my flesh I undergo whatever is still needed to make the sorrows
of Christ complete, for the salvation of his body, the church;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Of which I became a servant by the
purpose of God which was given to me for you, to give effect to the word
of God,

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> The secret which has been kept from all
times and generations, but has now been made clear to his saints,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> To whom God was pleased to give knowledge
of the wealth of the glory of this secret among the Gentiles, which is
Christ in you, the hope of glory:

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Whom we are preaching; guiding and
teaching every man in all wisdom, so that every man may be complete in
Christ;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And for this purpose I am working, using
all my strength by the help of his power which is working in me
strongly.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For it is my desire to give you news of the
great fight I am making for you and for those at Laodicea, and for all
who have not seen my face in the flesh;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So that their hearts may be comforted, and
that being joined together in love, they may come to the full wealth of
the certain knowledge of the secret of God, even Christ,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> In whom are all the secret stores of wisdom
and knowledge.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I say this so that you may not be turned
away by any deceit of words.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For though I am not present in the flesh,
still I am with you in the spirit, seeing with joy your order, and your
unchanging faith in Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> As, then, you took Christ Jesus the Lord,
so go on in him,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Rooted and based together in him, strong in
the faith which the teaching gave you, giving praise to God at all
times.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Take care that no one takes you away by
force, through man's wisdom and deceit, going after the beliefs of men
and the theories of the world, and not after Christ:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For in him all the wealth of God's being
has a living form,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And you are complete in him, who is the
head of all rule and authority:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> In whom you had a circumcision not made
with hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the
circumcision of Christ;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Having been put to death with him in
baptism, by which you came to life again with him, through faith in the
working of God, who made him come back from the dead.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And you, being dead through your sins and
the evil condition of your flesh, to you, I say, he gave life together
with him, and forgiveness of all our sins;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Having put an end to the handwriting of
the law which was against us, taking it out of the way by nailing it to
his cross;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Having made himself free from the rule of
authorities and powers, he put them openly to shame, glorying over them
in it.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For this reason let no man be your judge
in any question of food or drink or feast days or new moons or Sabbaths:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For these are an image of the things
which are to come; but the body is Christ's.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Let no man take your reward from you by
consciously making little of himself and giving worship to angels;
having his thoughts fixed on the things which he has seen, being
foolishly lifted up in his natural mind,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And not joined to the Head, from whom all
the body, being given strength and kept together through its joins and
bands, has its growth with the increase of God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> If you were made free, by your death with
Christ, from the rules of the world, why do you put yourselves under the
authority of orders

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Which say there may be no touching,
tasting, or taking in your hands,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> (Rules which are all to come to an end
with their use) after the orders and teaching of men?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> These things seem to have a sort of
wisdom in self-ordered worship and making little of oneself, and being
cruel to the body, not honouring it by giving it its natural use.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> If then you have a new life with Christ,
give your attention to the things of heaven, where Christ is seated at
the right hand of God.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Keep your mind on the higher things, not on
the things of earth.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For your life on earth is done, and you
have a secret life with Christ in God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> At the coming of Christ who is our life,
you will be seen with him in glory.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then put to death your bodies which are of
the earth; wrong use of the flesh, unclean things, passion, evil desires
and envy, which is the worship of strange gods;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Because of which the wrath of God comes on
those who go against his orders;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Among whom you were living in the past,
when you did such things.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But now it is right for you to put away all
these things; wrath, passion, bad feeling, curses, unclean talk;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Do not make false statements to one
another; because you have put away the old man with all his doings,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And have put on the new man, which has
become new in knowledge after the image of his maker;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Where there is no Greek or Jew, no one
with circumcision or without circumcision, no division between nations,
no servant or free man: but Christ is all and in all.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> As saints of God, then, holy and dearly
loved, let your behaviour be marked by pity and mercy, kind feeling, a
low opinion of yourselves, gentle ways, and a power of undergoing all
things;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Being gentle to one another and having
forgiveness for one another, if anyone has done wrong to his brother,
even as the Lord had forgiveness for you:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And more than all, have love; the only
way in which you may be completely joined together.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And let the peace of Christ be ruling in
your hearts, as it was the purpose of God for you to be one body; and
give praise to God at all times.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Let the word of Christ be in you in all
wealth of wisdom; teaching and helping one another with songs of praise
and holy words, making melody to God with grace in your hearts.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And whatever you do, in word or in act,
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving praise to God the Father
through him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Wives, be under the authority of your
husbands, as is right in the Lord.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Husbands, have love for your wives, and
be not bitter against them.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Children, do the orders of your fathers
and mothers in all things, for this is pleasing to the Lord.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Fathers, do not be hard on your children,
so that their spirit may not be broken.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Servants, in all things do the orders of
your natural masters; not only when their eyes are on you, as pleasers
of men, but with all your heart, fearing the Lord:

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Whatever you do, do it readily, as to the
Lord and not to men;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Being certain that the Lord will give you
the reward of the heritage: for you are the servants of the Lord Christ.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For the wrongdoer will have punishment
for the wrong he has done, without respect for any man's position.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Masters, give your servants what is right
and equal, conscious that you have a Master in heaven.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Give yourselves to prayer at all times,
keeping watch with praise;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And making prayer for us, that God may give
us an open door for the preaching of the word, the secret of Christ, for
which I am now in chains;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> So that I may make it clear, as it is right
for me to do.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Be wise in your behaviour to those who are
outside, making good use of the time.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Let your talk be with grace, mixed with
salt, so that you may be able to give an answer to everyone.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Tychicus will give you news of all my
business: he is a dear brother and true servant and helper in the word;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And I have sent him to you for this very
purpose, so that you may have news of how we are, and so that he may
give your hearts comfort;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And with him I have sent Onesimus, the true
and well-loved brother, who is one of you. They will give you word of
everything which is taking place here.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Aristarchus, my brother-prisoner, sends
his love to you, and Mark, a relation of Barnabas (about whom you have
been given orders: if he comes to you, be kind to him),

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And Jesus, whose other name is Justus;
these are of the circumcision: they are my only brother-workers for the
kingdom of God, who have been a comfort to me.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of
Christ Jesus, sends you his love, ever taking thought for you in his
prayers, that you may be complete and fully certain of all the purpose
of God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For I give witness of him that he has
undergone much trouble for you and for those in Laodicea and in
Hierapolis.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Luke, our well-loved medical friend, and
Demas, send you their love.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Give my love to the brothers in Laodicea
and to Nymphas and the church in their house.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And when this letter has been made public
among you, let the same be done in the church of Laodicea; and see that
you have the letter from Laodicea.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Say to Archippus, See that you do the
work which the Lord has given you to do.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> I, Paul, give you this word of love in my
handwriting. Keep in memory that I am a prisoner. Grace be with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians](th1)
