[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](num)  [Next](jos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Deuteronomy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the words which Moses said to all
Israel on the far side of Jordan, in the waste land in the Arabah
opposite Suph, between Paran on the one side, and Tophel, Laban,
Hazeroth, and Dizahab on the other.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> It is eleven days' journey from Horeb by
the way of Mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Now in the fortieth year, on the first day
of the eleventh month, Moses gave to the children of Israel all the
orders which the Lord had given him for them;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> After he had overcome Sihon, king of the
Amorites, ruling in Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, ruling in
Ashtaroth, at Edrei:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> On the far side of Jordan in the land of
Moab, Moses gave the people this law, saying,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The Lord our God said to us in Horeb, You
have been long enough in this mountain:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Make a move now, and go on your way into
the hill-country of the Amorites and the places near it, in the Arabah
and the hill-country and in the lowlands and in the South and by the
seaside, all the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the
great river, the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> See, all the land is before you: go in and
take for yourselves the land which the Lord gave by an oath to your
fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to their seed after them.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> At that time I said to you, I am not able
to undertake the care of you by myself;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The Lord your God has given you increase,
and now you are like the stars of heaven in number.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> May the Lord, the God of your fathers,
make you a thousand times greater in number than you are, and give you
his blessing as he has said!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> How is it possible for me by myself to be
responsible for you, and undertake the weight of all your troubles and
your arguments?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Take for yourselves men who are wise,
far-seeing, and respected among you, from your tribes, and I will make
them rulers over you.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And you made answer and said to me, It is
good for us to do as you say.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So I took the heads of your tribes, wise
men and respected, and made them rulers over you, captains of thousands
and captains of hundreds and captains of fifties and captains of tens,
and overseers of your tribes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And at that time I gave orders to your
judges, saying, Let all questions between your brothers come before you
for hearing, and give decisions uprightly between a man and his brother
or one from another nation who is with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> In judging, do not let a man's position
have any weight with you; give hearing equally to small and great; have
no fear of any man, for it is God who is judge: and any cause in which
you are not able to give a decision, you are to put before me and I will
give it a hearing.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And at that time I gave you all the
orders which you were to do.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Then we went on from Horeb, through all
that great and cruel waste which you saw, on our way to the hill-country
of the Amorites, as the Lord gave us orders; and we came to
Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And I said to you, You have come to the
hill-country of the Amorites, which the Lord our God is giving us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> See now, the Lord your God has put the
land into your hands: go up and take it, as the Lord, the God of your
fathers, has said to you; have no fear and do not be troubled.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And you came near to me, every one of
you, and said, Let us send men before us to go through the land with
care and give us an account of the way we are to go and the towns to
which we will come.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And what you said seemed good to me, and
I took twelve men from among you, one from every tribe;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they went up into the hill-country
and came to the valley of Eshcol, and saw what was there.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And taking in their hands some of the
fruit of the land, they came down again to us, and gave us their
account, saying, It is a good land which the Lord our God is giving us.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But going against the order of the Lord
your God, you would not go up:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And you made an angry outcry in your
tents, and said, In his hate for us the Lord has taken us out of the
land of Egypt, to give us up into the hands of the Amorites for our
destruction.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Where are we going up? Our brothers have
made our hearts feeble with fear by saying, The people are greater and
taller than we are, and the towns are great and walled up to heaven; and
more than this, we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Then I said to you, Have no fear of them.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> The Lord your God who goes before you
will be fighting for you, and will do such wonders as he did for you in
Egypt before your eyes;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And in the waste land, where you have
seen how the Lord was supporting you, as a man does his son, in all your
journeying till you came to this place.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> But for all this, you had no faith in the
Lord your God,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Who goes before you on your way, looking
for a place where you may put up your tents, in fire by night, lighting
up the way you are to go, and in a cloud by day.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And the Lord, hearing your words, was
angry, and said with an oath,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Truly, not one of this evil generation
will see that good land which I said I would give to your fathers,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> But only Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, he
will see it; and to him and to his children I will give the land over
which his feet have gone, because he has been true to the Lord with all
his heart.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> And, in addition, the Lord was angry with
me because of you, saying, You yourself will not go into it:

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Joshua, the son of Nun, your servant, he
will go into the land: say to him that he is to be strong, for he will
be Israel's guide into their heritage.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And your little ones, who, you said,
would come into strange hands, your children, who now have no knowledge
of good or evil, they will go into that land, and to them I will give it
and it will be theirs.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> But as for you, go back, journeying into
the waste land by the way of the Red Sea.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Then you said to me, We have done evil
against the Lord, we will go up to the attack, as the Lord our God has
given us orders. And arming yourselves every one, you made ready to go
up without care into the hill-country.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And the Lord said to me, Say to them, Do
not go up to the attack; for I am not among you, and you will be
overcome by those who are against you.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> This I said to you, but you gave no
attention and went against the orders of the Lord, and in your pride
went up into the hill-country.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And the Amorites who were in the
hill-country came out against you and put you to flight, rushing after
you like bees, and overcame you in Seir, driving you even as far as
Hormah.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And you came back, weeping before the
Lord; but the Lord gave no attention to your cries and did not give ear
to you.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> So you were kept waiting in Kadesh for a
long time.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then we went back, journeying into the
waste land by the way to the Red Sea, as the Lord had said to me: and we
were a long time going round Mount Seir.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the Lord said to me,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> You have been journeying round this
mountain long enough: now go to the north;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And give the people orders, saying, You are
about to go through the land of your brothers, the children of Esau, who
are living in Seir; and they will have fear of you; so take care what
you do:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Make no attack on them, for I will not give
you any of their land, not even space enough for a man's foot: because I
have given Mount Seir to Esau for his heritage.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> You may get food for your needs from them
for a price, and water for drinking.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the blessing of the Lord your God has
been on you in all the work of your hands: he has knowledge of your
wanderings through this great waste: these forty years the Lord your God
has been with you, and you have been short of nothing.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> So we went on past our brothers, the
children of Esau, living in Seir, by the road through the Arabah, from
Elath and Ezion-geber. And turning, we went by the road through the
waste land of Moab.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the Lord said to me, Make no attack on
Moab and do not go to war with them, for I will not give you any of his
land: because I have given Ar to the children of Lot for their heritage.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> (In the past the Emim were living there;
a great people, equal in numbers to the Anakim and as tall;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> They are numbered among the Rephaim, like
the Anakim; but are named Emim by the Moabites.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And the Horites in earlier times were
living in Seir, but the children of Esau took their place; they sent
destruction on them and took their land for themselves, as Israel did to
the land of his heritage which the Lord gave them.)

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Get up now, and go over the stream Zered.
So we went over the stream Zered.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Thirty-eight years had gone by from the
time when we came away from Kadesh-barnea till we went over the stream
Zered; by that time all the generation of the men of war among us were
dead, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For the hand of the Lord was against
them, working their destruction, till all were dead.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So when death had overtaken all the men
of war among the people,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The word of the Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> You are about to go by Ar, the limit of
the country of Moab;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And when you come near the land of the
children of Ammon, give them no cause of trouble and do not make war on
them, for I will not give you any of the land of the children of Ammon
for your heritage: because I have given it to the children of Lot.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> (That land is said to have been a land of
the Rephaim, for Rephaim had been living there in earlier times, but
they were named Zamzummim by the Ammonites;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> They were a great people, tall as the
Anakim, and equal to them in number; but the Lord sent destruction on
them and the children of Ammon took their place, living in their land;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> As he did for the children of Esau living
in Seir, when he sent destruction on the Horites before them, and they
took their land where they are living to this day:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And the Avvim, living in the small towns
as far as Gaza, came to destruction by the hands of the Caphtorim who
came out from Caphtor and took their land.)

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Get up now, and go on your journey,
crossing over the valley of the Arnon: see, I have given into your hands
Sihon, the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and all his land: go forward to
make it yours, and make war on him,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> From now on I will put the fear of you in
all peoples under heaven, who, hearing of you, will be shaking with fear
and grief of heart because of you.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Then from the waste land of Kedemoth I
sent representatives to Sihon, king of Heshbon, with words of peace,
saying,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Let me go through your land: I will keep
to the highway, not turning to the right or to the left;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Let me have food, at a price, for my
needs, and water for drinking: only let me go through on foot;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> As the children of Esau did for me in
Seir and the Moabites in Ar; till I have gone over Jordan into the land
which the Lord our God is giving us.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But Sihon, king of Heshbon, would not let
us go through; for the Lord your God made his spirit hard and his heart
strong, so that he might give him up into your hands as at this day.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And the Lord said to me, See, from now on
I have given Sihon and his land into your hands: go forward now to take
his land and make it yours.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Then Sihon came out against us with all
his people, to make an attack on us at Jahaz.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And the Lord our God gave him into our
hands; and we overcame him and his sons and all his people.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> At that time we took all his towns, and
gave them over to complete destruction, together with men, women, and
children; we had no mercy on any:

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Only the cattle we took for ourselves,
with the goods from the towns we had taken.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> From Aroer on the edge of the valley of
the Arnon and from the town in the valley as far as Gilead, no town was
strong enough to keep us out; the Lord our God gave them all into our
hands:

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> But you did not go near the land of the
children of Ammon, that is, all the side of the river Jabbok or the
towns of the hill-country, wherever the Lord our God had said we were
not to go.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then turning we took the road to Bashan:
and Og, king of Bashan, came out against us with all his people, and
made an attack on us at Edrei.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the Lord said to me, Have no fear of
him: for I have given him and all his people and his land into your
hands; do to him as you did to Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was
ruling in Heshbon.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So the Lord our God gave up Og, king of
Bashan, and all his people into our hands; and we overcame him so
completely that all his people came to their end in the fight.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> At that time we took all his towns; there
was not one town of the sixty towns, all the country of Argob, the
kingdom of Og in Bashan, which we did not take.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> All these towns had high walls round them
with doors and locks; and in addition we took a great number of unwalled
towns.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And we put them to the curse, every town
together with men, women, and children.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But we took for ourselves all the cattle
and the stored wealth of the towns.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> At that time we took their land from the
two kings of the Amorites on the far side of Jordan, from the valley of
the Arnon to Mount Hermon;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> (By the Sidonians, Hermon is named Sirion,
and by the Amorites Shenir;)

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> All the towns of the table-land and all
Gilead and Bashan as far as Salecah and Edrei, towns of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> (For Og, king of Bashan, was the last of
all the Rephaim; his bed was made of iron; is it not in Rabbah, in the
land of the children of Ammon? It was nine cubits long and four cubits
wide, measured by the common cubit.)

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And this land which we took at that time,
from Aroer by the valley of the Arnon, and half the hill-country of
Gilead with its towns, I gave to the Reubenites and the Gadites.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The rest of Gilead and all Bashan, the
kingdom of Og, all the land of Argob, together with Bashan, I gave to
the half-tribe of Manasseh. (This land is named the land of the Rephaim.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Jair, the son of Manasseh, took all the
land of Argob, as far as the country of the Geshurites and the
Maacathites, naming it, Bashan, Havvoth-Jair after himself, as it is to
this day.)

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Gilead I gave to Machir.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And the land from Gilead to the valley of
the Arnon, with the middle of the valley as a limit, as far as the river
Jabbok which is the limit of the country of the children of Ammon, I
gave to the Reubenites and the Gadites;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> As well as the Arabah, with the river
Jordan as their limit, from Chinnereth to the Salt Sea, under the slopes
of Pisgah to the east.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> At that time I gave you orders, saying,
The Lord has given you this land for your heritage: all the men of war
are to go over armed before your brothers the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But your wives and your little ones and
your cattle (for it is clear that you have much cattle) may go on living
in the towns I have given you;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Till the Lord has given rest to your
brothers as to you, and till they have taken for themselves the land
which the Lord your God is giving them on the other side of Jordan: then
you may go back, every man of you, to the heritage which I have given
you.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I gave orders to Joshua at that time,
saying, Your eyes have seen what the Lord your God has done to these two
kings: so will the Lord do to all the kingdoms into which you come.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Have no fear of them, for the Lord your
God will be fighting for you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And at that time I made request to the
Lord, saying,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> O Lord God, you have now for the first
time let your servant see your great power and the strength of your
hand; for what god is there in heaven or on earth able to do such great
works and such acts of power?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Let me go over, O Lord, and see the good
land on the other side of Jordan, and that fair mountain country, even
Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But the Lord was angry with me because of
you and would not give ear to my prayer; and the Lord said to me, Let it
be enough, say no more about this thing.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Go up to the top of Pisgah, and turning
your eyes to the west and the north, to the south and the east, see the
land with your eyes: for you are not to go over Jordan.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> But give my orders to Joshua, comforting
him and making him strong; for he is to go over Jordan at the head of
this people, and he will give them this land which you will see for
their heritage.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> So we were waiting in the valley facing
Beth-peor.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And now give ear, O Israel, to the laws and
the decisions which I am teaching you, and do them; so that life may be
yours, and you may go in and take for yourselves the land which the
Lord, the God of your fathers, is giving you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Make no addition to the orders which I give
you, and take nothing from them, but keep the orders of the Lord your
God which I give you.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Your eyes have seen what the Lord did
because of Baal-peor: for destruction came from the Lord on all those
among you who went after Baal-peor.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But you who kept faith with the Lord are
living, every one of you, today.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> I have been teaching you laws and
decisions, as I was ordered to do by the Lord my God, so that you might
keep them in the land to which you are going to take it for your
heritage.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> So keep these laws and do them; for so will
your wisdom and good sense be clear in the eyes of the peoples, who
hearing all these laws will say, Truly, this great nation is a wise and
far-seeing people.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For what great nation has a god so near to
them as the Lord our God is, whenever we are turned to him in prayer?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And what great nation has laws and
decisions so right as all this law which I put before you today?

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Only take care, and keep watch on your
soul, for fear that the things which your eyes have seen go from your
memory and from your heart all the days of your life; but let the
knowledge of them be given to your children and to your children's
children;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> That day when you were waiting before the
Lord your God in Horeb, and the Lord said to me, Make all the people
come together, so that hearing my words they may go in fear of me all
the days of their life on earth and give this teaching to their
children.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And you came near, waiting at the foot of
the mountain; and flames of fire went up from the mountain to the heart
of heaven, with dark clouds, and all was black as night.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And the voice of the Lord came to you out
of the fire: the sound of his words came to your ears but you saw no
form; there was nothing but a voice.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he gave you his agreement with you,
the ten rules which you were to keep, which he put in writing on the two
stones of the law.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the Lord gave me orders at that time
to make clear to you these laws and decisions, so that you might do them
in the land to which you are going, and which is to be your heritage.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> So keep watch on yourselves with care;
for you saw no form of any sort on the day when the voice of the Lord
came to you in Horeb out of the heart of the fire:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> So that you may not be turned to evil
ways and make for yourselves an image in the form of any living thing,
male or female,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Or any beast of the earth, or winged bird
of the air,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Or of anything which goes flat on the
earth, or any fish in the water under the earth.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And when your eyes are lifted up to
heaven, and you see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the army of
heaven, do not let yourselves be moved to give them worship, or become
the servants of what the Lord has given equally to all peoples under
heaven.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But the Lord has taken you out of the
flaming fire, out of Egypt, to be to him the people of his heritage, as
you are today.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the Lord was angry with me because of
you, and made an oath that I was not to go over Jordan into the good
land which the Lord is giving you for your heritage:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> But death is to come to me in this land,
I may not go over Jordan: but you will go over and take that good land
for your heritage.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Take care that you do not let the
agreement of the Lord your God, which he has made with you, go out of
your mind, or make for yourselves images of any sort, against the orders
which the Lord your God has given you.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For the Lord your God is an all-burning
fire, and he will not let the honour which is his be given to any other.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> If, when you have had children and
children's children, and have been living a long time in the land, you
are turned to evil ways, and make an image of any sort, and do evil in
the eyes of the Lord your God, moving him to wrath:

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> May heaven and earth be my witnesses
against you today, that destruction will quickly overtake you, cutting
you off from that land which you are going over Jordan to take; your
days will not be long in that land, but you will come to a complete end.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And the Lord will send you wandering
among the peoples; only a small band of you will be kept from death
among the nations where the Lord will send you.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> There you will be the servants of gods,
made by men's hands, of wood and stone, having no power of seeing or
hearing or taking food or smelling.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But if in those lands you are turned
again to the Lord your God, searching for him with all your heart and
soul, he will not keep himself from you.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> When you are in trouble and all these
things have come on you, if, in the future, you are turned again to the
Lord your God, and give ear to his voice:

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Because the Lord your God is a God of
mercy, he will not take away his help from you or let destruction
overtake you, or be false to the agreement which he made by an oath with
your fathers.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> Give thought now to the days which are
past, before your time, from the day when God first gave life to man on
the earth, and searching from one end of heaven to the other, see if
such a great thing as this has ever been, or if anything like it has
been talked of in story.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Has any people ever gone on living after
hearing the voice of God out of the heart of the fire as you did?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Has God ever before taken a nation for
himself from out of another nation, by punishments and signs and
wonders, by war and by a strong hand and a stretched-out arm and great
acts of wonder and fear, as the Lord your God did for you in Egypt,
before your very eyes?

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> All this he let you see, so that you
might be certain that the Lord is God and there is no other.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Out of heaven itself his voice came to
you, teaching you; and on earth he let you see his great fire; and his
words came to your ears out of the heart of the fire.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And because of his love for your fathers,
he took their seed and made it his, and he himself, present among you,
took you out of Egypt by his great power;

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> Driving out before you nations greater
and stronger than you, to take you into their land and give it to you
for your heritage, as at this day.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> So today be certain, and keep the
knowledge deep in your hearts, that the Lord is God, in heaven on high
and here on earth; there is no other God.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> Then keep his laws and his orders which I
give you today, so that it may be well for you and for your children
after you, and that your lives may be long in the land which the Lord
your God is giving you for ever.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Moses had three towns marked out on
the far side of Jordan looking to the east;

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> To which anyone causing the death of his
neighbour in error and not through hate, might go in flight; so that in
one of these towns he might be kept from death:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> The names of the towns were Bezer in the
waste land, in the table-land, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead
for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan for Manasseh.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> This is the law which Moses put before
the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> These are the rules and the laws and the
decisions which Moses gave to the children of Israel after they came out
of Egypt;

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> On the far side of Jordan, in the valley
facing Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was
ruling in Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel overcame after
they had come out of Egypt:

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> And they took his land for a heritage,
and the land of Og, king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, whose
lands were on the other side of Jordan to the east;

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> From Aroer on the edge of the valley of
the Arnon as far as Mount Sion, which is Hermon,

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> And all the Arabah on the far side of
Jordan to the east, as far as the sea of the Arabah under the slopes of
Pisgah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Moses sent for all Israel, and said to
them, Give ear, O Israel, to the laws and the decisions which I give you
today, and give attention to them so that you may keep and do them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The Lord our God made an agreement with us
in Horeb.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> The Lord did not make this agreement with
our fathers but with us, who are all living and present here today.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> The word of the Lord came to you face to
face on the mountain, out of the heart of the fire,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> (I was between the Lord and you at that
time, to make clear to you the word of the Lord: because, through fear
of the fire, you did not go up the mountain;) saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I am the Lord your God, who took you out of
the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> You are to have no other gods but me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> You may not make for yourselves an image in
the form of anything in heaven or on earth or in the waters under the
earth:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> You may not go down on your faces before
them or give them worship: for I, the Lord your God, am a God who will
not give his honour to another; and I will send punishment on the
children for the wrongdoing of their fathers, to the third and fourth
generation of my haters;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And I will have mercy through a thousand
generations on those who have love for me and keep my laws.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> You are not to make use of the name of
the Lord your God for an evil purpose; whoever takes the Lord's name on
his lips for an evil purpose will be judged as a sinner by the Lord.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Keep the Sabbath day as a holy day, as
you have been ordered by the Lord your God.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> On six days do all your work:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But the seventh day is a Sabbath to the
Lord your God; on that day do no work, you or your son or your daughter,
or your man-servant or your woman-servant, or your ox or your ass or any
of your cattle, or the man from a strange country who is living among
you; so that your man-servant and your woman-servant may have rest as
well as you.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And keep in mind that you were a servant
in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord your God took you out of that
land by his strong hand and his stretched-out arm: for this reason the
Lord has given you orders to keep the Sabbath day.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Give honour to your father and your
mother, as you have been ordered by the Lord your God; so that your life
may be long and all may be well for you in the land which the Lord your
God is giving you.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Do not put anyone to death without cause.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Do not be false to the married relation.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Do not take the property of another.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Do not give false witness against your
neighbour;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Or let your desire be turned to your
neighbour's wife, or his house or his field or his man-servant or his
woman-servant or his ox or his ass or anything which is your
neighbour's.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> These words the Lord said to all of you
together on the mountain, out of the heart of the fire, out of the cloud
and the dark, with a great voice: and he said no more; he put them in
writing on the two stones of the law and gave them to me.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And after hearing the voice which came
out of the dark while the mountain was burning with fire, all the heads
of your tribes and your chiefs came to me,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And said, The Lord has let us see his
glory and his power, and his voice has come to us out of the fire: today
we have seen that a man may go on living even after hearing the voice of
God.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Why then is death to be our fate? For if
the voice of the Lord our God comes to us any more, death will overtake
us, and we will be burned up in this great fire.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For what man is there in all the earth,
who, hearing the voice of the living God as we have, out of the heart of
the fire, has been kept from death?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Do you go near: and after hearing
everything which the Lord our God has to say, give us an account of all
he has said to you, and we will give ear, and do it.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Then the Lord, hearing your words to me,
said to me, The words which this people have said to you have come to my
ears: what they have said is well said.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> If only they had such a heart in them at
all times, so that they might go in fear of me and keep my orders and
that it might be well for them and for their children for ever!

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Now say to them, Go back to your tents.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> But as for you, keep your place here by
me, and I will give you all the orders and the laws and the decisions
which you are to make clear to them, so that they may do them in the
land which I am giving them for their heritage.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> Take care, then, to do whatever the Lord
your God has given you orders to do; let there be no turning away to the
right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Go on walking in the way ordered for you
by the Lord your God, so that life may be yours and it may be well for
you, and your days may be long in the land of your heritage.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now these are the orders and the laws and
the decisions which the Lord your God gave me for your teaching, so that
you might do them in the land of your heritage to which you are going:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> So that living in the fear of the Lord your
God, you may keep all his laws and his orders, which I give you: you and
your son and your son's son, all the days of your life; and so that your
life may be long.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> So give ear, O Israel, and take care to do
this; so that it may be well for you, and you may be greatly increased,
as the Lord the God of your fathers has given you his word, in a land
flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give ear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one
Lord:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the Lord your God is to be loved with
all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Keep these words, which I say to you this
day, deep in your hearts;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Teaching them to your children with all
care, talking of them when you are at rest in your house or walking by
the way, when you go to sleep and when you get up.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Let them be fixed as a sign on your hand,
and marked on your brow;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Have them lettered on the pillars of your
houses and over the doors of your towns.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And when the Lord your God has taken you
into the land which he gave his oath to your fathers, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob, that he would give you; with great and fair towns
which were not of your building;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And houses full of good things not stored
up by you, and places for storing water which you did not make, and
vine-gardens and olive-trees not of your planting; and you have taken
food and are full;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Then take care that you keep your hearts
true to the Lord, who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the
prison-house.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Let the fear of the Lord your God be in
your hearts, and be his servants, taking your oaths by his name.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Do not go after other gods, the gods of
the peoples round about you;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For the Lord your God who is with you is
a God who will not let his honour be given to another; or the wrath of
the Lord will be burning against you, causing your destruction from the
face of the earth.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Do not put the Lord your God to the test
as you did in Massah.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Keep with care the orders of the Lord
your God, and his rules and his laws which he has given you;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And do what is upright and good in the
eyes of the Lord your God, so that it may be well for you and you may go
in and take for your heritage that good land from which the Lord
undertook by an oath to your fathers,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> To send out from before you all those who
are against you.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And when your son says to you in time to
come, What is the reason for these rules and laws and decisions which
the Lord our God has given you?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then you will say to your son, We were
servants under Pharaoh's yoke in Egypt; and the Lord took us out of
Egypt with a strong hand:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the Lord did great signs and wonders
against Egypt, and against Pharaoh and all his house, before our eyes:

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he took us out from that place,
guiding us here to give us this land, as he said in his oath to our
fathers.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the Lord gave us orders to keep all
these laws, in the fear of the Lord our God, so that it might be well
for us for ever, and that he might keep us from death, as he has done to
this day.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And it will be our righteousness if we
take care to keep all this order before the Lord our God as he has given
it to us.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When the Lord your God takes you into the
land where you are going, which is to be your heritage, and has sent out
the nations before you, the Hittites and the Girgashites and the
Amorites and the Canaanites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the
Jebusites, seven nations greater and stronger than you;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And when the Lord has given them up into
your hands and you have overcome them, give them up to complete
destruction: make no agreement with them, and have no mercy on them:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Do not take wives or husbands from among
them; do not give your daughters to their sons, or take their daughters
for your sons.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For through them your sons will be turned
from me to the worship of other gods: and the Lord will be moved to
wrath against you and send destruction on you quickly.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> But this is what you are to do to them:
their altars are to be pulled down and their pillars broken, and their
holy trees cut down and their images burned with fire.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For you are a holy people to the Lord your
God: marked out by the Lord your God to be his special people out of all
the nations on the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The Lord did not give you his love or take
you for himself because you were more in number than any other people;
for you were the smallest of the nations:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But because of his love for you, and in
order to keep his oath to your fathers, the Lord took you out with the
strength of his hand, making you free from the prison-house and from the
hand of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Be certain, then, that the Lord your God is
God; whose faith and mercy are unchanging, who keeps his word through a
thousand generations to those who have love for him and keep his laws;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Rewarding his haters to their face with
destruction; he will have no mercy on his hater, but will give him open
punishment.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> So keep the orders and the laws and the
decisions which I give you today and do them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And it will be, that if you give
attention to these decisions and keep and do them, then the Lord will
keep his agreement with you and his mercy, as he said in his oath to
your fathers.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he will give you his love, blessing
you and increasing you: he will send his blessing on the offspring of
your body and the fruit of your land, your grain and your wine and your
oil, the increase of your cattle and the young of your flock, in the
land which by his oath to your fathers he undertook to give you.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> You will have greater blessings than any
other people: no male or female among you or among your cattle will be
without offspring.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And the Lord will take away from you all
disease, and will not put on you any of the evil diseases of Egypt which
you have seen, but will put them on your haters.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And you are to send destruction on all
the peoples which the Lord your God gives into your hands; have no pity
on them, and do not give worship to their gods; for that will be a cause
of sin to you.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If you say in your hearts, These nations
are greater in number than we are: how are we to take their land from
them?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Have no fear of them, but keep well in
mind what the Lord your God did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The great punishments which your eyes
saw, and the signs and the wonders and the strong hand and the
stretched-out arm, by which the Lord your God took you out: so will the
Lord your God do to all the peoples who are the cause of your fears.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And the Lord will send a hornet among
them, till all the rest who have kept themselves safe from you in secret
places have been cut off.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Have no fear of them: for the Lord your
God is with you, a great God greatly to be feared.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> The Lord your God will send out the
nations before you little by little; they are not to be rooted out
quickly, for fear that the beasts of the field may be increased overmuch
against you.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But the Lord your God will give them up
into your hands, overpowering them till their destruction is complete.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> He will give their kings into your hands,
and you will put their names out of existence under heaven; there is not
one of them who will not give way before you, till their destruction is
complete.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The images of their gods are to be burned
with fire: have no desire for the gold and silver on them, and do not
take it for yourselves, for it will be a danger to you: it is a thing
disgusting to the Lord your God:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And you may not take a disgusting thing
into your house, and so become cursed with its curse: but keep
yourselves from it, turning from it with fear and hate, for it is a
cursed thing.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Take care to keep all the orders which I
give you today, so that you may have life and be increased and go in and
take as a heritage the land which the Lord, by his oath to your fathers,
undertook to give you.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And keep in mind the way by which the Lord
your God has taken you through the waste land these forty years, so that
he might make low your pride and put you to the test, to see what was in
your heart and if you would keep his orders or not.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he made low your pride and let you be
without food and gave you manna for your food, a thing new to you, which
your fathers never saw; so that he might make it clear to you that bread
is not man's only need, but his life is in every word which comes out of
the mouth of the Lord.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Through all these forty years your clothing
did not get old or your feet become tired.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Keep in mind this thought, that as a son is
trained by his father, so you have been trained by the Lord your God.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Then keep the orders of the Lord your God,
fearing him and walking in his ways.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For the Lord your God is guiding you into a
good land, a land of water-springs, of fountains, and deep streams
flowing out from the valleys and the hills;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> A land of grain and vines and fig-trees and
fair fruits; a land of oil-giving olive-trees and honey;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Where there will be bread for you in full
measure and you will be in need of nothing; a land where the very stones
are iron and from whose hills you may get copper.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And you will have food enough and be
full, praising the Lord your God for the good land he has given you.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Then take care that you are not turned
away from the Lord your God and from keeping his orders and decisions
and laws which I give you this day:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And when you have taken food and are
full, and have made fair houses for yourselves and are living in them;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And when your herds and your flocks are
increased, and your stores of silver and gold, and you have wealth of
every sort;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Take care that your hearts are not lifted
up in pride, giving no thought to the Lord your God who took you out of
the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Who was your guide through that great and
cruel waste, where there were poison-snakes and scorpions and a dry land
without water; who made water come out of the hard rock for you;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Who gave you manna for your food in the
waste land, a food which your fathers had never seen; so that your pride
might be broken and your hearts tested for your good in the end;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Say not then, in your hearts, My power
and the strength of my hands have got me this wealth.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But keep in mind the Lord your God: for
it is he who gives you the power to get wealth, so that he may give
effect to the agreement which he made by his oath with your fathers, as
at this day.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And it is certain that if at any time you
are turned away from the Lord your God, and go after other gods, to be
their servants and to give them worship, destruction will overtake you.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Like the nations which the Lord is
cutting off before you, so you will be cut off; because you would not
give ear to the voice of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Give ear, O Israel: today you are to go
over Jordan, to take the heritage of nations greater and stronger than
yourselves, and towns of great size with walls as high as heaven;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> A people great and tall, the sons of the
Anakim, of whom you have knowledge and of whom it has been said, All are
forced to give way before the sons of Anak.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Be certain then today that it is the Lord
your God who goes over before you like an all-burning fire; he will send
destruction on them, crushing them before you; and you will send them in
flight, putting an end to them quickly, as the Lord has said.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And after the Lord has sent them in flight
from before you, say not in your heart, Because of my righteousness the
Lord has given me this land; when it is because of their evil-doing that
the Lord is driving these nations out before you.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Not for your righteousness or because your
hearts are upright are you going in to take their land; but because of
the evil-doing of these nations the Lord your God is driving them out
from before you, and to give effect to his oath to your fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Be certain then that the Lord your God is
not giving you this good land as a reward for your righteousness; for
you are a stiff-necked people.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Keep well in mind how you made the Lord
your God angry in the waste land; from the day when you went out of
Egypt till you came to this place, you have gone against the orders of
the Lord.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Again in Horeb you made the Lord angry, and
in his wrath he would have put an end to you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> When I had gone up into the mountain to be
given the stones on which was recorded the agreement which the Lord made
with you, I was on the mountain for forty days and forty nights without
taking food or drinking water.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the Lord gave me the two stones with
writing on them done by the finger of God: on them were recorded all the
words which the Lord said to you on the mountain out of the heart of the
fire, on the day of the great meeting.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Then at the end of forty days and forty
nights the Lord gave me those stones, the stones of the agreement.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the Lord said to me, Get up now, and
go down quickly from this place; for the people you have taken out of
Egypt have given themselves over to evil; they have quickly been turned
from the way in which I gave them orders to go; they have made
themselves a metal image.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And then the Lord said to me, I have seen
that this people is stiff-necked:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Let me send destruction on them till
their very name is cut off; and I will make of you a nation greater and
stronger than they.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So turning round I came down from the
mountain, and the mountain was burning with fire; and the two stones of
the agreement were in my hands.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I saw that you had done evil against
the Lord, and had made for yourselves a metal image of a young ox: you
had quickly been turned from the way in which the Lord had given you
orders to go.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And I let the stones go from my hands,
and they were broken before your eyes.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And I went down on my face before the
Lord, as at the first, for forty days and forty nights, without taking
food or drinking water, because of all your sin, in doing evil in the
eyes of the Lord and moving him to wrath.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For I was full of fear because of the
wrath of the Lord which was burning against you, with your destruction
in view. But again the Lord's ear was open to my prayer.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And the Lord, in his wrath, would have
put Aaron to death: and I made prayer for Aaron at the same time.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And I took your sin, the image which you
had made, and put it in the fire and had it hammered and crushed very
small till it was only dust: and the dust I put in the stream flowing
down from the mountain.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Again at Taberah and at Massah and at
Kibroth-hattaavah you made the Lord angry.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when the Lord sent you from
Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and take the land which I have given you;
you went against the orders of the Lord your God, and had no faith in
him, and would not give ear to his voice.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> From the day when I first had knowledge
of you, you have gone against the word of the Lord.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> So I went down on my face in prayer
before the Lord for forty days and forty nights as I did at first;
because the Lord had said that he would put an end to you.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And I made prayer to the Lord and said, O
Lord God, do not send destruction on your people and your heritage, to
whom, by your great power, you have given salvation, whom you have taken
out of Egypt by the strength of your hand.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Keep in mind your servants, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, not looking at the hard heart of this people, or their
evil-doing and their sin:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Or it may be said in the land from which
you have taken them, Because the Lord was not able to take them into the
land which he said he would give them, and because of his hate for them,
he has taken them out to put them to death in the waste land.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> But still they are your people and your
heritage, whom you took out by your great power and by your
stretched-out arm.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> At that time the Lord said to me, Make
two other stones, cut like the first two, and come up to me on the
mountain, and make an ark of wood.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And I will put on the stones the words
which were on the first stones which were broken by you, and you are to
put them into the ark.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> So I made an ark of hard wood, and had
two stones cut like the others, and went up the mountain with the stones
in my hands.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he put on the stones, as in the first
writing, the ten rules which the Lord gave you on the mountain out of
the fire on the day of the great meeting: and the Lord gave the stones
to me.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And turning round I came down from the
mountain and put the stones in the ark which I had made; and there they
are as the Lord gave me orders.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> (And the children of Israel went on from
Beeroth Bene-jaakan to Moserah: there death came to Aaron and he was put
to rest in the earth; and Eleazar, his son, took his place as priest.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> From there they went on to Gudgodah, and
from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of streams of water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> At that time the Lord had the tribe of
Levi marked out to take up the ark of the Lord's agreement, to be before
the Lord and to do his work and to give blessings in his name, to this
day.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> For this reason Levi has no part or
heritage for himself among his brothers: the Lord is his heritage, as
the Lord your God said to him.)

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And I was in the mountain, as at the
first time, for forty days and forty nights; and again the ears of the
Lord were open to my prayer, and he did not send destruction on you.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Then the Lord said to me, Get up and go
on your journey before the people, so that they may go in and take the
land which I said in my oath to their fathers that I would give them.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And now, Israel, what would the Lord
your God have you do, but to go in the fear of the Lord your God,
walking in all his ways and loving him and doing his pleasure with all
your heart and all your soul,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Doing the orders of the Lord and
keeping his laws which I give you this day for your good?

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> The Lord your God is ruler of heaven,
of the heaven of heavens, and of the earth with everything in it.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> But the Lord had delight in your
fathers and love for them, marking out for himself their seed after
them, even you, from all peoples, as at this day.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Let your circumcision be of the heart,
and put away your pride.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For the Lord your God is God of gods
and Lord of lords, the great God, strong in power and greatly to be
feared, who has no respect for any man's position and takes no rewards:

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Judging uprightly in the cause of the
widow and of the child who has no father, and giving food and clothing
in his mercy to the man from a strange country.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> So be kind to the man from a strange
country who is living among you, for you yourselves were living in a
strange country in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Let the fear of the Lord your God be
before you, give him worship and be true to him at all times, taking
your oaths in his name.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He is your God, the God of your praise,
your God who has done for you all these works of power which your eyes
have seen.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Your fathers went down into Egypt with
seventy persons; and now the Lord your God has made you like the stars
of heaven in number.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> So have love for the Lord your God, and
give him worship, and keep his laws and his decisions and his orders at
all times.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And be certain in your minds this day;
for these words are not said to your children, who have had no
experience of the training of the Lord your God, and who have not seen
his great power or his strong hand and his stretched-out arm,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Or his signs and wonders which he did in
Egypt, to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and all his land;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And what he did to the army of Egypt, to
their horses and their war-carriages; how he made the waters of the Red
Sea come up over them when they went after you, and how the Lord put an
end to them even to this day;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And what he did for you in the waste
land, till you came to this place;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the
sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben; when they went down into the open
mouth of the earth, with their families and their tents and every living
thing which was theirs, before the eyes of all Israel:

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But your eyes have seen all the great
works of the Lord which he has done.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> So keep all the orders which I give you
today, so that you may be strong, and go in and take the land which is
to be your heritage;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And that your days may be long in the
land which the Lord gave by an oath to your fathers and to their seed
after them, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For the land where you are going is not
like the land of Egypt from which you have come, where you put in your
seeds, watering them with your foot, like a planted garden:

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> But the land where you are going is a
land of hills and valleys, drinking in the rain of heaven:

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> A land cared for by the Lord your God:
the eyes of the Lord your God are on it at all times from one end of the
year to the other.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it will be that if you truly give
ear to the orders which I put before you this day, loving the Lord your
God and worshipping him with all your heart and all your soul,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Then I will send rain on your land at
the right time, the early rains and the late rains, so that you may get
in your grain and your wine and your oil.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And I will give grass in your fields
for your cattle, so that you may have food in full measure.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But take care that your hearts are not
turned to false ways so that you become servants and worshippers of
other gods;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> For if you do so, the wrath of the Lord
will be burning against you, and the heaven will be shut up so that
there is no rain and the land will give no fruit; and in a very little
time you will be cut off from the good land which the Lord is giving
you.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> So keep these words deep in your heart
and in your soul, and have them fixed on your hand for a sign and marked
on your brow;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Teaching them to your children, and
talking of them when you are at rest in your house or walking by the
way, when you go to sleep and when you get up:

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Writing them on the pillars of your
houses and over the doors of your towns:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> So that your days, and the days of your
children, may be long in the land which the Lord by his oath to your
fathers said he would give them, like the days of the eternal heavens.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> For if you take care to keep all the
orders which I give you, and to do them; loving the Lord your God and
walking in all his ways and being true to him:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Then the Lord will send these nations
in flight before you, and you will take the lands of nations greater and
stronger than yourselves.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Every place where you put your foot
will be yours: from the waste land and Lebanon, from the river, the
river Euphrates as far as the Great Sea, will be the limits of your
land.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> All people will give way before you:
for the Lord your God will put the fear of you on all the land through
which you go, as he has said.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Today I put before you a blessing and a
curse:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> The blessing if you give ear to the
orders of the Lord your God, which I give you this day:

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And the curse if you do not give ear to
the orders of the Lord your God, but let yourselves be turned from the
way which I have put before you this day, and go after other gods which
are not yours.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And when the Lord your God has taken
you into the land of your heritage, you are to put the blessing on Mount
Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Are they not on the other side of
Jordan, looking west, in the land of the Canaanites living in the
Arabah, opposite Gilgal, by the holy tree of Moreh?

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For you are about to go over Jordan to
take the heritage which the Lord your God is giving you, and it will be
your resting-place.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And you are to take care to keep all
the laws and the decisions which I put before you today.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> These are the laws and the decisions
which you are to keep with care in the land which the Lord, the God of
your fathers, has given you to be your heritage all the days of your
life on earth.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> You are to give up to the curse all those
places where the nations, whom you are driving out, gave worship to
their gods, on the high mountains and the hills and under every green
tree:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Their altars and their pillars are to be
broken down, and their holy trees burned with fire, and the images of
their gods cut down; you are to take away their names out of that place.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Do not so to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But let your hearts be turned to the
place which will be marked out by the Lord your God, among your tribes,
to put his name there;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And there you are to take your burned
offerings and other offerings, and the tenth part of your goods, and the
offerings to be lifted up to the Lord, and the offerings of your oaths,
and those which you give freely from the impulse of your hearts, and the
first births among your herds and your flocks;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> There you and all your families are to
make a feast before the Lord your God, with joy in everything to which
you put your hand, because the Lord has given you his blessing.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> You are not to do things then in the way
in which we now do them here, every man as it seems right to him:

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> For you have not come to the rest and the
heritage which the Lord your God is giving you.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But when you have gone over Jordan and
are living in the land which the Lord your God is giving you as your
heritage, and when he has given you rest from all those on every side
who are fighting against you, and you are living there safely;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Then there will be a place marked out
by the Lord your God as the resting-place for his name, and there you
will take all the things which I give you orders to take: your burned
offerings and other offerings, and the tenth part of your goods, and the
offerings to be lifted up, and the offerings of your oaths which you
make to the Lord;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And you will be glad before the Lord
your God, you and your sons and your daughters, and your men-servants
and your women-servants, and the Levite who is with you in your house,
because he has no part or heritage among you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Take care that you do not make your
burned offerings in any place you see:

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But in the place marked out by the Lord
in one of your tribes, there let your burned offerings be offered, and
there do what I have given you orders to do.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Only you may put to death animals, such
as the gazelle or the roe, for your food in any of your towns, at the
desire of your soul, in keeping with the blessing of the Lord your God
which he has given you: the unclean and the clean may take of it.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But you may not take the blood for
food, it is to be drained out on the earth like water.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> In your towns you are not to take as
food the tenth part of your grain, or of your wine or your oil, or the
first births of your herds or of your flocks, or anything offered under
an oath, or freely offered to the Lord, or given as a lifted offering;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> But they will be your food before the
Lord your God in the place of his selection, where you may make a feast
of them, with your son and your daughter, and your man-servant and your
woman-servant, and the Levite who is living with you: and you will have
joy before the Lord your God in everything to which you put your hand.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> See that you do not give up caring for
the Levite as long as you are living in your land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> When the Lord your God makes wide the
limit of your land, as he has said, and you say, I will take flesh for
my food, because you have a desire for it; then you may take whatever
flesh you have a desire for.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> If the place marked out by the Lord
your God as the resting-place for his name is far away from you, then
take from your herds and from your flocks which the Lord has given you,
as I have said, and have a meal of it in the towns where you may be
living.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> It will be your food, like the gazelle
and the roe; the unclean and the clean may take of it.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> But see that you do not take the blood
for food; for the blood is the life; and you may not make use of the
life as food with the flesh.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Do not take it for food but let it be
drained out on the earth like water.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Do not take it for food; so that it may
be well for you and for your children after you, while you do what is
right in the eyes of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> But the holy things which you have, and
the offerings of your oaths, you are to take to the place which will be
marked out by the Lord:

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Offering the flesh and the blood of
your burned offerings on the altar of the Lord your God; and the blood
of your offerings is to be drained out on the altar of the Lord your
God, and the flesh will be your food.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Take note of all these orders I am
giving you and give attention to them, so that it may be well for you
and for your children after you for ever, while you do what is good and
right in the eyes of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> When the people of the land where you
are going have been cut off before you by the Lord your God, and you
have taken their land and are living in it;

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> After their destruction take care that
you do not go in their ways, and that you do not give thought to their
gods, saying, How did these nations give worship to their gods? I will
do as they did.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Do not so to the Lord your God: for
everything which is disgusting to the Lord and hated by him they have
done in honour of their gods: even burning their sons and daughters in
the fire to their gods.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> You are to keep with care all the words
I give you, making no addition to them and taking nothing from them.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If ever you have among you a prophet or a
dreamer of dreams and he gives you a sign or a wonder,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And the sign or the wonder takes place,
and he says to you, Let us go after other gods, which are strange to
you, and give them worship;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Then give no attention to the words of
that prophet or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God is testing
you, to see if all the love of your heart and soul is given to him.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> But keep on in the ways of the Lord your
God, fearing him and keeping his orders and hearing his voice,
worshipping him and being true to him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And that prophet or that dreamer of
dreams is to be put to death; for his words were said with the purpose
of turning you away from the Lord your God, who took you out of the land
of Egypt and made you free from the prison-house; and of forcing you out
of the way in which the Lord your God has given you orders to go. So you
are to put away the evil from among you.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If your brother, the son of your mother,
or your son or your daughter or the wife of your heart, or the friend
who is as dear to you as your life, working on you secretly says to you,
Let us go and give worship to other gods, strange to you and to your
fathers;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Gods of the peoples round about you, near
or far, from one end of the earth to the other;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Do not be guided by him or give attention
to him; have no pity on him or mercy, and give him no cover;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But put him to death without question;
let your hand be the first stretched out against him to put him to
death, and then the hands of all the people.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Let him be stoned with stones till he
is dead; because it was his purpose to make you false to the Lord your
God, who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And all Israel, hearing of it, will be
full of fear, and no one will again do such evil as this among you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And if word comes to you, in one of the
towns which the Lord your God is giving you for your resting-place,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> That good-for-nothing persons have gone
out from among you, turning the people of their town from the right way
and saying, Let us go and give worship to other gods, of whom you have
no knowledge;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Then let a full search be made, and let
questions be put with care; and if it is true and certain that such a
disgusting thing has been done among you;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then take up arms against the people of
that town and give it up to the curse, with all its cattle and
everything in it.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And take all the goods into the middle
of its open space, burning the town and all its property with fire as an
offering to the Lord your God; it is to be a waste for ever; there is to
be no more building there.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Keep not a thing of what is cursed for
yourselves: so the Lord may be turned away from the heat of his wrath,
and have mercy on you, and give you increase as he said in his oath to
your fathers:

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> So long as you give ear to the voice of
the Lord your God, and keep all his orders which I give you today, and
do what is right in the eyes of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> You are the children of the Lord your
God: you are not to make cuts on your bodies or take off the hair on
your brows in honour of the dead;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For you are a holy people to the Lord
your God, and the Lord has taken you to be his special people out of all
the nations on the face of the earth.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> No disgusting thing may be your food.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are the beasts which you may have
for food: the ox, the sheep, and the goat;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The hart, the gazelle, and the roe, the
mountain goat and the pygarg and the antelope and the mountain sheep.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Any beast which has a division in the
horn of its foot and whose food comes back into its mouth to be crushed
again, may be used for food.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> But even among these, there are some
which may not be used for food: such as the camel, the hare, and the
coney, which are unclean to you, because, though their food comes back,
the horn of their feet is not parted in two.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the pig is unclean to you, because
though it has a division in the horn of its foot, its food does not come
back; their flesh may not be used for food or their dead bodies touched
by you.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And of the things living in the waters,
you may take all those who have wings for swimming with and skins formed
of thin plates.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But any which have no skin-plates or
wings for swimming, you may not take; they are unclean for you.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> All clean birds may be used for food.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> But these birds you may not take: the
eagle and the gier-eagle and the ospray;

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> The falcon and the kite, and birds of
that sort;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Every raven, and all birds of that
sort;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the ostrich and the night-hawk and
the sea-hawk and birds of that sort;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> The little owl and the great owl and
the water-hen;

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And the pelican and the vulture and the
cormorant;

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The stork and the heron and birds of
that sort, and the hoopoe and the bat.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Every winged thing which goes flat on
the earth is unclean to you and may not be used as food.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But all clean birds you may take.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> You may not have as food anything which
has come to a natural death; the man from another country who is living
with you may take it for food, or you may get a price for it from one of
another nation; for you are a holy people to the Lord your God. The
young goat is not to be cooked in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Put on one side a tenth of all the
increase of your seed, produced year by year.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And make a feast before the Lord your
God, in the place which is to be marked out, where his name will be for
ever, of the tenth part of your grain and your wine and your oil, and
the first births of your herds and your flocks; so that you may have the
fear of the Lord your God in your hearts at all times.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And if the way is so long that you are
not able to take these things to the place marked out by the Lord your
God for his name, when he has given you his blessing, because it is far
away from you;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Then let these things be exchanged for
money, and, taking the money in your hand, go to the place marked out by
the Lord your God for himself;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And with the money get whatever you
have a desire for, oxen or sheep or wine or strong drink, whatever your
soul's desire may be: and make a feast there before the Lord your God,
and be glad, you and all your house;

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And give a thought to the Levite who is
living among you, for he has no part or heritage in the land.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> At the end of every three years take a
tenth part of all your increase for that year, and put it in store
inside your walls:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And the Levite, because he has no part
or heritage in the land, and the man from a strange country, and the
child who has no father, and the widow, who are living among you, will
come and take food and have enough; and so the blessing of the Lord your
God will be on you in everything you do.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> At the end of every seven years there is
to be a general forgiveness of debt.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> This is how it is to be done: every
creditor is to give up his right to whatever he has let his neighbour
have; he is not to make his neighbour, his countryman, give it back;
because a general forgiveness has been ordered by the Lord.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> A man of another nation may be forced to
make payment of his debt, but if your brother has anything of yours, let
it go;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> But there will be no poor among you; for
the Lord will certainly give you his blessing in the land which the Lord
your God is giving you for your heritage;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> If only you give ear to the voice of the
Lord your God, and take care to keep all these orders which I give you
today.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For the Lord your God will give you his
blessing as he has said: you will let other nations have the use of your
money, but you will not make use of theirs; you will be rulers over a
number of nations, but they will not be your rulers.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If in any of your towns in the land which
the Lord your God is giving you, there is a poor man, one of your
countrymen, do not let your heart be hard or your hand shut to him;

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> But let your hand be open to give him the
use of whatever he is in need of.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And see that there is no evil thought in
your heart, moving you to say to yourself, The seventh year, the year of
forgiveness is near; and so looking coldly on your poor countryman you
give him nothing; and he will make an outcry to the Lord against you,
and it will be judged as sin in you.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> But it is right for you to give to him,
without grief of heart: for because of this, the blessing of the Lord
your God will be on all your work and on everything to which you put
your hand.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> For there will never be a time when
there are no poor in the land; and so I give orders to you, Let your
hand be open to your countrymen, to those who are poor and in need in
your land.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> If one of your countrymen, a Hebrew man
or woman, becomes your servant for a price and does work for you six
years, in the seventh year let him go free.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when you make him free, do not let
him go away with nothing in his hands:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But give him freely from your flock and
from your grain and your wine: in the measure of the wealth which the
Lord your God has given you, you are to give to him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And keep in mind that you yourself were
a servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God made you free: so
I give you this order today.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> But if he says to you, I have no desire
to go away from you; because you and your family are dear to him and he
is happy with you;

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Then take a sharp-pointed instrument,
driving it through his ear into the door, and he will be your servant
for ever. And you may do the same for your servant-girl.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Let it not seem hard to you that you
have to send him away free; for he has been working for you for six
years, which is twice the regular time for a servant: and the blessing
of the Lord your God will be on you in everything you do.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> All the first males to come to birth in
your herd and your flock are to be holy to the Lord your God: the first
birth of your ox is not to be used for work, the wool of your first lamb
is not to be cut.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But year by year you and all your house
are to take a meal of it before the Lord, in the place of his selection.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But if it has any mark on it, if it is
blind or has damaged legs, or if there is anything wrong with it, it may
not be offered to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> It may be used for food in your houses:
the unclean and the clean may take of it, as of the gazelle and the roe.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Only do not take its blood for food,
but let it be drained out on the earth like water.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Take note of the month of Abib and keep
the Passover to the Lord your God: for in the month of Abib the Lord
your God took you out of Egypt by night.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> The Passover offering, from your flock or
your herd, is to be given to the Lord your God in the place marked out
by him as the resting-place of his name.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Take no leavened bread with it; for seven
days let your food be unleavened bread, that is, the bread of sorrow;
for you came out of the land of Egypt quickly: so the memory of that
day, when you came out of the land of Egypt, will be with you all your
life.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> For seven days let no leaven be used
through all your land; and nothing of the flesh which is put to death in
the evening of the first day is to be kept through the night till
morning.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> The Passover offering is not to be put to
death in any of the towns which the Lord your God gives you:

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But in the place marked out by the Lord
your God as the resting-place of his name, there you are to put the
Passover to death in the evening, at sundown, at that time of the year
when you came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> It is to be cooked and taken as food in
the place marked out by the Lord: and in the morning you are to go back
to your tents.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> For six days let your food be unleavened
bread; and on the seventh day there is to be a holy meeting to the Lord
your God; no work is to be done.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Let seven weeks be numbered from the
first day when the grain is cut.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Then keep the feast of weeks to the
Lord your God, with an offering freely given to him from the wealth he
has given you:

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Then you are to be glad before the Lord
your God, you and your son and your daughter, your man-servant and your
woman-servant, and the Levite who is with you, and the man from a
strange country, and the child without a father, and the widow, who are
living among you, in the place marked out by the Lord your God as a
resting-place for his name.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And you will keep in mind that you were
a servant in the land of Egypt: and you will take care to keep all these
laws.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> You are to keep the feast of tents for
seven days after you have got in all your grain and made your wine:

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> You are to keep the feast with joy, you
and your son and your daughter, your man-servant and your woman-servant,
and the Levite, and the man from a strange country, and the child
without a father, and the widow, who are living among you.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Keep the feast to the Lord your God for
seven days, in the place marked out by the Lord: because the blessing of
the Lord your God will be on all the produce of your land and all the
work of your hands, and you will have nothing but joy.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Three times in the year let all your
males come before the Lord your God in the place named by him; at the
feast of unleavened bread, the feast of weeks, and the feast of tents:
and they are not to come before the Lord with nothing in their hands;

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Every man is to give as he is able, in
the measure of the blessing which the Lord your God has given you.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> You are to make judges and overseers in
all your towns which the Lord your God gives you, for every tribe: and
they are to be upright men, judging the people in righteousness.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> You are not to be moved in your judging
by a man's position, you are not to take rewards; for rewards make the
eyes of the wise man blind, and the decisions of the upright false.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Let righteousness be your guide, so
that you may have life, and take for your heritage the land which the
Lord your God is giving you.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Let no holy tree of any sort be planted
by the altar of the Lord your God which you will make.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> You are not to put up stone pillars,
for they are hated by the Lord your God.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> No ox or sheep which has a mark on it or
is damaged in any way may be offered to the Lord your God: for that is
disgusting to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> If there is any man or woman among you,
in any of the towns which the Lord your God gives you, who does evil in
the eyes of the Lord your God, sinning against his agreement,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> By becoming a servant of other gods and
worshipping them or the sun or the moon or all the stars of heaven,
against my orders;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> If word of this comes to your ears, then
let this thing be looked into with care, and if there is no doubt that
it is true, and such evil has been done in Israel;

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Then you are to take the man or woman who
has done the evil to the public place of your town, and they are to be
stoned with stones till they are dead.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> On the word of two or three witnesses, a
man may be given the punishment of death; but he is not to be put to
death on the word of one witness.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> The hands of the witnesses will be the
first to put him to death, and after them the hands of all the people.
So you are to put away the evil from among you.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> If you are not able to give a decision as
to who is responsible for a death, or who is right in a cause, or who
gave the first blow in a fight, and there is a division of opinion about
it in your town: then go to the place marked out by the Lord your God;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And come before the priests, the Levites,
or before him who is judge at the time: and they will go into the
question and give you a decision:

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And you are to be guided by the
decision they give in the place named by the Lord, and do whatever they
say:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Acting in agreement with their teaching
and the decision they give: not turning to one side or the other from
the word they have given you.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And any man who, in his pride, will not
give ear to the priest whose place is there before the Lord your God, or
to the judge, is to be put to death: you are to put away the evil from
Israel.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And all the people, hearing of it, will
be full of fear and put away their pride.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When you have come into the land which
the Lord your God is giving you, and have taken it for a heritage and
are living in it, if it is your desire to have a king over you, like the
other nations round about you;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Then see that you take as your king the
man named by the Lord your God: let your king be one of your countrymen,
not a man of another nation who is not one of yourselves.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And he is not to get together a great
army of horses for himself, or make the people go back to Egypt to get
horses for him: because the Lord has said, You will never again go back
that way.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And he is not to have a great number of
wives, for fear that his heart may be turned away; or great wealth of
silver and gold.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And when he has taken his place on the
seat of his kingdom, he is to make in a book a copy of this law, from
that which the priests, the Levites, have in their care:

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And it is to be with him for his
reading all the days of his life, so that he may be trained in the fear
of the Lord his God to keep and do all the words of this teaching and
these laws:

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> So that his heart may not be lifted up
over his countrymen, and he may not be turned away from the orders, to
one side or the other: but that his life and the lives of his children
may be long in his kingdom in Israel.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The priests, the Levites, that is, all
the tribe of Levi, will have no part or heritage with Israel: their food
and their heritage will be the offerings of the Lord made by fire.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And they will have no heritage among
their countrymen: the Lord is their heritage, as he has said to them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And this is to be the priests' right:
those who make an offering of a sheep or an ox are to give to the priest
the top part of the leg and the two sides of the head and the stomach.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And in addition you are to give him the
first of your grain and wine and oil, and the first wool cut from your
sheep.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For he, and his sons after him for ever,
have been marked out by the Lord your God from all your tribes, to do
the work of priests in the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And if a Levite, moved by a strong
desire, comes from any town in all Israel where he is living to the
place marked out by the Lord;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Then he will do the work of a priest in
the name of the Lord his God, with all his brothers the Levites who are
there before the Lord.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> His food will be the same as theirs, in
addition to what has come to him as the price of his property.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> When you have come into the land which
the Lord your God is giving you, do not take as your example the
disgusting ways of those nations.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Let there not be seen among you anyone
who makes his son or his daughter go through the fire, or anyone using
secret arts, or a maker of strange sounds, or a reader of signs, or any
wonder-worker,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Or anyone using secret force on people,
or putting questions to a spirit, or having secret knowledge, or going
to the dead for directions.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> For all who do such things are
disgusting to the Lord; and because of these disgusting things the Lord
your God is driving them out before you.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> You are to be upright in heart before
the Lord your God.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> For these nations, whose land you are
taking, give attention to readers of signs and to those using secret
arts: but the Lord your God will not let you do so.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The Lord your God will give you a
prophet from among your people, like me; you will give ear to him;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> In answer to the request you made to
the Lord your God in Horeb on the day of the great meeting, when you
said, Let not the voice of the Lord my God come to my ears again, and
let me not see this great fire any more, or death will overtake me.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then the Lord said to me, What they
have said is well said.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> I will give them a prophet from among
themselves, like you, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he will
say to them whatever I give him orders to say.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And whoever does not give ear to my
words which he will say in my name, will be responsible to me.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> But the prophet who takes it on himself
to say words in my name which I have not given him orders to say, or who
says anything in the name of other gods, will come to his death.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And if you say in your hearts, How are
we to be certain that the word does not come from the Lord?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When a prophet makes a statement in the
name of the Lord, if what he says does not take place and his words do
not come true, then his word is not the word of the Lord: the words of
the prophet were said in the pride of his heart, and you are to have no
fear of him.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> When the nations, whose land the Lord
your God is giving you, have been cut off by him, and you have taken
their place and are living in their towns and in their houses;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> You are to have three towns marked out in
the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> You are to make ready a way, and see that
the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, is
marked out into three parts, to which any taker of life may go in
flight.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> This is to be the rule for anyone who
goes in flight there, after causing the death of his neighbour in error
and not through hate;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> For example, if a man goes into the woods
with his neighbour for the purpose of cutting down trees, and when he
takes his axe to give a blow to the tree, the head of the axe comes off,
and falling on to his neighbour gives him a wound causing his death;
then the man may go in flight to one of these towns and be safe:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> For if not, he who has the right of
punishment may go running after the taker of life in the heat of his
wrath, and overtake him because the way is long, and give him a
death-blow; though it is not right for him to be put to death because he
was not moved by hate.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And so I am ordering you to see that
three towns are marked out for this purpose.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And if the Lord your God makes wide the
limits of your land, as he said in his oath to your fathers, and gives
you all the land which he undertook to give to your fathers;

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> If you keep and do all these orders which
I give you today, loving the Lord your God and walking ever in his ways;
then let three more towns, in addition to these three, be marked out for
you:

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> So that in all your land, which the
Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, no man may be wrongly put
to death, for which you will be responsible.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But if any man has hate for his
neighbour, and waiting for him secretly makes an attack on him and gives
him a blow causing his death, and then goes in flight to one of these
towns;

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> The responsible men of his town are to
send and take him, and give him up to the one who has the right of
punishment to be put to death.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Have no pity on him, so that Israel may
be clear from the crime of putting a man to death without cause, and it
will be well for you.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Your neighbour's landmark, which was
put in its place by the men of old times, is not to be moved or taken
away in the land of your heritage which the Lord your God is giving you.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> One witness may not make a statement
against a man in relation to any sin or wrongdoing which he has done: on
the word of two or three witnesses a question is to be judged.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> If a false witness makes a statement
against a man, saying that he has done wrong,

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> Then the two men, between whom the
argument has taken place, are to come before the Lord, before the
priests and judges who are then in power;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And the judges will have the question
looked into with care: and if the witness is seen to be false and to
have made a false statement against his brother,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Then do to him what it was his purpose
to do to his brother: and so put away the evil from among you.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the rest of the people, hearing of
it, will be full of fear, and never again do such evil among you.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Have no pity; let life be given for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> When you go out to war against other
nations, and come face to face with horses and war-carriages and armies
greater in number than yourselves, have no fear of them: for the Lord
your God is with you, who took you up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when you are on the point of
attacking, let the priest come forward and say to the people,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Give ear, O Israel: today you are going
forward to the fight; let your heart be strong; do not let uncontrolled
fear overcome you because of those who are against you;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For the Lord your God goes with you,
fighting for you to give you salvation from those who are against you.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And let the overseers say to the people,
If there is any man who has made for himself a new house and has not
gone into it, let him go back to his house, so that in the event of his
death in the fight, another may not take his house for himself.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Or if any man has made a vine-garden
without taking the first-fruits of it, let him go back to his house, so
that in the event of his death in the fight, another may not be the
first to make use of the fruit.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Or if any man is newly married and has
had no sex relations with his wife, let him go back to his house, so
that in the event of his death in the fight, another man may not take
her.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And let the overseers go on to say to the
people, If there is any man whose heart is feeble with fear, let him go
back to his house before he makes the hearts of his countrymen feeble.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Then, after saying these words to the
people, let the overseers put captains over the army.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> When you come to a town, before
attacking it, make an offer of peace.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And if it gives you back an answer of
peace, opening its doors to you, then all the people in it may be put to
forced work as your servants.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> If however it will not make peace with
you, but war, then let it be shut in on all sides:

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And when the Lord your God has given it
into your hands, let every male in it be put to death without mercy.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But the women and the children and the
cattle and everything in the town and all its wealth, you may take for
yourselves: the wealth of your haters, which the Lord your God has given
you, will be your food.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> So you are to do to all the towns far
away, which are not the towns of these nations.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> But in the towns of these peoples whose
land the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, let no living
thing be kept from death:

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Give them up to the curse; the Hittite,
the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite,
as the Lord your God has given you orders:

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> So that you may not take them as your
example and do all the disgusting things which they do in the worship of
their gods, so sinning against the Lord your God.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> If in war a town is shut in by your
armies for a long time, do not let its trees be cut down and made waste;
for their fruit will be your food; are the trees of the countryside men
for you to take up arms against them?

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Only those trees which you are certain
are not used for food may be cut down and put to destruction: and you
are to make walls of attack against the town till it is taken.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> If, in the land which the Lord your God
is giving you, you come across the dead body of a man in the open
country, and you have no idea who has put him to death:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Then your responsible men and your judges
are to come out, and give orders for the distance from the dead body to
the towns round about it to be measured;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And whichever town is nearest to the
body, the responsible men of that town are to take from the herd a young
cow which has never been used for work or put under the yoke;

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And they are to take the cow into a
valley where there is flowing water, and which is not ploughed or
planted, and there the neck of the cow is to be broken:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Then the priests, the sons of Levi, are
to come near; for they have been marked out by the Lord your God to be
his servants and to give blessings in the name of the Lord; and by their
decision every argument and every blow is to be judged:

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And all the responsible men of that town
which is nearest to the dead man, washing their hands over the cow whose
neck was broken in the valley,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Will say, This death is not the work of
our hands and our eyes have not seen it.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Have mercy, O Lord, on your people Israel
whom you have made free, and take away from your people the crime of a
death without cause. Then they will no longer be responsible for the
man's death.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So you will take away the crime of a
death without cause from among you, when you do what is right in the
eyes of the Lord.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When you go out to war against other
nations, and the Lord your God gives them up into your hands and you
take them as prisoners;

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> If among the prisoners you see a
beautiful woman and it is your desire to make her your wife;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Then take her back to your house; and
let her hair and her nails be cut;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And let her take off the dress in which
she was made prisoner and go on living in your house and weeping for her
father and mother for a full month: and after that you may go in to her
and be her husband and she will be your wife.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> But if you have no delight in her, you
are to let her go wherever she will; you may not take a price for her as
if she was your property, for you have made use of her for your
pleasure.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> If a man has two wives, one greatly
loved and the other hated, and the two of them have had children by him;
and if the first son is the child of the hated wife:

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Then when he gives his property to his
sons for their heritage, he is not to put the son of his loved one in
the place of the first son, the son of the hated wife:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> But he is to give his first son his
birthright, and twice as great a part of his property: for he is the
first-fruits of his strength and the right of the first son is his.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If a man has a son who is hard-hearted
and uncontrolled, who gives no attention to the voice of his father and
mother, and will not be ruled by them, though they give him punishment:

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Then let his father and mother take him
to the responsible men of the town, to the public place;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And say to them, This son of ours is
hard-hearted and uncontrolled, he will not give attention to us; he
gives himself up to pleasure and strong drink.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Then he is to be stoned to death by all
the men of the town: so you are to put away the evil from among you; and
all Israel, hearing of it, will be full of fear.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> If a man does a crime for which the
punishment is death, and he is put to death by hanging him on a tree;

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Do not let his body be on the tree all
night, but put it to rest in the earth the same day; for the man who
undergoes hanging is cursed by God; so do not make unclean the land
which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> If you see your brother's ox or his sheep
wandering, do not go by without helping, but take them back to your
brother.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> If their owner is not near, or if you are
not certain who he is, then take the beast to your house and keep it
till its owner comes in search of it, and then you are to give it back
to him.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Do the same with his ass or his robe or
anything which has gone from your brother's keeping and which you have
come across: do not keep it to yourself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> If you see your brother's ox or his ass
falling down on the road, do not go by without giving him help in
lifting it up again.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> It is not right for a woman to be dressed
in man's clothing, or for a man to put on a woman's robe: whoever does
such things is disgusting to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If by chance you see a place which a bird
has made for itself in a tree or on the earth, with young ones or eggs,
and the mother bird seated on the young ones or on the eggs, do not take
the mother bird with the young:

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> See that you let the mother bird go, but
the young ones you may take; so it will be well for you and your life
will be long.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> If you are building a house, make a
railing for the roof, so that the blood of any man falling from it will
not come on your house.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Do not have your vine-garden planted with
two sorts of seed: or all of it may become a loss, the seed you have put
in as well as the increase.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Do not do your ploughing with an ox and
an ass yoked together.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Do not have clothing made of two sorts
of thread, wool and linen together.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> On the four edges of your robe, with
which your body is covered, put ornaments of twisted threads.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If any man takes a wife, and having had
connection with her, has no delight in her,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And says evil things about her and
gives her a bad name, saying, I took this woman, and when I had
connection with her it was clear to me that she was not a virgin:

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then let the girl's father and mother
put before the responsible men of the town, in the public place, signs
that the girl was a virgin:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And let the girl's father say to the
responsible men, I gave my daughter to this man for his wife, but he has
no love for her;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And now he has put shame on her, saying
that she is not a virgin; but here is the sign that she is a virgin.
Then they are to put her clothing before the responsible men of the
town.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Then the responsible men of the town
are to give the man his punishment;

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> They will take from him a hundred
shekels of silver, which are to be given to the father of the girl,
because he has given an evil name to a virgin of Israel: she will go on
being his wife, he may never put her away all his life.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> But if what he has said is true, and
she is seen to be not a virgin,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Then they are to make the girl come to
the door of her father's house and she will be stoned to death by the
men of the town, because she has done evil and put shame on Israel, by
acting as a loose woman in her father's house: so you are to put away
evil from among you.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> If a man is taken in the act of going
in to a married woman, the two of them, the man as well as the woman,
are to be put to death: so you are to put away the evil from Israel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If a young virgin has given her word to
be married to a man, and another man meeting her in the town, has
connection with her;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then you are to take the two of them to
the doorway of the town, and have them stoned to death; the young
virgin, because she gave no cry for help, though it was in the town, and
the man, because he has put shame on his neighbour's wife: so you are to
put away evil from among you.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But if the man, meeting such a virgin
in the open country, takes her by force, then only the man is to be put
to death;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Nothing is to be done to the virgin,
because there is no cause of death in her: it is the same as if a man
made an attack on his neighbour and put him to death:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For he came across her in the open
country, and there was no one to come to the help of the virgin in
answer to her cry.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> If a man sees a young virgin, who has
not given her word to be married to anyone, and he takes her by force
and has connection with her, and discovery is made of it;

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Then the man will have to give the
virgin's father fifty shekels of silver and make her his wife, because
he has put shame on her; he may never put her away all his life.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> A man may not take his father's wife or
have sex relations with a woman who is his father's.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> No man whose private parts have been
wounded or cut off may come into the meeting of the Lord's people.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> One whose father and mother are not
married may not come into the meeting of the Lord's people, or any of
his family to the tenth generation.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> No Ammonite or Moabite or any of their
people to the tenth generation may come into the meeting of the Lord's
people:

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Because they gave you no bread or water
on your way, when you came out of Egypt: and they got Balaam, the son of
Peor, from Pethor in Aram-naharaim to put curses on you.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But the Lord your God would not give ear
to Balaam, but let the curse be changed into a blessing to you, because
of his love for you.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Do nothing for their peace or well-being
for ever.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> But have no hate for an Edomite, because
he is your brother, or for an Egyptian, for you were living in his land.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Their children in the third generation
may come into the meeting of the Lord's people.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> When you go out to war and put your tents
in position, keep from every evil thing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> If any man among you becomes unclean
through anything which has taken place in the night, he is to go out
from the tent-circle and keep outside it:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But when evening comes near, let him
take a bath: and after sundown he may come back to the tents.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Let there be a place outside the
tent-circle to which you may go;

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And have among your arms a spade; and
when you have been to that place, let that which comes from you be
covered up with earth:

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For the Lord your God is walking among
your tents, to keep you safe and to give up into your hands those who
are fighting against you; then let your tents be holy, so that he may
see no unclean thing among you, and be turned away from you.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Do not give back to his master a
servant who has gone in flight from his master and come to you:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Let him go on living among you in
whatever place is most pleasing to him: do not be hard on him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> No daughter of Israel is to let herself
be used as a loose woman for a strange god, and no son of Israel is to
give himself to a man.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Do not take into the house of the Lord
your God, as an offering for an oath, the price of a loose woman or the
money given to one used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods: for
these two things are disgusting to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Do not take interest from an Israelite
on anything, money or food or any other goods, which you let him have:

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> From men of other nations you may take
interest, but not from an Israelite: so that the blessing of the Lord
your God may be on everything to which you put your hand, in the land
which you are about to take as your heritage.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> When you take an oath to the Lord, do
not be slow to give effect to it: for without doubt the Lord your God
will make you responsible, and will put it to your account as sin.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if you take no oath, there will be
no sin.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Whatever your lips have said, see that
you do it; for you gave your word freely to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> When you go into your neighbour's
vine-garden, you may take of his grapes at your pleasure, but you may
not take them away in your vessel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> When you go into your neighbour's
field, you may take the heads of grain with your hand; but you may not
put your blade to his grain.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> If a man takes a wife, and after they are
married she is unpleasing to him because of some bad quality in her, let
him give her a statement in writing and send her away from his house.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And when she has gone away from him, she
may become another man's wife.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And if the second husband has no love for
her and, giving her a statement in writing, sends her away; or if death
comes to the second husband to whom she was married;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Her first husband, who had sent her away,
may not take her back after she has been wife to another; for that is
disgusting to the Lord: and you are not to be a cause of sin in the land
which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A newly married man will not have to go
out with the army or undertake any business, but may be free for one
year, living in his house for the comfort of his wife.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> No one is to take, on account of a debt,
the stones with which grain is crushed: for in doing so he takes a man's
living.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> If a man takes by force one of his
countrymen, the children of Israel, using him as his property or getting
a price for him, that thief is to be put to death: so you are to put
away evil from among you.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> In connection with the leper's disease,
take care to keep and do every detail of the teaching of the priests,
the Levites: as I gave them orders, so you are to do.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Keep in mind what the Lord your God did
to Miriam on the way, when you came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> If you let your brother have the use of
anything which is yours, do not go into his house and take anything of
his as a sign of his debt;

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> But keep outside till he comes out and
gives it to you.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If he is a poor man, do not keep his
property all night;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> But be certain to give it back to him
when the sun goes down, so that he may have his clothing for sleeping
in, and will give you his blessing: and this will be put to your account
as righteousness before the Lord your God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Do not be hard on a servant who is poor
and in need, if he is one of your countrymen or a man from another
nation living with you in your land.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Give him his payment day by day, not
keeping it back over night; for he is poor and his living is dependent
on it; and if his cry against you comes to the ears of the Lord, it will
be judged as sin in you.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Fathers are not to be put to death for
their children or children for their fathers: every man is to be put to
death for the sin which he himself has done.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Be upright in judging the cause of the
man from a strange country and of him who has no father; do not take a
widow's clothing on account of a debt:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> But keep in mind that you were a
servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God made you free: for
this is why I give you orders to do this.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> When you get in the grain from your
field, if some of the grain has been dropped by chance in the field, do
not go back and get it, but let it be for the man from a strange land,
the child without a father, and the widow: so that the blessing of the
Lord your God may be on all the work of your hands.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> When you are shaking the fruit from
your olive-trees, do not go over the branches a second time: let some be
for the man from a strange land, the child without a father, and the
widow.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> When you are pulling the grapes from
your vines, do not take up those which have been dropped; let them be
for the man from a strange land, the child without a father, and the
widow.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Keep in mind that you were a servant in
the land of Egypt: for this is why I give you orders to do this.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> If there is an argument between men and
they go to law with one another, let the judges give their decision for
the upright, and against the wrongdoer.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And if the wrongdoer is to undergo
punishment by whipping, the judge will give orders for him to go down on
his face and be whipped before him, the number of the blows being in
relation to his crime.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> He may be given forty blows, not more;
for if more are given, your brother may be shamed before you.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Do not keep the ox from taking the grain
when he is crushing it.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> If brothers are living together and one
of them, at his death, has no son, the wife of the dead man is not to be
married outside the family to another man: let her husband's brother go
in to her and make her his wife, doing as it is right for a
brother-in-law to do.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Then the first male child she has will
take the rights of the brother who is dead, so that his name may not
come to an end in Israel.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> But if the man says he will not take his
brother's wife, then let the wife go to the responsible men of the town,
and say, My husband's brother will not keep his brother's name living in
Israel; he will not do what it is right for a husband's brother to do.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Then the responsible men of the town will
send for the man, and have talk with him: and if he still says, I will
not take her;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Then his brother's wife is to come to
him, before the responsible men of the town, and take his shoe off his
foot, and put shame on him, and say, So let it be done to the man who
will not take care of his brother's name.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And his family will be named in Israel,
The house of him whose shoe has been taken off.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> If two men are fighting, and the wife
of one of them, coming to the help of her husband, takes the other by
the private parts;

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Her hand is to be cut off; have no pity
on her.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Do not have in your bag different
weights, a great and a small;

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Or in your house different measures, a
great and a small.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> But have a true weight and a true
measure: so that your life may be long in the land which the Lord your
God is giving you.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> For all who do such things, and all
whose ways are not upright, are disgusting to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Keep in mind what Amalek did to you on
your way from Egypt;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> How, meeting you on the way, he made an
attack on you when you were tired and without strength, cutting off all
the feeble ones at the end of your line; and the fear of God was not in
him.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> So when the Lord your God has given you
rest from all who are against you on every side, in the land which the
Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, see to it that the memory
of Amalek is cut off from the earth; keep this in mind.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Now when you have come into the land
which the Lord is giving you for your heritage, and you have made it
yours and are living in it;

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> You are to take a part of the
first-fruits of the earth, which you get from the land which the Lord
your God is giving you, and put it in a basket, and go to the place
marked out by the Lord your God, as the resting-place of his name.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> And you are to come to him who is priest
at that time, and say to him, I give witness today before the Lord your
God, that I have come into the land which the Lord made an oath to our
fathers to give us.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Then the priest will take the basket from
your hand and put it down in front of the altar of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And these are the words which you will
say before the Lord your God: My father was a wandering Aramaean, and he
went down with a small number of people into Egypt; there he became a
great and strong nation:

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And the Egyptians were cruel to us,
crushing us under a hard yoke:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And our cry went up to the Lord, the God
of our fathers, and the Lord's ear was open to the voice of our cry, and
his eyes took note of our grief and the crushing weight of our work:

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And the Lord took us out of Egypt with a
strong hand and a stretched-out arm, with works of power and signs and
wonders:

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And he has been our guide to this place,
and has given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> So now, I have come here with the first
of the fruits of the earth which you, O Lord, have given me. Then you
will put it down before the Lord your God and give him worship:

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And you will have joy in every good
thing which the Lord your God has given to you and to your family; and
the Levite, and the man from a strange land who is with you, will take
part in your joy.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> When you have taken out a tenth from
the tenth of all your produce in the third year, which is the year when
this has to be done, give it to the Levite, and the man from a strange
land, and the child without a father, and the widow, so that they may
have food in your towns and be full;

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And say before the Lord your God, I
have taken all the holy things out of my house and have given them to
the Levite, and the man from a strange land, and him who has no father,
and the widow, as you have given me orders: I have kept in mind all your
orders, in nothing have I gone against them:

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> No part of these things has been used
for food in a time of weeping, or put away when I was unclean, or given
for the dead: I have given ear to the voice of the Lord my God, and have
done all you have given me orders to do.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> So, looking down from your holy place
in heaven, send your blessing on your people Israel and on the land
which you have given us, as you said in your oath to our fathers, a land
flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Today the Lord your God gives you
orders to keep all these laws and decisions: so then keep and do them
with all your heart and all your soul.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Today you have given witness that the
Lord is your God, and that you will go in his ways and keep his laws and
his orders and his decisions and give ear to his voice:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And the Lord has made it clear this day
that you are a special people to him, as he gave you his word; and that
you are to keep all his orders;

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And that he will make you high over all
the nations he has made, in praise, in name, and in honour, and that you
are to be a holy people to the Lord your God as he has said.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Then Moses and the responsible men of
Israel gave the people these orders: Keep all the orders which I have
given you this day;

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And on the day when you go over Jordan
into the land which the Lord your God is giving you, put up great
stones, coating them with building-paste,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And writing on them all the words of this
law, after you have gone over; so that you may take the heritage which
the Lord your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, as
the Lord, the God of your fathers, has said.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And when you have gone over Jordan, you
are to put up these stones, as I have said to you today, in Mount Ebal,
and have them coated with building-paste.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> There you are to make an altar to the
Lord your God, of stones on which no iron instrument has been used.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> You are to make the altar of the Lord
your God of uncut stones; offering on it burned offerings to the Lord
your God:

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And you are to make your peace-offerings,
feasting there with joy before the Lord your God.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And put on the stones all the words of
this law, writing them very clearly.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then Moses and the priests, the Levites,
said to all Israel, Be quiet and give ear, O Israel; today you have
become the people of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For this cause you are to give ear to
the voice of the Lord your God, and do his orders and his laws which I
give you this day.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> That same day Moses said to the people,

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> These are to take their places on Mount
Gerizim for blessing the people when you have gone over Jordan: Simeon
and Levi and Judah and Issachar and Joseph and Benjamin;

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And these are to be on Mount Ebal for
the curse: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> Then the Levites are to say in a loud
voice to all the men of Israel,

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Cursed is the man who makes any image
of wood or stone or metal, disgusting to the Lord, the work of man's
hands, and puts it up in secret. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Cursed is he who does not give honour
to his father or mother. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Cursed is he who takes his neighbour's
landmark from its place. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Cursed is he by whom the blind are
turned out of the way. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Cursed is he who gives a wrong decision
in the cause of a man from a strange land, or of one without a father,
or of a widow. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Cursed is he who has sex relations with
his father's wife, for he has put shame on his father. And let all the
people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Cursed is he who has sex relations with
any sort of beast. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Cursed is he who has sex relations with
his sister, the daughter of his father or of his mother. And let all the
people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Cursed is he who has sex relations with
his mother-in-law. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Cursed is he who takes his neighbour's
life secretly. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Cursed is he who for a reward puts to
death one who has done no wrong. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Cursed is he who does not take this law
to heart to do it. And let all the people say, So be it.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Now if you give ear to the voice of the
Lord your God, and keep with care all these orders which I have given
you today, then the Lord your God will put you high over all the nations
of the earth:

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And all these blessings will come on you
and overtake you, if your ears are open to the voice of the Lord your
God.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A blessing will be on you in the town,
and a blessing in the field.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> A blessing will be on the fruit of your
body, and on the fruit of your land, on the fruit of your cattle, the
increase of your herd, and the young of your flock.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> A blessing will be on your basket and on
your bread-basin.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> A blessing will be on your coming in and
on your going out.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> By the power of the Lord, those who take
arms against you will be overcome before you: they will come out against
you one way, and will go in flight from you seven ways.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The Lord will send his blessing on your
store-houses and on everything to which you put your hand: his blessing
will be on you in the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The Lord will keep you as a people holy
to himself, as he has said to you in his oath, if you keep the orders of
the Lord your God and go on walking in his ways.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And all the peoples of the earth will
see that the name of the Lord is on you, and they will go in fear of
you.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And the Lord will make you fertile in
every good thing, in the fruit of your body, and the fruit of your
cattle, and the fruit of your fields, in the land which the Lord, by his
oath to your fathers, said he would give you.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Opening his store-house in heaven, the
Lord will send rain on your land at the right time, blessing all the
work of your hands: other nations will make use of your wealth, and you
will have no need of theirs.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> The Lord will make you the head and not
the tail; and you will ever have the highest place, if you give ear to
the orders of the Lord your God which I give you today, to keep and to
do them;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Not turning away from any of the orders
which I give you today, to the right hand or to the left, or going after
any other gods to give them worship.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> But if you do not give ear to the voice
of the Lord your God, and take care to do all his orders and his laws
which I give you today, then all these curses will come on you and
overtake you:

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> You will be cursed in the town and
cursed in the field.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> A curse will be on your basket and on
your bread-basin.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> A curse will be on the fruit of your
body, and on the fruit of your land, on the increase of your cattle, and
the young of your flock.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> You will be cursed when you come in and
cursed when you go out.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> The Lord will send on you cursing and
trouble and punishment in everything to which you put your hand, till
sudden destruction overtakes you; because of your evil ways in which you
have been false to me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> The Lord will send disease after
disease on you, till you have been cut off by death from the land to
which you are going.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> The Lord will send wasting disease, and
burning pain, and flaming heat against you, keeping back the rain till
your land is waste and dead; so will it be till your destruction is
complete.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And the heaven over your heads will be
brass, and the earth under you hard as iron.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> The Lord will make the rain of your
land powder and dust, sending it down on you from heaven till your
destruction is complete.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> The Lord will let you be overcome by
your haters: you will go out against them one way, and you will go in
flight before them seven ways: you will be the cause of fear among all
the kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Your bodies will be meat for all the
birds of the air and the beasts of the earth; there will be no one to
send them away.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> The Lord will send on you the disease
of Egypt, and other sorts of skin diseases which nothing will make well.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> He will make your minds diseased, and
your eyes blind, and your hearts wasted with fear:

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> You will go feeling your way when the
sun is high, like a blind man for whom all is dark, and nothing will go
well for you: you will be crushed and made poor for ever, and you will
have no saviour.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> You will take a wife, but another man
will have the use of her: the house which your hands have made will
never be your resting-place: you will make a vine-garden, and never take
the fruit of it.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Your ox will be put to death before
your eyes, but its flesh will not be your food: your ass will be
violently taken away before your face, and will not be given back to
you: your sheep will be given to your haters, and there will be no
saviour for you.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> Your sons and your daughters will be
given to another people, and your eyes will be wasted away with looking
and weeping for them all the day: and you will have no power to do
anything.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> The fruit of your land and all the work
of your hands will be food for a nation which is strange to you and to
your fathers; you will only be crushed down and kept under for ever:

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> So that the things which your eyes have
to see will send you out of your minds.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> The Lord will send a skin disease,
attacking your knees and your legs, bursting out from your feet to the
top of your head, so that nothing will make you well.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> And you, and the king whom you have put
over you, will the Lord take away to a nation strange to you and to your
fathers; there you will be servants to other gods of wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And you will become a wonder and a name
of shame among all the nations where the Lord will take you.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> You will take much seed out into the
field, and get little in; for the locust will get it.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> You will put in vines and take care of
them, but you will get no wine or grapes from them; for they will be
food for worms.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> Your land will be full of olive-trees,
but there will be no oil for the comfort of your body; for your
olive-tree will give no fruit.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> You will have sons and daughters, but
they will not be yours; for they will go away prisoners into a strange
land.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> All your trees and the fruit of your
land will be the locust's.

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> The man from a strange land who is
living among you will be lifted up higher and higher over you, while you
go down lower and lower.

<span id="an_28:44">28:44</span> He will let you have his wealth at
interest, and will have no need of yours: he will be the head and you
the tail.

<span id="an_28:45">28:45</span> And all these curses will come after
you and overtake you, till your destruction is complete; because you did
not give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, or keep his laws and his
orders which he gave you:

<span id="an_28:46">28:46</span> These things will come on you and on
your seed, to be a sign and a wonder for ever;

<span id="an_28:47">28:47</span> Because you did not give honour to the
Lord your God, worshipping him gladly, with joy in your hearts on
account of all your wealth of good things;

<span id="an_28:48">28:48</span> For this cause you will become servants
to those whom the Lord your God will send against you, without food and
drink and clothing, and in need of all things: and he will put a yoke of
iron on your neck till he has put an end to you.

<span id="an_28:49">28:49</span> The Lord will send a nation against you
from the farthest ends of the earth, coming with the flight of an eagle;
a nation whose language is strange to you;

<span id="an_28:50">28:50</span> A hard-faced nation, who will have no
respect for the old or mercy for the young:

<span id="an_28:51">28:51</span> He will take the fruit of your cattle
and of your land till death puts an end to you: he will let you have
nothing of your grain or wine or oil or any of the increase of your
cattle or the young of your flock, till he has made your destruction
complete.

<span id="an_28:52">28:52</span> Your towns will be shut in by his
armies, till your high walls, in which you put your faith, have come
down: his armies will be round your towns, through all your land which
the Lord your God has given you.

<span id="an_28:53">28:53</span> And your food will be the fruit of your
body, the flesh of the sons and daughters which the Lord your God has
given you; because of your bitter need and the cruel grip of your
haters.

<span id="an_28:54">28:54</span> That man among you who is soft and used
to comfort will be hard and cruel to his brother, and to his dear wife,
and to of those his children who are still living;

<span id="an_28:55">28:55</span> And will not give to any of them the
flesh of his children which will be his food because he has no other; in
the cruel grip of your haters on all your towns.

<span id="an_28:56">28:56</span> The most soft and delicate of your
women, who would not so much as put her foot on the earth, so delicate
is she, will be hard-hearted to her husband and to her son and to her
daughter;

<span id="an_28:57">28:57</span> And to her baby newly come to birth,
and to the children of her body; for having no other food, she will make
a meal of them secretly, because of her bitter need and the cruel grip
of your haters on all your towns.

<span id="an_28:58">28:58</span> If you will not take care to do all the
words of this law, recorded in this book, honouring that name of glory
and of fear, THE LORD YOUR GOD;

<span id="an_28:59">28:59</span> Then the Lord your God will make your
punishment, and the punishment of your seed, a thing to be wondered at;
great punishments and cruel diseases stretching on through long years.

<span id="an_28:60">28:60</span> He will send on you again all the
diseases of Egypt, which were a cause of fear to you, and they will take
you in their grip.

<span id="an_28:61">28:61</span> And all the diseases and the pains not
recorded in the book of this law will the Lord send on you till your
destruction is complete.

<span id="an_28:62">28:62</span> And you will become a very small band,
though your numbers were like the stars of heaven; because you did not
give ear to the voice of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_28:63">28:63</span> And as the Lord took delight in doing
you good and increasing you, so the Lord will take pleasure in cutting
you off and causing your destruction, and you will be uprooted from the
land which you are about to take as your heritage.

<span id="an_28:64">28:64</span> And the Lord will send you wandering
among all peoples, from one end of the earth to the other: there you
will be servants to other gods, of wood and stone, gods of which you and
your fathers had no knowledge.

<span id="an_28:65">28:65</span> And even among these nations there will
be no peace for you, and no rest for your feet: but the Lord will give
you there a shaking heart and wasting eyes and weariness of soul:

<span id="an_28:66">28:66</span> Your very life will be hanging in doubt
before you, and day and night will be dark with fears, and nothing in
life will be certain:

<span id="an_28:67">28:67</span> In the morning you will say, If only it
was evening! And at evening you will say, If only morning would come!
Because of the fear in your hearts and the things which your eyes will
see.

<span id="an_28:68">28:68</span> And the Lord will take you back to
Egypt again in ships, by the way of which I said to you, You will never
see it again: there you will be offering yourselves as men-servants and
women-servants to your haters for a price, and no man will take you.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> These are the words of the agreement
which Moses was ordered by the Lord to make with the children of Israel
in the land of Moab, in addition to the agreement which he made with
them in Horeb.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And Moses said in the hearing of all
Israel, You have seen all the Lord did before your eyes in the land of
Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and all his land;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> The great tests which your eyes saw, and
the signs and wonders:

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> But even to this day the Lord has not
given you a mind open to knowledge, or seeing eyes or hearing ears.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> For forty years I have been your guide
through the waste land: your clothing has not become old on your backs,
or your shoes on your feet.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> You have had no bread, or wine, or strong
drink: so that you might see that I am the Lord your God.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When you came to this place, Sihon, king
of Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, came out to make war against us and
we overcame them:

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And we took their land and gave it to the
Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, for their
heritage.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> So keep the words of this agreement and
do them, so that it may be well for you in everything you do.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> You have come here today, all of you,
before the Lord your God; the heads of your tribes, the overseers, and
those who are in authority over you, with all the men of Israel,

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And your little ones, your wives, and
the men of other lands who are with you in your tents, down to the
wood-cutter and the servant who gets water for you:

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> With the purpose of taking part in the
agreement of the Lord your God, and his oath which he makes with you
today:

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And so that he may make you his people
today, and be your God, as he has said to you, and as he made an oath to
your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And not with you only do I make this
agreement and this oath;

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> But with everyone who is here with us
today before the Lord our God, as well as with those who are not here:

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> (For you have in mind how we were
living in the land of Egypt; and how we came through all the nations
which were on your way;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And you have seen their disgusting
doings, and the images of wood and stone and silver and gold which were
among them:)

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> So that there may not be among you any
man or woman or family or tribe whose heart is turned away from the Lord
our God today, to go after other gods and give them worship; or any root
among you whose fruit is poison and bitter sorrow;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> If such a man, hearing the words of
this oath, takes comfort in the thought that he will have peace even if
he goes on in the pride of his heart, taking whatever chance may give
him:

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> The Lord will have no mercy on him, but
the wrath of the Lord will be burning against that man, and all the
curses recorded in this book will be waiting for him, and the Lord will
take away his name completely from the earth.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> He will be marked out by the Lord, from
all the tribes of Israel, for an evil fate, in keeping with all the
curses of the agreement recorded in this book of the law.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And future generations, your children
coming after you, and travellers from far countries, will say, when they
see the punishments of that land and the diseases which the Lord has
sent on it;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And that all the land is a salt and
smoking waste, not planted or giving fruit or clothed with grass, but
wasted like Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, on which the Lord
sent destruction in the heat of his wrath:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Truly all the nations will say, Why has
the Lord done so to this land? what is the reason for this great and
burning wrath?

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Then men will say, Because they gave up
the agreement of the Lord, the God of their fathers, which he made with
them when he took them out of the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And they went after other gods and gave
them worship, gods who were strange to them, and whom he had not given
them:

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And so the wrath of the Lord was moved
against this land, to send on it all the curse recorded in this book:

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> Rooting them out of their land, in the
heat of his wrath and passion, and driving them out into another land,
as at this day.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> The secret things are the Lord our
God's: but the things which have been made clear are ours and our
children's for ever, so that we may do all the words of this law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Now when all these things have come on
you, the blessing and the curse which I have put before you, if the
thought of them comes back to your minds, when you are living among the
nations where the Lord your God has sent you,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> And your hearts are turned again to the
Lord your God, and you give ear to his word which I give you today, you
and your children, with all your heart and with all your soul:

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> Then the Lord will have pity on you,
changing your fate, and taking you back again from among all the nations
where you have been forced to go.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Even if those who have been forced out
are living in the farthest part of heaven, the Lord your God will go in
search of you, and take you back;

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Placing you again in the land of your
fathers as your heritage; and he will do you good, increasing you till
you are more in number than your fathers were.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And the Lord your God will give to you
and to your seed a circumcision of the heart, so that, loving him with
all your heart and all your soul, you may have life.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And the Lord your God will put all these
curses on those who are against you, and on your haters who put a cruel
yoke on you.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And you will again give ear to the voice
of the Lord, and do all his orders which I have given you today.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And the Lord your God will make you
fertile in all good things, blessing the work of your hands, and the
fruit of your body, and the fruit of your cattle, and the fruit of your
land: for the Lord will have joy in you, as he had in your fathers:

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> If you give ear to the voice of the
Lord your God, keeping his orders and his laws which are recorded in
this book of the law, and turning to the Lord your God with all your
heart and with all your soul.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For these orders which I have given you
today are not strange and secret, and are not far away.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> They are not in heaven, for you to say,
Who will go up to heaven for us and give us knowledge of them so that we
may do them?

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And they are not across the sea, for
you to say, Who will go over the sea for us and give us news of them so
that we may do them?

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> But the word is very near you, in your
mouth and in your heart, so that you may do it.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> See, I have put before you today, life
and good, and death and evil;

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> In giving you orders today to have love
for the Lord your God, to go in his ways and keep his laws and his
orders and his decisions, so that you may have life and be increased,
and that the blessing of the Lord your God may be with you in the land
where you are going, the land of your heritage.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> But if your heart is turned away and
your ear is shut, and you go after those who would make you servants and
worshippers of other gods:

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> I give witness against you this day
that destruction will certainly be your fate, and your days will be cut
short in the land where you are going, the land of your heritage on the
other side of Jordan.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Let heaven and earth be my witnesses
against you this day that I have put before you life and death, a
blessing and a curse: so take life for yourselves and for your seed:

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> In loving the Lord your God, hearing
his voice and being true to him: for he is your life and by him will
your days be long: so that you may go on living in the land which the
Lord gave by an oath to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> So Moses said all these things to Israel.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Then he said to them, I am now a hundred
and twenty years old; I am no longer able to go out and come in: and the
Lord has said to me, You are not to go over Jordan.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> The Lord your God, he will go over before
you; he will send destruction on all those nations, and you will take
their land as your heritage: and Joshua will go over at your head as the
Lord has said.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> The Lord will do to them as he did to
Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land, whom he
put to destruction.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> The Lord will give them up into your
hands, and you are to do to them as I have given you orders.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Be strong and take heart, and have no
fear of them: for it is the Lord your God who is going with you; he will
not take away his help from you.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Then Moses sent for Joshua, and before
the eyes of all Israel said to him, Be strong and take heart: for you
are to go with this people into the land which the Lord, by his oath to
their fathers, has given them; by your help they will take it for their
heritage.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> It is the Lord who goes before you; he
will be with you, he will not take away his help from you or give you
up: so have no fear.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Then Moses put all this law in writing,
and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi, who take up the ark of the
Lord's agreement, and to all the responsible men of Israel.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And Moses said to them, At the end of
every seven years, at the time fixed for the ending of debts, at the
feast of tents,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> When all Israel has come before the
Lord your God in the place named by him, let a reading be given of this
law in the hearing of all Israel.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Make all the people come together, men
and women and children, and anyone from another country who is with you,
so that hearing they may become wise in the fear of the Lord your God,
and take care to do all the words of this law;

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> And so that your children, to whom it
is new, may give ear and be trained in the fear of the Lord your God,
while you are living in the land which you are going over Jordan to take
for your heritage.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> At that time the Lord said to Moses,
The day of your death is near: send for Joshua, and come to the Tent of
meeting so that I may give him his orders. So Moses and Joshua went to
the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And the Lord was seen in the Tent in a
pillar of cloud resting by the door of the Tent.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Now you are
going to rest with your fathers; and this people will be false to me,
uniting themselves to the strange gods of the land where they are going;
they will be turned away from me and will not keep the agreement I have
made with them.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> In that day my wrath will be moved
against them, and I will be turned away from them, veiling my face from
them, and destruction will overtake them, and unnumbered evils and
troubles will come on them; so that in that day they will say, Have not
these evils come on us because our God is not with us?

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> Truly, my face will be turned away from
them in that day, because of all the evil they have done in going after
other gods.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Make then this song for yourselves,
teaching it to the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, so that
this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> For when I have taken them into the
land named in my oath to their fathers, a land flowing with milk and
honey, and they have made themselves full of food and are fat, then they
will be turned to other gods and will give them worship, no longer
honouring me or keeping my agreement.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Then when evils and troubles without
number have overtaken them, this song will be a witness to them, for the
words of it will be clear in the memories of their children: for I see
the thoughts which are moving in their hearts even now, before I have
taken them into the land of my oath.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> So that same day Moses made this song,
teaching it to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Then he gave orders to Joshua, the son
of Nun, saying to him, Be strong and take heart: for you are to go at
the head of the children of Israel into the land which I made an oath to
give them; and I will be with you.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> Now after writing all the words of this
law in a book till the record of them was complete,

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Moses said to the Levites who were
responsible for taking up the ark of the Lord's agreement,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Take this book of the law and put it by
the ark of the Lord's agreement, so that it may be a witness against
you.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> For I have knowledge of your hard and
uncontrolled hearts: even now, while I am still living, you will not be
ruled by the Lord; how much less after my death?

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Get together before me all those who
are in authority in your tribes, and your overseers, so that I may say
these things in their hearing, and make heaven and earth my witnesses
against them.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> For I am certain that after my death
you will give yourselves up to sin, wandering from the way which I have
given you; and evil will overtake you in the end, because you will do
evil in the eyes of the Lord, moving him to wrath by the work of your
hands.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Then in the hearing of all the meeting
of Israel, Moses said the words of this song, to the end.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Give ear, O heavens, to my voice; let the
earth take note of the words of my mouth:

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> My teaching is dropping like rain, coming
down like dew on the fields; like rain on the young grass and showers on
the garden plants:

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For I will give honour to the name of the
Lord: let our God be named great.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> He is the Rock, complete is his work; for
all his ways are righteousness: a God without evil who keeps faith, true
and upright is he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> They have become false, they are not his
children, the mark of sin is on them; they are an evil and hard-hearted
generation.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Is this your answer to the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise? Is he not your father who has given you life?
He has made you and given you your place.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Keep in mind the days of the past, give
thought to the years of generations gone by: go to your father and he
will make it clear to you, to the old men and they will give you the
story.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> When the Most High gave the nations their
heritage, separating into groups the children of men, he had the limits
of the peoples marked out, keeping in mind the number of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For the Lord's wealth is his people;
Jacob is the land of his heritage.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> He came to him in the waste land, in
the unpeopled waste of sand: putting his arms round him and caring for
him, he kept him as the light of his eye.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> As an eagle, teaching her young to make
their flight, with her wings outstretched over them, takes them up on
her strong feathers:

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> So the Lord only was his guide, no
other god was with him.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> He put him on the high places of the
earth, his food was the increase of the field; honey he gave him out of
the rock and oil out of the hard rock;

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Butter from his cows and milk from his
sheep, with fat of lambs and sheep of Bashan, and goats, and the heart
of the grain; and for your drink, wine from the blood of the grape.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> But Jeshurun became fat and would not
be controlled: you have become fat, you are thick and full of food: then
he was untrue to the God who made him, giving no honour to the Rock of
his salvation.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> The honour which was his they gave to
strange gods; by their disgusting ways he was moved to wrath.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> They made offerings to evil spirits
which were not God, to gods who were strange to them, which had newly
come up, not feared by your fathers.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> You have no thought for the Rock, your
father, you have no memory of the God who gave you birth.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And the Lord saw with disgust the
evil-doing of his sons and daughters.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he said, My face will be veiled
from them, I will see what their end will be: for they are an
uncontrolled generation, children in whom is no faith.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> They have given my honour to that which
is not God, moving me to wrath with their false worship: I will give
their honour to those who are not a people, moving them to wrath by a
foolish nation,

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For my wrath is a flaming fire, burning
to the deep parts of the underworld, burning up the earth with her
increase, and firing the deep roots of the mountains.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> I will send a rain of troubles on them,
my arrows will be showered on them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> They will be wasted from need of food,
and overcome by burning heat and bitter destruction; and the teeth of
beasts I will send on them, with the poison of the worms of the dust.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> Outside they will be cut off by the
sword, and in the inner rooms by fear; death will take the young man and
the virgin, the baby at the breast and the grey-haired man.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> I said I would send them wandering far
away, I would make all memory of them go from the minds of men:

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> But for the fear that their haters,
uplifted in their pride, might say, Our hand is strong, the Lord has not
done all this.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> For they are a nation without wisdom;
there is no sense in them.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> If only they were wise, if only this
was clear to them, and they would give thought to their future!

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> How would it be possible for one to
overcome a thousand, and two to send ten thousand in flight, if their
rock had not let them go, if the Lord had not given them up?

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For their rock is not like our Rock,
even our haters themselves being judges.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For their vine is the vine of Sodom,
from the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are the grapes of evil, and
the berries are bitter:

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Their wine is the poison of dragons,
the cruel poison of snakes.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> Is not this among my secrets, kept safe
in my store-house?

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> Punishment is mine and reward, at the
time of the slipping of their feet: for the day of their downfall is
near, sudden will be their fate.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> For the Lord will be judge of his
people, he will have pity for his servants; when he sees that their
power is gone, there is no one, shut up or free.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> And he will say, Where are their gods,
the rock in which they put their faith?

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> Who took the fat of their offerings,
and the wine of their drink offering? Let them now come to your help,
let them be your salvation.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> See now, I myself am he; there is no
other god but me: giver of death and life, wounding and making well: and
no one has power to make you free from my hand.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> For lifting up my hand to heaven I say,
By my unending life,

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> If I make sharp my shining sword, and
my hand is outstretched for judging, I will give punishment to those who
are against me, and their right reward to my haters.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> I will make my arrows red with blood,
my sword will be feasting on flesh, with the blood of the dead and the
prisoners, of the long-haired heads of my haters.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Be glad, O you his people, over the
nations; for he will take payment for the blood of his servants, and
will give punishment to his haters, and take away the sin of his land,
for his people.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> So Moses said all the words of this
song in the hearing of the people, he and Hoshea, the son of Nun.

<span id="an_32:45">32:45</span> And after saying all this to the
people,

<span id="an_32:46">32:46</span> Moses said to them, Let the words which
I have said to you today go deep into your hearts, and give orders to
your children to do every word of this law.

<span id="an_32:47">32:47</span> And this is no small thing for you, but
it is your life, and through this you may make your days long in the
land which you are going over Jordan to take for your heritage.

<span id="an_32:48">32:48</span> That same day the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_32:49">32:49</span> Go up into this mountain of Abarim, to
Mount Nebo in the land of Moab opposite Jericho; there you may see the
land of Canaan, which I am giving to the children of Israel for their
heritage:

<span id="an_32:50">32:50</span> And let death come to you on the
mountain where you are going, and be put to rest with your people; as
death came to Aaron, your brother, on Mount Hor, where he was put to
rest with his people:

<span id="an_32:51">32:51</span> Because of your sin against me before
the children of Israel at the waters of Meribath Kadesh in the waste
land of Zin; because you did not keep my name holy among the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_32:52">32:52</span> So you will see the land before you,
but you will not go into the land which I am giving to the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Now this is the blessing which Moses, the
man of God, gave to the children of Israel before his death.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> He said, The Lord came from Sinai,
dawning on them from Seir; shining out from Mount Paran, coming from
Meribath Kadesh: from his right hand went flames of fire: his wrath made
waste the peoples.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> All his holy ones are at his hand; they
go at his feet; they are lifted up on his wings.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Moses gave us a law, a heritage for the
people of Jacob.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And there was a king in Jeshurun, when
the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel came together.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Let life not death be Reuben's, let not
the number of his men be small.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And this is the blessing of Judah: he
said, Give ear, O Lord, to the voice of Judah and make him one with his
people: let your hands take up his cause, and be his help against his
attackers.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And of Levi he said, Give your Thummim to
Levi and let the Urim be with your loved one, whom you put to the test
at Massah, with whom you were angry at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Who said of his father, Who is he? and of
his mother, I have not seen her; he kept himself separate from his
brothers and had no knowledge of his children: for they have given ear
to your word and kept your agreement.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They will be the teachers of your
decisions to Jacob and of your law to Israel: the burning of perfumes
before you will be their right, and the ordering of burned offerings on
your altar.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Let your blessing, O Lord, be on his
substance, may the work of his hands be pleasing to you: may those who
take up arms against him and all who have hate for him, be wounded
through the heart, never to be lifted up again.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And of Benjamin he said, Benjamin is
the loved one of the Lord, he will be kept safe at all times; he will be
covered by the Most High, resting between his arms.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And of Joseph he said, Let the blessing
of the Lord be on his land; for the good things of heaven on high, and
the deep waters flowing under the earth,

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And the good things of the fruits of
the sun, and the good things of the growth of the moons,

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And the chief things of the oldest
mountains, and the good things of the eternal hills,

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> The good things of the earth and all
its wealth, the good pleasure of him who was seen in the burning tree:
may they come on the head of Joseph, on the head of him who was prince
among his brothers.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> He is a young ox, glory is his; his
horns are the horns of the mountain ox, with which all peoples will be
wounded, even to the ends of the earth: they are the ten thousands of
Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And of Zebulun he said, Be glad,
Zebulun, in your going out; and, Issachar, in your tents.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> They will send out the word for the
people to come to the mountain, taking there the offerings of
righteousness: for the store of the seas will be theirs, and the secret
wealth of the sand.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Of Gad he said, A blessing be on him
who makes wide the limits of Gad: he takes his rest like a she-lion,
taking for himself the arm and the crown of the head.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> He kept for himself the first part, for
his was the ruler's right: he put in force the righteousness of the
Lord, and his decisions for Israel.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And of Dan he said, Dan is a young
lion, springing out from Bashan.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali,
made glad with grace and full of the blessing of the Lord: the sea and
its fishes will be his.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And of Asher he said, Let Asher have
the blessing of children; may he be pleasing to his brothers, and let
his foot be wet with oil.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Your shoes will be iron and brass; and
as your days, so may your work be.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> No other is like the God of Jeshurun,
coming on the heavens to your help, and letting his glory be seen in the
skies.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> The God of your fathers is your safe
resting-place, and under you are his eternal arms: driving out the
forces of your haters from before you, he said, Let destruction overtake
them.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And Israel is living in peace, the
fountain of Jacob by himself, in a land of grain and wine, with dew
dropping from the heavens.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Happy are you, O Israel: who is like
you, a people whose saviour is the Lord, whose help is your cover, whose
sword is your strength! All those who are against you will put
themselves under your rule, and your feet will be planted on their high
places.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Moses went up from the table-lands of
Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah which is facing Jericho. And
the Lord let him see all the land, the land of Gilead as far as Dan;

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And all Naphtali and the land of Ephraim
and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, as far as the Great Sea of the
west;

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And the South, and the circle of the
valley of Jericho, the town of palm-trees, as far as Zoar.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And the Lord said to him, This is the
land about which I made an oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, I
will give it to your seed: now I have let you see it with your eyes, but
you will not go in there.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> So death came to Moses, the servant of
the Lord, there in the land of Moab, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And the Lord put him to rest in the
valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor: but no man has knowledge
of his resting-place to this day.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And Moses at his death was a hundred and
twenty years old: his eye had not become clouded, or his natural force
become feeble.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> For thirty days the children of Israel
were weeping for Moses in the table-lands of Moab, till the days of
weeping and sorrow for Moses were ended.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And Joshua, the son of Nun, was full of
the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had put his hands on him: and the
children of Israel gave ear to him, and did as the Lord had given orders
to Moses.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> There has never been another prophet in
Israel like Moses, whom the Lord had knowledge of face to face;

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> In all the signs and wonders which the
Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and to all his
servants and all his land;

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> And in all the acts of power and fear
which Moses did before the eyes of all Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua](jos)
