[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gen)  [Next](lev) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Exodus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now these are the names of the sons of
Israel who came into Egypt; every man and his family came with Jacob.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> All the offspring of Jacob were seventy
persons: and Joseph had come to Egypt before them.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Then Joseph came to his end, and all his
brothers, and all that generation.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the children of Israel were fertile,
increasing very greatly in numbers and in power; and the land was full
of them.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now a new king came to power in Egypt, who
had no knowledge of Joseph.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he said to his people, See, the people
of Israel are greater in number and in power than we are:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Let us take care for fear that their
numbers may become even greater, and if there is a war, they may be
joined with those who are against us, and make an attack on us, and go
up out of the land.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> So they put overseers of forced work over
them, in order to make their strength less by the weight of their work.
And they made store-towns for Pharaoh, Pithom and Raamses.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But the more cruel they were to them, the
more their number increased, till all the land was full of them. And the
children of Israel were hated by the Egyptians.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And they gave the children of Israel even
harder work to do:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And made their lives bitter with hard
work, making building-material and bricks, and doing all sorts of work
in the fields under the hardest conditions.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the king of Egypt said to the Hebrew
women who gave help at the time of childbirth (the name of the one was
Shiphrah and the name of the other Puah),

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> When you are looking after the Hebrew
women in childbirth, if it is a son you are to put him to death; but if
it is a daughter, she may go on living.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But the women had the fear of God, and
did not do as the king of Egypt said, but let the male children go on
living.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the king of Egypt sent for the women,
and said to them, Why have you done this, and let the male children go
on living?

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they said to Pharaoh, Because the
Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women, for they are strong, and
the birth takes place before we come to them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the blessing of God was on these
women: and the people were increased in number and became very strong.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And because the women who took care of
the Hebrew mothers had the fear of God, he gave them families.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And Pharaoh gave orders to all his
people, saying, Every son who comes to birth is to be put into the
river, but every daughter may go on living.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now a man of the house of Levi took as his
wife a daughter of Levi.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And she became with child and gave birth to
a Son; and when she saw that he was a beautiful child, she kept him
secretly for three months.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And when she was no longer able to keep him
secret, she made him a basket out of the stems of water-plants, pasting
sticky earth over it to keep the water out; and placing the baby in it
she put it among the plants by the edge of the Nile.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And his sister took her place at a distance
to see what would become of him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now Pharaoh's daughter came down to the
Nile to take a bath, while her women were walking by the riverside; and
she saw the basket among the river-plants, and sent her servant-girl to
get it.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And opening it, she saw the child, and he
was crying. And she had pity on him, and said, This is one of the
Hebrews' children.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter,
May I go and get you one of the Hebrew women to give him the breast?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And
the girl went and got the child's mother.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take
the child away and give it milk for me, and I will give you payment. And
the woman took the child and gave it milk at her breast.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And when the child was older, she took
him to Pharaoh's daughter and he became her son, and she gave him the
name Moses, Because, she said, I took him out of the water.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Now when Moses had become a man, one day
he went out to his people and saw how hard their work was; and he saw an
Egyptian giving blows to a Hebrew, one of his people.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And turning this way and that, and seeing
no one, he put the Egyptian to death, covering his body with sand.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went out the day after and saw two
of the Hebrews fighting: and he said to him who was in the wrong, Why
are you fighting your brother?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And he said, Who made you a ruler and a
judge over us? are you going to put me to death as you did the Egyptian?
And Moses was in fear, and said, It is clear that the thing has come to
light.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Now when Pharaoh had news of this, he
would have put Moses to death. But Moses went in flight from Pharaoh
into the land of Midian: and he took his seat by a water-spring.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now the priest of Midian had seven
daughters: and they came to get water for their father's flock.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the keepers of the sheep came up and
were driving them away; but Moses got up and came to their help,
watering their flock for them.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And when they came to Reuel their father,
he said, How is it that you have come back so quickly today?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they said, An Egyptian came to our
help against the keepers of sheep and got water for us and gave it to
the flock.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And he said to his daughters, Where is
he? why have you let the man go? make him come in and give him a meal.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Moses was happy to go on living with
the man; and he gave his daughter Zipporah to Moses.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And she gave birth to a son, to whom he
gave the name Gershom: for he said, I have been living in a strange
land.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Now after a long time the king of Egypt
came to his end: and the children of Israel were crying in their grief
under the weight of their work, and their cry for help came to the ears
of God.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And at the sound of their weeping the
agreement which God had made with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob came to
his mind.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And God's eyes were turned to the
children of Israel and he gave them the knowledge of himself.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Moses was looking after the flock of
Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he took the flock
to the back of the waste land and came to Horeb, the mountain of God.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the angel of the Lord was seen by him
in a flame of fire coming out of a thorn-tree: and he saw that the tree
was on fire, but it was not burned up.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Moses said, I will go and see this
strange thing, why the tree is not burned up,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when the Lord saw him turning to one
side to see, God said his name out of the tree, crying, Moses, Moses.
And he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he said, Do not come near: take off
your shoes from your feet, for the place where you are is holy.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And he said, I am the God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses
kept his face covered for fear of looking on God.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And God said, Truly, I have seen the grief
of my people in Egypt, and their cry because of their cruel masters has
come to my ears; for I have knowledge of their sorrows;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I have come down to take them out of
the hands of the Egyptians, guiding them out of that land into a good
land and wide, into a land flowing with milk and honey; into the place
of the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Amorite and the Perizzite and
the Hivite and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For now, truly, the cry of the children of
Israel has come to me, and I have seen the cruel behaviour of the
Egyptians to them.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Come, then, and I will send you to
Pharaoh, so that you may take my people, the children of Israel, out of
Egypt.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Moses said to God, Who am I to go to
Pharaoh and take the children of Israel out of Egypt?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he said, Truly I will be with you;
and this will be the sign to you that I have sent you: when you have
taken the children of Israel out of Egypt, you will give worship to God
on this mountain.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Moses said to God, When I come to the
children of Israel and say to them, The God of your fathers has sent me
to you: and they say to me, What is his name? what am I to say to them?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And God said to him, I AM WHAT I AM: and
he said, Say to the children of Israel, I AM has sent me to you.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And God went on to say to Moses, Say to
the children of Israel, The Lord, the God of your fathers, the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has sent me to you: this is my name for
ever, and this is my sign to all generations.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Go and get together the chiefs of the
children of Israel, and say to them, The Lord, the God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has been seen by me, and has
said, Truly I have taken up your cause, because of what is done to you
in Egypt;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And I have said, I will take you up out
of the sorrows of Egypt into the land of the Canaanite and the Hittite
and the Amorite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, into
a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And they will give ear to your voice: and
you, with the chiefs of Israel, will go to Pharaoh, the king of Egypt,
and say to him, The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has come to us: let us
then go three days' journey into the waste land to make an offering to
the Lord our God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And I am certain that the king of Egypt
will not let you go without being forced.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> But I will put out my hand and overcome
Egypt with all the wonders which I will do among them: and after that he
will let you go.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I will give this people grace in the
eyes of the Egyptians, so that when you go out you will go out with your
hands full.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For every woman will get from her
neighbour and from the woman living in her house, ornaments of silver
and gold, and clothing; and you will put them on your sons and your
daughters; you will take the best of their goods from the Egyptians.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Moses, answering, said, It is certain
that they will not have faith in me or give ear to my voice; for they
will say, You have not seen the Lord.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And the Lord said to him, What is that in
your hand? And he said, A rod.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he said, Put it down on the earth. And
he put it down on the earth and it became a snake; and Moses went
running from it.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Put out your
hand and take it by the tail: (and he put out his hand and took a grip
of it and it became a rod in his hand:)

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> So that they may be certain that the Lord,
the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,
has been seen by you.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Then the Lord said to him again, Put your
hand inside your clothing. And he put his hand inside his robe: and when
he took it out it was like the hand of a leper, as white as snow.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And he said, Put your hand inside your robe
again. (And he put his hand into his robe again, and when he took it out
he saw that it had become like his other flesh.)

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And if they do not have faith in you or
give ear to the voice of the first sign, they will have faith in the
second sign.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And if they have no faith even in these two
signs and will not give ear to your voice, then you are to take the
water of the Nile and put it on the dry land: and the water you take out
of the river will become blood on the dry land.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And Moses said to the Lord, O Lord, I am
not a man of words; I have never been so, and am not now, even after
what you have said to your servant: for talking is hard for me, and I am
slow of tongue.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And the Lord said to him, Who has made
man's mouth? who takes away a man's voice or hearing, or makes him
seeing or blind? Is it not I, the Lord?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> So go now, and I will be with your mouth,
teaching you what to say.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he said, O Lord, send, if you will,
by the hand of anyone whom it seems good to you to send.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the Lord was angry with Moses, and
said, Is there not Aaron, your brother, the Levite? To my knowledge he
is good at talking. And now he is coming out to you: and when he sees
you he will be glad in his heart.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Let him give ear to your voice, and you
will put my words in his mouth; and I will be with your mouth and with
his, teaching you what you have to do.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he will do the talking for you to the
people: he will be to you as a mouth and you will be to him as God.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And take in your hand this rod with which
you will do the signs.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Moses went back to Jethro, his
father-in-law, and said to him, Let me go back now to my relations in
Egypt and see if they are still living. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in
peace.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And the Lord said to Moses in Midian, Go
back to Egypt, for all the men are dead who were attempting to take your
life.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Moses took his wife and his sons and
put them on an ass and went back to the land of Egypt: and he took the
rod of God in his hand.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the Lord said to Moses, When you go
back to Egypt, see that you do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I
have given you power to do: but I will make his heart hard and he will
not let the people go.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And you are to say to Pharaoh, The Lord
says, Israel is the first of my sons:

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And I said to you, Let my son go, so that
he may give me worship; and you did not let him go: so now I will put
the first of your sons to death.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Now on the journey, at the night's
resting-place, the Lord came in his way and would have put him to death.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and
cutting off the skin of her son's private parts, and touching his feet
with it, she said, Truly you are a husband of blood to me.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> So he let him go. Then she said, You are
a husband of blood because of the circumcision.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the
waste land and you will see Moses. So he went and came across Moses at
the mountain of God, and gave him a kiss.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And Moses gave Aaron an account of all
the words of the Lord which he had sent him to say, and of all the signs
which he had given him orders to do.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Then Moses and Aaron went and got
together all the chiefs of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And Aaron said to them all the words the
Lord had said to Moses, and did the signs before all the people.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And the people had faith in them; and
hearing that the Lord had taken up the cause of the children of Israel
and had seen their troubles, with bent heads they gave him worship.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And after that, Moses and Aaron came to
Pharaoh, and said, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, Let my people go
so that they may keep a feast to me in the waste land.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, to whose
voice I am to give ear and let Israel go? I have no knowledge of the
Lord and I will not let Israel go.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And they said, The God of the Hebrews has
come to us: let us then go three days' journey into the waste land to
make an offering to the Lord our God, so that he may not send death on
us by disease or the sword.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And the king of Egypt said to them, Why do
you, Moses and Aaron, take the people away from their work? get back to
your work.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Pharaoh said, Truly, the people of the
land are increasing in number, and you are keeping them back from their
work.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The same day Pharaoh gave orders to the
overseers and those who were responsible for the work, saying,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Give these men no more dry stems for their
brick-making as you have been doing; let them go and get the material
for themselves.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But see that they make the same number of
bricks as before, and no less: for they have no love for work; and so
they are crying out and saying, Let us go and make an offering to our
God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Give the men harder work, and see that they
do it; let them not give attention to false words.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the overseers of the people and their
responsible men went out and said to the people, Pharaoh says, I will
give you no more dry stems.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Go yourselves and get dry stems wherever
you are able; for your work is not to be any less.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> So the people were sent in all directions
through the land of Egypt to get dry grass for stems.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the overseers went on driving them
and saying, Do your full day's work as before when there were dry stems
for you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the responsible men of the children
of Israel, whom Pharaoh's overseers had put over them, were given blows,
and they said to them, Why have you not done your regular work, in
making bricks as before?

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Then the responsible men of the children
of Israel came to Pharaoh, protesting and saying, Why are you acting in
this way to your servants?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> They give us no dry stems and they say to
us, Make bricks: and they give your servants blows; but it is your
people who are in the wrong.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But he said, You have no love for work:
that is why you say, Let us go and make an offering to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Go now, get back to your work; no dry
stems will be given to you, but you are to make the full number of
bricks.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Then the responsible men of the children
of Israel saw that they were purposing evil when they said, The number
of bricks which you have to make every day will be no less than before.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And they came face to face with Moses and
Aaron, who were in their way when they came out from Pharaoh:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And they said to them, May the Lord take
note of you and be your judge; for you have given Pharaoh and his
servants a bad opinion of us, putting a sword in their hands for our
destruction.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And Moses went back to the Lord and said,
Lord, why have you done evil to this people? why have you sent me?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For from the time when I came to Pharaoh
to put your words before him, he has done evil to this people, and you
have given them no help.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Now you will
see what I am about to do to Pharaoh; for by a strong hand he will be
forced to let them go, driving them out of his land because of my
outstretched arm.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And God said to Moses, I am Yahweh:

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> I let myself be seen by Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, as God, the Ruler of all; but they had no knowledge of my name
Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And I made an agreement with them, to give
them the land of Canaan, the land of their wanderings.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And truly my ears are open to the cry of
the children of Israel whom the Egyptians keep under their yoke; and I
have kept in mind my agreement.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Say then to the children of Israel, I am
Yahweh, and I will take you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians,
and make you safe from their power, and will make you free by the
strength of my arm after great punishments.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And I will take you to be my people and I
will be your God; and you will be certain that I am the Lord your God,
who takes you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And I will be your guide into the land
which I made an oath to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I
will give it to you for your heritage: I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And Moses said these words to the children
of Israel, but they gave no attention to him, because of the grief of
their spirit and the cruel weight of their work.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Go in and say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt,
that he is to let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And Moses, answering the Lord, said, See,
the children of Israel will not give ear to me; how then will Pharaoh
give ear to me, whose lips are unclean?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And the word of the Lord came to Moses
and Aaron, with orders for the children of Israel and for Pharaoh, king
of Egypt, to take the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> These are the heads of their fathers'
families: the sons of Reuben the oldest son of Israel: Hanoch and Pallu,
Hezron and Carmi: these are the families of Reuben.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel and Jamin
and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar and Shaul, the son of a woman of Canaan:
these are the families of Simeon.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Levi in the order of their generations: Gershon and Kohath and Merari:
and the years of Levi's life were a hundred and thirty-seven.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, in
the order of their families.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And the sons of Kohath: Amram and Izhar
and Hebron and Uzziel: and the years of Kohath's life were a hundred and
thirty-three.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi:
these are the families of the Levites, in the order of their
generations.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And Amram took Jochebed, his father's
sister, as wife; and she gave birth to Aaron and Moses: and the years of
Amram's life were a hundred and thirty-seven.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the sons of Izhar: Korah and Nepheg
and Zichri.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the sons of Uzziel: Mishael and
Elzaphan and Sithri.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And Aaron took as his wife Elisheba, the
daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon; and she gave birth to
Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the sons of Korah: Assir and Elkanah
and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korahites.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And Eleazar, Aaron's son, took as his
wife one of the daughters of Putiel; and she gave birth to Phinehas.
These are the heads of the families of the Levites, in the order of
their families.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> These are the same Aaron and Moses to
whom the Lord said, Take the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt
in their armies.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> These are the men who gave orders to
Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go out of Egypt: these are the
same Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And on the day when the word of the Lord
came to Moses in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> The Lord said to Moses, I am the Lord:
say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, everything I am saying to you.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And Moses said to the Lord, My lips are
unclean; how is it possible that Pharaoh will give me a hearing?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, See I have made
you a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron your brother will be your prophet.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Say whatever I give you orders to say: and
Aaron your brother will give word to Pharaoh to let the children of
Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And I will make Pharaoh's heart hard, and
my signs and wonders will be increased in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> But Pharaoh will not give ear to you, and I
will put my hand on Egypt, and take my armies, my people, the children
of Israel, out of Egypt, after great punishments.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the Egyptians will see that I am the
Lord, when my hand is stretched out over Egypt, and I take the children
of Israel out from among them.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Moses and Aaron did so: as the Lord
gave them orders, so they did.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron
eighty-three years old, when they gave the Lord's word to Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> If Pharaoh says to you, Let me see a
wonder: then say to Aaron, Take your rod and put it down on the earth
before Pharaoh so that it may become a snake.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Then Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh
and they did as the Lord had said: and Aaron put his rod down on the
earth before Pharaoh and his servants, and it became a snake.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Then Pharaoh sent for the wise men and
the wonder-workers, and they, the wonder-workers of Egypt, did the same
with their secret arts.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For every one of them put down his rod on
the earth, and they became snakes: but Aaron's rod made a meal of their
rods.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> But Pharaoh's heart was made hard, and he
did not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,
Pharaoh's heart is unchanged; he will not let the people go.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Go to Pharaoh in the morning; when he
goes out to the water, you will be waiting for him by the edge of the
Nile, with the rod which was turned into a snake in your hand;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And say to him, The Lord, the God of the
Hebrews, has sent me to you, saying, Let my people go so that they may
give me worship in the waste land; but up to now you have not given ear
to his words.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> So the Lord says, By this you may be
certain that I am the Lord; see, by the touch of this rod in my hand the
waters of the Nile will be turned to blood;

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the fish in the Nile will come to
destruction, and the river will send up a bad smell, and the Egyptians
will not be able, for disgust, to make use of the water of the Nile for
drinking.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the Lord said, Say to Aaron, Let the
rod in your hand be stretched out over the waters of Egypt, and over the
rivers and the streams and the pools, and over every stretch of water,
so that they may be turned to blood; and there will be blood through all
the land of Egypt, in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had
said; and when his rod had been lifted up and stretched out over the
waters of the Nile before the eyes of Pharaoh and his servants, all the
water in the Nile was turned to blood;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And the fish in the Nile came to
destruction, and a bad smell went up from the river, and the Egyptians
were not able to make use of the water of the Nile for drinking; and
there was blood through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the wonder-workers of Egypt did the
same with their secret arts: but Pharaoh's heart was made hard, and he
would not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Then Pharaoh went into his house, and did
not take even this to heart.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And all the Egyptians made holes round
about the Nile to get drinking-water, for they were not able to make use
of the Nile water.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And seven days went past, after the Lord
had put his hand on the Nile.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And this is what the Lord said to Moses: Go
to Pharaoh and say to him, The Lord says, Let my people go so that they
may give me worship.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And if you will not let them go, see, I
will send frogs into every part of your land:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> The Nile will be full of frogs, and they
will come up into your house and into your bedrooms and on your bed, and
into the houses of your servants and your people, and into your ovens
and into your bread-basins.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> The frogs will come up over you and your
people and all your servants.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron,
Let the rod in your hand be stretched out over the streams and the
waterways and the pools, causing frogs to come up on the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And when Aaron put out his hand over the
waters of Egypt, the frogs came up and all the land of Egypt was covered
with them.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And the wonder-workers did the same with
their secret arts, making frogs come up over the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and
said, Make prayer to the Lord that he will take away these frogs from me
and my people; and I will let the people go and make their offering to
the Lord.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Moses said, I will let you have the
honour of saying when I am to make prayer for you and your servants and
your people, that the frogs may be sent away from you and your houses,
and be only in the Nile.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And he said, By tomorrow. And he said,
Let it be as you say: so that you may see that there is no other like
the Lord our God.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the frogs will be gone from you and
from your houses and from your servants and from your people and will be
only in the Nile.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then Moses and Aaron went out from
Pharaoh; and Moses made prayer to the Lord about the frogs which he had
sent on Pharaoh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And the Lord did as Moses said; and there
was an end of all the frogs in the houses and in the open spaces and in
the fields.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they put them together in masses, and
a bad smell went up from the land.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> But when Pharaoh saw that there was peace
for a time, he made his heart hard and did not give ear to them, as the
Lord had said.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron,
Let your rod be stretched out over the dust of the earth so that it may
become insects through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And they did so; and Aaron, stretching
out the rod in his hand, gave a touch to the dust of the earth, and
insects came on man and on beast; all the dust of the earth was changed
into insects through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the wonder-workers with their secret
arts, attempting to make insects, were unable to do so: and there were
insects on man and on beast.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Then the wonder-workers said to Pharaoh,
This is the finger of God: but Pharaoh's heart was hard, and he did not
give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Get up early
in the morning and take your place before Pharaoh when he comes out to
the water; and say to him, This is what the Lord says: Let my people go
to give me worship.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For if you do not let my people go, see,
I will send clouds of flies on you and on your servants and on your
people and into their houses; and the houses of the Egyptians and the
land where they are will be full of flies.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And at that time I will make a division
between your land and the land of Goshen where my people are, and no
flies will be there; so that you may see that I am the Lord over all the
earth.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And I will put a division between my
people and your people; tomorrow this sign will be seen.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And the Lord did so; and great clouds of
flies came into the house of Pharaoh and into his servants' houses, and
all the land of Egypt was made waste because of the flies.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and
said, Go and make your offering to your God here in the land.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And Moses said, It is not right to do so;
for we make our offerings of that to which the Egyptians give worship;
and if we do so before their eyes, certainly we will be stoned.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But we will go three days' journey into
the waste land and make an offering to the Lord our God as he may give
us orders.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Then Pharaoh said, I will let you go to
make an offering to the Lord your God in the waste land; but do not go
very far away, and make prayer for me.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And Moses said, When I go out from you I
will make prayer to the Lord that the cloud of flies may go away from
Pharaoh and from his people and from his servants tomorrow: only let
Pharaoh no longer by deceit keep back the people from making their
offering to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Then Moses went out from Pharaoh and made
prayer to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And the Lord did as Moses said, and took
away the cloud of flies from Pharaoh and from his servants and from his
people; not one was to be seen.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> But again Pharaoh made his heart hard and
did not let the people go.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then the Lord said to Moses, Go in to
Pharaoh and say to him, This is what the Lord, the God of the Hebrews,
says: Let my people go so that they may give me worship.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For if you will not let them go, but still
keep them in your power,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Then the hand of the Lord will put on your
cattle in the field, on the horses and the asses and the camels, on the
herds and the flocks, a very evil disease.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the Lord will make a division between
the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt; there will be no loss of
any of the cattle of Israel.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And the time was fixed by the Lord, and he
said, Tomorrow the Lord will do this thing in the land.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And on the day after, the Lord did as he
had said, causing the death of all the cattle of Egypt, but there was no
loss of any of the cattle of Israel.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Pharaoh sent and got word that there
was no loss of any of the cattle of Israel. But the heart of Pharaoh was
hard and he did not let the people go.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the Lord said to Moses and to Aaron,
Take in your hand a little dust from the fire and let Moses send it in a
shower up to heaven before the eyes of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And it will become small dust over all the
land of Egypt, and will be a skin-disease bursting out in wounds on man
and beast through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> So they took some dust from the fire, and
placing themselves before Pharaoh, Moses sent it out in a shower up to
heaven; and it became a skin-disease bursting out on man and on beast.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the wonder-workers were not able to
take their places before Moses, because of the disease; for the disease
was on the wonder-workers and on all the Egyptians.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard,
and he would not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Get up early
in the morning and take your place before Pharaoh, and say to him, This
is what the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, says: Let my people go so that
they may give me worship.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For this time I will send all my
punishments on yourself and on your servants and on your people; so that
you may see that there is no other like me in all the earth.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For if I had put the full weight of my
hand on you and your people, you would have been cut off from the earth:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> But, for this very reason, I have kept
you from destruction, to make clear to you my power, and so that my name
may be honoured through all the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Are you still uplifted in pride against
my people so that you will not let them go?

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Truly, tomorrow about this time I will
send down an ice-storm, such as never was in Egypt from its earliest
days till now.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Then send quickly and get in your cattle
and all you have from the fields; for if any man or beast in the field
has not been put under cover, the ice-storm will come down on them with
destruction.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Then everyone among the servants of
Pharaoh who had the fear of the Lord, made his servants and his cattle
come quickly into the house:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he who gave no attention to the word
of the Lord, kept his servants and his cattle in the field.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Now let your
hand be stretched out to heaven so that there may be an ice-storm on all
the land of Egypt, on man and on beast and on every plant of the field
through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Moses put out his rod to heaven: and
the Lord sent thunder, and an ice-storm, and fire running down on the
earth; the Lord sent an ice-storm on the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So there was an ice-storm with fire
running through it, coming down with great force, such as never was in
all the land of Egypt from the time when it became a nation.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And through all the land of Egypt the
ice-storm came down on everything which was in the fields, on man and on
beast; and every green plant was crushed and every tree of the field
broken.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Only in the land of Goshen, where the
children of Israel were, there was no ice-storm.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron,
and said to them, I have done evil this time: the Lord is upright, and I
and my people are sinners.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Make prayer to the Lord; for there has
been enough of these thunderings of God and this ice-storm; and I will
let you go and will keep you no longer.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And Moses said, When I am gone outside
the town, my hands will be stretched out to the Lord; the thunders and
the ice-storm will come to an end, so that you may see that the earth is
the Lord's.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> But as for you and your servants, I am
certain that even now the fear of the Lord God will not be in your
hearts.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And the flax and the barley were damaged,
for the barley was almost ready to be cut and the flax was in flower.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But the rest of the grain-plants were
undamaged, for they had not come up.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> So Moses went out of the town, and
stretching out his hands made prayer to God: and the thunders and the
ice-storm came to an end; and the fall of rain was stopped.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But when Pharaoh saw that the rain and
the ice-storm and the thunders were ended, he went on sinning, and made
his heart hard, he and his servants.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And the heart of Pharaoh was hard, and he
did not let the people go, as the Lord had said by the mouth of Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go in to
Pharaoh: for I have made his heart and the hearts of his servants hard,
so that I may let my signs be seen among them:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And so that you may be able to give to
your son and to your son's son the story of my wonders in Egypt, and the
signs which I have done among them; so that you may see that I am the
Lord.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Then Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh,
and said to him, This is what the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, says:
How long will you be lifted up in your pride before me? let my people go
so that they may give me worship.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For if you will not let my people go,
tomorrow I will send locusts into your land:

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the face of the earth will be covered
with them, so that you will not be able to see the earth: and they will
be the destruction of everything which up to now has not been damaged,
everything which was not crushed by the ice-storm, and every tree still
living in your fields.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And your houses will be full of them, and
the houses of your servants and of all the Egyptians; it will be worse
than anything your fathers have seen or their fathers, from the day when
they were living on the earth till this day. And so he went out from
Pharaoh.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Pharaoh's servants said to him, How
long is this man to be the cause of evil to us? let the men go so that
they may give worship to the Lord their God: are you not awake to
Egypt's danger?

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Then Moses and Aaron came in again before
Pharaoh: and he said to them, Go and give worship to the Lord your God:
but which of you are going?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And Moses said, We will go with our young
and our old, with our sons and our daughters, with our flocks and our
herds; for we are to keep a feast to the Lord.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he said to them, May the Lord be
with you, if I will let you and your little ones go! take care, for your
purpose clearly is evil.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Not so; but let your males go and give
worship to the Lord, as your desire is. This he said, driving them out
from before him.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Let your
hand be stretched out over the land of Egypt so that the locusts may
come up on the land for the destruction of every green plant in the
land, even everything untouched by the ice-storm.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Moses' rod was stretched out over
the land of Egypt, and the Lord sent an east wind over the land all that
day and all the night; and in the morning the locusts came up with the
east wind.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the locusts went up over all the
land of Egypt, resting on every part of the land, in very great numbers;
such an army of locusts had never been seen before, and never will be
again.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> For all the face of the earth was
covered with them, so that the land was black; and every green plant and
all the fruit of the trees which was untouched by the ice-storm they
took for food: not one green thing, no plant or tree, was to be seen in
all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Then Pharaoh quickly sent for Moses and
Aaron, and said, I have done evil against the Lord your God and against
you.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Let me now have forgiveness for my sin
this time only, and make prayer to the Lord your God that he will take
away from me this death only.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> So he went out from Pharaoh and made
prayer to the Lord.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the Lord sent a very strong west
wind, which took up the locusts, driving them into the Red Sea; not one
locust was to be seen in any part of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard,
and he did not let the children of Israel go.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Let your
hand be stretched out to heaven, and all the land of Egypt will be dark,
so that men will be feeling their way about in the dark.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And when Moses' hand was stretched out,
dark night came over all the land of Egypt for three days;

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> They were not able to see one another,
and no one got up from his place for three days: but where the children
of Israel were living it was light.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Then Pharaoh sent for Moses, and said,
Go and give worship to the Lord; only let your flocks and your herds be
kept here: your little ones may go with you.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> But Moses said, You will have to let us
take burned offerings to put before the Lord our God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> So our cattle will have to go with us,
not one may be kept back; for they are needed for the worship of the
Lord our God; we have no knowledge what offering we have to give till we
come to the place.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard,
and he would not let them go.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Pharaoh said to him, Go away from
me, take care that you come not again before me; for the day when you
see my face again will be your last.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Moses said, You say truly; I will
not see your face again.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, I will send
one more punishment on Pharaoh and on Egypt; after that he will let you
go; and when he does let you go, he will not keep one of you back, but
will send you out by force.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> So go now and give orders to the people
that every man and every woman is to get from his or her neighbour
ornaments of silver and of gold.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And the Lord gave the people grace in the
eyes of the Egyptians. For the man Moses was highly honoured in the land
of Egypt, by Pharaoh's servants and the people.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Moses said, This is what the Lord
says: About the middle of the night I will go out through Egypt:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And death will come to every mother's
first male child in all the land of Egypt, from the child of Pharaoh on
his seat of power, to the child of the servant-girl crushing the grain;
and the first births of all the cattle.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And there will be a great cry through all
the land of Egypt, such as never has been or will be again.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But against the children of Israel, man
or beast, not so much as the tongue of a dog will be moved: so that you
may see how the Lord makes a division between Israel and the Egyptians.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And all these your servants will come to
me, going down on their faces before me and saying, Go out, and all your
people with you: and after that I will go out. And he went away from
Pharaoh burning with wrath.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Pharaoh will
not give ear to you, so that my wonders may be increased in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> All these wonders Moses and Aaron did
before Pharaoh: but the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard, and he did not
let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron in
the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Let this month be to you the first of
months, the first month of the year.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Say to all the children of Israel when
they are come together, In the tenth day of this month every man is to
take a lamb, by the number of their fathers' families, a lamb for every
family:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And if the lamb is more than enough for
the family, let that family and its nearest neighbour have a lamb
between them, taking into account the number of persons and how much
food is needed for every man.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Let your lamb be without a mark, a male
in its first year: you may take it from among the sheep or the goats:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Keep it till the fourteenth day of the
same month, when everyone who is of the children of Israel is to put it
to death between sundown and dark.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then take some of the blood and put it on
the two sides of the door and over the door of the house where the meal
is to be taken.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And let your food that night be the flesh
of the lamb, cooked with fire in the oven, together with unleavened
bread and bitter-tasting plants.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Do not take it uncooked or cooked with
boiling water, but let it be cooked in the oven; its head with its legs
and its inside parts.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Do not keep any of it till the morning;
anything which is not used is to be burned with fire.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And take your meal dressed as if for a
journey, with your shoes on your feet and your sticks in your hands:
take it quickly: it is the Lord's Passover.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For on that night I will go through the
land of Egypt, sending death on every first male child, of man and of
beast, and judging all the gods of Egypt: I am the Lord.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the blood will be a sign on the
houses where you are: when I see the blood I will go over you, and no
evil will come on you for your destruction, when my hand is on the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And this day is to be kept in your
memories: you are to keep it as a feast to the Lord through all your
generations, as an order for ever.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> For seven days let your food be
unleavened bread; from the first day no leaven is to be seen in your
houses: whoever takes bread with leaven in it, from the first till the
seventh day, will be cut off from Israel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And on the first day there is to be a
holy meeting and on the seventh day a holy meeting; no sort of work may
be done on those days but only to make ready what is necessary for
everyone's food.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> So keep the feast of unleavened bread;
for on this very day I have taken your armies out of the land of Egypt:
this day, then, is to be kept through all your generations by an order
for ever.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> In the first month, from the evening of
the fourteenth day, let your food be unleavened bread till the evening
of the twenty-first day of the month.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> For seven days no leaven is to be seen
in your houses: for whoever takes bread which is leavened will be cut
off from the people of Israel, if he is from another country or if he is
an Israelite by birth.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Take nothing which has leaven in it;
wherever you are living let your food be unleavened cakes.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Then Moses sent for the chiefs of
Israel, and said to them, See that lambs are marked out for yourselves
and your families, and let the Passover lamb be put to death.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And take some hyssop and put it in the
blood in the basin, touching the two sides and the top of the doorway
with the blood from the basin; and let not one of you go out of his
house till the morning.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For the Lord will go through the land,
sending death on the Egyptians; and when he sees the blood on the two
sides and the top of the door, the Lord will go over your door and will
not let death come in for your destruction.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And you are to keep this as an order to
you and to your sons for ever.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And when you come into the land which
the Lord will make yours, as he gave his word, you are to keep this act
of worship.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And when your children say to you, What
is the reason of this act of worship?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Then you will say, This is the offering
of the Lord's Passover; for he went over the houses of the children of
Israel in Egypt, when he sent death on the Egyptians, and kept our
families safe. And the people gave worship with bent heads.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the children of Israel went and did
so; as the Lord had given orders to Moses and Aaron, so they did.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And in the middle of the night the Lord
sent death on every first male child in the land of Egypt, from the
child of Pharaoh on his seat of power to the child of the prisoner in
the prison; and the first births of all the cattle.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Then Pharaoh got up in the night, he
and all his servants and all the Egyptians; and a great cry went up from
Egypt; for there was not a house where someone was not dead.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he sent for Moses and Aaron by
night, and said, Get up and go out from among my people, you and the
children of Israel; go and give worship to the Lord as you have said.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And take your flocks and your herds as
you have said, and be gone; and give me your blessing.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And the Egyptians were forcing the
people on, to get them out of the land quickly; for they said, We are
all dead men.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And the people took their bread-paste
before it was leavened, putting their basins in their clothing on their
backs.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And the children of Israel had done as
Moses had said; and they got from the Egyptians ornaments of silver and
of gold, and clothing:

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> And the Lord had given the people grace
in the eyes of the Egyptians so that they gave them whatever was
requested. So they took away all their goods from the Egyptians.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And the children of Israel made the
journey from Rameses to Succoth; there were about six hundred thousand
men on foot, as well as children.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And a mixed band of people went with
them; and flocks and herds in great numbers.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And they made unleavened cakes from the
paste which they had taken out of Egypt; it was not leavened, for they
had been sent out of Egypt so quickly, that they had no time to make any
food ready.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Now the children of Israel had been
living in Egypt for four hundred and thirty years.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And at the end of four hundred and
thirty years, to the very day, all the armies of the Lord went out of
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> It is a watch-night before the Lord who
took them out of the land of Egypt: this same night is a watch-night to
the Lord for all the children of Israel, through all their generations.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,
This is the law of the Passover: no man who is not an Israelite is to
take of it:

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> But every man's servant, whom he has
got for money, may take of it, when he has had circumcision.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> A man from a strange country living
among you, and a servant working for payment, may not take part in it.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> It is to be taken in one house; not a
bit of the flesh is to be taken out of the house, and no bone of it may
be broken.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> All Israel is to keep the feast.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> And if a man from another country is
living with you, and has a desire to keep the Passover to the Lord, let
all the males of his family undergo circumcision, and then let him come
near and keep it; for he will then be as one of your people; but no one
without circumcision may keep it.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> The law is the same for him who is an
Israelite by birth and for the man from a strange country who is living
with you.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> So the children of Israel did as the
Lord gave orders to Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> And on that very day the Lord took the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Let the first male child of every mother
among the children of Israel be kept holy for me, even the first male
birth among man or beast; for it is mine.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses said to the people, Let this
day, on which you came out of Egypt, out of your prison-house, be kept
for ever in memory; for by the strength of his hand the Lord has taken
you out from this place; let no leavened bread be used.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> On this day, in the month Abib, you are
going out.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And it will be that, when the Lord takes
you into the land of the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Amorite and
the Hivite and the Jebusite, the land which he made an oath to your
fathers that he would give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, you
will do this act of worship in this month.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For seven days let your food be
unleavened cakes; and on the seventh day there is to be a feast to the
Lord.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Unleavened cakes are to be your food
through all the seven days; let no leavened bread be seen among you, or
any leaven, in any part of your land.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And you will say to your son in that day,
It is because of what the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And this will be for a sign to you on
your hand and for a mark on your brow, so that the law of the Lord may
be in your mouth: for with a strong hand the Lord took you out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So let this order be kept, at the right
time, from year to year.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And when the Lord takes you into the
land of Canaan, as he made his oath to you and to your fathers, and
gives it to you,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> You are to put on one side for the Lord
every mother's first male child, the first-fruit of her body, and the
first young one of every beast; every male is holy to the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And for the young of an ass you may
give a lamb in payment, or if you will not make payment for it, its neck
is to be broken; but for all the first sons among your children, let
payment be made.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And when your son says to you in time
to come, What is the reason for this? say to him, By the strength of his
hand the Lord took us out of Egypt, out of the prison-house:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And when Pharaoh made his heart hard
and would not let us go, the Lord sent death on all the first sons in
Egypt, of man and of beast: and so every first male who comes to birth
is offered to the Lord; but for all the first of my sons I give a price.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And this will be for a sign on your
hand and for a mark on your brow: for by the strength of his hand the
Lord took us out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Now after Pharaoh had let the people
go, God did not take them through the land of the Philistines, though
that was near: for God said, If the people see war, they may have a
change of heart and go back to Egypt.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> But God took the people round by the
waste land near the Red Sea: and the children of Israel went up in
fighting order out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Moses took the bones of Joseph with
him, for Joseph had made the children of Israel take an oath, saying,
God will certainly keep you in mind; and you are to take my bones away
with you.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Then they went on their journey from
Succoth, and put up their tents in Etham at the edge of the waste land.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And the Lord went before them by day in
a pillar of cloud, guiding them on their way; and by night in a pillar
of fire to give them light: so that they were able to go on day and
night:

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The pillar of cloud went ever before
them by day, and the pillar of fire by night.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Give orders to the children of Israel to
go back and put up their tents before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and
the sea, in front of Baal-zephon, opposite to which you are to put up
your tents by the sea.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And Pharaoh will say of the children of
Israel, They are wandering without direction, they are shut in by the
waste land.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And I will make Pharaoh's heart hard, and
he will come after them and I will be honoured over Pharaoh and all his
army, so that the Egyptians may see that I am the Lord. And they did so.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And word came to Pharaoh of the flight of
the people: and the feeling of Pharaoh and of his servants about the
people was changed, and they said, Why have we let Israel go, so that
they will do no more work for us?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> So he had his war-carriage made ready and
took his people with him:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he took six hundred carriages, all
the carriages of Egypt, and captains over all of them.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the Lord made the heart of Pharaoh
hard, and he went after the children of Israel: for the children of
Israel had gone out without fear.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> But the Egyptians went after them, all
the horses and carriages of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and
overtook them in their tents by the sea, by Pihahiroth, before
Baal-zephon.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And when Pharaoh came near, the
children of Israel, lifting up their eyes, saw the Egyptians coming
after them, and were full of fear; and their cry went up to God.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they said to Moses, Was there no
resting-place for the dead in Egypt, that you have taken us away to come
to our death in the waste land? why have you taken us out of Egypt?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Did we not say to you in Egypt, Let us
be as we are, working for the Egyptians? for it is better to be the
servants of the Egyptians than to come to our death in the waste land.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> But Moses said, Keep where you are and
have no fear; now you will see the salvation of the Lord which he will
give you today; for the Egyptians whom you see today you will never see
again.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The Lord will make war for you, you
have only to keep quiet.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Why are you
crying out to me? give the children of Israel the order to go forward.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And let your rod be lifted up and your
hand stretched out over the sea, and it will be parted in two; and the
children of Israel will go through on dry land.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And I will make the heart of the
Egyptians hard, and they will go in after them: and I will be honoured
over Pharaoh and over his army, his war-carriages, and his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the Egyptians will see that I am
the Lord, when I get honour over Pharaoh and his war-carriages and his
horsemen.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Then the angel of God, who had been
before the tents of Israel, took his place at their back; and the pillar
of cloud, moving from before them, came to rest at their back:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And it came between the army of Egypt
and the army of Israel; and there was a dark cloud between them, and
they went on through the night; but the one army came no nearer to the
other all the night.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And when Moses' hand was stretched out
over the sea, the Lord with a strong east wind made the sea go back all
night, and the waters were parted in two and the sea became dry land.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And the children of Israel went through
the sea on dry land: and the waters were a wall on their right side and
on their left.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> Then the Egyptians went after them into
the middle of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses and his war-carriages and
his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And in the morning watch, the Lord,
looking out on the armies of the Egyptians from the pillar of fire and
cloud, sent trouble on the army of the Egyptians;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And made the wheels of their
war-carriages stiff, so that they had hard work driving them: so the
Egyptians said, Let us go in flight from before the face of Israel, for
the Lord is fighting for them against the Egyptians.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Let your
hand be stretched out over the sea, and the waters will come back again
on the Egyptians, and on their war-carriages and on their horsemen.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And when Moses' hand was stretched out
over the sea, at dawn the sea came flowing back, meeting the Egyptians
in their flight, and the Lord sent destruction on the Egyptians in the
middle of the sea.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the waters came back, covering the
war-carriages and the horsemen and all the army of Pharaoh which went
after them into the middle of the sea; not one of them was to be seen.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But the children of Israel went through
the sea walking on dry land, and the waters were a wall on their right
side and on their left.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> So that day the Lord gave Israel
salvation from the hands of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians
dead on the sea's edge.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And Israel saw the great work which the
Lord had done against the Egyptians, and the fear of the Lord came on
the people and they had faith in the Lord and in his servant Moses.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then Moses and the children of Israel
made this song to the Lord, and said, I will make a song to the Lord,
for he is lifted up in glory: the horse and the horseman he has sent
down into the sea.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The Lord is my strength and my strong
helper, he has become my salvation: he is my God and I will give him
praise; my father's God and I will give him glory.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his
name.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Pharaoh's war-carriages and his army he
has sent down into the sea: the best of his captains have gone down into
the Red Sea.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> They were covered by the deep waters:
like a stone they went down under the waves.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Full of glory, O Lord, is the power of
your right hand; by your right hand those who came against you are
broken.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> When you are lifted up in power, all
those who come against you are crushed: when you send out your wrath,
they are burned up like dry grass.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> By your breath the waves were massed
together, the flowing waters were lifted up like a pillar; the deep
waters became solid in the heart of the sea.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Egypt said, I will go after them, I will
overtake, I will make division of their goods: my desire will have its
way with them; my sword will be uncovered, my hand will send destruction
on them.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> You sent your wind and the sea came
over them: they went down like lead into the great waters.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Who is like you, O Lord, among the
gods? who is like you, in holy glory, to be praised with fear, doing
wonders?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> When your right hand was stretched out,
the mouth of the earth was open for them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> In your mercy you went before the
people whom you have made yours; guiding them in your strength to your
holy place.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Hearing of you the peoples were shaking
in fear: the people of Philistia were gripped with pain.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> The chiefs of Edom were troubled in
heart; the strong men of Moab were in the grip of fear: all the people
of Canaan became like water.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Fear and grief came on them; by the
strength of your arm they were turned to stone; till your people went
over, O Lord, till the people went over whom you have made yours.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> You will take them in, planting them in
the mountain of your heritage, the place, O Lord, where you have made
your house, the holy place, O Lord, the building of your hands.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> The Lord is King for ever and ever.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For the horses of Pharaoh, with his
war-carriages and his horsemen, went into the sea, and the Lord sent the
waters of the sea back over them; but the children of Israel went
through the sea on dry land.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Miriam, the woman prophet, the
sister of Aaron, took an instrument of music in her hand; and all the
women went after her with music and dances.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Miriam, answering, said, Make a
song to the Lord, for he is lifted up in glory; the horse and the
horseman he has sent into the sea.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then Moses took Israel forward from the
Red Sea, and they went out into the waste land of Shur; and for three
days they were in the waste land where there was no water.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And when they came to Marah, the water
was no good for drinking, for the waters of Marah were bitter, which is
why it was named Marah.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And the people, crying out against
Moses, said, What are we to have for drink?

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And in answer to his prayer, the Lord
made him see a tree, and when he put it into the water, the water was
made sweet. There he gave them a law and an order, testing them;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And he said, If with all your heart you
will give attention to the voice of the Lord your God, and do what is
right in his eyes, giving ear to his orders and keeping his laws, I will
not put on you any of the diseases which I put on the Egyptians: for I
am the Lord your life-giver.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And they came to Elim where there were
twelve water-springs and seventy palm-trees: and they put up their tents
there by the waters.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And they went on their way from Elim, and
all the children of Israel came into the waste land of Sin, which is
between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
they went out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And all the children of Israel were
crying out against Moses and Aaron in the waste land:

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And the children of Israel said to them,
It would have been better for the Lord to have put us to death in the
land of Egypt, where we were seated by the flesh-pots and had bread
enough for our needs; for you have taken us out to this waste of sand,
to put all this people to death through need of food.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Then the Lord said to Moses, See, I will
send down bread from heaven for you; and the people will go out every
day and get enough for the day's needs; so that I may put them to the
test to see if they will keep my laws or not.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And on the sixth day they are to make
ready what they get in, and it will be twice as much as they get on the
other days.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Moses and Aaron said to all the
children of Israel, This evening it will be clear to you that it is the
Lord who has taken you out of the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And in the morning you will see the glory
of the Lord; for your angry words against the Lord have come to his
ears: and what are we that you are crying out against us?

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses said, The Lord will give you
meat for your food at evening, and in the morning bread in full measure;
for your outcry against the Lord has come to his ears: for what are we?
your outcry is not against us but against the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Moses said to Aaron, Say to all the
people of Israel, Come near before the Lord for he has given ear to your
outcry.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And while Aaron was talking to the
children of Israel, their eyes were turned in the direction of the waste
land, and they saw the glory of the Lord shining in the cloud.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> The outcry of the children of Israel
has come to my ears: say to them now, At nightfall you will have meat
for your food, and in the morning bread in full measure; and you will
see that I am the Lord your God.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And it came about that in the evening
little birds came up and the place was covered with them: and in the
morning there was dew all round about the tents.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And when the dew was gone, on the face
of the earth was a small round thing, like small drops of ice on the
earth.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when the children of Israel saw it,
they said to one another, What is it? for they had no idea what it was.
And Moses said to them, It is the bread which the Lord has given you for
your food.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> This is what the Lord has said, Let
every man take up as much as he has need of; at the rate of one omer for
every person, let every man take as much as is needed for his family.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And the children of Israel did so, and
some took more and some less.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And when it was measured, he who had
taken up much had nothing over, and he who had little had enough; every
man had taken what he was able to make use of.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Moses said to them, Let nothing be
kept till the morning.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> But they gave no attention to Moses,
and some of them kept it till the morning and there were worms in it and
it had an evil smell: and Moses was angry with them.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And they took it up morning by morning,
every man as he had need: and when the sun was high it was gone.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And on the sixth day they took up twice
as much of the bread, two omers for every person: and all the rulers of
the people gave Moses word of it.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And he said, This is what the Lord has
said, Tomorrow is a day of rest, a holy Sabbath to the Lord: what has to
be cooked may be cooked; and what is over, put on one side to be kept
till the morning.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And they kept it till the morning as
Moses had said: and no smell came from it, and it had no worms.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Moses said, Make your meal today of
what you have, for this day is a Sabbath to the Lord: today you will not
get any in the fields.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For six days you will get it, but on
the seventh day, the Sabbath, there will not be any.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> But still on the seventh day some of
the people went out to get it, and there was not any.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And the Lord said to Moses, How long
will you go against my orders and my laws?

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> See, because the Lord has given you the
Sabbath, he gives you on the sixth day bread enough for two days; let
every man keep where he is; let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> So the people took their rest on the
seventh day.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And this bread was named manna by
Israel: it was white, like a grain seed, and its taste was like cakes
made with honey.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And Moses said, This is the order which
the Lord has given: Let one omer of it be kept for future generations,
so that they may see the bread which I gave you for your food in the
waste land, when I took you out from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Moses said to Aaron, Take a pot and
put one omer of manna in it, and put it away before the Lord, to be kept
for future generations.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> So Aaron put it away in front of the
holy chest to be kept, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And the children of Israel had manna
for their food for forty years, till they came to a land with people in
it, till they came to the edge of the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Now an omer is the tenth part of an
ephah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the children of Israel went on from
the waste land of Sin, by stages as the Lord gave them orders, and put
up their tents in Rephidim: and there was no drinking-water for the
people.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> So the people were angry with Moses, and
said, Give us water for drinking. And Moses said, Why are you angry with
me? and why do you put God to the test?

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And the people were in great need of
water; and they made an outcry against Moses, and said, Why have you
taken us out of Egypt to send death on us and our children and our
cattle through need of water?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Moses, crying out to the Lord, said,
What am I to do to this people? they are almost ready to put me to death
by stoning.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go on before
the people, and take some of the chiefs of Israel with you, and take in
your hand the rod which was stretched out over the Nile, and go.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> See, I will take my place before you on
the rock in Horeb; and when you give the rock a blow, water will come
out of it, and the people will have drink. And Moses did so before the
eyes of the chiefs of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And he gave that place the name Massah
and Meribah, because the children of Israel were angry, and because they
put the Lord to the test, saying, Is the Lord with us or not?

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Then Amalek came and made war on Israel
in Rephidim.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And Moses said to Joshua, Get together a
band of men for us and go out, make war on Amalek: tomorrow I will take
my place on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So Joshua did as Moses said to him, and
went to war with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of
the hill.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Now while Moses' hand was lifted up,
Israel was the stronger: but when he let his hand go down, Amalek became
the stronger.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But Moses' hands became tired; so they
put a stone under him and he took his seat on it, Aaron and Hur
supporting his hands, one on one side and one on the other; so his hands
were kept up without falling till the sun went down.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Joshua overcame Amalek and his
people with the sword.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Make a
record of this in a book, so that it may be kept in memory, and say it
again in the ears of Joshua: that all memory of Amalek is to be
completely uprooted from the earth.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Then Moses put up an altar and gave it
the name of Yahweh-nissi:

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> For he said, The Lord has taken his
oath that there will be war with Amalek from generation to generation.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Now news came to Jethro, the priest of
Midian, Moses' father-in-law, of all God had done for Moses and for
Israel his people, and how the Lord had taken Israel out of Egypt.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took
Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her away,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And her two sons, one of whom was named
Gershom, for he said, I have been living in a strange land:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And the name of the other was Eliezer,
for he said, The God of my father was my help, and kept me safe from the
sword of Pharaoh:

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came
with his sons and his wife to where Moses had put up his tent in the
waste land, by the mountain of God.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And he said to Moses, I, your
father-in-law, have come to you, with your wife and your two sons.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Moses went out to his father-in-law,
and went down on his face before him and gave him a kiss; and they said
to one another, Are you well? and they came into the tent.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Moses gave his father-in-law an
account of all the Lord had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians because
of Israel, and of all the troubles which had come on them by the way,
and how the Lord had given them salvation.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And Jethro was glad because the Lord had
been good to Israel, freeing them from the power of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And Jethro said, Praise be to the Lord,
who has taken you out of the hand of Pharaoh and out of the hand of the
Egyptians; freeing the people from the yoke of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now I am certain that the Lord is
greater than all gods, for he has overcome them in their pride.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, made
a burned offering to God: and Aaron came, with the chiefs of Israel, and
had a meal with Moses' father-in-law, before God.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Now on the day after, Moses took his
seat to give decisions for the people: and the people were waiting
before Moses from morning till evening.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when Moses' father-in-law saw all
he was doing, he said, What is this you are doing for the people? why
are you seated here by yourself, with all the people waiting before you
from morning till evening?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Moses said to his father-in-law,
Because the people come to me to get directions from God:

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And if they have any question between
themselves, they come to me, and I am judge between a man and his
neighbour, and I give them the orders and laws of God.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Moses' father-in-law said to him,
What you are doing is not good.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Your strength and that of the people
will be completely used up: this work is more than you are able to do by
yourself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Give ear now to my suggestion, and may
God be with you: you are to be the people's representative before God,
taking their causes to him:

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Teaching them his rules and his laws,
guiding them in the way they have to go, and making clear to them the
work they have to do.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But for the rest, take from among the
people able men, such as have the fear of God, true men hating profits
wrongly made; and put such men over them, to be captains of thousands,
captains of hundreds and of fifties and of tens;

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And let them be judges in the causes of
the people at all times: and let them put before you all important
questions, but in small things let them give decisions themselves: in
this way, it will be less hard for you, and they will take the weight
off you.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> If you do this, and God gives approval,
then you will be able to go on without weariness, and all this people
will go to their tents in peace.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> So Moses took note of the words of his
father-in-law, and did as he had said.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And he made selection of able men out
of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, captains of
thousands, captains of hundreds and of fifties and of tens.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they were judges in the causes of
the people at all times: the hard questions they put before Moses; but
on every small point they gave decisions themselves.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Moses let his father-in-law go
away, and he went back to his land.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> In the third month after the children of
Israel went out from Egypt, on the same day, they came into the waste
land of Sinai.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And when they had gone away from Rephidim
and had come into the waste land of Sinai, they put up their tents in
the waste land before the mountain: there Israel put up its tents.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Moses went up to God, and the voice
of the Lord came to him from the mountain, saying, Say to the family of
Jacob, and give word to the children of Israel:

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> You have seen what I did to the
Egyptians, and how I took you, as on eagles' wings, guiding you to
myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> If now you will truly give ear to my
voice and keep my agreement, you will be my special property out of all
the peoples: for all the earth is mine:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And you will be a kingdom of priests to
me, and a holy nation. These are the words which you are to say to the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And Moses came and sent for the chiefs of
the people and put before them all these words which the Lord had given
him orders to say.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And all the people, answering together,
said, Whatever the Lord has said we will do. And Moses took back to the
Lord the words of the people.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And the Lord said to Moses, See, I will
come to you in a thick cloud, so that what I say to you may come to the
ears of the people and they may have belief in you for ever. And Moses
gave the Lord word of what the people had said.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go to the
people and make them holy today and tomorrow, and let their clothing be
washed.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And by the third day let them be ready:
for on the third day the Lord will come down on Mount Sinai, before the
eyes of all the people.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And let limits be marked out for the
people round the mountain, and say to them, Take care not to go up the
mountain or near the sides of it: whoever puts his foot on the mountain
will certainly come to his death:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> He is not to be touched by a hand, but
is to be stoned or have an arrow put through him; man or beast, he is to
be put to death: at the long sounding of a horn they may come up to the
mountain.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Then Moses went down from the mountain
to the people, and made the people holy; and their clothing was washed.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And he said to the people, Be ready by
the third day: do not come near a woman.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And when morning came on the third day,
there were thunders and flames and a thick cloud on the mountain, and a
horn sounding very loud; and all the people in the tents were shaking
with fear.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And Moses made the people come out of
their tents and take their places before God; and they came to the foot
of the mountain,

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And all the mountain of Sinai was
smoking, for the Lord had come down on it in fire: and the smoke of it
went up like the smoke of a great burning; and all the mountain was
shaking.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And when the sound of the horn became
louder and louder, Moses' words were answered by the voice of God.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Then the Lord came down on to Mount
Sinai, to the top of the mountain, and the Lord sent for Moses to come
up to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go down and
give the people orders to keep back, for fear that a great number of
them, forcing their way through to see the Lord, may come to
destruction.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And let the priests who come near to
the Lord make themselves holy, for fear that the Lord may come on them
suddenly.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And Moses said to the Lord, The people
will not be able to come up the mountain, for you gave us orders to put
limits round the mountain, marking it out and making it holy.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And the Lord said to him, Go down, and
you and Aaron may come up; but let not the priests and the people make
their way through to the Lord, or he will come on them suddenly.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> So Moses went down to the people and
said this to them.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And God said all these words:

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> I am the Lord your God who took you out
of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> You are to have no other gods but me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> You are not to make an image or picture
of anything in heaven or on the earth or in the waters under the earth:

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> You may not go down on your faces before
them or give them worship: for I, the Lord your God, am a God who will
not give his honour to another; and I will send punishment on the
children for the wrongdoing of their fathers, to the third and fourth
generation of my haters;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And I will have mercy through a thousand
generations on those who have love for me and keep my laws.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> You are not to make use of the name of
the Lord your God for an evil purpose; whoever takes the Lord's name on
his lips for an evil purpose will be judged a sinner by the Lord

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Keep in memory the Sabbath and let it be
a holy day.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> On six days do all your work:

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But the seventh day is a Sabbath to the
Lord your God; on that day you are to do no work, you or your son or
your daughter, your man-servant or your woman-servant, your cattle or
the man from a strange country who is living among you:

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> For in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and the sea, and everything in them, and he took his rest on
the seventh day: for this reason the Lord has given his blessing to the
seventh day and made it holy.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Give honour to your father and to your
mother, so that your life may be long in the land which the Lord your
God is giving you.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Do not put anyone to death without
cause.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Do not be false to the married
relation.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Do not take the property of another.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Do not give false witness against your
neighbour.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Let not your desire be turned to your
neighbour's house, or his wife or his man-servant or his woman-servant
or his ox or his ass or anything which is his.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And all the people were watching the
thunderings and the flames and the sound of the horn and the mountain
smoking; and when they saw it, they kept far off, shaking with fear.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And they said to Moses, To your words
we will give ear, but let not the voice of God come to our ears, for
fear death may come on us.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And Moses said to the people, Have no
fear: for God has come to put you to the test, so that fearing him you
may be kept from sin.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the people kept their places far
off, but Moses went near to the dark cloud where God was.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Say to the
children of Israel, You yourselves have seen that my voice has come to
you from heaven

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Gods of silver and gods of gold you are
not to make for yourselves.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Make for me an altar of earth, offering
on it your burned offerings and your peace-offerings, your sheep and
your oxen: in every place where I have put the memory of my name, I will
come to you and give you my blessing.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And if you make me an altar of stone do
not make it of cut stones: for the touch of an instrument will make it
unclean.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And do not go up by steps to my altar,
for fear that your bodies may be seen uncovered.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now these are the laws which you are to
put before them.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> If you get a Hebrew servant for money, he
is to be your servant for six years, and in the seventh year you are to
let him go free without payment.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> If he comes to you by himself, let him go
away by himself: if he is married, let his wife go away with him.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> If his master gives him a wife, and he
gets sons or daughters by her, the wife and her children will be the
property of the master, and the servant is to go away by himself.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> But if the servant says clearly, My
master and my wife and children are dear to me; I have no desire to be
free:

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Then his master is to take him to the
gods of the house, and at the door, or at its framework, he is to make a
hole in his ear with a sharp-pointed instrument; and he will be his
servant for ever.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And if a man gives his daughter for a
price to be a servant, she is not to go away free as the men-servants
do.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> If she is not pleasing to her master who
has taken her for himself, let a payment be made for her so that she may
go free; her master has no power to get a price for her and send her to
a strange land, because he has been false to her.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And if he gives her to his son, he is to
do everything for her as if she was his daughter.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And if he takes another woman, her food
and clothing and her married rights are not to be less.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And if he does not do these three
things for her, she has the right to go free without payment.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> He who gives a man a death-blow is
himself to be put to death.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> But if he had no evil purpose against
him, and God gave him into his hand, I will give you a place to which he
may go in flight.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> But if a man makes an attack on his
neighbour on purpose, to put him to death by deceit, you are to take him
from my altar and put him to death.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Any man who gives a blow to his father
or his mother is certainly to be put to death.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Any man who gets another into his power
in order to get a price for him is to be put to death, if you take him
in the act.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> Any man cursing his father or his
mother is to be put to death.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If, in a fight, one man gives another a
blow with a stone, or with the shut hand, not causing his death, but
making him keep in bed;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> If he is able to get up again and go
about with a stick, the other will be let off; only he will have to give
him payment for the loss of his time, and see that he is cared for till
he is well.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> If a man gives his man-servant or his
woman-servant blows with a rod, causing death, he is certainly to
undergo punishment.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> But, at the same time, if the servant
goes on living for a day or two, the master is not to get punishment,
for the servant is his property.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> If men, while fighting, do damage to a
woman with child, causing the loss of the child, but no other evil comes
to her, the man will have to make payment up to the amount fixed by her
husband, in agreement with the decision of the judges.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> But if damage comes to her, let life be
given in payment for life,

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for foot,

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> Burning for burning, wound for wound,
blow for blow.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> If a man gives his man-servant or his
woman-servant a blow in the eye, causing its destruction, he is to let
him go free on account of the damage to his eye.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Or if the loss of a tooth is caused by
his blow, he will let him go free on account of his tooth.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> If an ox comes to be the cause of death
to a man or a woman, the ox is to be stoned, and its flesh may not be
used for food; but the owner will not be judged responsible.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> But if the ox has frequently done such
damage in the past, and the owner has had word of it and has not kept it
under control, so that it has been the cause of the death of a man or
woman, not only is the ox to be stoned, but its owner is to be put to
death.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> If a price is put on his life, let him
make payment of whatever price is fixed.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> If the death of a son or of a daughter
has been caused, the punishment is to be in agreement with this rule.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> If the death of a man-servant or of a
woman-servant is caused by the ox, the owner is to give their master
thirty shekels of silver, and the ox is to be stoned.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> If a man makes a hole in the earth
without covering it up, and an ox or an ass dropping into it comes to
its death;

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> The owner of the hole is responsible;
he will have to make payment to their owner, but the dead beast will be
his.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And if one man's ox does damage to
another man's ox, causing its death, then the living ox is to be
exchanged for money, and division made of the price of it, and of the
price of the dead one.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> But if it is common knowledge that the
ox has frequently done such damage in the past, and its owner has not
kept it under control, he will have to give ox for ox; and the dead
beast will be his.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> If a man takes without right another
man's ox or his sheep, and puts it to death or gets a price for it, he
is to give five oxen for an ox, or four sheep for a sheep, in payment:
the thief will have to make payment for what he has taken; if he has no
money, he himself will have to be exchanged for money, so that payment
may be made.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> If a thief is taken in the act of forcing
his way into a house, and his death is caused by a blow, the owner of
the house is not responsible for his blood.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> But if it is after dawn, he will be
responsible.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> If he still has what he had taken,
whatever it is, ox or ass or sheep, he is to give twice its value.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> If a man makes a fire in a field or a
vine-garden, and lets the fire do damage to another man's field, he is
to give of the best produce of his field or his vine-garden to make up
for it.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If there is a fire and the flames get to
the thorns at the edge of the field, causing destruction of the cut
grain or of the living grain, or of the field, he who made the fire will
have to make up for the damage.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> If a man puts money or goods in the care
of his neighbour to keep for him, and it is taken from the man's house,
if they get the thief, he will have to make payment of twice the value.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> If they do not get the thief, let the
master of the house come before the judges and take an oath that he has
not put his hand on his neighbour's goods.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> In any question about an ox or an ass or
a sheep or clothing, or about the loss of any property which anyone says
is his, let the two sides put their cause before God; and he who is
judged to be in the wrong is to make payment to his neighbour of twice
the value.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> If a man puts an ass or an ox or a
sheep or any beast into the keeping of his neighbour, and it comes to
death or is damaged or is taken away, without any person seeing it:

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> If he takes his oath before the Lord
that he has not put his hand to his neighbour's goods, the owner is to
take his word for it and he will not have to make payment for it.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> But if it is taken from him by a thief,
he is to make up for the loss of it to its owner.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> But if it has been damaged by a beast,
and he is able to make this clear, he will not have to make payment for
what was damaged.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> If a man gets from his neighbour the
use of one of his beasts, and it is damaged or put to death when the
owner is not with it, he will certainly have to make payment for the
loss.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> If the owner is with it, he will not
have to make payment: if he gave money for the use of it, the loss is
covered by the payment.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> If a man takes a virgin, who has not
given her word to another man, and has connection with her, he will have
to give a bride-price for her to be his wife.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> If her father will not give her to him
on any account, he will have to give the regular payment for virgins.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Any woman using unnatural powers or
secret arts is to be put to death.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Any man who has sex connection with a
beast is to be put to death.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Complete destruction will come on any
man who makes offerings to any other god but the Lord.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Do no wrong to a man from a strange
country, and do not be hard on him; for you yourselves were living in a
strange country, in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Do no wrong to a widow, or to a child
whose father is dead.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If you are cruel to them in any way,
and their cry comes up to me, I will certainly give ear;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And in the heat of my wrath I will put
you to death with the sword, so that your wives will be widows and your
children without fathers.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> If you let any of the poor among my
people have the use of your money, do not be a hard creditor to him, and
do not take interest.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> If ever you take your neighbour's
clothing in exchange for the use of your money, let him have it back
before the sun goes down:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For it is the only thing he has for
covering his skin; what is he to go to sleep in? and when his cry comes
up to me, I will give ear, for my mercy is great.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> You may not say evil of the judges, or
put a curse on the ruler of your people.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Do not keep back your offerings from
the wealth of your grain and your vines. The first of your sons you are
to give to me.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> In the same way with your oxen and your
sheep: for seven days let the young one be with its mother; on the
eighth day give it to me.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> You are to be holy men to me: the flesh
of no animal whose death has been caused by the beasts of the field may
be used for your food; it is to be given to the dogs.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Do not let a false statement go further;
do not make an agreement with evil-doers to be a false witness.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Do not be moved to do wrong by the
general opinion, or give the support of your words to a wrong decision:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> But, on the other hand, do not be turned
from what is right in order to give support to a poor man's cause.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> If you come across the ox or the ass of
one who is no friend to you wandering from its way, you are to take it
back to him.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> If you see the ass of one who has no love
for you bent down to the earth under the weight which is put on it, you
are to come to its help, even against your desire.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Let no wrong decisions be given in the
poor man's cause.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Keep yourselves far from any false
business; never let the upright or him who has done no wrong be put to
death: for I will make the evil-doer responsible for his sin.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Take no rewards in a cause: for rewards
make blind those who have eyes to see, and make the decisions of the
upright false.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Do not be hard on the man from a strange
country who is living among you; for you have had experience of the
feelings of one who is far from the land of his birth, because you
yourselves were living in Egypt, in a strange land.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For six years put seed into your fields
and get in the increase;

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But in the seventh year let the land
have a rest and be unplanted; so that the poor may have food from it:
and let the beasts of the field take the rest. Do the same with your
vine-gardens and your olive-trees.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> For six days do your work, and on the
seventh day keep the Sabbath; so that your ox and your ass may have
rest, together with the son of your servant and the man from a strange
land living among you.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Take note of all these things which I
have said to you, and let not the names of other gods come into your
minds or from your lips.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Three times in the year you are to keep
a feast to me.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> You are to keep the feast of unleavened
bread; for seven days let your bread be without leaven, as I gave you
orders, at the regular time in the month Abib (for in it you came out of
Egypt); and let no one come before me without an offering:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And the feast of the grain-cutting, the
first-fruits of your planted fields: and the feast at the start of the
year, when you have got in all the fruit from your fields.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Three times in the year let all your
males come before the Lord God.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Do not give the blood of my offering
with leavened bread; and do not let the fat of my feast be kept all
night till the morning.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> The best of the first-fruits of your
land are to be taken into the house of the Lord your God. The young goat
is not to be cooked in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> See, I am sending an angel before you,
to keep you on your way and to be your guide into the place which I have
made ready for you.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Give attention to him and give ear to
his voice; do not go against him; for your wrongdoing will not be
overlooked by him, because my name is in him.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if you truly give ear to his voice,
and do whatever I say, then I will be against those who are against you,
fighting those who are fighting you.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And my angel will go before you,
guiding you into the land of the Amorite and the Hittite and the
Perizzite and the Canaanite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, and they
will be cut off by my hand.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Do not go down on your faces and give
worship to their gods, or do as they do; but overcome them completely,
and let their pillars be broken down.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And give worship to the Lord your God,
who will send his blessing on your bread and on your water; and I will
take all disease away from among you.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> All your animals will give birth
without loss, not one will be without young in all your land; I will
give you a full measure of life.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> I will send my fear before you, putting
to flight all the people to whom you come; all those who are against you
will go in flight, turning their backs before you.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> I will send hornets before you, driving
out the Hivite and the Canaanite and the Hittite before your face.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> I will not send them all out in one
year, for fear that their land may become waste, and the beasts of the
field be increased overmuch against you.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Little by little I will send them away
before you, till your numbers are increased and you take up your
heritage in the land.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> I will let the limits of your land be
from the Red Sea to the sea of the Philistines, and from the waste land
to the river Euphrates: for I will give the people of those lands into
your power; and you will send them out before you.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Make no agreement with them or with
their gods.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Let them not go on living in your land,
or they will make you do evil against me: for if you give worship to
their gods, it will certainly be a cause of sin to you.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And he said to Moses, Come up to the
Lord, you and Aaron, and Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the chiefs of
Israel; and give me worship from a distance.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Moses only may come near to the Lord;
but the others are not to come near, and the people may not come up with
them.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Then Moses came and put before the people
all the words of the Lord and his laws: and all the people, answering
with one voice, said, Whatever the Lord has said we will do.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Then Moses put down in writing all the
words of the Lord, and he got up early in the morning and made an altar
at the foot of the mountain, with twelve pillars for the twelve tribes
of Israel.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And he sent some of the young men of the
children of Israel to make burned offerings and peace-offerings of oxen
to the Lord.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Moses took half the blood and put it
in basins; draining out half of the blood over the altar.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And he took the book of the agreement,
reading it in the hearing of the people: and they said, Everything which
the Lord has said we will do, and we will keep his laws.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Then Moses took the blood and let it come
on the people, and said, This blood is the sign of the agreement which
the Lord has made with you in these words.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu,
and seventy of the chiefs of Israel went up:

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And they saw the God of Israel; and
under his feet there was, as it seemed, a jewelled floor, clear as the
heavens.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And he put not his hand on the chiefs
of the children of Israel: they saw God, and took food and drink.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Come up to
me on the mountain, and take your place there: and I will give you the
stones on which I have put in writing the law and the orders, so that
you may give the people knowledge of them.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Then Moses and Joshua his servant got
up; and Moses went up into the mountain of God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And he said to the chiefs, Keep your
places here till we come back to you: Aaron and Hur are with you; if
anyone has any cause let him go to them.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And Moses went up into the mountain,
and it was covered by the cloud.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And the glory of the Lord was resting
on Mount Sinai, and the cloud was over it for six days; and on the
seventh day he said Moses' name out of the cloud.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the glory of the Lord was like a
flame on the top of the mountain before the eyes of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And Moses went up the mountain, into
the cloud, and was there for forty days and forty nights.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Say to the children of Israel that they
are to make me an offering; from every man who has the impulse in his
heart take an offering for me.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And this is the offering you are to take
from them: gold and silver and brass;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And blue and purple and red, and the best
linen, and goats' hair;

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And sheepskins coloured red, and leather,
and hard wood;

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Oil for the light, spices for the
sweet-smelling oil, sweet perfumes for burning;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Beryls and stones of value to be put on
the ephod and on the priest's bag.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And let them make me a holy place, so
that I may be ever present among them.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Make the House and everything in it from
the designs which I will give you.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And they are to make an ark of hard
wood; two and a half cubits long, and a cubit and a half wide and high.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> It is to be plated inside and out with
the best gold, with an edge of gold all round it

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And make four rings of gold for it, to
be fixed on its four feet, two rings on one side of it and two on the
other.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And make rods of the same wood, plating
them with gold.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And put the rods through the rings at
the sides of the ark, for lifting it.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> The rods are to be kept in the rings,
and never taken out.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Inside the ark you are to put the
record which I will give you.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And you are to make a cover of the best
gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And at the two ends of the cover you
are to make two winged ones of hammered gold,

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> One at one end and one at the other;
the winged ones are to be part of the cover.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And their wings are to be outstretched
over the cover, and the winged ones are to be opposite one another,
facing the cover.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And put the cover over the ark, and in
the ark the record which I will give you.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And there, between the two winged ones
on the cover of the ark, I will come to you, face to face, and make
clear to you all the orders I have to give you for the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And you are to make a table of the same
wood, two cubits long, a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high,

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> Plated with the best gold, with a gold
edge all round it;

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And make a frame all round it, as wide
as a man's hand, with a gold edge to the frame.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And make four gold rings and put them
at the four angles, on the four feet of the table;

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> The rings are to be fixed under the
frame to take the rods with which the table is to be lifted.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Make rods of the same wood, plated with
gold, for lifting the table.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And make the table-vessels, the spoons
and the cups and the basins for liquids, all of the best gold.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And on the table at all times you are
to keep my holy bread.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And you are to make a support for
lights, of the best gold; its base and its pillar are to be of hammered
gold; its cups, its buds, and its flowers are to be made of the same
metal.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> It is to have six branches coming out
from its sides; three branches from one side and three from the other.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> Every branch having three cups made
like almond flowers, every cup with a bud and a flower, on all the
branches.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> And on the pillar, four cups like
almond flowers, every one with its bud and its flower:

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And under every two branches a bud,
made with the branch, for all the six branches of it.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> The buds and the branches are to be
made of the same metal; all together one complete work of hammered gold.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> Then you are to make its seven vessels
for the lights, putting them in their place so that they give light in
front of it.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> And the instruments and trays for use
with it are all to be of the best gold.

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> A talent of gold will be needed for it,
with all these vessels.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And see that you make them from the
design which you saw on the mountain.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And you are to make a House for me, with
ten curtains of the best linen, blue and purple and red, worked with
designs of winged ones by a good workman.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Every curtain is to be twenty-eight
cubits long and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Five curtains are to be joined together,
and the other five are to be joined together.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And you are to put twists of blue cord on
the edge of the outside curtain of the first group of five, and on the
edge of the outside curtain of the second group of five;

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Fifty twists on one curtain and fifty on
the other, the twists to be opposite one another.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Then make fifty gold hooks, joining the
curtains together by the hooks, and in this way the House will be made.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And you are to make curtains of goats'
hair for a tent over the House, eleven curtains.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Every curtain is to be thirty cubits long
and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Five of these curtains are to be joined
together, and the other six are to be joined together, the sixth being
folded over to make a hanging in front of the tent.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And you are to put fifty twists of cord
on the edge of the outside curtain of one group, and fifty twists on the
edge of the outside curtain of the other group.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Then make fifty brass hooks and put the
hooks into the twists, joining the tent together to make it one.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And the folded part which is over of
the curtains of the tent, the half-curtain which is folded back, will be
hanging down over the back of the House.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And the cubit which is over of the ten
curtains at the sides will be hanging over the two sides of the House as
a cover.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And then you are to make a cover for
the tent, of sheepskins coloured red, and a cover of leather over that.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And you are to make upright boards of
hard wood for the House.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Every board is to be ten cubits high
and a cubit and a half wide.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Every board is to be joined to the one
nearest to it by two tongues, and so for every board in the House.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> These are the boards needed for the
house; twenty boards for the south side,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> With forty silver bases under the
twenty boards, two bases under every board to take its tongues.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And twenty boards for the second side
of the house on the north,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> With their forty silver bases, two
under every board.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And six boards for the back of the
House on the west,

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> With two boards for the angles of the
House at the back.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> The two are to be joined together at
the base and at the top to one ring, forming the two angles.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> So there are to be eight boards, with
their sixteen silver bases, two bases under every board.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And make rods of the same wood, five
for the boards on the one side,

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And five for the boards on the other
side of the House, and five for the west side of the House at the back.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And the middle rod is to go through the
rings of all the boards from end to end.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And the boards are to be plated with
gold, having gold rings for the rods to go through: and the rods are to
be plated with gold.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And you are to make the House from the
design which you saw on the mountain.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And you are to make a veil of the best
linen, blue and purple and red, worked with designs of winged ones by a
good workman:

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> Hanging it by gold hooks from four
pillars of wood, plated with gold and fixed in silver bases.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And you are to put up the veil under
the hooks, and put inside it the ark of the law: the veil is to be a
division between the holy place and the most holy.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> You are to put the cover on the ark of
the law, inside the most holy place.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And outside the veil you are to put the
table, and the support for the lights opposite the table on the south
side of the House; and the table is to be on the north side.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> And you are to make a curtain for the
doorway of the Tent, of the best linen with needlework of blue and
purple and red.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And make five pillars for the curtain,
of hard wood plated with gold; their hooks are to be of gold and their
bases of brass

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And make an altar of hard wood, a square
altar, five cubits long, five cubits wide and three cubits high.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Put horns at the four angles of it, made
of the same, plating it all with brass.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And make all its vessels, the baskets for
taking away the dust of the fire, the spades and basins and meat-hooks
and fire-trays, of brass.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And make a network of brass, with four
brass rings at its four angles.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And put the network under the shelf round
the altar so that the net comes half-way up the altar.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And make rods for the altar, of hard
wood, plated with brass.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And put the rods through the rings at the
two opposite sides of the altar, for lifting it.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The altar is to be hollow, boarded in
with wood; make it from the design which you saw on the mountain.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And let there be an open space round the
House, with hangings for its south side of the best linen, a hundred
cubits long.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Their twenty pillars and their twenty
bases are to be of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their bands are
to be of silver.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And on the north side in the same way,
hangings a hundred cubits long, with twenty pillars of brass on bases of
brass; their hooks and their bands are to be of silver.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And for the open space on the west
side, the hangings are to be fifty cubits wide, with ten pillars and ten
bases;

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And on the east side the space is to be
fifty cubits wide.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> On the one side of the doorway will be
hangings fifteen cubits long, with three pillars and three bases;

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And on the other side, hangings fifteen
cubits long, with three pillars and three bases.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And across the doorway, a veil of
twenty cubits of the best linen, made of needlework of blue and purple
and red, with four pillars and four bases.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> All the pillars round the open space
are to have silver bands, with hooks of silver and bases of brass.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> The open space is to be a hundred
cubits long, fifty cubits wide, with sides five cubits high, curtained
with the best linen, with bases of brass.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> All the instruments for the work of the
House, and all its nails, and the nails of the open space are to be of
brass.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Give orders to the children of Israel
to give you clear olive oil for the lights, so that a light may be
burning there at all times.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Let Aaron and his sons put this in
order, evening and morning, before the Lord, inside the Tent of meeting,
outside the veil which is before the ark; this is to be an order for
ever, from generation to generation, to be kept by the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Now let Aaron your brother, and his sons
with him, come near from among the children of Israel, so that they may
be my priests, even Aaron, and Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar, his
sons.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And make holy robes for Aaron your
brother, so that he may be clothed with glory and honour.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Give orders to all the wise-hearted
workmen, whom I have made full of the spirit of wisdom, to make robes
for Aaron, so that he may be made holy as my priest.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> This is what they are to make: a priest's
bag, an ephod, and a robe, and a coat of coloured needlework, a
head-dress, and a linen band; they are to make holy robes for Aaron your
brother and for his sons, so that they may do the work of priests for
me.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> They are to take the gold and blue and
purple and red and the best linen,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And make the ephod of gold and blue and
purple and red and the best linen, the work of a designer.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> It is to have two bands stitched to it at
the top of the arms, joining it together.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And the beautifully worked band, which
goes on it, is to be of the same work and the same material, of gold and
blue and purple and red and twisted linen-work.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> You are to take two beryl stones, on
which the names of the children of Israel are to be cut:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Six names on the one stone and six on
the other, in the order of their birth.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> With the work of a jeweller, like the
cutting of a stamp, the names of the children of Israel are to be cut on
them, and they are to be fixed in twisted frames of gold.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And the two stones are to be placed on
the ephod, over the arm-holes, to be stones of memory for the children
of Israel: Aaron will have their names on his arms when he goes in
before the Lord, to keep the Lord in mind of them.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And you are to make twisted frames of
gold;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And two chains of the best gold,
twisted like cords; and have the chains fixed on to the frames.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And make a priest's bag for giving
decisions, designed like the ephod, made of gold and blue and purple and
red and the best linen.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It is to be square, folded in two, a
hand-stretch long and a hand-stretch wide.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And on it you are to put four lines of
jewels; the first line is to be a cornelian, a chrysolite, and an
emerald;

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> The second, a ruby, a sapphire, and an
onyx;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> The third, a jacinth, an agate, and an
amethyst;

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> The fourth, a topaz, a beryl, and a
jasper; they are to be fixed in twisted frames of gold.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> The jewels are to be twelve in number,
for the names of the children of Israel; every jewel having the name of
one of the twelve tribes cut on it as on a stamp.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And you are to make two chains of gold,
twisted like cords, to be fixed to the priest's bag.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And put two gold rings on the two ends
of the bag.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Put the two gold chains on the two
rings at the ends of the bag;

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Joining the other ends of the chains to
the gold frames and putting them on the front of the ephod, at the top
of the arms.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Then make two gold rings and put them
on the lower ends of the bag, at the edge of it on the inner side
nearest to the ephod.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> And make two more gold rings and put
them on the front of the ephod at the top of the arms, at the join, over
the worked band:

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> So that the rings on the bag may be
fixed to the rings of the ephod by a blue cord and on to the band of the
ephod, so that the bag may not come loose from the ephod.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And so Aaron will have the names of the
children of Israel on the priest's bag over his heart whenever he goes
into the holy place, to keep the memory of them before the Lord.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And in the bag you are to put the Urim
and Thummim, so that they may be on Aaron's heart whenever he goes in
before the Lord; and Aaron may have the power of making decisions for
the children of Israel before the Lord at all times.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> The robe which goes with the ephod is
to be made all of blue;

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> With a hole at the top, in the middle
of it; the hole is to be edged with a band to make it strong like the
hole in the coat of a fighting-man, so that it may not be broken open.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> And round the skirts of it put fruits
in blue and purple and red, with bells of gold between;

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> A gold bell and a fruit in turn all
round the skirts of the robe.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> Aaron is to put it on for his holy
work; and the sound of it will be clear, when he goes into the holy
place before the Lord, and when he comes out, keeping him safe from
death.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> You are to make a plate of the best
gold, cutting on it, as on a stamp, these words: HOLY TO THE LORD.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> Put a blue cord on it and put it on the
front of the twisted head-dress:

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> And it will be over Aaron's brow, so
that Aaron will be responsible for any error in all the holy offerings
made by the children of Israel; it will be on his brow at all times, so
that their offerings may be pleasing to the Lord.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> The coat is to be made of the best
linen, worked in squares; and you are to make a head-dress of linen, and
a linen band worked in needlework.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> And for Aaron's sons you are to make
coats, and bands, and head-dresses, so that they may be clothed with
glory and honour.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> These you are to put on Aaron, your
brother, and on his sons, putting oil on them, separating them and
making them holy, to do the work of priests to me.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> And you are to make them linen
trousers, covering their bodies from the middle to the knee;

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> Aaron and his sons are to put these on
whenever they go into the Tent of meeting or come near the altar, when
they are doing the work of the holy place, so that they may be free from
any sin causing death: this is to be an order for him and his seed after
him for ever.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> This is what you are to do to make them
holy, to do the work of priests to me: Take one young ox and two male
sheep, without any mark on them,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And unleavened bread, and unleavened
cakes mixed with oil, and thin unleavened cakes on which oil has been
put, made of the best bread-meal;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Put these in a basket and take them, with
the ox and the two sheep.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And let Aaron and his sons come to the
door of the Tent of meeting, and there let them be washed with water.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Take the robes, and put the coat and the
dress and the ephod and the priest's bag on Aaron; put the band of
needlework round him,

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And let the head-dress be placed on his
head and the holy crown on the head-dress.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Then take the oil and put it on his head.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And take his sons and put their robes on
them;

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And put the linen bands round Aaron and
his sons, and the head-dresses on them, to make them priests by my order
for ever: so you are to make Aaron and his sons holy to me.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Then let the ox be taken in front of
the Tent of meeting: and let Aaron and his sons put their hands on its
head.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And you are to put the ox to death
before the Lord at the door of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Then take some of the blood of the ox,
and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger, draining out all
the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And take all the fat covering the
inside of the ox, and the fat joining the liver and the two kidneys with
the fat round them, and let them be burned on the altar;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> But the flesh of the ox and its skin
and its waste parts are to be burned outside the circle of the tents,
for it is a sin-offering.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Then take one of the sheep, and let
Aaron and his sons put their hands on its head.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Then let it be put to death, so that
the sides of the altar are marked with its blood.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Then the sheep is to be cut up into its
parts, and after washing its legs and its inside parts, you are to put
them with the parts and the head,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And let them all be burned on the altar
as a burned offering to the Lord: a sweet smell, an offering made by
fire to the Lord.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Then take the other sheep; and after
Aaron and his sons have put their hands on its head,

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> You are to put the sheep to death, and
take some of its blood and put it on the point of Aaron's right ear, and
of the right ears of his sons, and on the thumbs of their right hands
and the great toes of their right feet, dropping the rest of the blood
on the sides of the altar.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Then take some of the blood on the
altar, and the oil, and put it on Aaron and his robes and on his sons
and on their robes, so that he and his robes and his sons and their
robes may be made holy.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Then take the fat of the sheep, the fat
tail, the fat covering the insides, and the fat joining the liver and
the two kidneys with the fat round them, and the right leg; for by the
offering of this sheep they are to be marked out as priests:

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And take one bit of bread and one cake
of oiled bread and one thin cake out of the basket of unleavened bread
which is before the Lord:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And put them all on the hands of Aaron
and of his sons, to be waved for a wave offering before the Lord.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Then take them from their hands, and
let them be burned on the burned offering on the altar, a sweet smell
before the Lord, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Then take the breast of Aaron's sheep,
waving it before the Lord; and it is to be your part of the offering.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> So you are to make holy the breast of
the sheep which is waved and the leg which is lifted up on high, that
is, of the sheep which is offered for Aaron and his sons;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And it will be their part as a right
for ever from the children of Israel, it is a special offering from the
children of Israel, made from their peace-offerings, a special offering
lifted up to the Lord.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And Aaron's holy robes will be used by
his sons after him; they will put them on when they are made priests.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> For seven days the son who becomes
priest in his place will put them on when he comes into the Tent of
meeting to do the work of the holy place.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Then take the sheep of the wave
offering and let its flesh be cooked in water in a holy place.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And let Aaron and his sons make a meal
of it, with the bread in the basket, at the door of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> All those things which were used as
offerings to take away sin, and to make them holy to be priests, they
may have for food: but no one who is not a priest may have them, for
they are holy food.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And if any of the flesh of the offering
or of the bread is over till the morning, let it be burned with fire; it
is not to be used for food, for it is holy.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> All these things you are to do to Aaron
and his sons as I have given you orders: for seven days the work of
making them priests is to go on.

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> Every day an ox is to be offered as a
sin-offering, to take away sins: and by this offering on it, you will
make the altar clean from sin; and you are to put oil on it and make it
holy.

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> For seven days you are to make
offerings for the altar and make it holy, so that it may become
completely holy, and anything touching it will become holy.

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> Now this is the offering which you are
to make on the altar: two lambs in their first year, every day
regularly.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> One lamb is to be offered in the
morning and the other in the evening:

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> And with the one lamb, a tenth part of
an ephah of the best meal, mixed with a fourth part of a hin of clear
oil; and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering.

<span id="an_29:41">29:41</span> And the other lamb is to be offered in
the evening, and with it the same meal offering and drink offering, for
a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

<span id="an_29:42">29:42</span> This is to be a regular burned offering
made from generation to generation, at the door of the Tent of meeting
before the Lord, where I will come face to face with you and have talk
with you.

<span id="an_29:43">29:43</span> There I will come face to face with the
children of Israel, and the Tent will be made holy by my glory

<span id="an_29:44">29:44</span> I will make holy the Tent of meeting
and the altar: and Aaron and his sons I will make holy, to be my priests

<span id="an_29:45">29:45</span> Among the children of Israel I will
make my living-place, and I will be their God.

<span id="an_29:46">29:46</span> And they will see that I am the Lord
their God, who took them out of the land of Egypt, so that I might be
ever with them: I am the Lord their God.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And you are to make an altar for the
burning of perfume; of hard wood let it be made.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> The altar is to be square, a cubit long
and a cubit wide, and two cubits high, and its horns are to be made of
the same.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> It is to be plated with the best gold,
the top of it and the sides and the horns, with an edging of gold all
round it.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Under the edge on the two opposite sides,
you are to make two gold rings, to take the rods for lifting it.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And make these rods of the same wood,
plating them with gold.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And let it be placed in front of the veil
before the ark of the law, before the cover which is over the law, where
I will come face to face with you.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And on this altar sweet spices are to be
burned by Aaron every morning when he sees to the lights.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And every evening, when he puts the
lights up in their places, the spices are to be burned, a sweet-smelling
smoke going up before the Lord from generation to generation for ever.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> No strange perfume, no burned offering or
meal offering, and no drink offering is to be offered on it.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And once every year Aaron is to make
its horns clean: with the blood of the sin-offering he is to make it
clean once every year from generation to generation: it is most holy to
the Lord.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> When you are taking the number of the
children of Israel, let every man who is numbered give to the Lord a
price for his life, so that no disease may come on them when they are
numbered.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And this is what they are to give; let
every man who is numbered give half a shekel, by the scale of the holy
place: (the shekel being valued at twenty gerahs:) this money is an
offering to the Lord.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> Everyone who is numbered, from twenty
years old and over, is to give an offering to the Lord.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The man of wealth is to give no more
and the poor man no less than the half-shekel of silver, when the
offering is made to the Lord as the price for your lives.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And you are to take this money from the
children of Israel to be used for the work of the Tent of meeting, to
keep the memory of the children of Israel before the Lord and to be the
price of your lives.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> You are to make a brass washing-vessel,
with a brass base; and put it between the Tent of meeting and the altar,
with water in it;

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> That it may be used by Aaron and his
sons for washing their hands and feet;

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Whenever they go into the Tent of
meeting they are to be washed with water, to keep them from death; and
whenever they come near to do the work of the altar, or to make an
offering by fire to the Lord,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Their hands and feet are to be washed.
so that they may be safe from death: this is an order to them for ever;
to him and his seed from generation to generation.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Take the best spices, five hundred
shekels' weight of liquid myrrh, and of sweet cinnamon half as much,
that is, two hundred and fifty shekels, and two hundred and fifty
shekels of sweet calamus,

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And of cassia, five hundred shekels'
weight measured by the scale of the holy place, and of olive oil a hin:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And make these into a holy oil, a
perfume made by the art of the perfume-maker; it is to be a holy oil.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> This oil is to be put on the Tent of
meeting, and on the ark of the law,

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> And on the table and all its vessels,
and on the support for the lights, with its vessels, and on the altar
for burning spices,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> And on the altar of burned offerings
with its vessels, and on the washing-vessel and its base.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> And you are to make them most holy;
anything touching them will become holy.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And put the oil on Aaron and his sons,
making them holy to do the work of priests to me.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And say to the children of Israel, This
is to be the Lord's holy oil, from generation to generation.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> It is not to be used for man's flesh,
and no other is to be made like it: holy it is, and you are to keep it
holy.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> Whoever makes any like it, or puts it
on one who is not a priest, will be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Take sweet
spices, stacte and onycha and galbanum, with the best frankincense, in
equal weights;

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> And make from them a perfume, such as
is made by the art of the perfume-maker, mixed with salt, and clean and
holy.

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> And put some of it, crushed very small,
in front of the ark in the Tent of meeting, where I will come face to
face with you; it is to be most holy.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> You are not to make any perfume like it
for yourselves: it is to be kept holy to the Lord.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> Whoever makes any like it, for its
sweet smell, will be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> I have made selection of Bezalel, the son
of Uri, by name, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And I have given him the spirit of God
and made him wise and full of knowledge and expert in every sort of
handwork,

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> To do all sorts of delicate work in gold
and silver and brass;

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> In cutting stones for framing, and to do
every form of woodwork.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And I have made selection of Oholiab with
him, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; and in the hearts of all
who are wise I have put the knowledge to make whatever I have given you
orders to have made;

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> The Tent of meeting, and the ark of the
law, and the cover which is on it, and all the things for the tent,

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And the table with its vessels, and the
holy light-support with all its vessels, and the altar for the burning
of spices,

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And the altar of burned offerings with
all its vessels, and the washing-vessel with its base,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And the robes of needlework, the holy
robes for Aaron and for his sons, for their use when acting as priests,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And the holy oil, and the perfume of
sweet spices for the holy place; they will do whatever I have given you
orders to have done.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Say to the children of Israel that they
are to keep my Sabbaths; for the Sabbath day is a sign between me and
you through all your generations; so that you may see that I am the Lord
who makes you holy.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> So you are to keep the Sabbath as a
holy day; and anyone not honouring it will certainly be put to death:
whoever does any work on that day will be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Six days may work be done, but the
seventh day is a Sabbath of complete rest, holy to the Lord; whoever
does any work on the Sabbath day is to be put to death.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> And the children of Israel are to keep
the Sabbath holy, from generation to generation, by an eternal
agreement.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever; because in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and on the seventh day he took his rest and had pleasure in
it.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And when his talk with Moses on Mount
Sinai was ended, he gave him the two stones of the law, two stones on
which was the writing made by the finger of God.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And when the people saw that Moses was a
long time coming down from the mountain, they all came to Aaron and said
to him, Come, make us a god to go before us: as for this Moses, who took
us up out of the land of Egypt, we have no idea what has become of him.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Then Aaron said to them, Take off the
gold rings which are in the ears of your wives and your sons and your
daughters, and give them to me.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And all the people took the gold rings
from their ears and gave them to Aaron.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And he took the gold from them and,
hammering it with an instrument, he made it into the metal image of a
young ox: and they said, This is your god, O Israel, who took you out of
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And when Aaron saw this, he made an altar
before it, and made a public statement, saying, Tomorrow there will be a
feast to the Lord.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> So early on the day after they got up and
made burned offerings and peace-offerings; and took their seats at the
feast, and then gave themselves to pleasure.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go down
quickly; for your people, whom you took out of the land of Egypt, are
turned to evil ways;

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> Even now they are turned away from the
rule I gave them, and have made themselves a metal ox and given worship
to it and offerings, saying, This is your god, O Israel, who took you up
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And the Lord said to Moses, I have been
watching this people, and I see that they are a stiff-necked people.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Now do not get in my way, for my wrath
is burning against them; I will send destruction on them, but of you I
will make a great nation.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> But Moses made prayer to God, saying,
Lord, why is your wrath burning against your people whom you took out of
the land of Egypt, with great power and with the strength of your hand?

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Why let the Egyptians say, He took them
out to an evil fate, to put them to death on the mountains, cutting them
off from the earth? Let your wrath be turned away from them, and send
not this evil on your people.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Have in mind Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, your servants, to whom you gave your oath, saying, I will make
your seed like the stars of heaven in number, and all this land will I
give to your seed, as I said, to be their heritage for ever.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> So the Lord let himself be turned from
his purpose of sending punishment on his people.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Then Moses came down the mountain with
the two stones of the law in his hand; the stones had writing on their
two sides, on the front and on the back.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> The stones were the work of God, and
the writing was the writing of God, cut on the stones.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> Now when the noise and the voices of
the people came to the ears of Joshua, he said to Moses, There is a
noise of war in the tents.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And Moses said, It is not the voice of
men who are overcoming in the fight, or the cry of those who have been
overcome; it is the sound of songs which comes to my ear.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And when he came near the tents he saw
the image of the ox, and the people dancing; and in his wrath Moses let
the stones go from his hands, and they were broken at the foot of the
mountain.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he took the ox which they had made,
burning it in the fire and crushing it to powder, and he put it in the
water and made the children of Israel take a drink of it.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And Moses said to Aaron, What did the
people do to you that you let this great sin come on them?

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And Aaron said, Let not my lord be
angry; you have seen how the purposes of this people are evil.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> For they said to me, Make us a god to
go before us: as for this Moses, who took us up out of the land of
Egypt, we have no idea what has come to him.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Then I said to them, Whoever has any
gold, let him take it off; so they gave it to me, and I put it in the
fire, and this image of an ox came out.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And Moses saw that the people were out
of control, for Aaron had let them loose to their shame before their
haters:

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Then Moses took his place at the way
into the tents, and said, Whoever is on the Lord's side, let him come to
me. And all the sons of Levi came together to him.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And he said to them, This is the word
of the Lord, the God of Israel: Let every man take his sword at his
side, and go from one end of the tents to the other, putting to death
his brother and his friend and his neighbour.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And the sons of Levi did as Moses said;
and about three thousand of the people were put to death that day.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And Moses said, You have made
yourselves priests to the Lord this day; for every one of you has made
the offering of his son and his brother; the blessing of the Lord is on
you this day.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And on the day after, Moses said to the
people, Great has been your sin: but I will go up to the Lord, and see
if I may get forgiveness for your sin.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Then Moses went back to the Lord and
said, This people has done a great sin, making themselves a god of gold;

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> But now, if you will give them
forgiveness--but if not, let my name be taken out of your book.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Whoever has
done evil against me will be taken out of my book.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> But now, go, take the people into that
place of which I have given you word; see, my angel will go before you:
but when the time of my judging has come, I will send punishment on them
for their sin.

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And the Lord sent punishment on the
people because they gave worship to the ox which Aaron made.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go forward
from this place, you and the people whom you have taken up out of the
land of Egypt, to that land about which I made an oath to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, saying, To your seed will I give it.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And I will send an angel before you,
driving out the Canaanite and the Amorite and the Hittite and the
Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Go up to that land flowing with milk and
honey; but I will not go up among you, for you are a stiff-necked
people, for fear that I send destruction on you while you are on the
way.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Hearing this bad news the people were
full of grief, and no one put on his ornaments.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Say to the
children of Israel, You are a stiff-necked people: if I come among you,
even for a minute, I will send destruction on you; so take off all your
ornaments, so that I may see what to do with you.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> So the children of Israel took off their
ornaments at Mount Horeb, and did not put them on again.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Now it was Moses' way to put up the Tent
of meeting outside the tent-circle, at some distance away; giving it the
name of The Tent of meeting. And everyone desiring to make his prayer to
the Lord went to the Tent of meeting outside the tent-circle.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And whenever Moses went out to the Tent
of meeting, all the people got up and everyone went to the door of his
tent, looking after Moses till he went inside the Tent.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And whenever Moses went into the Tent,
the pillar of cloud came down, and took its place by the door of the
Tent, as long as the Lord was talking with Moses.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And all the people saw the cloud at the
door of the Tent, and they went down on their faces, everyone at the
door of his tent.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And the Lord had talk with Moses face
to face, as a man may have talk with his friend. And when Moses came
back to the tents, his servant, the young man Joshua, the son of Nun,
did not come away from the Tent.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And Moses said to the Lord, See, you
say to me, Be this people's guide on their journey, but you have not
made clear to me whom you will send with me. But you have said, I have
knowledge of you by name, and you have grace in my eyes.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> If then I have grace in your eyes, let
me see your ways, so that I may have knowledge of you and be certain of
your grace; and my prayer is that you will keep in mind that this nation
is your people.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And he said, I myself will go with you
and give you rest.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And Moses said, If you yourself are not
going with us, do not send us on from here.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> For is not the fact of your going with
us the sign that I and this people have grace in your eyes, so that we,
that is, I and your people, are separate from all other people on the
face of the earth?

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And the Lord said to Moses, I will do
as you say: for you have grace in my eyes, and I have knowledge of you
by your name.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And Moses said, O Lord, let me see your
glory.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And he said, I will make all the light
of my being come before you, and will make clear to you what I am; I
will be kind to those to whom I will be kind, and have mercy on those on
whom I will have mercy.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> But it is not possible for you to see
my face, for no man may see me and still go on living.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And the Lord said, See, there is a
place near me, and you may take your place on the rock:

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And when my glory goes by, I will put
you in a hole in the rock, covering you with my hand till I have gone
past:

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Then I will take away my hand, and you
will see my back: but my face is not to be seen.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Make two
other stones like the first two; and I will put on them the words which
were on the first stones, which were broken by you.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And be ready by the morning, and come up
on Mount Sinai, and come before me there in the morning, on the top of
the mountain.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> No one is to come up with you, and let no
man be seen anywhere on the mountain; let no flocks or herds come near
to get their food at its foot.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> So Moses got two stones cut like the
first; and early in the morning he went up Mount Sinai, as the Lord had
said, with the two stones in his hand.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And the Lord came down in the cloud and
took his place by the side of Moses, and Moses gave worship to the name
of the Lord.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And the Lord went past before his eyes,
saying, The Lord, the Lord, a God full of pity and grace, slow to wrath
and great in mercy and faith;

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Having mercy on thousands, overlooking
evil and wrongdoing and sin; he will not let wrongdoers go free, but
will send punishment on children for the sins of their fathers, and on
their children's children to the third and fourth generation.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> Then Moses quickly went down on his face
in worship.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And he said, If now I have grace in your
eyes, let the Lord go among us, for this is a stiff-necked people, and
give us forgiveness for our wrongdoing and our sin, and take us for your
heritage.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And the Lord said, See, this is what I
will undertake: before the eyes of your people I will do wonders, such
as have not been done in all the earth or in any nation: and all your
people will see the work of the Lord, for what I am about to do for you
is greatly to be feared.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Take care to do the orders which I give
you today; I will send out from before you the Amorite and the Canaanite
and the Hittite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> But take care, and do not make any
agreement with the people of the land where you are going, for it will
be a cause of sin to you.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> But their altars are to be overturned
and their pillars broken and their images cut down:

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> For you are to be worshippers of no
other god: for the Lord is a God who will not give his honour to
another.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> So see that you make no agreement with
the people of the land, and do not go after their gods, or take part in
their offerings, or be guests at their feasts,

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Or take their daughters for your sons;
for when their daughters give worship before their gods, they will make
your sons take part with them.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Make for yourselves no gods of metal.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Keep the feast of unleavened bread; for
seven days your food is to be bread without leaven, as I gave you
orders, at the regular time in the month Abib; for in that month you
came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> Every first male child is mine; the
first male birth of your cattle, the first male of every ox and sheep.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> A lamb may be given in payment for the
young of an ass, but if you will not make payment for it, its neck will
have to be broken. For all the first of your sons you are to make
payment. No one is to come before me without an offering.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Six days let work be done, but on the
seventh day take your rest: at ploughing time and at the grain-cutting
you are to have a day for rest.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> And you are to keep the feast of weeks
when you get in the first-fruits of the grain, and the feast at the turn
of the year when you take in the produce of your fields.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Three times in the year let all your
males come before the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> For I will send out the nations before
you and make wide the limits of your land; and no man will make an
attempt to take your land while you go up to give worship to the Lord,
three times in the year.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> No leaven is to be offered with the
blood of my offering, and the offering of the Passover feast may not be
kept till the morning.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> Take the first-fruits of your land as
an offering to the house of the Lord your God. Let not the young goat be
cooked in its mother's milk

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Put all
these words in writing; for on them is based the agreement which I will
make with you.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And for forty days and forty nights
Moses was there with the Lord, and in that time he had no food or drink.
And he put in writing on the stones the words of the agreement, the ten
rules of the law.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> Now when Moses came down from Mount
Sinai, with the two stones in his hand, he was not conscious that his
face was shining because of his talk with God.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> But when Aaron and all the children of
Israel saw Moses, and the shining of his face, they would not come near
him for fear.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> Then Moses sent for them; and Aaron,
with the chiefs of the people, came to him; and Moses had talk with
them.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> And later, all the children of Israel
came near, and he gave them all the orders which the Lord had given him
on Mount Sinai.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> And at the end of his talk with them,
Moses put a veil over his face.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> But whenever Moses went in before the
Lord to have talk with him, he took off the veil till he came out. And
whenever he came out he said to the children of Israel what he had been
ordered to say;

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> And the children of Israel saw that the
face of Moses was shining: so Moses put the veil over his face again
till he went to the Lord.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Moses sent for all the children of
Israel to come together, and said to them, This is what the Lord has
said and these are his orders.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Six days let work be done, but the
seventh day is to be a holy day to you, a Sabbath of rest to the Lord;
whoever does any work on that day is to be put to death.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> No fire is to be lighted in any of your
houses on the Sabbath day.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And Moses said to all the meeting of the
children of Israel, This is the order which the Lord has given:

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Take from among you an offering to the
Lord; everyone who has the impulse in his heart, let him give his
offering to the Lord; gold and silver and brass;

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And blue and purple and red and the best
linen and goats' hair,

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And sheepskins coloured red, and leather,
and hard wood,

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And oil for the lights, and spices for
the holy oil and for the sweet perfumes for burning.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> And beryls and jewels to be cut for the
ephod and for the priest's bag.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And let every wise-hearted man among
you come and make whatever has been ordered by the Lord;

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> The House and its tent and its cover,
its hooks and its boards, its rods and its pillars and its bases;

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> The ark with its cover and its rods and
the veil hanging before it;

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> The table and its rods and all its
vessels, and the holy bread;

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> And the support for the lights, with
its vessels and its lights and the oil for the light;

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And the altar for burning spices, with
its rods, and the holy oil and the sweet perfume, and the curtain for
the door, at the door of the House;

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> The altar of burned offerings, with its
network of brass, its rods, and all its vessels, the washing-vessel and
its base;

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> The hangings for the open space, its
pillars and their bases, and the curtain for the doorway;

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> The nails for the House, and the nails
for the open space and their cords;

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> The robes of needlework for the work of
the holy place, the holy robes for Aaron the priest, and the robes for
his sons when acting as priests.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And all the children of Israel went
away from Moses.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> And everyone whose heart was moved,
everyone who was guided by the impulse of his spirit, came with his
offering for the Lord, for whatever was needed for the Tent of meeting
and its work and for the holy robes.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> They came, men and women, all who were
ready to give, and gave pins and nose-rings and finger-rings and
neck-ornaments, all of gold; everyone gave an offering of gold to the
Lord.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> And everyone who had blue and purple
and red and the best linen and goats' hair and sheepskins coloured red
and leather, gave them.

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> Everyone who had silver and brass gave
an offering of them to the Lord; and everyone who had hard wood, such as
was needed for the work, gave it.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> And all the women who were expert with
their hands, made cloth, and gave the work of their hands, blue and
purple and red and the best linen.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> And those women who had the knowledge,
made the goats' hair into cloth.

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And the rulers gave the beryls and the
cut jewels for the ephod and the priest's bag;

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> And the spice and the oil for the
light, and the holy oil and the sweet perfumes.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> The children of Israel, every man and
woman, from the impulse of their hearts, gave their offerings freely to
the Lord for the work which the Lord had given Moses orders to have
done.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> And Moses said to the children of
Israel, See, the Lord has made selection of Bezalel, the son of Uri, the
son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> And he has made him full of the spirit
of God, in all wisdom and knowledge and art of every sort;

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> As an expert designer of beautiful
things, working in gold and silver and brass;

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> Trained in the cutting of stones and
the ornamenting of wood and in every sort of handwork.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> And he has given to him, and to
Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, the power of
training others.

<span id="an_35:35">35:35</span> To them he has given knowledge of all
the arts of the handworker, of the designer, and the expert workman; of
the maker of needlework in blue and purple and red and the best linen,
and of the maker of cloth; in all the arts of the designer and the
trained workman they are expert.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> So let Bezalel and Oholiab get to work,
with every wise-hearted man to whom the Lord has given wisdom and
knowledge, to do whatever is necessary for the ordering of the holy
place, as the Lord has given orders.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Then Moses sent for Bezalel and Oholiab,
and for all the wise-hearted men to whom the Lord had given wisdom, even
everyone who was moved by the impulse of his heart to come and take part
in the work:

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And they took from Moses all the
offerings which the children of Israel had given for the building of the
holy place. And still they went on giving him more free offerings every
morning.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Then the wise men, who were doing all the
work of the holy place, came from their work;

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And said to Moses, The people are giving
much more than is needed for the work which the Lord has given us orders
to do.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> So Moses made an order and had it given
out through all the tents, saying, Let no man or woman make any more
offerings for the holy place. So the people were kept from giving more.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For the material they had was enough and
more than enough for all the work which had to be done.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Then all the expert workmen among them
made the House with its ten curtains; of the best linen, blue and purple
and red, they made them, with winged ones worked by expert designers.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Every curtain was twenty-eight cubits
long and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And five curtains were joined together,
and the other five curtains were joined together.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And they put twists of blue cord on the
edge of the outside curtain of the first group, and in the same way on
the outside curtain of the second group.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Fifty twists on the one curtain and
fifty on the edge of the curtain of the other group; the twists being
opposite to one another.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And they made fifty hooks of gold,
joining the curtains one to another with the hooks; and so the House was
made.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And they made curtains of goats' hair
for the tent; eleven curtains were made.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Every curtain was thirty cubits long
and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Five curtains were joined together to
make one group, and six curtains were joined together to make the other
group.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And they put fifty twists of cord on
the edge of the outside curtain of the first group, and fifty twists on
the edge of the outside curtain of the second group,

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And fifty hooks of brass for joining
them together to make the tent.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And they made a cover of sheepskins
coloured red, to go over the tent, and a cover of leather over that.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And for the uprights of the House they
made boards of hard wood.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> The boards were ten cubits long and one
cubit and a half wide.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Every board had two tongues fixed into
it; all the boards were made in this way.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> They made twenty boards for the south
side of the House:

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And for these twenty boards, forty
silver bases, two bases under every board, to take its tongues.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And for the second side of the House,
on the north, they made twenty boards,

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> With their forty silver bases, two
bases for every board.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And for the west side of the House, at
the back, they made six boards,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And two boards for the angles at the
back.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> These were joined together at the base
and at the top to one ring, so forming the two angles.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> So there were eight boards with sixteen
bases of silver, two bases under every board.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And they made rods of hard wood; five
for the boards on one side of the House,

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> And five for the boards on the other
side of the House, and five for the boards at the back, on the west.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> The middle rod was made to go right
through the rings of all the boards from one end to the other.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> All the boards were plated with gold,
and the rings through which the rods went were of gold, and the rods
were plated with gold.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And he made the veil of the best linen,
blue and purple and red, worked with winged ones designed by expert
workmen.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And they made four pillars for it of
hard wood plated with gold: they had hooks of gold and four silver
bases.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And they made a curtain for the door of
the tent, of the best linen with needlework of blue and purple and red;

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> And five pillars for the curtain, with
their hooks; the heads of the pillars were of gold and they were circled
with bands of gold; and their five bases were of brass.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Bezalel made the ark of hard wood,
two and a half cubits long, a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a
half high;

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Plating it inside and out with the best
gold, and putting an edge of gold all round it.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he made four gold rings for its four
angles, two on one side and two on the other,

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And rods of the same wood plated with
gold.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> These rods he put in the rings at the
sides of the ark, for lifting it.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he made the cover all of gold, two
and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> And he made two winged ones, hammered out
of one bit of gold, for the two ends of the cover;

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> Placing one at one end and one at the
other; the winged ones were part of the cover.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And their wings were stretched out over
the cover; the faces of the winged ones were opposite one another and
facing the cover.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And he made the table of hard wood, two
cubits long, a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high;

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Plating it with the best gold and
putting a gold edge all round it.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And he made a frame all round it about
as wide as a man's hand, edged with gold all round.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And he made four gold rings, and put
the rings at the angles of its four feet.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> The rings were fixed under the frame to
take the rods with which the table was to be lifted.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> The rods for lifting the table he made
of hard wood plated with gold.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And all the table-vessels, the plates
and spoons and basins and the cups for liquids, he made of the best
gold.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Then he made the support for the
lights, all of the best gold; its base and its pillar were of hammered
gold; its cups and buds and flowers were all made out of the same metal:

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> It had six branches coming out from its
sides, three from one side and three from the other;

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Every branch having three cups made
like almond flowers, every cup with a bud and a flower on all the
branches;

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And on its pillar, four cups like
almond flowers, every one with its bud and its flower;

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And under every two branches a bud,
made with the branch, for all six branches of it.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> The buds and the branches were made of
the same metal, all together one complete work of the best hammered
gold.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And he made the seven vessels for the
lights, and all the necessary instruments for it, of gold.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> A talent of the best gold was used for
the making of it and its vessels.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And he made the altar for the burning
of spices, using the same hard wood; it was square, a cubit long and a
cubit wide and two cubits high; the horns made of the same.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> The top and the sides and the horns
were all plated with the best gold; and he put an edge of gold all round
it.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And he made two gold rings, placing
them on the two opposite sides under the edge, to take the rods for
lifting it.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> The rods he made of the same hard wood,
plating them with gold.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> And he made the holy oil and the
perfume of sweet spices for burning, after the art of the perfume-maker.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> The altar of burned offerings he made of
hard wood; a square altar, five cubits long, five cubits wide and three
cubits high,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And he put horns at its four angles made
of the same, plating it all with brass;

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And brass was used for all the vessels of
the altar, the baskets and the spades, the basins and the meat-hooks and
the fire-trays; all the vessels he made of brass

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And he made a network of brass for the
altar, under the frame round it, stretching half-way up;

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> And four rings for the four angles of
this network, to take the rods.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> The rods he made of hard wood plated with
brass.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> He put the rods through the rings at the
opposite sides of the altar for lifting it; he made the altar hollow,
boarded in with wood.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And he made the washing-vessel of brass
on a brass base, using the polished brass looking-glasses given by the
women who did work at the doors of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> To make the open space, he put hangings
on the south side, of the best linen, a hundred cubits long:

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Their twenty pillars and their twenty
bases were brass; and the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of
silver.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And for the north side. hangings a
hundred cubits long, on twenty brass pillars in brass bases, with silver
hooks and bands.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And on the west side, hangings fifty
cubits long, on ten pillars in ten bases, with silver bands.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And on the east side, the open space
was fifty cubits long.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> The hangings on one side of the doorway
were fifteen cubits long, on three pillars with their three bases;

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And the same on the other side of the
doorway; on this side and on that the hangings were fifteen cubits long,
on three pillars with their three bases.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> All the hangings were of the best
linen.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And the bases of the pillars were of
brass; their hooks and the bands round the tops of them were of silver;
all the pillars were ringed with silver.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And the curtain for the doorway of the
open space was of the best linen, with designs of blue and purple and
red in needlework; it was twenty cubits long and five cubits high, to go
with the hangings round the sides.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> There were four pillars with their
bases, all of brass, the hooks being of silver, and their tops and their
bands being covered with silver.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> All the nails used for the House and
the open space round it were of brass.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> This is the price of the making of the
House, even the House of witness, as it was valued by the word of Moses,
for the work of the Levites under the direction of Ithamar, the son of
Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of
Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made everything as the Lord had given orders
to Moses.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And with him was Oholiab, the son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; a designer and a trained workman, expert
in needlework of blue and purple and red and the best linen.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> The gold used for all the different
work done for the holy place, the gold which was given, was twenty-nine
talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels in weight, by the scale of
the holy place.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And the silver given by those who were
numbered of the people was a hundred talents, and a thousand, seven
hundred and seventy-five shekels in weight, by the scale of the holy
place.

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> A beka, that is, half a shekel by the
holy scale, for everyone who was numbered; there were six hundred and
three thousand, five hundred and fifty men of twenty years old and over.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> Of this silver, a hundred talents was
used for making the bases of the pillars of the holy place and of the
veil; a talent for every base.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And a thousand, seven hundred and
seventy-five shekels of silver was used to make the hooks for the
pillars, and for plating the tops of the pillars and for making their
bands.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> The brass which was given was seventy
talents, two thousand four hundred shekels;

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> From it he made the bases of the
doorway of the Tent of meeting and the brass altar and the network for
it and all the vessels for the altar,

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> And the bases for the open space all
round and for its doorway, and all the nails for the House and for the
open space.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And from the needlework of blue and
purple and red they made the robes used for the work of the holy place,
and the holy robes for Aaron, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> The ephod he made of gold and blue and
purple and red and the best linen;

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> Hammering the gold into thin plates and
cutting it into wires to be worked into the blue and the purple and the
red and the linen by the designer.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And they made two bands for joining its
edges together at the top of the arms.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the beautifully worked band which
went on it was of the same design and the same material, worked in gold
and blue and purple and red and twisted linen-work, as the Lord gave
orders to Moses.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Then they made the beryl stones, fixed in
twisted frames of gold and cut like the cutting of a stamp, with the
names of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> These he put on the ephod, over the
arm-holes, to be stones of memory for the children of Israel, as the
Lord had said to Moses.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> The priest's bag was designed like the
ephod, of the best linen worked with gold and blue and purple and red.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> It was square and folded in two, as long
and as wide as the stretch of a man's hand;

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And on it they put four lines of
stones: in the first line was a carnelian, a chrysolite, and an emerald;

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> In the second, a ruby, a sapphire, and
an onyx;

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> In the third, a jacinth, an agate, and
an amethyst;

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> In the fourth, a topaz, a beryl, and a
jasper; they were fixed in twisted frames of gold.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> There were twelve stones for the twelve
tribes of Israel; on every one the name of one of the tribes of Israel
was cut, like the cutting of a stamp.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And on the bag they put gold chains,
twisted like cords.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And they made two gold frames and two
gold rings, the rings being fixed to the ends of the priest's bag;

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And they put the two twisted chains on
the two rings at the ends of the priest's bag;

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> And the other two ends of the chains
were joined to the two frames and fixed to the front of the ephod over
the arm-holes.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And they made two rings of gold and put
them on the two lower ends of the bag, on the inner side nearest to the
ephod.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And two other gold rings were put on
the front of the ephod, over the arm-holes, at the join, and over the
worked band.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And the rings on the bag were fixed to
the rings of the ephod by a blue cord, keeping it in place over the
band, so that the bag might not get loose, as the Lord gave orders to
Moses.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> The robe which went with the ephod was
made all of blue;

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> With a hole at the top in the middle,
like the hole in the coat of a fighting-man, edged with a band to make
it strong.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> The skirts of the robe were worked all
round with fruits in blue and purple and red made of twisted linen.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> And between the fruits all round the
skirt they put gold bells, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> All round the skirt of the robe were
bells and fruits in turn.

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> The coats for Aaron and his sons they
made of the best linen;

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And the twisted head-dress for Aaron,
and beautiful head-dresses of linen, and linen trousers,

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> And a linen band worked with a design
of blue and purple and red, as the Lord had said to Moses.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> The plate for the holy crown was made
of the best gold, and on it were cut these words, HOLY TO THE LORD.

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> It was fixed to the head-dress by a
blue cord, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> So all the work on the House of the
Tent of meeting was done; as the Lord had given orders to Moses, so the
children of Israel did it.

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> Then they took the House to Moses, the
tent with all the things for it; its hooks, its boards, its rods, its
pillars, and its bases;

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> The outer cover of sheepskins coloured
red, and the cover of leather, and the veil for the doorway;

<span id="an_39:35">39:35</span> The ark of the law, with its rods and
its cover;

<span id="an_39:36">39:36</span> The table, with all its vessels and the
holy bread;

<span id="an_39:37">39:37</span> The support for the lights, with the
vessels for the lights to be put in their places on it, and all its
vessels, and the oil for the lights;

<span id="an_39:38">39:38</span> And the gold altar, and the holy oil,
and the sweet perfume for burning, and the curtain for the doorway of
the tent;

<span id="an_39:39">39:39</span> And the brass altar, with its network
of brass, and its rods and all its vessels, and the washing-vessel and
its base;

<span id="an_39:40">39:40</span> The hangings for the open space, with
the pillars and their bases, and the curtain for the doorway, and the
cords and nails, and all the instruments necessary for the work of the
House of the Tent of meeting;

<span id="an_39:41">39:41</span> The robes for use in the holy place,
and the holy robes for Aaron and his sons when acting as priests.

<span id="an_39:42">39:42</span> The children of Israel did everything
as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

<span id="an_39:43">39:43</span> Then Moses, when he saw all their work
and saw that they had done everything as the Lord had said, gave them
his blessing.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> On the first day of the first month you
are to put up the House of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And inside it put the ark of the law,
hanging the veil before it.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And put the table inside, placing all the
things on it in order; and put in the support for the lights, and let
its lights be burning.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And put the gold altar for burning
perfumes in front of the ark of the law, hanging the curtain over the
doorway of the House.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And put the altar of burned offerings
before the doorway of the House of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And let the washing-vessel, with water in
it, be put between the Tent of meeting and the altar.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And put up the hangings forming the open
space all round it, with the curtain over its doorway.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And take the holy oil and put it on the
House and everything in it, and make it and everything in it holy:

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And put oil on the altar of burned
offering, and make it and all its vessels holy; this altar is to be most
holy.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And put oil on the washing-vessel and
its base, and make them holy.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Then let Aaron and his sons come to the
door of the Tent of meeting; and after washing them with water,

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> You are to put on Aaron the holy robes;
and you are to put oil on him, and make him holy, so that he may be my
priest.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And take his sons with him and put
coats on them;

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And put oil on them as you did on their
father, so that they may be my priests: the putting on of oil will make
them priests for ever, from generation to generation.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Moses did this; as the Lord gave
him orders, so he did.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> So on the first day of the first month
in the second year the House was put up.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> Moses put up the House; placing its
bases in position and lifting up its uprights, putting in the rods and
planting the pillars in their places;

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Stretching the outer tent over it, and
covering it, as the Lord had given him orders.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And he took the law and put it inside
the ark, and put the rods at its side and the cover over it;

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And he took the ark into the House,
hanging up the veil before it as the Lord had given him orders.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And he put the table in the Tent of
meeting, on the north side outside the veil.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And he put the bread on it in order
before the Lord, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> The support for the lights he put in
the Tent of meeting, opposite the table, on the south side:

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> Lighting the lights before the Lord, as
the Lord had given him orders.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And he put the gold altar in the Tent
of meeting, in front of the veil:

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> Burning sweet perfumes on it, as the
Lord had given him orders.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he put up the curtain at the
doorway of the House.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> And at the door of the House of the
Tent of meeting, he put the altar of burned offerings, offering on it
the burned offering and the meal offering, as the Lord had given him
orders.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And between the altar and the Tent of
meeting he put the vessel with water in it for washing.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> In it the hands and feet of Moses and
Aaron and his sons were washed,

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> Whenever they went into the Tent of
meeting, and when they came near the altar, as the Lord had given orders
to Moses.

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> And he put up the hangings forming the
open space round the House and the altar, and put the curtain over the
doorway. So Moses made the work complete.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> Then the cloud came down covering the
Tent of meeting, and the House was full of the glory of the Lord;

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> So that Moses was not able to go into
the Tent of meeting, because the cloud was resting on it, and the House
was full of the glory of the Lord.

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> And whenever the cloud was taken up
from the House, the children of Israel went forward on their journey:

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> But while the cloud was there, they
made no move till it was taken up.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> For the cloud of the Lord was resting
on the House by day, and at night there was fire in the cloud, before
the eyes of all the people of Israel, and so it was through all their
journeys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus](lev)
